The Project Gutenberg eBook of Evangelical Lutheran hymn-book
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Evangelical Lutheran hymn-book
        Abridged edition

Author: Lutheran Church--Missouri Synod

Release date: July 13, 2025 [eBook #76498]

Language: English

Original publication: St. Louis MO: Concordia Publishing House, 1912

Credits: Lisa Corcoran, Stephen Hutcheson, Dave Morgan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN HYMN-BOOK ***





                           Evangelical Lutheran
                                 HYMN-BOOK

                             ABRIDGED EDITION

                              [Illustration]

                              ST. LOUIS, MO.
                        CONCORDIA PUBLISHING HOUSE
                                   1927

                             Copyrighted 1927
                                    by
                        CONCORDIA PUBLISHING HOUSE
                              St. Louis, Mo.

                          PRINTED IN THE U. S. A.




The Order of Morning Service, or the Communion.


Introduction.

    A Hymn of Invocation of the Holy Ghost may be sung.

    The _Congregation_ shall rise, and the _Minister_, standing at
    the Altar, shall say:

In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

    The _Congregation_ shall chant or say:

                                  =Amen.=

    Then shall be said the _Confession of Sins_, as here followeth:


The Confession of Sins.

_Minister._ Beloved in the Lord! Let us draw near with a true heart and
confess our sins unto God, our Father, beseeching Him, in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to grant us forgiveness.

    Then, all kneeling or standing, shall be chanted or said:

_Minister._ Our help is in the name of the Lord.

_Congregation._ =Who made heaven and earth.=

_Minister._ I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord.

_Congregation._ =And Thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin.=

    Then shall the _Minister_ say:

Almighty God, our Maker and Redeemer, we poor sinners confess unto Thee
that we are by nature sinful and unclean, and that we have sinned against
Thee by thought, word, and deed. Wherefore we flee for refuge to Thine
infinite mercy, seeking and imploring Thy grace, for the sake of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

    The _Congregation_ shall say with the _Minister_:

=O most merciful God, who hast given Thine only-begotten Son to die for
us, have mercy upon us, and for His sake grant us remission of all our
sins; and by Thy Holy Spirit increase in us true knowledge of Thee and of
Thy will, and true obedience to Thy Word, to the end that by Thy grace we
may come to everlasting life; through Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen.=

    Then the _Minister_, standing, shall say:

Almighty God, our heavenly Father, hath had mercy upon us and hath given
His only Son to die for us and for His sake forgiveth us all our sins. To
them that believe on His name He giveth power to become the sons of God
and hath promised them His Holy Spirit. He that believeth and is baptized
shall be saved. Grant this, Lord, unto us all.

    Then shall the _Congregation_ chant or say:

                                  =Amen=.

    Then, all standing to the close of the _Collect_, shall be
    chanted or said the _Introit_ for the day.


The Introit.

    The _Introit_ with the _Gloria Patri_ may be chanted by the
    _Choir_; or the _Introit_ may be said by the _Minister_ and the
    _Gloria Patri_ chanted or said by the _Congregation_. Instead
    of the _Introit_ a Psalm or a Hymn may be used.


Gloria Patri.

=Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Ghost; as it was
in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.=

    Then shall follow the


Kyrie.

    The _Kyrie_ may be chanted or said by the _Minister_ and
    _Congregation_, or each petition may be said by the _Minister_
    and chanted or said by the _Congregation_ in response.

                        Lord, have mercy upon us.
                        Christ, have mercy upon us.
                        Lord, have mercy upon us.

    Then shall be chanted the _Gloria in Excelsis_ as here
    followeth. Instead of the _Gloria in Excelsis_ another Canticle
    or Hymn of Praise may be sung, except on festival days and when
    there is a Communion.


Gloria in Excelsis.

    The _Minister_ shall say:

                         Glory be to God on high!

    The _Congregation_ shall chant:

=Glory be to God on high and on earth peace, good will toward men. We
praise Thee, we bless Thee, we worship Thee, we glorify Thee, we give
thanks to Thee for Thy great glory, O Lord God, heavenly King, God the
Father Almighty.=

=O Lord, the only-begotten Son, Jesus Christ; O Lord God, Lamb of God,
Son of the Father, that takest away the sin of the world, have mercy upon
us. Thou that takest away the sin of the world, receive our prayer. Thou
that sittest at the right hand of God the Father, have mercy upon us.=

=For Thou only art holy; Thou only art the Lord; Thou only, O Christ,
with the Holy Ghost, art most high in the glory of God the Father. Amen.=

    Then shall the _Minister_ say:

                           The Lord be with you.

    The _Congregation_ shall chant or say:

                          =And with thy spirit.=

    The _Minister_ shall say:

                               Let us pray.

    Then shall the _Minister_ say the _Collect_ for the Day.


The Collect.

    The _Collect_ ended, the _Congregation_ shall chant or say:

                                  =Amen.=

    Then shall the _Minister_ read the _Epistle for the Day_. Other
    _Scripture Lessons_ may be read before the _Epistle_, but the
    _Epistle_ and _Gospel for the Day_ shall always be read. The
    _Minister_ shall announce the _Epistle_, saying:

The Epistle for (_here he shall name the Day_) is written in the ——
chapter of ——, beginning at the —— verse.


The Epistle for the Day.

    The _Epistle_ ended, the _Minister_ shall say:

                         Here endeth the Epistle.

    Then shall the _Hallelujah_ be chanted or said, except in the
    Passion season.


The Hallelujah.

                               =Hallelujah!=

    Instead of the simple _Hallelujah_ a _sentence_ for the Season
    of the Church-year may be chanted with it; or a Psalm or Hymn
    may be chanted after the _Hallelujah_.


The Hallelujah and Sentence.


For Advent.

    Hallelujah! Remember, O Lord, Thy tender mercies; for they have
    been ever of old. Hallelujah!


For the Epiphany Season.

    Hallelujah! O praise the Lord, all ye nations; and laud Him,
    all ye people. For His merciful kindness is great toward us;
    and the truth of the Lord endureth forever. Hallelujah!


For the Passion Season.

    Christ hath humbled Himself and become obedient unto death,
    even the death of the cross.


For the Easter Season.

    Hallelujah! Christ, our Passover, is sacrificed for us.
    Hallelujah!


For Whitsuntide.

    Hallelujah! Thou sendest forth Thy Spirit, they are created;
    and Thou renewest the face of the earth. Hallelujah!


From Trinity to Advent.

    Hallelujah! O Lord, deal with Thy servant according unto Thy
    mercy and teach me Thy statutes. I am Thy servant; give me
    understanding that I may know Thy testimonies. Hallelujah!

    or this:

    Hallelujah! Blessed be the Lord God of our fathers: praise Him,
    and highly exalt Him forever. Hallelujah!

    Then shall the _Minister_ announce the _Gospel for the Day_,
    saying:

The holy Gospel is written in the —— chapter of St. ——, beginning at the
—— verse.

    The _Congregation_ may chant or say:

                        =Glory be to Thee, O Lord.=

    Then shall the _Minister_ read _The Gospel for the Day_.

    The _Gospel_ ended, the _Minister_ shall say: Here endeth the
    _Gospel_, and the _Congregation_ shall stand up, unless it has
    stood at the reading of the _Gospel_, and shall chant or say:

                      =Praise be to Thee, O Christ.=

    Then shall be said or chanted the _Nicene Creed_ or the
    _Apostles’ Creed_; but if there be a Communion, the _Nicene
    Creed_ shall be used.


The Nicene Creed.

=I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth,
And of all things visible and invisible.=

=And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son of God, begotten of
His Father before all worlds, God of God, Light of Light, Very God of
Very God, Begotten, not made, Being of one substance with the Father,
By whom all things were made; Who for us men and for our salvation came
down from heaven And was incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary.
And was made man; And was crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate. He
suffered and was buried; and the third day He rose again, according to
the Scripture; and ascended into heaven, And sitteth on the right hand of
the Father; and He shall come again with glory to judge both the quick
and the dead; Whose kingdom shall have no end.=

=And I believe in the Holy Ghost, The Lord and Giver of Life, Who
proceedeth from the Father and the Son, Who with the Father and the Son
together is worshiped and glorified, Who spake by the prophets. And
I believe one holy Christian and Apostolic Church. I acknowledge one
Baptism for the remission of sins; And I look for the resurrection of the
dead; And the life of the world to come. Amen.=


The Apostles’ Creed.

=I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth.=

=And in Jesus Christ, His only Son, our Lord; Who was conceived by the
Holy Ghost, Born of the Virgin Mary; Suffered under Pontius Pilate, Was
crucified, dead, and buried; He descended into hell; The third day He
rose again from the dead; He ascended into heaven and sitteth on the
right hand of God the Father Almighty; From thence He shall come to judge
the quick and the dead.=

=I believe in the Holy Ghost; The holy Christian Church, the communion of
saints; The forgiveness of sins; The resurrection of the body; And the
life everlasting. Amen.=

    Then may a Hymn be sung, and the _Minister_ shall go into the
    pulpit. After the Hymn shall follow


The Sermon.

    The Sermon ended, the _Congregation_ standing up, the
    _Minister_ shall say:

The peace of God, which passeth all understanding, keep your hearts and
minds through Christ Jesus.

    The _Offertory_ shall then be chanted, at the close of which
    the _Congregation_ shall be seated.

    One of the _Offertories_ here following, or any other suitable
    _Offertory_, may be used.


The Offertory.


I.

=Create in me a clean heart, O God: and renew a right spirit within me.=

=Cast me not away from Thy presence: and take not Thy Holy Spirit from
me.=

=Restore unto me the joy of Thy salvation: and uphold me with Thy free
Spirit.=


II.

=The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite
heart, O God, Thou wilt not despise.=

=Do good in Thy good pleasure unto Zion: build Thou the walls of
Jerusalem.=

=Then shalt Thou be pleased with the sacrifices of righteousness: with
burnt offering and whole burnt offering.=

    The Offerings shall be gathered and brought to the _Minister_,
    who shall place them on the Altar.

    Then shall the _Minister_ make mention of any special petition,
    intercessions, or thanksgivings which may have been requested.
    He may also make mention of the death of any member of the
    Congregation.

    Then shall follow the _General Prayer_. The prayer here
    following may be used, or, if there be no Communion, the
    _Litany_, or a selection from the _Collects and Prayers_, or
    any other suitable prayer.


The General Prayer.

Almighty and most merciful God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, we
give Thee thanks for all Thy goodness and tender mercies, especially for
the gift of Thy dear Son and for the revelation of Thy will and grace;
and we beseech Thee so to implant Thy Word in us that in good and honest
hearts we may keep it and bring forth fruit by patient continuance in
well-doing.

Most heartily we beseech Thee so to rule and govern Thy Church Universal,
with all its pastors and ministers, that it may be preserved in the
pure doctrine of Thy saving Word, whereby faith toward Thee may be
strengthened and charity increased in us toward all mankind.

Grant also health and prosperity to all that are in authority, especially
to the President [and Congress] of the United States, the Governor [and
Legislature] of this Commonwealth, and to all our Judges and Magistrates;
and endue them with grace to rule after Thy good pleasure, to the
maintenance of righteousness and to the hindrance and punishment of
wickedness, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness
and honesty.

May it please Thee also to turn the hearts of our enemies and adversaries
that they may cease their enmity and be inclined to walk with us in
meekness and in peace.

All who are in trouble, want, sickness, anguish of labor, peril of death,
or any other adversity, especially those who are in suffering for Thy
name and for Thy truth’s sake, comfort, O God, with Thy Holy Spirit that
they may receive and acknowledge their afflictions as the manifestation
of Thy fatherly will.

And although we have deserved Thy righteous wrath and manifold
punishments, yet, we entreat Thee, O most merciful Father, remember not
the sins of our youth nor our many transgressions, but out of Thine
unspeakable goodness, grace, and mercy defend us from all harm and danger
of body and soul. Preserve us from false and pernicious doctrine, from
war and bloodshed, from plague and pestilence, from all calamity by
fire and water, from hail and tempest, from failure of harvest and from
famine, from anguish of heart and despair of Thy mercy, and from an evil
death. And in every time of trouble show Thyself a very present Help, the
Savior of all men, and especially of them that believe.

Cause also the needful fruits of the earth to prosper that we may enjoy
them in due season. Give success to the Christian training of the young,
to all lawful occupations on land and sea, and to all pure arts and
useful knowledge; and crown them with Thy blessing.

    Here special Supplications, Intercessions, and Prayers may be
    made.

These and whatsoever other things Thou wouldst have us ask of Thee, O
God, vouchsafe unto us for the sake of the bitter sufferings and death
of Jesus Christ, Thine only Son, our Lord and Savior, who liveth and
reigneth with Thee and the Holy Ghost, ever one God, world without end.

    Then shall the _Minister_, and the _Congregation_ with him, say
    the _Lord’s Prayer_.


The Lord’s Prayer.

=Our Father, who art in heaven; Hallowed be Thy name; Thy kingdom come;
Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven; Give us this day our daily
bread; And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass
against us; And lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil;
For Thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory forever and ever.
Amen.=

    Then shall be sung a Hymn.

       *       *       *       *       *

    If there be no Communion, a Doxology may be sung, and the
    _Minister_, standing at the Altar, shall pronounce the
    _Benediction_, after which the _Congregation_ shall offer
    silent prayer.


The Benediction.

The Lord bless thee and keep thee.

The Lord make His face shine upon thee and be gracious unto thee.

The Lord lift up His countenance upon thee and give thee peace.

    The _Congregation_ shall chant or say:

                                  =Amen=.

    While the Hymn is sung, the _Minister_ shall go to the
    Altar, make ready the Communion vessels, and prepare for the
    administration of the _Holy Communion_.

    The Hymn ended, the _Congregation_ shall rise and stand to the
    end of the _Agnus Dei_.


The Preface.

    The _Minister_ shall chant or say:

                           The Lord be with you.

    The _Congregation_ shall chant or say:

                          =And with thy spirit.=

_Minister._ Lift up your hearts.

_Congregation._ =We lift them up unto the Lord.=

_Minister._ Let us give thanks unto the Lord, our God.

_Congregation._ =It is meet and right so to do.=

_Minister._ It is truly meet, right, and salutary that we should at all
times and in all places give thanks unto Thee, O Lord, Holy Father,
Almighty, Everlasting God:

    Here shall follow the _Proper Preface_, according to the time,
    if there be any specially appointed, or else immediately shall
    follow,

                        Therefore with angels, etc.


Proper Prefaces.


For Christmas.

    For in the mystery of the Word made flesh Thou hast given us a
    new revelation of Thy glory, that, seeing Thee in the person of
    Thy Son, we may be drawn to the love of those things which are
    not seen. Therefore with angels, etc.


For the Passion Season.

    Who on the tree of the cross didst give salvation unto mankind,
    that, whence death arose, thence Life also might rise again;
    and that he, who by a tree once overcame, might likewise by a
    tree be overcome through Christ, our Lord; through whom with
    angels, etc.


For the Easter Season.

    But chiefly are we bound to praise Thee for the glorious
    resurrection of Thy Son Jesus Christ, our Lord; for He is the
    very Paschal Lamb, which was offered for us and hath taken away
    the sin of the world; who by His death hath destroyed death and
    by His rising to life again hath restored to us everlasting
    life. Therefore with angels, etc.


For Ascension Day.

    Through Jesus Christ, our Lord, who after His Resurrection
    appeared openly to all His disciples and in their sight was
    taken up into heaven that He might make us partakers of His
    divine nature. Therefore with angels, etc.


For Whitsunday.

    Through Jesus Christ, Thy dear Son, our Lord and Savior; who
    ascended above the heavens and, sitting at Thy right hand,
    poured out on this day the Holy Spirit, as He had promised,
    upon the chosen disciples; whereat the whole earth rejoices
    with exceeding joy. Therefore with angels, etc.


For the Festival of the Holy Trinity.

    Who with Thine only-begotten Son and the Holy Ghost art one
    God, one Lord. And in the confession of the only true God we
    worship the Trinity in Person, and the Unity in Substance, of
    Majesty coequal. Therefore with angels, etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

    After the _Preface_ shall follow immediately:

Therefore with angels and archangels and with all the company of heaven
we laud and magnify Thy glorious name, evermore praising Thee and saying:

    Then shall the _Congregation_ chant or say the _Sanctus_.

=Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabaoth! Heaven and earth are full of Thy
glory. Hosanna in the highest!=

=Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord.=

=Hosanna in the highest![1]=

    Then the _Minister_, turning to the Altar, shall chant or say:

                               Let us pray.

Our Father, who art in heaven; Hallowed be Thy name; Thy kingdom come;
Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven; Give us this day our daily
bread; And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass
against us; And lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil.

    Then shall the _Congregation_ chant or say:

=For Thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory forever and ever.
Amen.=

    Then shall the _Minister_ chant or say:

Our Lord Jesus Christ, in the night in which He was betrayed, took
bread;[2] and when He had given thanks, He brake it and gave it to His
disciples and said: Take, eat; this is My body, which is given for you;
this do in remembrance of Me.

After the same manner, also, He took the cup,[3] when He had supped; and
when He had given thanks, He gave it to them, saying: Drink ye all of
it; this cup is the New Testament in My blood, which is shed for you and
for many for the remission of sins; this do, as oft as ye drink it, in
remembrance of Me.

    Then shall the _Minister_ turn to the congregation and chant or
    say:

The peace of the Lord be with you alway.

    Then shall the _Congregation_ chant or say the _Agnus Dei_, and
    the distribution shall begin.


Agnus Dei.

=O Christ, Thou Lamb of God, that takest away the sin of the world, have
mercy upon us!=

=O Christ, Thou Lamb of God, that takest away the sin of the world, have
mercy upon us!=

=O Christ, Thou Lamb of God, that takest away the sin of the world, grant
us Thy peace! Amen.=

    When the _Minister_ giveth the Bread, he shall say:

Take and eat; this is the true body of our Lord Jesus Christ, given into
death for thy sins. This strengthen and preserve thee in the true faith
unto life eternal. Amen.

    When he giveth the Cup, he shall say:

Take and drink; this is the true blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, shed for
the remission of thy sins. This strengthen and preserve thee in the true
faith unto life eternal. Amen.

    In dismissing the Communicants, the _Minister_ may say:

                             Depart in peace.

    If the consecrated bread or wine be spent before all have
    communed, the _Minister_ shall consecrate more, saying aloud,
    so much of the words of institution as pertaineth to the
    element to be consecrated.

    When all have communed, the _Minister_ shall reverently cover
    what remaineth of the bread and wine.

    Then, all standing, the _Congregation_ may chant or say the


Nunc Dimittis.

=Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace according to Thy
word;=

=For mine eyes have seen Thy salvation, which Thou hast prepared before
the face of all people.=

=A light to lighten the Gentiles; and the glory of Thy people Israel.=

=Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Ghost;=

=As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without
end. Amen.=

    Then shall be chanted or said:


The Thanksgiving.

_Minister._ O give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good.

    The _Congregation_ shall chant or say:

                     =And His mercy endureth forever.=

_Minister._ We give thanks to Thee, Almighty God, that Thou hast
refreshed us through this salutary gift; and we beseech Thee that of Thy
mercy Thou wouldst strengthen us through the same in faith toward Thee
and in fervent love toward one another; through Jesus Christ, Thy dear
Son, our Lord, who liveth and reigneth with Thee and the Holy Ghost ever
one God, world without end.

    The _Congregation_ shall chant or say:

                                  =Amen.=

    Then may be chanted or said the


Benedicamus.

_Minister._ The Lord be with you.

_Congregation._ =And with thy spirit.=

_Minister._ Bless we the Lord.

_Congregation._ =Thanks be to God!=

    Then shall the _Minister_ say the _Benediction_ as here
    followeth, or he may say the words _2 Cor. 13, 14_.


The Benediction.

The Lord bless thee and keep thee.

The Lord make His face shine upon thee and be gracious unto thee.

The Lord lift up His countenance upon thee and give thee peace.

    The _Congregation_ shall chant or say:

                                  =Amen.=

    After the _Benediction_ the _Congregation_ should offer silent
    prayer.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Then may the _Minister_ give this _Exhortation_.[4]


The Exhortation.

Dearly Beloved! Forasmuch as we purpose to come to the Holy Supper of our
Lord Jesus Christ, it becometh us diligently to examine ourselves, as St.
Paul exhorteth us. For this holy Sacrament hath been instituted for the
special comfort and strengthening of those who humbly confess their sins
and hunger and thirst after righteousness.

But if we thus examine ourselves, we shall find nothing in us but only
sin and death, from which we can in no wise set ourselves free. Therefore
our Lord Jesus Christ hath had mercy upon us and hath taken upon Himself
our nature, that so He might fulfil for us the whole will and Law of God
and for us and for our deliverance suffer death and all that we by our
sins have deserved. And to the end that we should the more confidently
believe this and be strengthened by our faith in a cheerful obedience to
His holy will, He hath instituted the holy Sacrament of His Supper, in
which He feedeth us with His body and giveth us to drink of His blood.

Therefore, whoso eateth of this bread and drinketh of this cup, firmly
believing the words of Christ, dwelleth in Christ and Christ in him and
hath eternal life.

We should also do this in remembrance of Him, showing His death, that He
was delivered for our offenses and raised again for our justification,
and, rendering unto Him most hearty thanks for the same, take up our
cross and follow Him, and, according to His commandment, love one another
even as He hath loved us. For we are all one bread and one body, even as
we are all partakers of this one bread and drink of this one cup.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] For Exhortation see end of this service.

[2] _Here he shall take the Plate with the Bread in his hand._

[3] _Here he shall take the Cup in his hand._

[4] The Exhortation, if in use, may be inserted at the place indicated
above.




The Order of Evening Service, or Vespers.


    A Hymn of Invocation of the Holy Ghost or another Hymn may be
    sung.

    Then shall be chanted or said, responsively, the _Versicle_
    with the _Gloria Patri_ as here followeth, all standing to the
    end of the _Psalm_.

_Minister._ O Lord, open Thou my lips.

_Congregation._ =And my mouth shall show forth Thy praise.=

_Minister._ Make haste, O God, to deliver me.

_Congregation._ =Make haste, to help me, O Lord.=

=Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Ghost, as it was
in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.=

                               =Hallelujah!=

    During the Passion Season the _Hallelujah_ shall be omitted.


The Psalm.

    Then shall be chanted or said one or more _Psalms_. At the
    end of the _Psalm_ the _Gloria Patri_ shall be chanted. An
    _Antiphon_ may be used with each Psalm.


The Lesson.

    The _Scripture Lessons_ shall then be read, and after each
    _Lesson_ may be chanted or said:

_Minister._ But Thou, O Lord, have mercy upon us.

_Congregation._ =Thanks be to Thee, O Lord.=

    After the _Lessons_ a _Responsory_ may be chanted.

    Then may be sung a Hymn.

    Then may follow a _Sermon_, after which the _Offerings_ may be
    gathered.

    Then shall be sung


The Hymn.

    Then, all standing, may be chanted or said this _Versicle_.

    But on Festival Days a special _Versicle_ may be used.

_Minister._ Let my prayers be set forth before Thee as incense;

_Congregation._ =And the lifting up of my hands as the evening sacrifice.=


The Canticle.

    Then shall be chanted the


Magnificat.

Luke 1, 46-55.

=My soul doth magnify the Lord: and my spirit hath rejoiced in God, my
Savior.=

=For He hath regarded: the low estate of His handmaiden.=

=For, behold, from henceforth: all generations shall call me blessed.=

=For He that is mighty hath done to me great things: and holy is His
name.=

=And His mercy is on them that fear Him: from generation to generation.=

=He hath showed strength with His arm: He hath scattered the proud in the
imagination of their hearts.=

=He hath put down the mighty from their seats: and exalted them of low
degree.=

=He hath filled the hungry with good things: and the rich He hath sent
empty away.=

=He hath holpen His servant Israel in remembrance of His mercy: as He
spake to our fathers, to Abraham and to his seed, forever.=

=Glory be to the Father and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost;=

=As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without
end. Amen.=

or the


Nunc Dimittis.

Luke 2, 29-32.

=Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace: according to Thy
word;=

=For mine eyes have seen Thy salvation: which Thou hast prepared before
the face of all people;=

=A light to lighten the Gentiles: and the glory of Thy people Israel.=

=Glory be to the Father and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost;=

=As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without
end. Amen.=

    An _Antiphon_ may be chanted with the _Canticle_.

    Then shall be said the _Prayers_ here following, or the
    _Suffrages_, the _Litany_, or other prayers.


The Prayer.

_Minister._ Lord, have mercy upon us.

_Congregation._ =Lord, have mercy upon us.=

_Minister._ Christ, have mercy upon us.

_Congregation._ =Christ, have mercy upon us.=

_Minister._ Lord, have mercy upon us.

_Congregation._ =Lord, have mercy upon us.=

    Then all shall say:

=Our Father, who art in heaven; Hallowed be Thy name; Thy kingdom come;
Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven; Give us this day our daily
bread; And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass
against us; And lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil;
For Thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory forever and ever.
Amen.=

_Minister._ The Lord be with you.

_Congregation._ =And with thy spirit.=

                               Let us pray.

    Then shall be said the _Collect_ for the day. The _Collect_
    for the Sunday is said throughout the week following until
    Friday; but on Saturday the _Collect_ for the following Sunday
    is said. Then may be said any other _Collects_ and after that
    this _Collect for Peace_. A _Versicle_ may be used with the
    _Collect_.

_Minister._ The Lord will give strength unto His people.

_Congregation._ =The Lord will bless His people with peace.=


Collect for Peace.

O God, from whom all holy desires, all good counsels, and all just works
do proceed, give unto Thy servants that peace which the world cannot
give, that our hearts may be set to obey Thy commandments, and also
that we by Thee, being defended from the fear of our enemies, may pass
our time in rest and quietness; through the merits of Jesus Christ, our
Savior.

                                   Amen.

    Then may be chanted or said the


Benedicamus.

_Minister._ Bless we the Lord.

_Congregation._ =Thanks be to God!=

    The service may end with the _Benedicamus_, or a Closing Hymn
    may be sung, after which may be said:

The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God and the communion
of the Holy Ghost be with you all.

                                  =Amen.=

    At the close of the Service silent prayer should be offered.




The Order of Early Service, or Matins.


    A Hymn of Invocation of the Holy Ghost or another Hymn may be
    sung.

    Then shall be chanted or said the _Versicles_ here following,
    all standing to the end of the _Venite_.

_Minister._ O Lord, open Thou my lips.

_Congregation._ =And my mouth shall show forth Thy praise.=

_Minister._ Make haste, O God, to deliver me.

_Congregation._ =Make haste to help me, O Lord.=

=Glory be to the Father and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost;=

=As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without
end. Amen.=

                               =Hallelujah!=

    During the Passion season the _Hallelujah_ shall be omitted.

    Then shall follow the _Invitatory_ with the _Venite_. On
    Festival Days a special _Invitatory_ may be used.

_Minister._ O come, let us worship the Lord.

_Congregation._ =For He is our Maker.=


Venite Exultemus.

Ps. 95, 1-7.

=O come, let us sing unto the Lord: let us make a joyful noise to the
Rock of our salvation.=

=Let us come before His presence with thanksgiving: and make a joyful
noise unto Him with psalms.=

=For the Lord is a great God: and a great King above all gods.=

=In His hand are the deep places of the earth: the strength of the hills
is His also.=

=The sea is His, and He made it: and His hands formed the dry land.=

=O come, let us worship and bow down: let us kneel before the Lord, our
Maker.=

=For He is our God: and we are the people of His pasture and the sheep of
His hand.=

=Glory be to the Father and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost;=

=As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without
end. Amen.=


The Hymn.

    The Hymn shall then be sung.


The Psalm.

    Then, all standing to the end of the _Psalm_, shall be chanted
    or said one or more _Psalms_. At the end of the _Psalm_ the
    _Gloria Patri_ shall be chanted. An _Antiphon_ may be used with
    each _Psalm_.


The Lesson.

    The _Scripture Lessons_ shall then be read. After each _Lesson_
    may be chanted or said:

_Minister._ But Thou, O Lord, have mercy upon us.

_Congregation._ =Thanks be to God!=

    After the _Lessons_ a _Responsory_ may be chanted.

    A brief _Exhortation_ or a _Sermon_ may then follow.


The Canticle.

    The _Congregation_ shall stand and chant the _Te Deum Laudamus_
    or the _Benedictus_. An _Antiphon_ may be chanted with the
    _Benedictus_.


Te Deum Laudamus.

=We praise Thee, O God: we acknowledge Thee to be the Lord.=

=All the earth doth worship Thee: the Father everlasting.=

=To Thee all angels cry aloud: the heavens and all the powers therein.=

=To Thee cherubim and seraphim: continually do cry:=

=Holy, holy, holy: Lord God of Sabaoth;=

=Heaven and earth are full of the majesty: of Thy glory.=

=The glorious company of the apostles: praise Thee.=

=The goodly fellowship of the prophets: praise Thee.=

=The noble army of martyrs: praise Thee.=

=The holy Church throughout all the world: doth acknowledge Thee.=

=The Father: of an infinite Majesty;=

=Thine adorable, true: and only Son.=

=Also the Holy Ghost: the Comforter.=

=Thou art the King of Glory: O Christ.=

=Thou art the everlasting Son: of the Father.=

=When Thou tookest upon Thee to deliver man: Thou didst humble Thyself to
be born of a virgin.=

=When Thou hadst overcome the sharpness of death: Thou didst open the
kingdom of heaven to all believers.=

=Thou sittest at the right hand of God: in the glory of the Father.=

=We believe that Thou shalt come: to be our Judge.=

=We therefore pray Thee, help Thy servants: whom Thou hast redeemed with
Thy precious blood.=

=Make them to be numbered with Thy saints: in glory everlasting.=

=O Lord, save Thy people: and bless Thine inheritance.=

=Govern them: and lift them up forever.=

=Day by day: we magnify Thee.=

=And we worship Thy name: ever, world without end.=

=Vouchsafe, O Lord: to keep us this day without sin.=

=O Lord, have mercy upon us: have mercy upon us.=

=O Lord, let Thy mercy be upon us: as our trust is in Thee.=

=O Lord, in Thee have I trusted: let me never be confounded. Amen.=


or the

Benedictus.

Luke 1, 68-79.

=Blessed be the Lord God of Israel: for He hath visited and redeemed His
people;=

=And hath raised up a horn of salvation for us: in the house of His
servant David;=

=As He spake by the mouth of His holy prophets: which have been since the
world began;=

=That we should be saved from our enemies: and from the hand of all that
hate us;=

=To perform the mercy promised to our fathers: and to remember His holy
covenant;=

=The oath which He sware to our father Abraham: that He would grant unto
us;=

=That we, being delivered out of the hand of our enemies: might serve Him
without fear,=

=In holiness and righteousness before Him: all the days of our life.=

=And thou, child, shalt be called the prophet of the Highest: for thou
shalt go before the face of the Lord to prepare His ways;=

=To give knowledge of salvation unto His people: by the remission of
their sins,=

=Through the tender mercy of our God: whereby the Dayspring from on high
hath visited us,=

=To give light to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death:
to guide our feet in the way of peace.=

=Glory be to the Father and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost;=

=As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without
end. Amen.=


The Prayer.

    Then shall be said the _Prayers_ here following, or the
    _Suffrages_, the _Litany_, or other prayers.

_Minister._ Lord, have mercy upon us.

_Congregation._ =Lord, have mercy upon us.=

_Minister._ Christ, have mercy upon us.

_Congregation._ =Christ, have mercy upon us.=

_Minister._ Lord, have mercy upon us.

_Congregation._ =Lord, have mercy upon us.=

    Then all shall say:

=Our Father, who art in heaven; Hallowed be Thy name; Thy kingdom come;
Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven; Give us this day our daily
bread; And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass
against us; And lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil;
For Thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory forever and ever.
Amen.=

    One or more _Collects_ may be used, with the _Salutation_,
    which may be preceded by a _Versicle_. After each _Collect_ the
    _Congregation_ shall chant or say:

                                  =Amen.=

    Then may be chanted or said the _Benedicamus_ with the
    _Salutation_.

_Minister._ The Lord be with you.

_Congregation._ =And with thy spirit.=


Benedicamus.

_Minister._ Bless we the Lord.

_Congregation._ =Thanks be to God!=

    The service may end with the _Benedicamus_, or a closing Hymn
    may be sung; after which may be said:

The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God and the communion
of the Holy Ghost be with you all.

                                  =Amen.=

    At the close of the service silent prayer should be offered.




HYMNS




THE BEGINNING OF WORSHIP.


1

                                                                     L. M.

    Lord Jesus Christ, to us attend,
    Thy Holy Spirit to us send,
    With grace to rule us day by day
    And lead us in true wisdom’s way.

    2. Teach Thou our lips to sing Thy praise,
    Our hearts in true devotion raise,
    Our faith increase, and grant us light
    That we may know Thy name aright;

    3. Until we join the hosts that cry,
    “Holy art Thou, O Lord most high!”
    And in the light of that blest place
    Shall gaze upon Thee face to face.

    4. Glory to God, the Father, Son,
    And Holy Spirit, Three in One!
    To Thee, O holy Trinity,
    Be praise throughout eternity!

                                       William, Duke of Saxe-Weimar, 1651.


2

                                                                     L. M.

    Lord, open Thou my heart to hear
    And by Thy Word to me draw near;
    Let me Thy Word still pure retain,
    Let me Thy child and heir remain.

    2. Thy Word doth move the inmost heart,
    Thy Word doth perfect health impart,
    Thy Word my soul with joy doth bless.
    Thy Word brings peace and blessedness.

    3. Glory to God the Father, Son,
    And Holy Spirit, Three in One!
    To Thee, O blessed Trinity,
    Be praise throughout eternity!

                                                        J. Olearius, 1671.


3

                                                          7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 8

    Blessed Jesus, at Thy word
      We are gathered all to hear Thee;
    Let our hearts and souls be stirred
      Now to seek and love and fear Thee,
    By Thy teachings, sweet and holy,
    Drawn from earth to love Thee solely.

    2. All our knowledge, sense, and sight
      Lie in deepest darkness shrouded
    Till Thy Spirit breaks our night,
      With the beams of truth unclouded.
    Thou alone to God canst win us,
    Thou must work all good within us.

    3. Glorious Lord, Thyself impart!
      Light of Light, from God proceeding;
    Open Thou our ears and heart,
      Help us by Thy Spirit’s pleading;
    Hear the cry Thy people raises,
    Hear and bless our prayers and praises.

    4. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
      Praise to Thee and adoration!
    Grant that we Thy Word may trust
      And obtain true consolation,
    While we here below must wander,
    Till we sing Thy praises yonder.

                            T. Clausnitzer, 1663; C. Winkworth, tr., 1858.


4

                                                                     L. M.

    Thy presence, gracious God, afford,
    Prepare us to receive Thy Word;
    Now let Thy voice engage our ear
    And faith be mixed with what we hear.

    2. Distracting thoughts and cares remove
    And fix our hearts and hopes above;
    With food divine may we be fed
    And satisfied with living bread.

    3. To us the sacred Word apply
    With sovereign power and energy;
    And may we, in Thy faith and fear,
    Reduce to practise what we hear.

    4. Father, in us Thy Son reveal;
    Teach us to know and do Thy will;
    Thy saving power and love display
    And guide us to the realms of day.

                                                         J. Fawcett, 1817.


5

                                                          8, 7, 8, 7, 7, 7

    Open now Thy gates of beauty,
      Zion, let me enter there,
    Where my soul in joyful duty
      Waits for Him who answers pray’r;
    Oh, how blessed is this place,
    Filled with solace, light, and grace!

    2. Yes, my God, I come before Thee,
      Come Thou also down to me;
    Where we find Thee and adore Thee,
      There a heaven on earth must be.
    In my heart, oh, enter Thou,
    Let it be Thy temple now.

    3. Here Thy praise is gladly chanted,
      Here Thy seed is duly sown;
    Let my soul, where it is planted,
      Bring forth precious sheaves alone,
    So that all I hear may be
    Fruitful unto life in me.

    4. Thou my faith increase and quicken,
      Let me keep Thy Gift divine,
    Howsoe’er temptations thicken;
      May Thy Word still o’er me shine,
    As my pole-star through my life,
    As my comfort in my strife.

    5. Speak, O God, and I will hear Thee,
      Let Thy will be done indeed;
    May I undisturbed draw near Thee
      Whilst Thou dost Thy people feed.
    Here of life the fountain flows,
    Here is balm for all our woes.

                               B. Schmolck, 1734; C. Winkworth, tr., 1862.


6

                                                                     C. M.

    Lord, when we bend before Thy throne
      And our confessions pour,
    Teach us to feel the sins we own
      And hate what we deplore.

    2. Our broken spirit pitying see,
      True penitence impart;
    Then let a kindling glance from Thee
      Beam hope upon the heart.

    3. When our responsive tongues essay
      Their grateful hymns to raise,
    Grant that our souls may join the lay
      And mount to Thee in praise.

    4. When we disclose our wants in prayer,
      May we our wills resign
    And not a thought our bosom share
      That is not wholly Thine.

    5. May faith each meek petition fill
      And waft it to the skies
    And teach our hearts ’tis goodness still
      That grants it or denies.

                                                      J. D. Carlyle, 1802.


7

                                                                        7s

    Lord, we come before Thee now,
    At Thy feet we humbly bow;
    Oh, do not our suit disdain!
    Shall we seek Thee, Lord, in vain?

    2. Lord, on Thee our souls depend;
    In compassion now descend,
    Fill our hearts with Thy rich grace,
    Tune our lips to sing Thy praise.

    3. In Thine own appointed way
    Now we seek Thee, here we stay.
    Lord, we know not how to go
    Till a blessing Thou bestow.

    4. Send some message from Thy Word
    That may joy and peace afford;
    Let Thy Spirit now impart
    Full salvation to each heart.

    5. Comfort those who weep and mourn,
    Let the time of joy return;
    Those that are cast down lift up,
    Strong in faith, in love, and hope.

    6. Grant that those who seek may find
    Thee a God sincere and kind.
    Heal the sick, the captive free;
    Let us all rejoice in Thee.

                                                         W. Hammond, 1745.


8

                                                                        7s

    To Thy temple I repair;
    Lord, I love to worship there.
    While Thy glorious praise is sung,
    Touch my lips, unloose my tongue.

    2. While the prayers of saints ascend,
    God of Love, to mine attend.
    Hear me, for Thy Spirit pleads;
    Hear, for Jesus intercedes.

    3. While I hearken to Thy Law,
    Fill my soul with humble awe,
    Till Thy Gospel bring to me
    Life and immortality.

    4. While Thy ministers proclaim
    Peace and pardon in Thy name,
    Through their voice, by faith, may I
    Hear Thee speaking from the sky.

    5. From Thy house, when I return,
    May my heart within me burn;
    And at evening let me say,
    “I have walked with God to-day.”

                                                   James Montgomery, 1812.




THE CLOSE OF WORSHIP.


9

                                                                7, 6, 7, 6

    Abide, O dearest Jesus,
      Among us with Thy grace,
    That Satan may not harm us
      Nor we to sin give place.

    2. Abide, O dear Redeemer,
      Among us with Thy Word
    And thus now and hereafter
      True peace and joy afford.

    3. Abide with heavenly brightness
      Among us, precious Light;
    Thy truth direct, and keep us
      From error’s gloomy night.

    4. Abide with richest blessings
      Among us, bounteous Lord;
    Let us in grace and wisdom
      Grow daily through Thy Word.

    5. Abide with Thy protection
      Among us, Lord, our Strength,
    Lest world and Satan fell us
      And overcome at length.

    6. Abide, O faithful Savior,
      Among us with Thy love;
    Grant steadfastness and help us
      To reach our home above.

                                          J. Stegmann, 1628; A. Crull, tr.


10

                                                          7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 8

    Now our worship sweet is o’er—
      Singing, praying, teaching, hearing;
    Let us gladly God adore
      For His gracious strength and cheering.
    Praise our God, who now would save us,
    For the rich repast He gave us.

    2. Now the Blessing cheers our heart
      And the service thus is ended,
    Let us joyfully depart,—
      Be our souls to God commended.
    May His Spirit ever guide us
    And with all things well provide us.

    3. Let our going out be blest,
      Bless our entrance in like measure;
    Bless, O Lord, our toil and rest,
      Bless our bread, our grief and pleasure;
    Be in death Thy blessing given,
    And make us blest heirs of heaven.

                                          M. H. Schenck, 1680; M. Loy, tr.


11

                                                  6, 6, 6, 6, 8, 8 (H. M.)

    On what has now been sown
      Thy blessing, Lord, bestow;
    The pow’r is Thine alone
      To make it spring and grow:
    Do Thou the gracious harvest raise,
    And Thou alone shalt have the praise.

    2. To Thee our wants are known,
      From Thee are all our powers;
    Accept what is Thine own
      And pardon what is ours.
    Our praises, Lord, and prayers receive
    And to Thy Word a blessing give.

    3. O grant that each of us
      Who meet before Thee here,
    May meet together thus
      When Thou and Thine appear,
    And follow Thee to heaven, our home.
    E’en so, Amen, Lord Jesus, come!

                                                        John Newton, 1779.


12

                                                                 L. M. 6 l

    Sweet Savior, bless us ere we go;
      Thy Word into our minds instil;
    And make our lukewarm hearts to glow
      With lowly love and fervent will.
    Through life’s long day and death’s dark night,
    O gentle Jesus, be our Light.

    2. The day is gone, its hours have run,
      And Thou hast taken count of all—
    The scanty triumphs grace hath won,
      The broken vow, the frequent fall.
    Through life’s long day and death’s dark night,
    O gentle Jesus, be our Light.

    3. Grant us, dear Lord, from evil ways
      True absolution and release
    And bless us, more than in past days,
      With purity and inward peace.
    Through life’s long day and death’s dark night,
    O gentle Jesus, be our Light.

    4. For all we love, the poor, the sad,
      The sinful, unto Thee we call;
    O let Thy mercy make us glad;
      Thou art our Savior and our All.
    Through life’s long day and death’s dark night,
    O gentle Jesus, be our Light.

    5. Sweet Savior, bless us; night is come;
      Through night and darkness near us be;
    Good angels watch about our home,
      And we are one day nearer Thee.
    Through life’s long day and death’s dark night,
    O gentle Jesus, be our Light.

                                                        F. W. Faber, 1852.


13

                                                                     C. M.

    Almighty God, Thy Word is cast
      Like seed into the ground;
    Now let the dew of heaven descend
      And righteous fruits abound.

    2. Let not the foe of Christ and man
      This holy seed remove,
    But give it root in every heart
      To bring forth fruits of love.

    3. Let not the world’s deceitful cares
      The rising plant destroy,
    But let it yield a hundredfold
      The fruits of peace and joy.

    4. Oft as the precious seed is sown,
      Thy quickening grace bestow,
    That all whose souls the truth receive
      Its saving power may know.

                                                          J. Cawood, 1819.


14

                                                                8, 7, 8, 7

    Savior, all my sins confessing,
      Gracious hear me when I cry;
    Give through faith the promised blessing,
      Freely, fully _justify_.

    2. By Thy Holy Spirit’s leading,
      Bring me to Thy bosom nigh;
    In Thy blessed footsteps treading,
      Soul and body _sanctify_.

    3. So, the days of conflict ended,
      In the mansions of the sky,
    Whither, Lord, Thou art ascended,
      With Thyself me _glorify_.

                                                   Thomas Haweis, 1808, a.


15

                                                                        7s

    Now may He who from the dead
      Brought the Shepherd of the sheep,
    Jesus Christ, our king and Head,
      All our souls in safety keep.

    2. May He teach us to fulfil
      What is pleasing in His sight;
    Perfect us in all His will
      And preserve us day and night.

    3. To that dear Redeemer’s praise,
      Who the covenant sealed with blood,
    Let our hearts and voices raise
      Loud thanksgivings to our God.

                                                        John Newton, 1779.


16

                                                                       10s

    Savior, again to Thy dear name we raise
    With one accord our parting hymn of praise;
    Once more we bless Thee ere our worship cease;
    Then, lowly bending, wait Thy word of peace.

    2. Grant us Thy peace upon our homeward way;
    With Thee began, with Thee shall end the day;
    Guard Thou the lips from sin, the hearts from shame,
    That in this house have called upon Thy name.

    3. Grant us Thy peace, Lord, through the coming night,
    Turn Thou for us its darkness into light;
    From harm and danger keep Thy children free,
    For dark and light are both alike to Thee.

    4. Grant us Thy peace throughout our earthly life,
    Our balm in sorrow and our stay in strife;
    Then, when Thy voice shall bid our conflict cease,
    Call us, O Lord, to Thine eternal peace.

                                                        J. Ellerton, 1866.


17

                                                                 8, 7, 6 l

    Lord, dismiss us with Thy blessing,
      Fill our hearts with joy and peace.
    Let us each, Thy love possessing,
      Triumph in redeeming grace.
    |: O refresh us, :|
    Trav’ling through this wilderness.

    2. Thanks we give and adoration
      For Thy Gospel’s joyful sound.
    May the fruits of Thy salvation
      In our hearts and lives abound:
    |: May Thy presence :|
    With us evermore be found.

    3. So, whene’er the signal’s given
      Us from earth to call away,
    Borne on angels’ wings to heaven,
      Glad the summons to obey,
    |: May we, ready, :|
    Rise and reign in endless day.

                                                         J. Fawcett, 1773.


18

                                                          8, 6, 8, 6, 8, 8

    Lord of my life, whose tender care
      Hath led me on till now,
    Here lowly, at the hour of prayer,
      Before Thy throne I bow.
    I bless Thy gracious hand and pray
    Forgiveness for another day.

    2. O may I daily, hourly, strive
      In heavenly grace to grow;
    To Thee and to Thy glory live,
      Dead else to all below;
    Tread in the path my Savior trod,
    Though thorny, yet the path to God!

    3. With prayer my humble praise I bring
      For mercies day by day.
    Lord, teach my heart Thy love to sing;
      Lord, teach me how to pray!
    All that I have, I am, to Thee
    I offer through eternity.

                                                        “Ω Chelsea,” 1838.




MORNING.


19

                                                                 L. M. 6 l

    When streaming from the eastern skies,
    The morning light salutes my eyes,
    O Sun of righteousness divine,
    On me with beams of mercy shine,
    Chase the dark clouds of sin away,
    And turn my darkness into day.

    2. When to heaven’s great and glorious King
    My morning sacrifice I bring,
    And, grieving o’er my guilt and shame,
    Ask mercy, Savior, in Thy name,
    My conscience sprinkle with Thy blood
    And be my advocate with God.

    3. When each day’s scenes and labors close,
    And wearied nature seeks repose,
    With pardoning mercy, richly blest,
    Guard me, my Savior, while I rest;
    And as each morning’s sun shall rise,
    O lead me onward to the skies.

    4. And at my life’s last setting sun,
    My conflict o’er, my labors done,
    Jesus, Thy heavenly radiance shed,
    To cheer and bless my dying bed;
    And from death’s gloom my spirit raise
    To see Thy face and sing Thy praise.

                                                   Wm. Shrubsole, 1813, a.


20

                                                                     L. M.

    O holy, blessed Trinity,
    Divine, essential Unity,
    God Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
    Be Thou this day my Guide and Host.

    2. My soul and body keep from harm,
    O’er all I have extend Thine arm,
    That Satan may not cause distress,
    Nor bring me shame and wretchedness.

    3. The Father’s love shield me this day,
    The Son’s pure wisdom cheer my way,
    The Holy Spirit’s light divine
    Illume my heart’s benighted shrine.

    4. My Maker, strengthen Thou my heart,
    O my Redeemer, help impart,
    Blest Comforter, keep at my side
    That faith and love in me abide.

    5. Lord, bless and keep Thou me as Thine!
    Lord, make Thy face upon me shine!
    Lord, lift Thy countenance on me
    And give me peace, sweet peace, from Thee.

                             Martin Behm, 1608; C. H. L. Schuette, tr., a.


21

                                                                      7, 6

    While yet the morn is breaking,
      I thank my God once more,
    Beneath whose care awaking,
      I find the night is o’er;
    I thank Him that He calls me
      To life and health anew;
    I know whate’er befalls me,
      His care will still be true.

    2. O Israel’s Guardian, hear me,
      Watch over me this day;
    In all I do be near me.
      For others, too, I pray;
    To Thee I would commend them,
      Our Church, our school, our land,
    Direct them and defend them,
      When dangers are at hand.

    3. O gracious Lord, direct us,
      Thy doctrine pure defend,
    From heresies protect us,
      And for Thy Word contend,
    That we may praise Thee ever,
      O God, with one accord,
    And say: The Lord, our Savior,
      Be evermore adored!

    4. O grant us peace and gladness,
      Give us our daily bread,
    Shield us from grief and sadness,
      On us Thy blessings shed.
    Grant that our whole behavior,
      In truth and righteousness,
    May praise Thee, Lord, our Savior,
      Whose holy name we bless.

    5. And gently grant Thy blessing
      That we may do Thy will,
    No more Thy ways transgressing,
      Our proper task fulfil;
    With Peter’s full affiance
      Let down our nets again;
    If Thou art our Reliance,
      Our toil will not be vain.

    6. With craftiness unceasing
      Strives Satan to restrain
    What in Thy sight is pleasing
      And for Thy Church is gain;
    Yet vain is his endeavor,
      For Thou, O Christ, our Lord,
    Dost rule all things forever
      By Thine almighty Word.

    7. Thou art the Vine,—O nourish
      The branches graft in Thee
    And let them grow and flourish,
      A fair and fruitful tree.
    Thy Spirit pour within us
      And let His gifts of grace
    To such good actions win us
      As best may show Thy praise.

                                                       J. Muehlmann, 1610.


22

                                                                      7, 6

    My inmost heart now raises,
      In this fair morning hour,
    A song of thankful praises
      To Thine almighty power.
    O God, upon Thy throne!
      To honor and adore Thee,
      I bring my praise before Thee
    Through Christ, Thine only Son.

    2. For Thou from me hast warded
      All perils of the night;
    From every harm hast guarded
      My soul till morning’s light.
    Humbly to Thee I cry,
      O Savior, have compassion
      And pardon my transgression;
    Have mercy, Lord most high!

    3. And shield me from all evil,
      O gracious God, this day,
    From sin, and from the devil,
      From shame and from dismay,
    From fire’s consuming breath,
      From water’s devastation,
      From need and consternation,
    From evil sudden death.

    4. My life, my soul—defend them!
      My wife, child, goods, and home,—
    To Thy hand I commend them,
      From Thee my blessings come;
    Thy bounteous hand bestows
      My household and my treasures,
      My parents, friends, and pleasures;
    My cup with good o’erflows.

    5. Let not Thine angel leave me
      While here on earth I stay,
    Lest Satan’s arts deceive me
      And lead my soul astray.
    Then keep Thine angel near
      At night and each new morrow,
      Lest soul and body sorrow
    And, faltering, cost me dear.

    6. God shall do my advising,
      Whose might with wisdom blends;
    May He bless rest and rising,
      My efforts, means, and ends!
    To God, forever blessed,
      Will I with mine confide me
      And willing let Him guide me
    As seemeth to Him best.

    7. Amen! I say, not fearing
      That God rejects my prayer;
    I doubt not He is hearing
      And granting me His care.
    So I put forth my hands
      And look not long behind me,
      But ply the task assigned me
    By God as He commands.

                                                       J. Mathesius, 1592.


23

                                                          8, 7, 8, 7, 7, 7

    God, who madest earth and heaven,
      Father, Son, and Holy Ghost;
    Who the day and night hast given,
      Sun and moon and starry host;
    Thou whose mighty hand sustains
    Earth and all that it contains;—

    2. Praise to Thee my soul shall render,
      Who this night hast guarded me;
    My omnipotent Defender,
      Who from ill dost set me free,
    Free from danger, anguish, woe,
    Free from the infernal Foe.

    3. Let the night of my transgression
      With night’s darkness pass away;
    Jesus, into Thy possession
      I resign myself to-day;
    In Thy wounds I find relief
    From my greatest sin and grief.

    4. Grant that I may rise this morning
      From the lethargy of sin,
    So my soul, through Thy adorning,
      Shall be glorious within
    And I at the Judgment Day
    Shall not be a castaway.

    5. Let my life and conversation
      Be directed by Thy Word;
    Lord, Thy constant preservation
      To Thine erring child afford;
    Nowhere but alone in Thee
    From all harm can I be free.

    6. Wholly to Thy blest protection
      I commit my heart and mind.
    Mighty God, to Thy direction
      Wholly may I be resigned!
    Lord, my Shield, my Light divine,
    Oh, accept and own me Thine!

    7. Lord, to me Thine angel sending,
      Keep me from the subtle Foe;
    From his craft and might defending,
      Never let Thy wand’rer go,
    Till my final rest shall come
    And Thine angel bear me home.

                  H. Albert, 1642; J. C. Jacobi and A. T. Russell, tr., a.


24

                                                                      8, 8

    How lovely now the morning star
    In twilight sky bright gleams afar
      While night her curtain raiseth!
    Each creature hails, with ravished sight,
    The glories of returning light
      And God, its Maker, praiseth.
    Both far And near,
      All things living Thanks are giving,
    There high soaring,
    Here through earth’s wide field adoring.

    2. Then haste, my soul, thy song to raise
    Nor spare in thy Redeemer’s praise
      To pour thy due oblation;
    For glory, Lord, to Thee belongs,
    Thy praise resounds in grateful songs,
      With pious emulation,
    Joy rings Glad strings;
      Voices sounding, Hearts rebounding,
    Thus all nature
    Sings Thy praise, O great Creator.

    3. Unconscious, I securely slept
    Nor saw the cruel foes which kept
      Close watch about my slumber;
    Though evil spirits, through the night,
    With fiendish craft and watchful spite,
      Came round me without number;
    Whose hands In bands,
      Mischief brewing For my ruin,
    Had enslaved me,
    Hadst not Thou stood by and saved me.

    4. For, Jesus, Thou with saving power
    Wast near me in that threatening hour,
      Didst save me from their fury;
    And I reposed in quiet sleep
    Whilst Thou unwearied watch didst keep;
      To Thee all praise and glory!
    Lord, all My soul,
      Upward springing, Loudly singing,
    Shall adore Thee,
    While on earth I walk before Thee.

    5. This day my Fortress, Lord, abide,
    Now ope Thy gates of mercy wide,
      Within their shelter place me;
    My Castle and my Rock Thou art,
    Oh, let no foeman’s treacherous dart
      From Thee, my Stronghold, chase me!
    Help, Lord, Afford!
      Near me tarry Blows to parry,
    While around me
    Sword and armor sore confound me.

    6. Pour down Thy grace in cheering streams
    And warm my heart with mercy’s beams
      From heaven, Thy throne of beauty;
    Let Thy good Spirit guide my will
    That I, whate’er my station, still
      May seek my joy in duty.
    Send light And might
      That each measure, Scheme and pleasure,
    Heavenward tending,
    Still in Thee may find its ending.

    7. Keep grief, if this may be, away;
    If not, Thy will be done, I say,
      My choice to Thine resigning.
    O come and like the morning dew
    Refresh my heart and make it new,
      That I may, unrepining,
    Bear cross And loss
      Till that morrow Chase all sorrow,
    When upraisèd
    Where Thy name is ever praisèd.

    8. Meanwhile, my heart, both sing and leap,
    Mid cross and loss good courage keep,
      To heaven’s bright gate you hasten;
    Then lay desponding care aside,
    God ever thus His own hath tried
      And those He loves doth chasten;
    Hope still Midst ill,
      Calm, though grieving, Firm believing
    Tribulation
    Is the road to sure salvation.

                                  B. Wiesenmeyer, 1653; F. E. Cox, tr., a.


25

                                                                     S. M.

    We lift our hearts to Thee,
      O Day-star from on high!
    The sun itself is but Thy shade,
      Yet cheers both earth and sky.

    2. O let Thy rising beams
      The night of sin disperse,
    The mists of error and of vice,
      Which shade the universe.

    3. How beauteous nature now!
      How dark and sad before!
    With joy we view the pleasing change
      And nature’s God adore.

    4. O may no gloomy crime
      Pollute the rising day;
    May Jesus’ blood, like morning dew,
      Wash all our stains away.

    5. May we this life improve
      To mourn for errors past
    And live this short, revolving day
      As if it were our last.

                                                     Charles Wesley, 1741.


26

                                                                        7s

    Now the shades of night are gone,
    Now the morning light is come;
    Lord, may we be Thine to-day,
    Drive the shades of sin away.

    2. Fill our souls with heavenly light,
    Banish doubt and cleanse our sight;
    In Thy service, Lord, to-day,
    Help us labor, help us pray.

    3. Keep our haughty passions bound,
    Save us from our foes around;
    Going out and coming in,
    Keep us safe from every sin.

    4. When our work of life is past,
    Oh, receive us then at last!
    Night of sin will be no more
    When we reach the heavenly shore.

                                                       Samson Occom, 1770.


27

                                                                     C. M.

    Lord of my life, O may Thy praise
      Employ my noblest powers;
    Whose goodness lengthens out my days
      And fills the circling hours.

    2. Preserved by Thine almighty arm,
      I pass the shades of night,
    Serene and safe from every harm,
      And see returning light.

    3. When sleep, death’s semblance, o’er me spread,
      And I unconscious lay,
    Thy watchful care was round my bed
      To guard my feeble clay.

    4. O let the same almighty care
      My waking hours attend;
    From every trespass, every snare,
      My heedless steps defend.

    5. Smile on my minutes as they roll
      And guide my future days;
    And let Thy goodness fill my soul
      With gratitude and praise.

                                                        Anne Steele, 1760.


28

                                                                    7s 6 l

    Every morning mercies new
    Fall as fresh as morning dew;
    Every morning let us pay
    Tribute with the early day;
    For Thy mercies, Lord, are sure,
    Thy compassion doth endure.

    2. Still the greatness of Thy love
    Daily doth our sins remove;
    Daily, far as east from west,
    Lifts the burden from the breast;
    Gives unbought to those who pray
    Strength to stand in evil day.

    3. Let our prayers each morn prevail
    That these gifts may never fail;
    And as we confess the sin
    And the Tempter’s power within,
    Feed us with the Bread of Life,
    Fit us for our daily strife.

    4. As the morning light returns,
    As the sun with splendor burns,
    Teach us still to turn to Thee,
    Ever-blessed Trinity,
    With our hands our hearts to raise
    In unfailing prayer and praise.

                                                      G. Phillimore, 1863.


29

                                                                     L. M.

    Awake, my soul, and with the sun
    Thy daily stage of duty run;
    Shake off dull sloth and joyful rise
    To pay thy morning sacrifice.

    2. All praise to Thee, who safe hast kept
    And hast refreshed me while I slept.
    Grant, Lord, when I from death shall wake,
    I may of endless life partake.

    3. Lord, I my vows to Thee renew;
    Disperse my sins as morning dew,
    Guard my first springs of thought and will,
    And with Thyself my spirit fill.

    4. Direct, control, suggest, this day,
    All I design or do or say,
    That all my powers, with all their might,
    In Thy sole glory may unite.

    5. Praise God, from whom all blessings flow;
    Praise Him, all creatures here below;
    Praise Him, above, ye heavenly host:
    Praise Father, Son, and Holy Ghost!

                                                         Thomas Ken, 1695.




EVENING.


30

                                                                     C. M.

    Since now the day has reached its close
      And sunlight shines no more,
    In sleep the toil-worn find repose
      And all who wept before.

    2. But Thou, my God, no rest dost know,
      No slumber dims Thy sight;
    Thou hatest darkness as Thy foe,
      For Thou Thyself art light.

    3. O Lord, I pray, remember me
      Throughout the gloom of night
    And grant to me most graciously
      The shield of Thy great might.

    4. Turn from me Satan’s tyranny
      Through many an angel arm,
    Then shall I be from danger free
      And safe from every harm.

    5. I know the evil I have done
      Doth cry aloud to Thee;
    But yet the mercy of Thy Son
      Hath full atoned for me.

    6. Him I present Thee as my bail
      While suppliant at Thy feet;
    With such assurance I’ll not fail
      Before Thy judgment-seat.

    7. And therefore now I close my eyes
      And sleep with tranquil breast;
    Why waste the time in fears or sighs?
      God watches o’er my rest.

    8. Away, vain, idle thoughts, depart!
      Roam not, my soul, abroad!
    For now I build within my heart
      A temple to my God.

    9. Should this night prove the last for me
      In this dark vale of tears,
    Then lead me, Lord, in heaven to Thee
      And my elect compeers.

    10. And thus I live and die to Thee,
      Strong Lord of hosts, indeed!
    In life and death Thou helpest me
      From every fear and need.

                                                J. T. Herzog, before 1670.


31

                                                                      8, 7

    Sink not yet, my soul, to slumber,
      Wake, my heart, go forth and tell,
    All the mercies without number
      That this bygone day befell.
    Tell how God hath kept afar
    All things that against me war,
    Hath upheld me and defended,
    And His grace my soul befriended.

    2. Father, merciful and holy,
      Thee to-night I praise and bless,
    Who, to labor true and lowly,
      Grantest ever meet success;
    Many a sin and many a woe,
    Many a fierce and subtle foe,
    Hast Thou checked that once alarmed me,
    So that naught to-day has harmed me.

    3. Yes, our wisdom vainly ponders,
      Fathoms not Thy loving thought.
    Never tongue can tell the wonders
      That Thy hand for me hath wrought;
    Thou hast guided me to-day
    That no ill hath crossed my way.
    There is neither bound nor measure
    In Thy love’s o’erflowing treasure.

    4. Now the light that nature gladdens,
      And the pomp of day, is gone,
    And my heart is tired and saddens
      As the gloomy night comes on.
    Ah, then, with Thy changeless light
    Warm and cheer my heart to-night;
    As the shadows round me gather,
    Keep me close to Thee, my Father!

    5. Of Thy grace, I pray Thee, pardon
      All my sins and heal their smart;
    Sore and heavy is their burden,
      Sharp their sting within my heart;
    And my Foe lays many a snare
    But to tempt me to despair.
    Thou alone canst help me, Savior;
    Punish not my ill behavior.

    6. Though I have from Thee departed,
      Now I seek Thy face again,
    For Thy Son, the loving-hearted,
      Made our peace through bitter pain.
    Yes, far greater than our sin,
    Though it still be strong within,
    Is Thy love that fails us never,
    Mercy that endures forever.

    7. Brightness of th’ eternal city!
      Light of every faithful soul!
    Safe beneath Thy sheltering pity
      Let the tempest past me roll;
    Now it darkens far and near,
    Still, my God, still be Thou here;
    Thou canst comfort, and Thou only,
    When the night is long and lonely.

    8. From the power of darkness save me
      And from Satan’s hellish snares,
    Who endeavors to enslave me
      And assails me unawares;
    Let me never lose the sight
    Of Thy good and gracious light;
    Thou canst fill my heart with gladness,
    That it feel no pain in sadness.

    9. Though my weary eyes are closing
      And my senses fall asleep,
    Still my soul, on Thee reposing,
      Ever must its vigils keep.
    Let my spirit longingly
    Always dream, my God, of Thee,
    Firmly unto Thee e’er cleaving,
    Sleeping, yet Thy grace receiving.

    10. Lord, the twilight now hath vanished,
      Send Thy blessing on my sleep,
    Every sin and terror banished,
      Let my rest be calm and deep.
    Soul and body, mind and health,
    Wife and children, house and wealth,
    Friend and foe, the sick, the stranger,
    Keep Thou safe from harm and danger.

    11. O Thou mighty God, now hearken
      To the prayer Thy child hath made;
    Jesus, while the night-hours darken,
      Be Thou still my hope, my aid;
    Holy Ghost, on Thee I call,
    Friend and Comforter of all,
    Hear my earnest prayer, O hear me!
    Lord, Thou hearest, Thou art near me.

                                                            J. Rist, 1642.


32

                                                                     L. M.

    The happy sunshine now is gone,
    The gloomy night comes swiftly on;
    But shine Thou still, O Christ, our Light,
    Nor let us lose ourselves in night.

    2. We thank Thee that throughout the day
    Thy angels watched around our way
    And free from harm and vexing fear
    Have led us on in safety here.

    3. Whate’er of wrong we’ve done or said,
    Let not the charge on us be laid;
    That, through Thy free forgiveness blest,
    In peaceful slumber we may rest.

    4. Thy guardian angels round us place,
    All evil from our couch to chase;
    Our soul and body, while we sleep,
    In safety, gracious Father, keep.

                                                    Nikolaus Herman, 1560.


33

                                                                      7, 7

    Now rest beneath night’s shadows,
    Man, beast, town, woods, and meadows,
      The world in slumber lies;
    But thou, my heart, awake thee,
    To prayer and song betake thee,
      Let praise to thy Creator rise.

    2. O sun, where art thou vanished?
    The night thy reign hath banished,
      The foe of day, the night.
    Farewell! For now appeareth
    Another Sun and cheereth
      My heart—’tis Jesus Christ, my Light.

    3. The last faint beam is going,
    The golden stars are glowing
      In yonder dark-blue deep;
    Such is the glory given
    When, called of God to heaven,
      On earth no more we pine and weep.

    4. To rest my body hasteth,
    Aside its garments casteth,
      Types of mortality;
    These I put off and ponder
    How Christ shall give me yonder
      A robe of glorious majesty.

    5. Head, hands, and feet, reposing,
    Are glad the day is closing,
      That work came to an end;
    Cheer up, my heart, with gladness!
    For God from all earth’s sadness
      And from sin’s toil relief will send.

    6. Ye weary limbs, now rest you,
    For toil hath sore oppressed you,
      And quiet sleep ye crave;
    A sleep shall once o’ertake you
    From which no man can wake you,
      In your last narrow bed—the grave.

    7. My heavy eyes are closing;
    When I lie deep reposing,
      Soul, body, where are ye?
    To helpless sleep I yield them;
    O let Thy mercy shield them,
      Thou sleepless Eye, their Guardian be!

    8. Lord Jesus, who dost love me,
    O spread Thy wings above me
      And shield me from alarm!
    Though Satan would devour me,
    Let angel-guards sing o’er me:
      “This child of God shall meet no harm!”

    9. My loved ones, rest securely,
    From every peril surely
      Our God will guard your heads.
    May He sweet slumbers send you
    And bid His hosts attend you,
      And golden-armed, watch o’er your beds!

                                                      Paul Gerhardt, 1653.


34

                                                                     L. M.

    Christ, everlasting Source of light,
    All things are open to Thy sight;
    Thou Splendor of Thy Father’s face,
    Show us the path of truth and grace.

    2. We now implore Thy sovereign might
    To keep us, Lord, the coming night;
    Preserve us, Lord, from all distress;
    O God, Thy mercy we address.

    3. Remove our sinful drowsiness;
    Let Satan not our soul oppress;
    Our feeble flesh keep chaste and pure
    And let us rest in Thee secure.

    4. And when our eyes are bound in sleep,
    The lamp of faith still burning keep;
    Thy hand sustain us while we rest;
    Remove our sin, and we are blest.

    5. Great Guardian of Thy Christian flock,
    Thy presence be our saving rock;
    Thine agony and holy blood
    Be always our support, O God!

    6. Remember, Lord, the woes and pains
    Which here our body hold in chains;
    Our soul, which Thou hast ransomed, Lord,
    O comfort with Thy holy Word.

    7. To God the Father and the Son
    And Holy Spirit, Three in One,
    Be glory, praise, and majesty
    Now, ever, and eternally.

          From Ambrose’s _Christe, qui lux es et dies_: W. Meusslin, 1527.


35

                                                                     L. M.

    Before Thy throne I now appear,
    O Lord, bow down Thy gracious ear
    To me and cast not from Thy face
    Thy sinful child, that sues for grace.

    2. Thou, Father of eternity,
    Thine image hast impressed on me;
    In Thee I am and live and move,
    Nor can exist without Thy love.

    3. Oft hast Thou snatched me from distress
    And raised me oft when comfortless,
    When but a step, nay, one hair’s breadth,
    Was ’twixt my tottering life and death.

    4. My sense and reason come from Thee,
    And sustenance Thou givest me;
    A faithful friend Thou dost bestow
    To prove his love in weal and woe.

    5. Thou hast redeemed me, Son of God,
    Hast shed for me Thy precious blood,
    The Law for my sake hast fulfilled,
    And thus Thy Father’s wrath hast stilled.

    6. When sin and Satan witness bear
    Against me that I must despair,
    As Mediator step Thou in
    And save me from the curse of sin.

    7. Thou art my Advocate for aye,
    My Savior, Comfort, and my Stay.
    Thine all-sufficient merit is
    On earth my peace, in heaven my bliss.

    8. God Holy Spirit, Power Divine,
    Thou workest in this heart of mine;
    Naught can be counted good in me
    But what proceeds alone from Thee.

    9. Through Thee I now my God adore
    And call Him Father evermore;
    Through Thee His Word and Sacrament
    I love and hold till life is spent.

    10. Through Thee I’m in temptation free
    From fear and sad despondency;
    Through Thee I’m quickened oft to taste
    The sweets of Thine eternal rest.

    11. And so I now give thanks to Thee
    With heart and tongue most joyfully
    For all Thy mercies, Lord, my God,
    Which on my soul Thou hast bestowed.

    12. Beseeching Thine almighty grace
    To aid me, till I’ve run my race,
    Soul, body, honor, house, and friend
    To Thy protection I commend.

    13. Give me a heart that is sincere,
    To love Thy truth, and persevere
    In faith and Christian piety
    And shun all base hypocrisy.

    14. My sins and trespasses forgive;
    Have patience with me while I live;
    O give me faith and charity
    And let my hope rest but in Thee.

    15. Grant that in peace I close mine eyes,
    But on the Last Day bid me rise
    And let me see Thy face fore’er—
    Amen, Amen, Lord, hear my prayer!

                             B. von Hodenberg. 1640; J. Gesenius, a. 1650.


36

                                                                     L. M.

    Glory to Thee, my God, this night
    For all the blessings of the light!
    Keep me, O keep me, King of kings,
    Beneath Thine own almighty wings!

    2. Forgive me, Lord, for Thy dear Son,
    The ill that I this day have done,
    That with the world, myself, and Thee
    I, ere I sleep, at peace may be.

    3. Teach me to live that I may dread
    The grave as little as my bed;
    Teach me to die that so I may
    With joy behold the Judgment Day.

    4. Oh, may my soul on Thee repose,
    And may sweet sleep my eyelids close!
    Let no ill dreams disturb my rest,
    No powers of darkness me molest.

                                                    Thomas Ken, 1695, abr.


37

                                                                      8, 7

    Savior, breathe an evening blessing
      Ere repose our spirits seal;
    Sin and want we come confessing;
      Thou canst save, and Thou canst heal.

    2. Though destruction walk around us,
      Though the arrows past us fly,
    Angel-guards from Thee surround us;
      We are safe if Thou art nigh.

    3. Though the night be dark and dreary,
      Darkness cannot hide from Thee;
    Thou art He who, never weary,
      Watchest where Thy people be.

    4. Should swift death this night o’ertake us
      And our couch become our tomb,
    May the morn in heav’n awake us,
      Clad in light and deathless bloom.

                                                     James Edmeston, 1820.


38

                                                             11, 11, 11, 5

    Now God be with us, for the night is closing;
    The light and darkness are of His disposing,
    And ’neath His shadow here to rest we yield us,
    For He will shield us.

    2. Let evil thoughts and spirits flee before us;
    Till morning cometh, watch, O Master, o’er us;
    In soul and body Thou from harm defend us,
    Thine angels send us.

    3. Let pious thoughts be ours when sleep o’ertakes us,
    Our earliest thoughts be Thine when morning wakes us;
    All day serve Thee, in all that we are doing
    Thy praise pursuing.

    4. Through Thy Beloved soothe the sick and weeping
    And bid the captive lose his griefs in sleeping;
    Widows and orphans, we to Thee commend them,
    Do Thou befriend them.

    5. We have no refuge, none on earth to aid us,
    Save Thee, O Father, who Thine own hast made us:
    But Thy dear presence will not leave them lonely
    Who seek Thee only.

    6. Father, Thy name be praised, Thy kingdom given;
    Thy will be done on earth as ’tis in heaven;
    Give daily bread, forgive our sins, deliver
    Us now and ever.

                            Bohemian Brethren, 1566; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


39

                                                                     L. M.

    Thus far the Lord has led me on,
      Thus far His power prolongs my days;
    And every evening shall make known
      Some fresh memorial of His grace.

    2. Much of my time has run to waste,
      And I, perhaps, am near my home;
    But He forgives my follies past
      And gives me strength for days to come.

    3. I lay my body down to sleep;
      Peace is the pillow for my head;
    His ever-watchful eye will keep
      Its constant guard around my bed.

    4. Faith in Thy name forbids my fear;
      Oh, may Thy presence ne’er depart!
    And in the morning may I bear
      Thy loving-kindness on my heart!

                                            Isaac Watts, 1709, a. and abr.


40

                                                                       10s

    Abide with me! fast falls the eventide;
    The darkness deepens; Lord, with me abide!
    When other helpers fail and comforts flee,
    Help of the helpless, O abide with me!

    2. Swift to its close ebbs out life’s little day;
    Earth’s joys grow dim, its glories pass away;
    Change and decay in all around I see;
    O Thou, who changest not, abide with me!

    3. Not a brief glance I beg, a passing word,
    But as Thou dwell’st with Thy disciples, Lord,
    Familiar, condescending, patient, free,
    Come not to sojourn, but abide with me.

    4. Come not in terrors, as the King of kings,
    But kind and good, with healing in Thy wings;
    Tears for all woes, a heart for every plea;
    O Friend of sinners, thus abide with me!

    5. Thou on my head in early youth didst smile,
    And, though rebellious and perverse meanwhile,
    Thou hast not left me, oft as I left Thee:
    On to the close, O Lord, abide with me!

    6. I need Thy presence every passing hour:
    What but Thy grace can foil the Tempter’s power?
    Who like Thyself my guide and stay can be?
    Through cloud and sunshine, O abide with me!

    7. I fear no foe, with Thee at hand to bless;
    Ills have no weight and tears no bitterness.
    Where is death’s sting? where, grave, thy victory?
    I triumph still if Thou abide with me.

    8. Hold Thou Thy cross before my closing eyes,
    Shine through the gloom, and point me to the skies.
    Heaven’s morning breaks, and earth’s vain shadows flee;
    In life, in death, O Lord, abide with me!

                                                         H. F. Lyte, 1847.


41

                                                                     S. M.

    The day is past and gone,
      The evening shades appear;
    O may I ever keep in mind
      The night of death draws near.

    2. Lord, keep me safe this night,
      Secure from all my fears;
    May angels guard me while I sleep,
      Till morning light appears.

    3. And when I early rise
      And view th’ unwearied sun,
    May I set out to win the prize
      And after glory run,

    4. That, when my days are past
      And I from time remove,
    Lord, I may in Thy bosom rest,
      The bosom of Thy love.

                                                          J. Leland, 1792.


42

                                                                     L. M.

    Sun of my soul, Thou Savior dear,
    It is not night if Thou be near;
    Oh, may no earth-born cloud arise
    To hide Thee from Thy servant’s eyes!

    2. When the soft dews of kindly sleep
    My wearied eyelids gently steep,
    Be my last thought how sweet to rest
    Forever on my Savior’s breast.

    3. Abide with me from morn till eve,
    For without Thee I cannot live;
    Abide with me when night is nigh,
    For without Thee I dare not die.

    4. If some poor wandering child of Thine
    Has spurned to-day the voice divine,
    Now, Lord, the gracious work begin;
    Let him no more lie down in sin.

    5. Watch by the sick, enrich the poor
    With blessings from Thy boundless store;
    Be every mourner’s sleep to-night,
    Like infant’s slumbers, pure and light.

    6. Come near and bless us when we wake,
    Ere through the world our way we take;
    And lead us by Thy hand of love
    Until we reach our home above.

                                                           J. Keble, 1820.


43

                                                          8, 7, 8, 7, 7, 7

    Through the day Thy love hath spared us,
      Now we lay us down to rest;
    Through the silent watches guard us,
      Let no foe our peace molest:
    Jesus, Thou our Guardian be;
    Sweet it is to trust in Thee.

    2. Pilgrims here on earth and strangers,
      Dwelling in the midst of foes,
    Us and ours preserve from dangers;
      In Thine arms may we repose
    And, when life’s sad day is past,
    Rest with Thee in heaven at last.

    3. Triune God, let all adore Thee,
      Saints on earth and saints in heav’n;
    Every creature bow before Thee,
      Who hast all their being giv’n,
    Who dost seek and save the lost:
    Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

                                                       Thomas Kelly, 1806.


44

                                                    8, 4, 8, 4, 8, 8, 8, 4

    God, who madest earth and heaven,
      Darkness and light,
    Who the day for toil hast given,
      For rest the night,
    May Thine angel guards defend us,
    Slumber sweet Thy mercy send us,
    Holy dreams and hopes attend us,
      This livelong night!

    2. Guard us waking, guard us sleeping,
      And when we die,
    Let us in Thy mighty keeping
      All peaceful lie.
    When the trumpet’s call shall wake us,
    Do not Thou, blest Lord, forsake us,
    But to reign in glory take us
      With Thee on high.

                        Reginald Heber, 1827; 2d stanza, R. Whately, 1860.


45

                                                                      6, 5

    Now the day is over,
      Night is drawing nigh,
    Shadows of the evening
      Steal across the sky.

    2. Now the darkness gathers,
      Stars begin to peep,
    Birds and beasts and flowers
      Soon will be asleep.

    3. Jesus, give the weary
      Calm and sweet repose;
    With Thy tenderest blessing
      May my eyelids close.

    4. Through the long night-watches
      May Thine angels spread
    Their white wings above me,
      Watching round my bed.

    5. When the morning wakens,
      Then may I arise
    Pure and fresh and sinless
      In Thy holy eyes!

    6. Glory to the Father,
      Glory to the Son,
    And to Thee, blest Spirit,
      While all ages run.

                                           Sabine Baring-Gould, 1865, abr.




INVITATION.


46

                                                                 C. M. 8 l

    I heard the voice of Jesus say,
      “Come unto Me and rest;
    Lay down, thou weary one, lay down
      Thy head upon My breast!”
    I came to Jesus as I was,
      Weary and worn and sad;
    I found in Him a resting-place,
      And He has made me glad.

    2. I heard the voice of Jesus say,
      “Behold, I freely give
    The living water; thirsty one,
      Stoop down and drink and live!”
    I came to Jesus, and I drank
      Of that life-giving stream;
    My thirst was quenched, my soul revived,
      And now I live in Him.

    3. I heard the voice of Jesus say,
      “I am this dark world’s Light;
    Look unto Me, thy morn shall rise
      And all thy day be bright!”
    I looked to Jesus, and I found
      In Him my Star, my Sun;
    And in that Light of Life I’ll walk
      Till traveling days are done.

                                                           H. Bonar, 1846.


47

                                                                     C. M.

    The Savior calls; let every ear
      Attend the heavenly sound,
    Ye doubting souls, dismiss your fear;
      Hope smiles reviving round.

    2. For every thirsty, longing heart
      Here streams of bounty flow
    And life and health and bliss impart
      To banish mortal woe.

    3. Here springs of sacred pleasures rise
      To ease your every pain;
    Immortal fountain! full supplies!
      Nor shall you thirst in vain.

    4. Ye sinners, come, ’tis Mercy’s voice;
      The gracious call obey;
    Mercy invites to heavenly joys,
      And can you yet delay?

    5. Dear Savior, draw reluctant hearts;
      To Thee let sinners fly
    And take the bliss Thy love imparts
      And drink and never die.

                                                        Anne Steele, 1760.


48

                                                                        7s

    Sinners, turn; why will ye die?
    God, your Maker, asks you—Why?
    God, who did your being give,
    Made you with Himself to live.

    2. He the fatal cause demands,
    Asks the work of His own hands,
    Why, ye thankless creatures, why
    Will ye cross His love and die?

    3. Sinners, turn; why will ye die?
    God, your Savior, asks you—Why?
    He, who did your souls retrieve,
    Died Himself that you might live.

    4. Will ye let Him die in vain,
    Crucify your Lord again?
    Why, ye ransomed sinners, why
    Will ye slight His grace and die?

    5. Sinners, turn; why will ye die?
    God the Spirit asks you—Why?
    He, who all your lifetime strove,
    Wooed you to embrace His love.

    6. Will ye not His grace receive?
    Will ye still refuse to live?
    O ye long-sought sinners, why
    Will ye grieve your God and die?

                                                     Charles Wesley, 1741.


49

                                                                 7, 6, 8 l

    “Come unto Me, ye weary,
      And I will give you rest.”
    O blessed voice of Jesus,
      Which comes to hearts opprest!
    It tells of benediction,
      Of pardon, grace, and peace,
    Of joy that hath no ending,
      Of love which cannot cease.

    2. “Come unto Me, dear children,
      And I will give you light.”
    O loving voice of Jesus,
      Which comes to cheer the night!
    Our hearts were filled with sadness,
      And we had lost our way;
    But He has brought us gladness
      And songs at break of day.

    3. “Come unto Me, ye weary,
      And I will give you life,”
    O cheering voice of Jesus,
      Which comes to aid our strife!
    The Foe is stern and eager,
      The fight is fierce and long;
    But Thou hast made us mighty
      And stronger than the strong.

    4. “And whosoever cometh,
      I will not cast him out.”
    O welcome voice of Jesus,
      Which drives away our doubt,
    Which calls us, very sinners,
      Unworthy though we be
    Of love so free and boundless,
      To come, dear Lord, to Thee!

                                                          W. C. Dix, 1867.


50

                                                                 7, 6, 8 l

    To-day Thy mercy calls us
      To wash away our sin.
    However great our trespass,
      Whatever we have been;
    However long from mercy
      Our hearts have turned away,
    Thy precious blood can cleanse us
      And make us white to-day.

    2. To-day Thy gate is open,
      And all who enter in
    Shall find a Father’s welcome
      And pardon for their sin.
    The past shall be forgotten,
      A present joy be giv’n,
    A future grace be promised,
      A glorious crown in heav’n.

    3. To-day our Father calls us,
      His Holy Spirit waits;
    His blessed angels gather
      Around the heavenly gates.
    No question will be asked us
      How often we have come;
    Although we oft have wandered,
      It is our Father’s home.

    4. O all-embracing Mercy,
      O ever-open Door,
    What should we do without Thee
      When heart and eye run o’er?
    When all things seem against us,
      To drive us to despair,
    We know one gate is open,
      One ear will hear our prayer.

                                                           O. Allen, 1862.


51

                                                                     L. M.

    Behold a Stranger at the door!
    He gently knocks, has knocked before,
    Has waited long, is waiting still;
    You treat no other friend so ill.

    2. But will He prove a friend indeed?
    He will; the very Friend you need;
    The Friend of sinners—yes, ’tis He,
    With garments dyed on Calvary.

    3. O lovely attitude! He stands
    With melting heart and laden hands;
    O matchless kindness! and He shows
    This matchless kindness to His foes.

    4. Admit Him lest His anger burn
    And He, departing, ne’er return;
    Admit Him, or the hour’s at hand
    When at His door denied you’ll stand.

                                                        J. Grigg, 1756, a.


52

                                                                     S. M.

    The Spirit in our hearts
      Is whispering, “Sinner, come!”
    The Bride, the Church of Christ, proclaims
      To all His children, “Come!”

    2. Let him that heareth say
      To all about him, “Come!”
    Let him that thirsts for righteousness
      To Christ, the Fountain, come.

    3. Yes, whosoever will,
      O let him freely come
    And freely drink the stream of life;
      ’Tis Jesus bids him come.

    4. Lo, Jesus, who invites,
      Declares, “I quickly come.”
    Lord, even so; I wait Thine hour;
      Jesus, my Savior, come!

                                                    H. U. Onderdonk, 1826.


53

                                                                     S. M.

    Let every ear attend
      And every heart rejoice;
    The trumpet of the Gospel sounds
      With an inviting voice.

    2. Ho! all ye starving souls,
      That feed upon the wind
    And vainly strive with earthly toys
      To fill an empty mind.

    3. Here Wisdom has prepared
      A soul-reviving feast
    And bids your longing appetites
      The rich provision taste.

    4. Ho! ye that pant for streams
      And pine away and die,
    Here you may quench your raging thirst
      With springs that never dry.

    5. Rivers of mercy here
      In a rich ocean join;
    Salvation in abundance flows
      Like floods of milk and wine.

    6. The gates of Gospel grace
      Stand open night and day.
    Lord, we are come to seek supplies
      And drive our wants away.

                                                        Isaac Watts, 1707.


54

                                                                     L. M.

    Return, O wanderer, return
      And seek an injured Father’s face;
    Those warm desires that in thee burn
      Were kindled by reclaiming grace.

    2. Return, O wanderer, return
      And seek a Father’s melting heart;
    His pitying eyes thy grief discern,
      His hand shall heal thine inward smart.

    3. Return, O wanderer, return,
      Thy Savior bids thy spirit live;
    Go to His bleeding feet and learn
      How freely Jesus can forgive.

    4. Return, O wanderer, return
      And wipe away the falling tear;
    ’Tis God who says, “No longer mourn,”
      ’Tis Mercy’s voice invites thee near.

                                                      W. B. Collyer, 1812.


55

                                                                     L. M.

    Hasten, O sinner, to be wise
      And stay not for the morrow’s sun,
    The longer wisdom you despise,
      The harder is she to be won.

    2. O hasten, mercy to implore
      And stay not for the morrow’s sun,
    For fear thy season should be o’er
      Before this evening’s course be run.

    3. Hasten, O sinner, to return
      And stay not for the morrow’s sun,
    For fear thy lamp should fail to burn
      Before the needful work is done.

    4. Hasten, O sinner, to be blest
      And stay not for the morrow’s sun,
    For fear the curse should thee arrest
      Before the morrow is begun.

                                                       Thomas Scott, 1773.


56

                                                                        7s

    Come, my soul, thy suit prepare,
    Jesus loves to answer prayer;
    He Himself has bid thee pray,
    Therefore will not say thee nay.

    2. Thou art coming to a King,
    Large petitions with thee bring;
    For His grace and power are such
    None can ever ask too much.

    3. With my burden I begin:
    Lord, remove this load of sin;
    Let Thy blood, for sinners spilt,
    Set my conscience free from guilt.

    4. Lord, I come to Thee for rest,
    Take possession of my breast;
    There Thy blood-bought right maintain
    And without a rival reign.

    5. While I am a pilgrim here,
    Let Thy love my spirit cheer;
    As my Guide, my Guard, my Friend,
    Lead me to my journey’s end.

    6. Show me what I have to do,
    Every hour my strength renew;
    Let me live a life of faith,
    Let me die Thy people’s death.

                                                        John Newton, 1779.


57

                                                                       11s

    Delay not, delay not, O sinner, draw near,
      The waters of life are now flowing for thee;
    No price is demanded; the Savior is here;
      Redemption is purchased, salvation is free.

    2. Delay not, delay not, why longer abuse
      The love and compassion of Jesus, thy God?
    A fountain is opened; how canst thou refuse
      To wash and be cleansed in His pardoning blood?

    3. Delay not, delay not, O sinner, to come,
      For mercy still lingers and calls thee to-day;
    Her voice is not heard in the vale of the tomb;
      Her message, unheeded, will soon pass away.

    4. Delay not, delay not, the Spirit of Grace,
      Long grieved and resisted, may take its sad flight
    And leave thee in darkness to finish thy race,
      To sink in the gloom of eternity’s night.

    5. Delay not, delay not, the hour is at hand;
      The earth shall dissolve, and the heavens shall fade;
    The dead, small and great, in the Judgment shall stand;
      What power then, O sinner, shall lend thee its aid?

                                                        T. Hastings, 1831.


58

                                                                        7s

    Come, ye weary sinners, come,
      All who feel your heavy load;
    Jesus calls His wanderers home;
      Hasten to your pardoning God.

    2. Come, ye guilty souls opprest,
      Answer to the Savior’s call:
    “Come, and I will give you rest;
      Come, and I will save you all.”

    3. Jesus, full of truth and love,
      We Thy gracious call obey;
    Faithful let Thy mercies prove,
      Take our load of guilt away.

    4. Fain we would on Thee rely,
      Cast on Thee our sin and care,
    To Thine arms of mercy fly,
      Find our lasting quiet there.

    5. Lo, we come to Thee for ease:
      True and gracious as Thou art,
    How our weary souls release,
      Write forgiveness on our heart.

                                                  Charles Wesley, 1746, a.




PRAISE.


59

                                        7, 8, 7, 8, 7, 6, 7, 6, 7, 6, 7, 6

    My soul, now bless thy Maker!
      Let all within me bless His name,
    Who maketh thee partaker
      Of mercies more than thou dar’st claim!
    Forget Him not, whose meekness
      Forgiveth all thy sin;
    Who healeth all thy weakness,
      Renews thy life within;
    Whose grace and care are endless
      And saved thee through the past;
    Who leaves no sufferer friendless,
      But rights the wronged at last.

    2. He shows to man His treasure
      Of judgment, truth, and righteousness,
    His love beyond all measure,
      His yearning pity o’er distress;
    Nor treats us as we merit,
      But lays His anger by,
    The humble, contrite spirit
      Finds His compassion nigh;
    Far as the heavens above us,
      As break from close of day,
    So far, since He doth love us,
      He casts our sins away.

    3. For as a tender father
      Hath pity on his children here,
    He in His arms will gather
      All who are His in childlike fear.
    He knows how frail our powers,
      Who but from dust are made;
    We flourish as the flowers,
      And even so we fade;
    The wind but o’er them passes,
      And all their bloom is o’er,—
    We wither like the grasses,
      Our place knows us no more.

    4. His grace alone endureth,
      And children’s children yet shall prove
    How God with strength assureth
      The hearts of all that seek His love.
    In heaven is fixed His dwelling,
      His rule is over all;
    Angels in might excelling,
      Bright hosts, before Him fall!
    Praise Him who ever reigneth,
      All ye who hear His Word,
    Nor our poor hymns disdaineth;—
      My soul, O bless the Lord!

                                  G. Graumann, 1525; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


60

                                                       8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7

    To God, the Father of all love,
      The God of earth and heaven,
    The mighty God, who reigns above,
      Be praise and glory given!
    With healing balm my soul He fills
    And every pain and sorrow stills,—
      To God all praise and glory!

    2. The angel host, O King of kings,
      Thy praise forever telling,
    In earth and sky all living things
      Beneath Thy shadow dwelling,
    Adore and praise their Maker’s might,
    Whose wisdom orders all things right,—
      To God all praise and glory!

    3. What God’s almighty power hath made
      His gracious mercy keepeth;
    By morning glow or evening shade
      His watchful eye ne’er sleepeth;
    Within the kingdom of His might,
    Lo! all is just and all is right,—
      To God all praise and glory!

    4. I cried to God in my distress,
      His mercy heard me calling;
    My Savior saw my helplessness
      And kept my feet from falling.
    For this, Lord, praise and thanks to Thee!
    Praise God most high, praise God with me,—
      To God all praise and glory!

    5. The Lord forsaketh not His flock,
      His chosen generation;
    He is their Refuge and their Rock,
      Their Peace and their Salvation,
    And with a mother’s watchful love
    He guides them wheresoe’er they rove,—
      To God all praise and glory!

    6. When earth can comfort us no more
      Nor human help availeth,
    The Maker comes Himself, whose store
      Of blessing never faileth,
    And bends on them a Father’s eyes,
    Whom earth all rest and hope denies,—
      To God all praise and glory!

    7. Thus all my pilgrim way along
      I’ll sing aloud Thy praises
    That men may hear the grateful song
      My voice unwearied raises.
    Be joyful in the Lord, my heart;
    Both soul and body, bear your part,—
      To God all praise and glory!

    8. Ye who confess Christ’s holy name,
      To God give praise and glory!
    Ye who the Father’s power proclaim,
      To God give praise and glory!
    All idols under foot be trod,
    The Lord is God! The Lord is God!
      To God all praise and glory!

    9. Then come before His presence now
      And banish fear and sadness;
    To your Redeemer pay your vow
      And sing with joy and gladness:
    Though great distress my soul befall,
    The Lord, my God, rules over all,—
      To God all praise and glory!

                                                      J. J. Schuetz, 1673.


61

                                                                     C. M.

    Songs of immortal praise belong
      To my almighty God:
    He hath my heart and He my tongue
      To spread His name abroad.

    2. How great the works His hand hath wrought!
      How glorious in our sight!
    And men in every age have sought
      His wonders with delight.

    3. How most exact is nature’s frame!
      How wise th’ eternal Mind!
    His counsels never change the scheme
      That His first thoughts designed.

    4. When He redeemed the sons of men,
      He fixed His covenant sure;
    The orders that His lips pronounce
      To endless years endure.

    5. Nature and time and earth and skies
      Thy heavenly skill proclaim.
    What shall we do to make us wise
      But learn to read Thy name!

    6. To fear Thy power, to trust Thy grace,
      Is our divinest skill;
    And he’s the wisest of our race
      Who best obeys Thy will.

                                                        Isaac Watts, 1719.


62

                                                          9, 8, 9, 8, 8, 8

    O that I had a thousand voices,
      A mouth to speak with thousand tongues!
    My heart, which in the Lord rejoices,
      Then would proclaim in grateful songs
    To all, wherever I might be,
    What great things God hath done for me.

    2. O that my voice might high be sounding,
      Far as the widely distant poles;
    My blood run quick, with rapture bounding,
      Long as its vital current rolls,
    And every pulse thanksgiving raise,
    And every breath a hymn of praise!

    3. O all ye powers that God implanted,
      Arise, keep silence thus no more,
    Put forth the strength that He hath granted!
      Your noblest work is to adore.
    My soul and body, make ye meet
    With heartfelt praise your Lord to greet!

    4. Ye forest leaves, so green and tender,
      That dance for joy in summer air;
    Ye meadow grasses, bright and slender;
      Ye flowers, so wondrous sweet and fair;
    Ye live to show His praise alone,
    Help me to make His glory known!

    5. O all things that have breath and motion,
      That throng with life, earth, sea, and sky,
    Now join me in my heart’s devotion,
      Help me to raise His praises high;
    My utmost powers can ne’er aright
    Declare the wonders of His might.

    6. Dear Father, endless praise I render
      For soul and body, strangely joined;
    I praise Thee, Guardian kind and tender,
      For all the noble joys I find
    So richly spread on every side
    And freely for my use supplied.

    7. What equal praises can I offer,
      Dear Jesus, for Thy mercy shown?
    What pangs, my Savior, didst Thou suffer,
      And thus for all my sins atone!
    Thy death alone my soul could free
    From Satan, to be blest with Thee.

    8. Glory and praise, still onward reaching,
      Thine be it, Spirit of all grace,
    Whose holy power and faithful teaching
      Give me among Thy saints a place!
    Whate’er of good in me may shine
    Comes only from Thy light divine.

    9. Who grants abundant gifts to bless me?
      Who but Thyself, O God of love?
    Who guards my ways lest fears oppress me?
      ’Tis Thou, Lord God of hosts, above!
    And when my sins Thy wrath provoke,
    Thy patience, Lord, forbears the stroke.

    10. I kiss the rod, too, unrepining,
      When God His chastening makes me feel,
    My graces call for His refining,
      The trial works no lasting ill;
    It purifies and makes it known
    That He regards me as His own.

    11. In life I often have discovered,
      With gratitude and glad surprise,
    When clouds of sorrows o’er me hovered,
      God sent from them my best supplies.
    In troubles He is ever near
    And shows me all a Father’s care.

    12. Why not, then, with a faith unbounded,
      Forever in His love confide?
    Why not, with earthly griefs surrounded,
      Rejoicing still in hope abide,
    Until I reach that blissful home
    Where doubt and sorrow never come?

    13. No more low vanities regarding,
      To Thee, in whom I find my rest,
    I cry, my inmost soul according,
      “My God, Thou art the Highest, Best;
    Strength, honor, praise, and thanks, and power
    Be Thine both now and evermore!”

    14. Lord, I will tell, while I am living,
      Thy goodness forth with every breath
    And greet each morning with thanksgiving
      Until my heart is still in death;
    Yea, when at last my lips grow cold,
    Thy praise shall in my sighs be told.

    15. O Father, deign Thou, I beseech Thee,
      To listen to my earthly lays;
    A nobler strain in heav’n shall reach Thee,
      When I with angels hymn Thy praise
    And learn amid their choirs to sing
    Loud hallelujahs to my King.

                                                         J. Mentzer, 1704.


63

                                                           14, 14, 4, 7, 8

    Praise to the Lord, the Almighty, the King of creation!
    O my soul, praise Him, for He is thy Health and Salvation!
    Join the full throng;
    Wake, harp and psalter and song;
    Sound forth in glad adoration!

    2. Praise to the Lord, who o’er all things so wondrously reigneth,
    Who, as on wings of an eagle, uplifteth, sustaineth.
    Hast thou not seen
    How thy desires all have been
    Granted in what He ordaineth?

    3. Praise to the Lord, who hath fearfully, wondrously, made thee;
    Health hath vouchsafed and, when heedlessly falling, hath stayed thee!
    What need or grief
    Ever hath failed of relief?—
    Wings of His mercy did shade thee.

    4. Praise to the Lord, who doth visibly bless and defend thee;
    Who from the heavens the streams of His mercy doth send thee!
    Ponder anew
    What the Almighty can do
    If with His love He befriend thee.

    5. Praise to the Lord! O let all that is in me adore Him!
    All that hath life and breath, come now with praises before Him!
    He is thy Light;
    Soul, keep it always in sight,
    Gladly forever adore Him!

                                                         J. Neander, 1680.


64

                                                    6, 7, 6, 7, 6, 6, 6, 6

    Now thank we all our God
      With heart and hands and voices,
    Who wondrous things hath done,
      In whom His world rejoices;
    Who from our mother’s arms
      Hath blessed us on our way
    With countless gifts of love
      And still is ours to-day.

    2. Oh, may this bounteous God
      Through all this life be near us,
    With ever joyful hearts
      And blessed peace to cheer us;
    And keep us in His grace,
      And guide us when perplexed,
    And free us from all ills
      In this world and the next.

    3. All praise and thanks to God
      The Father now be given,
    The Son, and Him who reigns
      With them in highest heaven:
    The one eternal God,
      Whom earth and heaven adore;
    For thus it was, is now,
      And shall be evermore!

                                  Martin Rinckart, 1630; C. Winkworth, tr.


65

                                              8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 7, 7, 8, 7, 7

    I will sing my Maker’s praises
      And in Him most joyful be,
    For in all things I see traces
      Of His tender love to me.
    Nothing but His love could move Him
      With such sweet and tender care
      Evermore to raise and bear
    All who try to serve and love Him.
      All things have their little day,
      God’s great love abides for aye.

    2. As an eagle spreadeth over
      Her young brood her sheltering wings,
    So the arm of God did cover
      Me against affliction’s stings.
    He who life and being gave me,
      Even in my mother’s womb,
      From the cradle to the tomb,
    He shall ever guard and save me.
      All things have their little day,
      God’s great love abides for aye.

    3. Yea, so dear did He esteem me
      That His Son He loved so well
    He hath given to redeem me
      From the quenchless flames of hell.
    O Thou Spring of boundless blessing,
      How could e’er my feeble mind
      Of Thy depth the bottom find,
    Though my efforts were unceasing?
      All things have their little day,
      God’s great love abides for aye.

    4. God His Spirit to instruct me
      In His holy Word hath giv’n
    That He safely may conduct me
      Through this weary world to heav’n.
    He my heart’s dark chamber filleth
      With the clear, pure light of faith,
      Which destroys the power of death;
    Yea, e’en hell itself it stilleth.
      All things have their little day,
      God’s great love abides for aye.

    5. All that for my soul is needful
      He doth carefully provide,
    Nor of that is He unheedful
      Which my body needs beside.
    When my strength cannot avail me,
      When my powers can do no more,
      Doth my God His strength outpour,
    In my need He doth not fail me.
      All things have their little day,
      God’s great love abides for aye.

    6. All the hosts of earth and heaven
      Wheresoe’er I turn mine eye,
    For my benefit are given
      That they may my need supply.
    All that’s living, all that’s growing,
      On the heights or in the woods,
      In the vales or in the floods,
    God is for my good bestowing.
      All things have their little day,
      God’s great love abides for aye.

    7. When I sleep, He still is near me,
      O’er me rests His guardian eye;
    And new gifts and blessings cheer me
      When the morning streaks the sky.
    Were it not for God’s protection,
      Had His countenance not been
      Here my guide, I had not seen
    Any end of my affliction.
      All things have their little day,
      God’s great love abides for aye.

    8. Ah, how often doth the devil
      Cause some great calamity!
    But my life from all such evil
      Till this moment has been free.
    For the angel whom God sendeth,
      Wardeth off each threatening hurt,
      Every evil doth avert
    That mine enemy intendeth.
      All things have their little day,
      God’s great love abides for aye.

    9. As a father never turneth
      Wholly from a wayward child,
    For the prodigal still yearneth,
      Longing to be reconciled:
    So my many sins and errors
      Find a tender, pardoning God,
      Chast’ning frailty with His rod,
    Not, in vengeance, with His terrors.
      All things have their little day,
      God’s great love abides for aye.

    10. All His strokes and scourges truly
      For the moment grievous prove
    And yet, when I weigh them duly,
      Are but tokens of His love,
    Proofs that He is watching o’er me
      And by crosses to His fold,
      From the world that fain would hold
    Soul and body, would restore me.
      All things have their little day,
      God’s great love abides for aye.

    11. On this thought I dwell with pleasure;
      For it granteth joy and peace.
    Christ’s cross hath its time and measure
      And at last will wholly cease.
    When the winter disappeareth,
      Lovely summer comes again;
      Joy is giv’n for woe and pain
    Who his cross in patience beareth.
      All things have their little day,
      God’s great love abides for aye.

    12. Since, then, neither change nor coldness
      In my Father’s love can be,
    Lo, I lift my hands with boldness,
      As Thy child I come to Thee.
    Grant me grace, O God, I pray Thee,
      That I may with all my might,
      All my lifetime, day and night,
    Love and trust Thee and obey Thee;
      And when this brief life is o’er,
      Praise and love Thee evermore.

                                                      Paul Gerhardt, 1659.


66

                                                                     L. M.

    Thee we adore, eternal Lord!
    We praise Thy name with one accord;
    Thy saints, who here Thy goodness see,
    Through all the world do worship Thee.

    2. To Thee aloud all angels cry,
    The heavens and all the powers on high;
    Thee, “Holy, Holy, Holy King,
    Lord God of hosts!” they ever sing.

    3. Th’ apostles join the glorious throng;
    The prophets swell th’ immortal song;
    Thy martyrs’ noble army raise
    Eternal anthems to Thy praise.

    4. From day to day, O Lord, do we
    Highly exalt and honor Thee.
    Thy name we worship and adore
    World without end, forevermore!

    5. Vouchsafe, O Lord, we humbly pray,
    To keep us safe from sin this day;
    Have mercy, Lord! We trust in Thee;
    O let us ne’er confounded be!

                                                    T. Cotterill, 1815, a.


67

                                                      9, 10, 9, 10, 10, 10

    Jehovah, let me now adore Thee,
      For where is there a God such, Lord, as Thou?
    With songs I fain would come before Thee;
      O let Thy Holy Spirit teach me now
    To praise Thee in His name, through whom alone
    Our songs can please Thee, through Thy blessed Son.

    2. O Father, draw me to my Savior
      That Thy dear Son may draw me unto Thee;
    Thy Spirit guide my whole behavior
      And rule both sense and reason thus in me,
    That, Lord, Thy peace I taste may ne’er depart,
    But wake sweet melodies within my heart.

    3. Grant that Thy Spirit prompt my praises,
      Then shall my singing surely please Thine ear;
    Sweet are the sounds my heart then raises,
      My prayer in truth and spirit Thou wilt hear.
    Then shall Thy Spirit raise my heart to Thee
    To sing Thee psalms of praise in high degree.

    4. For He can plead for me with sighings
      That are unspeakable to lips like mine;
    He bids me pray with earnest cryings,
      Bears witness with my soul that I am Thine,
    Joint heir with Christ and thus may dare to say:
    O Abba, Father, hear me when I pray!

    5. When thus my heart in prayer ascendeth
      Through Thine own Holy Spirit unto Thee,
    Thy heart, O Father, kindly bendeth
      Its fervent love and favor unto me,
    Rejoicing my petition to fulfil
    Which I have made according to Thy will.

    6. And what Thy Spirit thus hath taught me
      To seek from Thee must needs be such a prayer
    As Thou wilt grant, through Him who bought me
      And raised me up to be Thy child and heir.
    In Jesus’ name I, fearless, seek Thy face
    And take from Thee, my Father, grace for grace.

    7. O joy! my hope and trust are founded
      On His sure Word and witness in the heart;
    I know Thy mercies are unbounded,
      And all good gifts Thou freely wilt impart;
    Nay, more is lavished by Thy bounteous hand
    Than I can ask or seek or understand.

    8. O bliss! in Jesus’ name I’ve tendered
      My prayer; He pleads at Thy right hand for me.
    Yea and amen in Him is rendered
      What I in faith and spirit ask of Thee.
    O joy for me! and praise be ever Thine
    Whose wondrous love has made such blessings mine!

                       Bartholomew Crasselius, 1697; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


68

                                                                        7s

    Songs of praise the angels sang,
    Heaven with hallelujahs rang,
    When Jehovah’s work begun,
    When He spake, and it was done.

    2. Songs of praise awoke the morn
    When the Prince of Peace was born;
    Songs of praise arose when He
    Captive led captivity.

    3. Heaven and earth must pass away;
    Songs of praise shall crown that day:
    God will make new heavens and earth;
    Songs of praise shall hail their birth.

    4. And shall man alone be dumb
    Till that glorious kingdom come?
    No; the Church delights to raise
    Psalms and hymns and songs of praise.

    5. Saints below, with heart and voice,
    Still in songs of praise rejoice;
    Learning here, by faith and love,
    Songs of praise to sing above.

    6. Borne upon their latest breath,
    Songs of praise shall conquer death;
    Then, amidst eternal joy,
    Songs of praise their powers employ.

                                                   James Montgomery, 1819.


69

                                                                 8, 5, 8 l

    Lord, ’tis not that I did choose Thee,
      That could never be,
    For this heart would still refuse Thee;
      Thou hast chosen me,
    Hast from all the sin that stained me
      Washed and set me free
    And unto this end ordained me,
      That I live to Thee.

    2. ’Twas Thy love and mercy called me,
      Taught my opening mind;
    Else the world had yet enthralled me,
      To Thy glories blind.
    Now my heart owns none above Thee;
      For Thy grace I thirst;
    Knowing well that, if I love Thee,
      Thou didst love me first.

    3. Praise the God of all creation
      For His boundless love;
    Praise the Lamb, our Expiation,
      Priest enthroned above;
    Praise the Spirit of salvation,
      Him by whom we live;
    Undivided adoration
      To the Godhead give!

                                                    Josiah Condor, † 1855.


70

                                                                     L. M.

    Give to our God immortal praise!
    Mercy and truth are all His ways,
    Wonders of grace to God belong;
    Repeat His mercies in your song.

    2. Give to the Lord of lords renown,
    The King of kings with glory crown.
    His mercies ever shall endure
    When lords and kings are known no more.

    3. He built the earth, He spread the sky,
    And fixed the starry lights on high.
    Wonders of grace to God belong;
    Repeat His mercies in your song.

    4. He fills the sun with morning light,
    He bids the moon direct the night;
    His mercies ever shall endure
    When suns and moons shall shine no more.

    5. He sent His Son with power to save
    From guilt and darkness and the grave.
    Wonders of grace to God belong;
    Repeat His mercies in your song.

    6. Through this vain world He guides our feet
    And leads us to His heavenly seat.
    His mercies ever shall endure
    When this vain world shall be no more.

                                               Ps. 136. Isaac Watts, 1719.


71

                                                                    7s 6 l

    God of mercy, God of grace,
    Show the brightness of Thy face!
    Shine upon us, Savior, shine,
    Fill Thy Church with light divine,
    And Thy saving health extend
    Unto earth’s remotest end.

    2. Let the people praise Thee, Lord!
    Be by all that live adored;
    Let the nations shout and sing
    Glory to their Lord and King,
    At Thy feet their tribute pay,
    And Thy holy will obey.

    3. Let the people praise Thee, Lord!
    Earth shall then her fruits afford,
    God to man His blessing give,
    Man to God devoted live;
    All below and all above
    One in joy and light and love.

                                                         H. F. Lyte, 1834.


72

                                                                     C. M.

    When all Thy mercies, O my God,
      My rising soul surveys,
    Transported with the view, I’m lost
      In wonder, love, and praise.

    2. Ten thousand thousand precious gifts
      My daily thanks employ;
    Nor is the least a cheerful heart,
      That tastes those gifts with joy.

    3. Through every period of my life
      Thy goodness I’ll pursue;
    And after death, in distant worlds,
      The glorious theme renew.

    4. When nature fails, and day and night
      Divide Thy works no more,
    My ever grateful heart, O Lord,
      Thy mercies shall adore.

    5. Through all eternity to Thee
      A joyful song I’ll raise;
    But oh! eternity’s too short
      To utter all Thy praise.

                                                    J. Addison, 1712, abr.


73

                                                                 L. M. 6 l

    I’ll praise my Maker whilst I’ve breath;
    And when my voice is lost in death,
      Praise shall employ my nobler powers.
    My days of praise shall ne’er be past
    While life and thought and being last
      Or immortality endures.

    2. Happy the man whose hopes rely
    On Israel’s God, who made the sky
      And earth and seas with all their train;
    His truth forever stands secure;
    He saves th’ oppressed, He feeds the poor,
      And none shall find His promise vain.

    3. The Lord gives eyesight to the blind;
    The Lord supports the sinking mind;
      He sends the laboring conscience peace;
    He helps the stranger in distress,
    The widow and the fatherless,
      And grants the prisoner sweet release.

    4. I’ll praise Him while He lends me breath;
    And when my voice is lost in death,
      Praise shall employ my nobler powers:
    My days of praise shall ne’er be past,
    While life and thought and being last
      Or immortality endures.

                                                     Isaac Watts, 1719, a.


74

                                                                     C. M.

    To God be glory, peace on earth,
      To all mankind good will!
    We bless, we praise, we worship Thee,
      And glorify Thee still.

    2. And thanks for Thy great glory give,
      That fills our soul with light,
    O Lord, our heavenly King, the God
      And Father of all might!

    3. And Thou, begotten Son of God,
      Before all time begun;
    O Jesus Christ, Thou Lamb of God,
      The Father’s only Son:

    4. Have mercy, Thou, that tak’st the sins
      Of all the world away!
    Have mercy, Savior of mankind,
      And hear us when we pray!

    5. O Thou, who sitt’st at God’s right hand,
      Upon the Father’s throne,
    Have mercy on us, Thou, O Christ,
      Who art the Holy One!

    6. Thou only, with the Holy Ghost,
      Whom earth and heaven adore,
    In glory of the Father art
      Most high forevermore.

                                    Supplement to Tate and Brady, 1700, a.


75

                                                                     C. M.

    Through all the changing scenes of life,
      In trouble and in joy,
    The praises of my God shall still
      My heart and tongue employ.

    2. Of His deliverance I will boast
      Till all that are distrest
    From my example comfort take
      And charm their griefs to rest.

    3. O magnify the Lord with me,
      With me exalt His name!
    When in distress on Him I called,
      He to my rescue came.

    4. The hosts of God encamp around
      The dwellings of the just;
    Deliverance He affords to all
      Who on His succor trust.

    5. O make but trial of His love!
      Experience will decide
    How blest are they, and only they,
      Who in His truth confide.

    6. Fear Him, ye Christians, you will then
      Have nothing else to fear;
    Make you His service your delight,
      Your wants shall be His care.

                                          Ps. 34. Tate and Brady, 1698, a.


76

                                                                     S. M.

    O bless the Lord, my soul!
      Let all within me join
    And aid my tongue to bless His name,
      Whose favors are divine.

    2. O bless the Lord, my soul!
      Nor let His mercies lie
    Forgotten in unthankfulness
      And without praises die.

    3. ’Tis He forgives thy sins;
      ’Tis He relieves thy pain;
    ’Tis He that heals thy sicknesses
      And gives thee strength again.

    4. He crowns thy life with love
      When ransomed from the grave;
    He that redeemed my soul from death
      Hath sovereign power to save.

    5. He fills the poor with good;
      He gives the sufferers rest:
    The Lord hath judgments for the proud
      And justice for th’ opprest.

    6. His wondrous works and ways
      He made by Moses known,
    But sent the world His truth and grace
      By His beloved Son.

                                            Ps. 103. Isaac Watts, 1719, a.


77

                                                                     S. M.

    My soul, repeat His praise,
      Whose mercies are so great;
    Whose anger is so slow to rise,
      So ready to abate.

    2. God will not always chide;
      And when His wrath is felt,
    His strokes are fewer than our crimes
      And lighter than our guilt.

    3. High as the heavens are raised
      Above the ground we tread,
    So far the riches of His grace
      Our highest thoughts exceed.

    4. His grace subdues our sins;
      And His forgiving love
    Far as the east is from the west
      Doth all our guilt remove.

    5. The pity of the Lord
      To those who fear His name
    Is such as tender parents feel;
      He knows our feeble frame.

    6. Our days are as the grass
      Or like the morning flower;
    If one sharp blast sweep o’er the field,
      It withers in an hour.

    7. But Thy compassions, Lord,
      To endless years endure;
    And children’s children ever find
      Thy words of promise sure.

                                               Ps. 103. Isaac Watts, 1719.


78

                                                                     L. M.

    Before Jehovah’s awful throne,
      Ye nations, bow with sacred joy;
    Know that the Lord is God alone,
      He can create and He destroy.

    2. His sov’reign power, without our aid,
      Made us of clay and formed us men;
    And when like wandering sheep we strayed,
      He brought us to His fold again.

    3. We are His people, we His care,
      Our souls and all our mortal frame.
    What lasting honors shall we rear,
      Almighty Maker, to Thy name?

    4. We’ll crowd Thy gates with thankful songs,
      High as the heavens our voices raise;
    And earth, with her ten thousand tongues,
      Shall fill Thy courts with sounding praise.

    5. Wide as the world is Thy command,
      Vast as eternity Thy love;
    Firm as a rock Thy truth must stand
      When rolling years shall cease to move.

                                                     Isaac Watts, 1719, a.


79

                                                                     L. M.

    From all that dwell below the skies
    Let the Creator’s praise arise;
    Let the Redeemer’s name be sung
    Through every land, by every tongue.

    2. Eternal are Thy mercies, Lord;
    Eternal truth attends Thy Word;
    Thy praise shall sound from shore to shore
    Till suns shall rise and set no more.

    3. Your lofty themes, ye mortals, bring;
    In songs of praise divinely sing;
    The great salvation loud proclaim
    And shout for joy the Savior’s name.

    4. In every land begin the song;
    To every land the strains belong;
    In cheerful sounds all voices raise
    And fill the world with loudest praise.

                                                        Isaac Watts, 1719.


80

                                                       8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7

    The Lord hath helped me hitherto
      By His surpassing favor;
    His mercies ev’ry morn were new,
      His kindness did not waver.
    God hitherto hath been my Guide,
    Hath pleasures hitherto supplied,
      And hitherto hath helped me.

    2. I praise and thank Thee, Lord, my God,
      For Thine abundant blessing,
    Which heretofore Thou hast bestowed
      And I am still possessing.
    Inscribe this on my memory:
    The Lord hath done great things for me
      And graciously hath helped me.

    3. Help me in future, God of grace,
      Help me on each occasion,
    Help me in each and ev’ry place,
      Help me through Jesus’ Passion;
    Help me in life and death, O God,
    Help me through Jesus’ dying blood,
      Help me as Thou hast helped me!

     Emilia Juliana, Countess of Schwarzburg, † 1706; A. Crull, tr., 1882.




THE REDEEMER.


81

                                                                8, 7, 8, 7

    Lamb of God, we fall before Thee,
      Humbly trusting in Thy cross;
    That alone be all our glory,
      All things else are only dross.

    2. Thee we own a perfect Savior,
      Only Source of all that’s good.
    Every grace and every favor
      Comes to us through Jesus’ blood.

    3. Jesus gives us true repentance,
      By His Spirit sent from heav’n;
    Whispers this transporting sentence,
      “Son, thy sins are all forgiv’n.”

    4. Faith He grants us to believe it,
      Grateful hearts His love to prize;
    Want we wisdom? He must give it;
      Hearing ears and seeing eyes.

    5. Jesus gives us pure affections,
      Wills to do what He requires,
    Makes us follow His directions,
      And what He commands, inspires.

    6. All our prayers and all our praises,
      Rightly offered in His name,—
    He that dictates them is Jesus;
      He that answers is the same.

                                                        Joseph Hart, 1759.


82

                                                 6, 6, 5, 6, 6, 5, 7, 8, 6

    Jesus, priceless Treasure,
    Source of purest pleasure,
      Truest Friend to me!
    Long my heart hath panted,
    Till it well-nigh fainted,
      Thirsting after Thee.
        Thine I am, O spotless Lamb!
    I will suffer naught to hide Thee,
    Ask for naught beside Thee.

    2. In Thine arms I rest me,
    Foes who would molest me
      Cannot reach me here;
    Though the earth be shaking,
    Every heart be quaking,
      Jesus calms my fear;
        Sin and hell, In conflict fell,
    With their heaviest storms assail me.
    Jesus will not fail me.

    3. Satan, I defy thee;
    Death, I need not fly thee;
      Fear, I bid thee cease!
    Rage, O world; thy noises
    Cannot drown our voices
      Singing still of peace,
        For God’s power Guards every hour;
    Earth and all its depths adore Him,
    Silent bow before Him.

    4. Wealth, I will not heed thee,
    Wherefore should I need thee?
      Jesus is my Joy.
    Honors, ye may glisten,
    But I will not listen,
      Ye the soul destroy.
        Want or loss Or shame or cross
    Ne’er to leave my Lord shall move me
    Since He deigns to love me.

    5. Farewell, thou who choosest
    Earth and heaven refusest;
      Thou wilt tempt in vain.
    Farewell, sins, nor blind me,
    Get ye far behind me,
      Come not forth again.
        Past your hour, O pomp and power;
    Godless life, thy bonds I sever,
    Farewell now forever!

    6. Hence, all fears and sadness!
    For the Lord of gladness,
      Jesus, enters in.
    Those who love the Father,
    Though the storms may gather,
      Still have peace within;
        Yea, whate’er I here must bear,
    Still in Thee lies purest pleasure,
    Jesus, priceless Treasure!

                                     J. Franck, c. 1653; C. Winkworth, tr.


83

                                                8, 7, 8, 7, 12, 12, 11, 11

    One thing’s needful! then, Lord Jesus,
      Keep this one thing in my mind;
    All beside, though first it please us,
      Soon a grievous yoke we find;
    Beneath it the heart is still fretting and striving,
    No true, lasting happiness ever deriving.
    The gain of this one thing all loss can requite
    And teach me in all things to find true delight.

    2. Soul, wilt thou this one thing find thee?
      Seek not midst created things;
    What is earthly leave behind thee,
      Over nature stretch thy wings.
    For where God and Man both in One are united,
    With God’s perfect fulness the heart is delighted,
    There, there, is the worthiest lot and the best,
    My One and my All, and my Joy and my Rest.

    3. How were Mary’s thoughts devoted
      Her eternal joy to find,
    As intent each word she noted,
      At her Savior’s feet reclined!
    How kindled her heart, how devout was its feeling,
    While hearing the lessons that Christ was revealing!
    For Jesus all earthly concerns she forgot,
    And all was repaid in that one happy lot.

    4. Thus my longings, heavenward tending,
      Jesus, rest alone on Thee;
    Help me, thus on Thee depending,
      Savior, come and dwell in me!
    Although all the world should forsake and forget Thee,
    In love I will follow Thee, ne’er will I quit Thee.
    Lord Jesus, both spirit and life is Thy Word;
    And is there a joy which Thou dost not afford?

    5. Wisdom’s highest, noblest treasure,
      Jesus, lies concealed in Thee;
    Grant that this may still the measure
      Of my will and actions be.
    Humility there, and simplicity, reigning.
    My steps shall in wisdom forever be training.
    Oh! if I of Christ have this knowledge divine,
    The fulness of heavenly wisdom is mine.

    6. Christ, Thou art the sole oblation
      That I’ll bring before my God;
    In His sight I’ve acceptation
      Only through Thy streaming blood.
    Immaculate righteousness I have acquired,
    Since Thou on the tree of the cross hast expired;
    The robe of salvation forever is mine,
    In this shall my faith through eternity shine.

    7. Let my soul, in full exemption,
      Wake up in Thy likeness now;
    Thou art made to me redemption,
      My sanctification Thou.
    Whatever I need for my journey to heaven,
    In Thee, O my Savior, is unto me given;
    O let me all perishing pleasure forego,
    And Thy life, O Jesus, alone let me know.

    8. Where should else my hopes be centered?
      Grace o’erwhelms me with its flood;
    Thou, my Savior, once hast entered
      Holiest heaven through Thy blood.
    Eternal redemption for sinners there finding,
    From hell’s dark dominion my spirit unbinding,
    To me perfect freedom Thy entrance has brought,
    And childlike to cry, “Abba, Father,” I’m taught.

    9. Christ Himself, my Shepherd, feeds me,
      Peace and joy my spirit fill;
    In a pasture green He leads me
      Forth beside the waters still.
    Oh, naught to my soul is so sweet and reviving
    As thus unto Jesus alone to be living;
    True happiness this, and this only, supplies,
    Through faith on my Savior to fasten mine eyes.

    10. Therefore, Jesus, my Salvation,
      Thou my One, my All, shalt be.
    Prove my fixed determination,
      Root out all hypocrisy.
    Look well if on sin’s slipp’ry paths I am hasting,
    And lead me, O Lord, in the way everlasting!
    This one thing is needful, all others are vain;
    I count all but loss that I Christ may obtain.

                                 J. H. Schroeder, 1697; F. E. Cox, tr., a.


84

                                                                 L. M. 6 l

    Jesus, Thy boundless love to me
      No thought can reach, no tongue declare;
    Unite my thankful heart to Thee
      And reign without a rival there.
    Thine wholly, Thine alone, I am;
    Be Thou alone my constant flame.

    2. O grant that nothing in my soul
      May dwell but Thy pure love alone;
    O may Thy love possess me whole,
      My Joy, my Treasure, and my Crown.
    Strange flames far from my heart remove;
    My every act, word, thought, be love!

    3. O Love, how cheering is Thy ray!
      All pain before Thy presence flies;
    Care, anguish, sorrow, melt away,
      Where’er Thy healing beams arise.
    O Jesus, nothing may I see,
    Nothing desire or seek but Thee.

    4. Unwearied, may I this pursue,
      Dauntless to the high prize aspire;
    Hourly within my soul renew
      This holy flame, this heavenly fire;
    And day and night be all my care
    To guard this sacred treasure there.

    5. O draw me, Savior, after Thee!
      So shall I run and never tire.
    With gracious words still comfort me;
      Be Thou my Hope, my sole Desire.
    Free me from every weight. Nor fear
    Nor sin can come if Thou art here.

    6. From all eternity, with love
      Unchangeable Thou hast me viewed;
    Ere knew this beating heart to move,
      Thy tender mercies me pursued.
    Ever with me may they abide
    And close me in on every side.

    7. Still let Thy love point out my way;
      How wondrous things Thy love hath wrought!
    Still lead me lest I go astray;
      Direct my work, inspire my thought;
    And if I fall, soon may I hear
    Thy voice and know that love is near.

    8. In suffering be Thy love my peace,
      In weakness be Thy love my power;
    And when the storms of life shall cease,
      Jesus, in that important hour,
    In death as life be Thou my Guide
    And save me, who for me hast died!

                                     P. Gerhardt, 1666; J. Wesley, tr., a.


85

                                                                 L. M. 6 l

    The Lord my pasture shall prepare
    And feed me with a shepherd’s care;
    His presence shall my wants supply
    And guard me with a watchful eye;
    My noonday walks He shall attend
    And all my midnight hours defend.

    2. While on the sultry glebe I faint
    Or on the thirsty mountain pant,
    To fertile vales and dewy meads
    My ever wandering steps He leads,
    Where peaceful rivers soft and slow
    Amid the verdant landscape flow.

    3. Though in a bare and rugged way,
    Through devious lonely wilds, I stray,
    Thy bounty shall my pains beguile;
    The barren wilderness shall smile,
    With sudden greens and herbage crowned,
    And streams shall murmur all around.

    4. Though in the paths of death I tread,
    With gloomy horrors overspread,
    My steadfast heart shall fear no ill,
    For Thou, O Lord, art with me still;
    Thy friendly crook shall give me aid
    And guide me through the dreadful shade.

                                                         J. Addison, 1712.


86

                                                          8, 7, 8, 7, 7, 7

    Jesus, Jesus, Jesus only
      Can my heartfelt longing still;
    Without Him my soul is lonely,
      And I wish what Jesus will.
    For my heart, which He hath filled,
    Ever cries: Lord, as Thou wilt.

    2. One it is for whom I’m living,
      Whom I’m loving faithfully;
    Jesus, unto whom I’m giving
      What in love He gave to me.
    Jesus’ blood hides all my guilt;
    Lord, O lead me as Thou wilt.

    3. What to me may seem a treasure,
      But displeasing is to Thee,
    O remove such harmful pleasure;
      Give instead what profits me.
    Let my heart by Thee be stilled,
    Make me Thine, Lord, as Thou wilt.

    4. Grant that always I endeavor
      Thy good pleasure to fulfil;
    In me, through me, with me ever,
      Lord, accomplish Thou Thy will.
    Let me die, Lord, on Thee built,
    When and where and as Thou wilt.

    5. Lord, my praise shall be unceasing,
      For Thou gav’st Thyself to me
    And, besides, so many a blessing,
      That I sing most joyfully:
    Be it unto me, my Shield,
    As Thou wilt, Lord, as Thou wilt.

        Ludaemilia Elizabeth, Countess of Schwarzburg, 1668; A. Crull, tr.


87

                                               11, 4, 4, 11, 6, 6, 6, 7, 8

    I leave Thee not; Thou art my Jesus ever,
      Though earth rebel,
      And death and hell
    Would from its steadfast hold my faith dissever.
      Ah, no! I ever will
      Cling to my Helper still.
      Hear what my love is taught:
    Thou art my Jesus ever,
      I leave Thee not, I leave Thee not!

    2. I leave Thee not, O Love! of love the highest,
      Though doubt display
      Its battle-day;
    I own the power which Thou, my Lord, appliest.
      Thou didst bear guilt and woe;
      Shall I to torment go
      When into Judgment brought?
    O Love! of love the highest,
      I leave Thee not, I leave Thee not!

    3. I leave Thee not, O Thou who sweetly cheerest,
      Whose fresh supplies
      Cause strength to rise
    Just in the hour when faith’s decay is nearest.
      If sickness chill the soul
      And nights of languor roll,
      My heart one hope hath caught.
    O Thou who sweetly cheerest,
      I leave Thee not, I leave Thee not!

    4. I leave Thee not, Thou Help in tribulation!
      Heap ill on ill,
      I trust Thee still;
    I hope when all seems near to desolation.
      Do what Thou wilt with me,
      Yet will I cling to Thee;
      Thy grace I have besought.
    Thou Help in tribulation,
      I leave Thee not, I leave Thee not!

    5. I leave Thee not; shall I forsake salvation?
      No, Jesus, no!
      Thou shalt not go;
    Mine still Thou art, to free from condemnation.
      Beyond this fleeting night
      Thy presence brings me light,
      Whose ray my soul hath sought;
    Shall I forsake salvation?
      I leave Thee not, I leave Thee not!

    6. I leave Thee not; Thy Word my way shall brighten.
      With Thee I go
      Through weal and woe;
    Thy precept wise shall every burden lighten.
      My Lord, on Thee I hang
      Nor heed the journey’s pang,
      Though thorny be my lot;
    Thy Word my way shall brighten.
      I leave Thee not, I leave Thee not!

    7. I leave Thee not, Thou Source of all my pleasure;
      For should I stray
      From Thee away,
    My richest joy must cease to be a treasure.
      All joys are dross to me,
      Unless delight from Thee
      Doth cheer my earthly lot.
    Thou Source of all my pleasure,
      I leave Thee not, I leave Thee not!

    8. I leave Thee not! I fear no condemnation;
      For how could share
      Thy child and heir
    The lot of those who spurn their soul’s salvation?
      Thy blood, Lord, cleanseth me,
      And therefore I am free
      From hell, the sinners’ lot.
    I fear no condemnation;
      I leave Thee not, I leave Thee not!

    9. I leave Thee not, my God, my Lord, my Heaven!
      Nor death shall rend
      From Thee, my Friend,
    Who for my sake Thyself to death hast given.
      Thou diedst for love to me,
      My love goes back to Thee;
      My heart has but one thought:
    My God, my Lord, my Heaven,
      I leave Thee not, I leave Thee not!

                          W. C. Dessler, 1692; J. W. Alexander, tr., 1851.


88

                                                          7, 8, 7, 8, 7, 7

    My dear Jesus I’ll not leave,
      Who for me Himself has given;
    Therefore unto Him I’ll cleave,
      Nor from Him be ever driven;
    Life from Him doth light receive,—
    My dear Jesus I’ll not leave.

    2. Jesus I will never leave
      While on earth I am abiding;
    My full trust He shall receive;
      What I have, without dividing,
    All to Him I freely give,—
    My dear Jesus I’ll not leave.

    3. Though my eyesight pass away,
      Hearing, taste, and feeling fail me;
    Though the earth’s last light of day
      Shall o’ertake and sore assail me;
    When my dying sigh I heave,—
    My dear Jesus I’ll not leave.

    4. Nor will I my Jesus leave
      When at length I shall come thither
    Where His saints He will receive,
      Where in bliss they live together;
    Endless joy to me He’ll give,—
    My dear Jesus I’ll not leave.

    5. Not for earth’s vain joys I crave,
      Not for heaven’s glorious pleasure;
    Jesus, who my soul did save,
      Shall be my Desire and Treasure;
    He redemption did achieve,—
    My dear Jesus I’ll not leave.

    6. Jesus I shall never leave,
      To His side still firmly clinging.
    Christ leads all who Him receive
      To life’s waters ever springing.
    Blessed they who to Him cleave!—
    My dear Jesus I’ll not leave.

                                                    Chr. Keymann, c. 1656.


89

                                                       7, 4, 7, 4, 7, 4, 6

    Jesus, Thou my heart’s Delight,
      Sweetest Jesus!
    Thrill’st my soul with rapture quite,
      Sweetest Jesus!
    All cares vanish at Thy sight,
      Sweetest Jesus!
      Jesus, sweetest Jesus!

    2. Evermore I think of Thee,
      My Redeemer!
    And I long for none but Thee,
      My Redeemer!
    Yearns my soul with Thee to be,
      My Redeemer!
      Jesus, my Redeemer!

    3. Feed Thou me and fill my soul,
      Heavenly Manna!
    Quench my thirst, my heart make whole,
      Help, Hosanna!
    Be the Rest unto my soul,
      Rest of weary,
      Jesus, Rest of weary!

    4. Naught is lovelier than Thou,
      Fairest Lover!
    Naught is friendlier than Thou,
      Gentle Lover!
    And naught sweeter is than Thou,
      Sweetest Lover,
      Jesus, sweetest Lover!

    5. I am weak; come, strengthen me,
      Strength in weakness!
    Faint am I, refresh Thou me,
      Sweetest Jesus!
    When I die, console Thou me,
      Thou Consoler,
      Jesus, my Consoler!

                           J. Flittner, 1661; J. A. Rimbach, tr., 1903, a.


90

                                                                     C. M.

    O Jesus, King most wonderful,
      Thou Conqueror renowned,
    Thou Sweetness most ineffable,
      In whom all joys are found!

    2. When once Thou visitest the heart,
      Then truth begins to shine,
    Then earthly vanities depart,
      Then kindles love divine.

    3. O Jesus, Light of all below,
      Thou Fount of life and fire,
    Surpassing all the joys we know,
      All that we can desire,—

    4. May every heart confess Thy name,
      And ever Thee adore,
    And, seeking Thee, itself inflame
      To seek Thee more and more.

    5. Thee may our tongues forever bless,
      Thee may we love alone,
    And ever in our lives express
      The image of Thine own.

                      Bernard of Clairvaux, † 1153; E. Caswall, tr., 1848.


91

                                                                     L. M.

    Jesus, and shall it ever be,
    A mortal man ashamed of Thee?
    Ashamed of Thee, whom angels praise,
    Whose glories shine through endless days?

    2. Ashamed of Jesus! Sooner far
    Let evening blush to own a star;
    He sheds the beams of light divine
    O’er this benighted soul of mine.

    3. Ashamed of Jesus! Just as soon
    Let midnight be ashamed of noon.
    ’Tis midnight with my soul till He,
    Bright Morning-Star, bids darkness flee.

    4. Ashamed of Jesus! that dear Friend
    On whom my hopes of heaven depend!
    No; when I blush, be this my shame,
    That I no more revere His name.

    5. Ashamed of Jesus! Yes, I may,
    When I’ve no guilt to wash away,
    No tear to wipe, no good to crave,
    No fears to quell, no soul to save.

    6. Till then—nor is my boasting vain—
    Till then I boast a Savior slain;
    And oh, may this my glory be,
    That Christ is not ashamed of me!

                                         J. Grigg, 1765; B. Francis, 1787.


92

                                                                     L. M.

    Awake, my soul, to joyful lays
    And sing Thy great Redeemer’s praise;
    He justly claims a song from me,—
    His loving-kindness, O how free!

    2. He saw me ruined in the Fall,
    Yet loved me notwithstanding all;
    He saved me from my lost estate,—
    His loving-kindness, O how great!

    3. When I was Satan’s easy prey
    And deep in debt and bondage lay,
    He paid His life for my discharge,—
    His loving-kindness, O how large!

    4. Though numerous hosts of mighty foes,
    Though earth and hell my way oppose,
    He safely leads my soul along,—
    His loving-kindness, O how strong!

    5. When trouble, like a gloomy cloud,
    Has gathered thick and thundered loud,
    He near my soul has always stood,—
    His loving-kindness, O how good!

    6. When earthly friends forsake me quite
    And I have neither skill nor might,
    He’s sure my Helper to appear,—
    His loving-kindness, O how near!

    7. Often I feel my sinful heart
    Prone from my Jesus to depart;
    But though I have Him oft forgot,
    His loving-kindness changes not.

    8. When I shall pass death’s gloomy vale
    And all my mortal power must fail,
    O may my last, expiring breath
    His loving-kindness sing in death!

    9. Then shall I mount and soar away
    To the bright world of endless day
    And sing with rapture and surprise
    His loving-kindness in the skies.

                                                          S. Medley, 1782.


93

                                                                     C. M.

    All hail the power of Jesus’ name!
      Let angels prostrate fall;
    Bring forth the royal diadem
      And crown Him Lord of all!

    2. Crown Him, ye martyrs of our God,
      Who from His altar call;
    Extol the Stem of Jesse’s rod
      And crown Him Lord of all!

    3. Ye seed of Israel’s chosen race,
      Ye ransomed from the Fall,
    Hail Him, who saves you by His grace,
      And crown Him Lord of all!

    4. Hail Him, ye heirs of David’s line,
      Whom David Lord did call,
    The God incarnate, Man divine,
      And crown Him Lord of all!

    5. Sinners, whose love can ne’er forget
      The wormwood and the gall,
    Go, spread your trophies at His feet,
      And crown Him Lord of all!

    6. Let every kindred, every tribe,
      On this terrestrial ball
    To Him all majesty ascribe
      And crown Him Lord of all!

    7. O that with yonder sacred throng
      We at His feet may fall,
    Join in the everlasting song,
      And crown Him Lord of all!

                                                        E. Perronet, 1780.


94

                                                                     C. M.

    Thou art the _Way_; to Thee alone
      From sin and death we flee;
    And he who would the Father seek,
      Must seek Him, Lord, by Thee.

    2. Thou art the _Truth_; Thy Word alone
      True wisdom can impart;
    Thou only canst inform the mind
      And purify the heart.

    3. Thou art the _Life_; the rending tomb
      Proclaims Thy conquering arm;
    And those who put their trust in Thee
      Nor death nor hell shall harm.

    4. Thou art the Way, the Truth, the Life;
      Grant us that Way to know,
    That Truth to keep, that Life to win,
      Whose joys eternal flow.

                                                        G. W. Doane, 1824.


95

                                                                8, 7, 8, 7

    In the Cross of Christ I glory,
      Towering o’er the wrecks of time;
    All the light of sacred story
      Gathers round its head sublime.

    2. When the woes of life o’ertake me,
      Hopes deceive, and fears annoy,
    Never shall the Cross forsake me;
      Lo! it glows with peace and joy.

    3. When the sun of bliss is beaming
      Light and love upon my way,
    From the Cross the radiance streaming
      Adds new luster to the day.

    4. Bane and blessing, pain and pleasure,
      By the Cross are sanctified;
    Peace is there that knows no measure,
      Joys that through all time abide.

                                                       John Bowring, 1825.


96

                                                                     C. M.

    How sweet the name of Jesus sounds
      In a believer’s ear!
    It soothes his sorrows, heals his wounds,
      And drives away his fear.

    2. It makes the wounded spirit whole
      And calms the troubled breast;
    ’Tis manna to the hungry soul
      And to the weary, rest.

    3. Dear name! the Rock on which I build
      My Shield and Hiding-place;
    My never-failing Treasury, filled
      With boundless stores of grace.

    4. By Thee my prayers acceptance gain,
      Although with sin defiled:
    Satan accuses me in vain,
      And I am owned a child.

    5. Jesus! my Shepherd, Guardian, Friend,
      My Prophet, Priest, and King,
    My Lord, my Life, my Way, my End,
      Accept the praise I bring.

    6. Weak is the effort of my heart
      And cold my warmest thought;
    But when I see Thee as Thou art,
      I’ll praise Thee as I ought.

    7. Till then I would Thy love proclaim
      With every fleeting breath;
    And may the music of Thy name
      Refresh my soul in death.

                                                        John Newton, 1779.


97

                                                                8, 7, 8, 7

    Jesus, Thou art mine forever,
      Dearer far than earth to me;
    Neither life nor death shall sever
      Those sweet ties which bind to Thee.

    2. All were drear to me and lonely,
      If Thy presence gladdened not;
    While I sing to Thee, Thee only,
      Mine’s an ever blissful lot.

    3. Thou alone art all my Treasure,
      Who hast died that I may live;
    Thou conferrest noblest pleasure,
      Who dost all my sins forgive.

    4. Brightest gems and fairest flowers
      Lose their beauty in Thy frown;
    Joy and peace, like balmy showers,
      In Thy smile come gently down.

    5. Jesus, Thou art mine forever,
      Suffer not myself to stray;
    Let me in my weakness never
      Cast my priceless pearl away.

    6. Lamb of God, I do implore Thee,
      Guard, support me, lest I fall;
    Let me evermore adore Thee,
      Be my everlasting All!

                                                             M. Loy, 1863.


98

                                                                     C. M.

    Jesus, the very thought of Thee
      With sweetness fills the breast;
    But sweeter far Thy face to see
      And in Thy presence rest.

    2. Nor voice can sing, nor heart can frame,
      Nor can the memory find
    A sweeter sound than Thy blest name,
      O Savior of mankind!

    3. O Hope of every contrite heart,
      O Joy of all the meek!
    To those who fall, how kind Thou art,
      How good to those who seek!

    4. But what to those who find?—Ah! this
      Nor tongue nor pen can show;
    The love of Jesus, what it is,
      None but His loved ones know.

    5. Jesus, our only Joy be Thou!
      As Thou our Prize wilt be;
    Jesus, be Thou our Glory now
      And through eternity!

                   Bernard of Clairvaux, † 1153; E. Caswall, tr., 1849, a.


99

                                                                        7s

    Chief of sinners though I be,
    Jesus shed His blood for me;
    Died that I might live on high,
    Lived that I might never die;
    As the branch is to the vine,
    I am His, and He is mine.

    2. O the height of Jesus’ love!
    Higher than the heavens above,
    Deeper than the depths of sea,
    Lasting as eternity;
    Love that found me,—wondrous thought!—
    Found me when I sought Him not.

    3. Jesus only can impart
    Balm to heal the smitten heart;
    Peace that flows from sin forgiv’n,
    Joy that lifts the soul to heav’n;
    Faith and hope to walk with God,
    In the way that Enoch trod.

    4. Chief of sinners though I be,
    Christ is all in all to me;
    All my wants to Him are known,
    All my sorrows are His own;
    Safe with Him from earthly strife,
    He sustains the hidden life.

    5. O my Savior, help afford
    By Thy Spirit and Thy Word!
    When my wayward heart would stray,
    Keep me in the narrow way;
    Grace in time of need supply
    While I live and when I die.

                                                         Wm. McComb, 1848.


100

                                                                    7s 6 l

    Christ, whose glory fills the skies,
      Christ, the true, the only Light,
    Sun of Righteousness, arise,
      Triumph o’er the shades of night.
    Day-spring from on high, be near;
    Day-star, in my heart appear.

    2. Dark and cheerless is the morn
      Unaccompanied by Thee;
    Joyless is the day’s return
      Till Thy mercy’s beams I see;
    Till they inward light impart,
    Cheer my eyes, and warm my heart.

    3. Visit, then, this soul of mine,
      Pierce the gloom of sin and grief;
    Fill me, Radiancy Divine,
      Scatter all my unbelief;
    More and more Thyself display,
    Shining to the perfect day.

                                                     Charles Wesley, 1740.


101

                                                                     C. M.

    To our Redeemer’s glorious name
      Awake the sacred song!
    O may His love, immortal flame,
      Tune every heart and tongue!

    2. His love, what mortal thought can reach!
      What mortal tongue display!
    Imagination’s utmost stretch
      In wonder dies away.

    3. He left His radiant throne on high,
      Left the bright realms of bliss,
    And came to earth to bleed and die,—
      Was ever love like this?

    4. Dear Lord, while we adoring pay
      Our humble thanks to Thee,
    May every heart with rapture say,
      “The Savior died for me!”

    5. O may the sweet, the blissful theme
      Fill every heart and tongue
    Till strangers love the charming name
      And join the sacred song!

                                                        Anne Steele, 1760.


102

                                                                     C. M.

    Come, let us join our cheerful songs
      With angels round the throne.
    Ten thousand thousand are their tongues,
      But all their joys are one.

    2. “Worthy the Lamb that died,” they cry,
      “To be exalted thus.”
    “Worthy the Lamb,” our lips reply,
      For He was slain for us.

    3. Jesus is worthy to receive
      Honor and power divine;
    And blessings more than we can give,
      Be, Lord, forever Thine.

    4. Let all that dwell above the sky,
      And air, and earth, and seas
    Conspire to lift Thy glories high
      And speak Thine endless praise!

    5. The whole creation join in one
      To bless the sacred name
    Of Him that sits upon the throne,
      And to adore the Lamb.

                                                        Isaac Watts, 1707.


103

                                              8, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7, 4, 8, 4, 8

    O Morning Star, how fair and bright
    Thou beamest forth in truth and light!
      O Sovereign meek and lowly!
    Sweet Root of Jesse, David’s Son,
    My King and Bridegroom, Thou hast won
      My heart to love Thee solely!
    Lovely art Thou,
    Fair and glorious, All victorious,
    Rich in blessing,
    Rule and might o’er all possessing.

    2. O King high-born, Pearl dearly won,
    True Son of God and Mary’s Son,
      Crown of exceeding glory!
    My heart calls Thee a Lily, Lord,
    Pure milk and honey is Thy Word,
      Thy sweetest Gospel-story.
    Rose of Sharon,
    Hail! hosanna! Heavenly Manna,
    Feed us ever;
    Lord, I can forget Thee never!

    3. Clear Jasper, Ruby fervent red,
    Deep, deep into my heart now shed
      Thy love’s pure fire forever;
    Fill me with joy, grant me to be
    Thy member, closely joined to Thee,
      Whom naught from Thee may sever;
    Toward Thee longing
    Doth possess me: Come and bless me,
    For Thy gladness
    Eye and heart here pine in sadness.

    4. But if Thou look on me in love,
    There straightway falls from God above
      A ray of purest pleasure;
    Thy Word and Spirit, flesh and blood,
    Refresh my soul with heavenly food,
      Thou art my hidden Treasure.
    Let Thy grace, Lord,
    Warm and cheer me, O draw near me;
    Thou hast taught us
    Thee to seek since Thou hast sought us.

    5. Lord God, my Father, mighty Shield,
    Thou in Thy Son art all revealed
      As Thou hast loved and known me;
    Thy Son hath me with Him betrothed,
    In His own whitest raiment clothed,
      He for His bride will own me.
    Hallelujah!
    Life in heaven Hath He given,
    With Him dwelling,
    Still shall I His praise be telling.

    6. Then touch the chords of harp and lute,
    Let no sweet music now be mute,
      But, joyously resounding,
    Tell of the marriage-feast, the bride,
    The heavenly Bridegroom at her side,
      Mid love and joy abounding.
    Shout for triumph,
    Loudly sing ye, Praises bring ye,
    Fall before Him,
    King of kings, let all adore Him!

    7. Here rests my heart and holds it fast;
    The Lord I love is First and Last,
      The End and the Beginning.
    I welcome death, for I shall rise
    Through Him to His own Paradise,
      Above all tears and sinning.
    Amen! Amen!
    Come, Lord Jesus. Soon release us!
    With deep yearning,
    Lord, we look for Thy returning!

                                   P. Nicolai, 1597; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


104

                                                                 S. M. 8 l

    Crown Him with many crowns,
      The Lamb upon His throne;
    Hark! how the heav’nly anthem drowns
      All music but its own;
    Awake, my soul, and sing
      Of Him who died for thee,
    And hail Him as thy matchless King
      Through all eternity.

    2. Crown Him the Virgin’s Son,
      The God incarnate born,
    Whose arm those crimson trophies won
      Which now His brow adorn;
    Fruit of the mystic rose,
      As of that rose the stem;
    The root whence mercy ever flows,
      The Babe of Bethlehem.

    3. Crown Him the Lord of love
      Behold His hands and side,
    Rich wounds, yet visible above,
      In beauty glorified.
    No angel in the sky
      Can fully bear that sight,
    But downward bends his wond’ring eye
      At mysteries so bright.

    4. Crown Him the Lord of peace,
      Whose power a scepter sways
    From pole to pole, that wars may cease
      And all be prayer and praise.
    His reign shall know no end,
      And round His piercèd feet
    Fair flowers of paradise extend
      Their fragrance ever sweet.

    5. Crown Him the Lord of years,
      The Potentate of time,
    Creator of the rolling spheres,
      Ineffably sublime.
    All hail, Redeemer, hail!
      For Thou hast died for me;
    Thy praise shall never, never fail
      Throughout eternity.

                                                         M. Bridges, 1851.


105

                                                                 S. M. 8 l

    I was a wandering sheep,
      I did not love the fold;
    I did not love my Shepherd’s voice,
      I would not be controlled;
    I was a wayward child,
      I did not love my home;
    I did not love my Father’s voice,
      I loved afar to roam.

    2. The Shepherd sought His sheep,
      The Father sought His child;
    They followed me o’er vale and hill,
      O’er deserts waste and wild;
    They found me nigh to death,
      Famished and faint and lone;
    They bound me with the bands of love,
      They saved the wandering one.

    3. Jesus my Shepherd is,
      ’Twas He that loved my soul,
    ’Twas He that washed me in His blood,
      ’Twas He that made me whole;
    ’Twas He that sought the lost,
      That found the wandering sheep;
    ’Twas He that brought me to the fold,
      ’Tis He that still doth keep.

    4. I was a wandering sheep,
      I would not be controlled.
    But now I love my Shepherd’s voice,
      I love, I love, the fold.
    I was a wayward child,
      I once preferred to roam,
    But now I love my Father’s voice,
      I love, I love, His home.

                                                           H. Bonar, 1844.


106

                                                                        7s

    Jesus, Savior, come to me!
    Let me ever be with Thee;
    Come and nevermore depart,
    Thou who reignest in my heart.

    2. Lord, for Thee I ever sigh,
    Nothing else can satisfy;
    ’Tis my constant cry to Thee:
    Jesus, Jesus, come to me!

    3. Earthly joys can give no peace,
    Cannot bid my longing cease;
    But to have my Jesus near,
    This is perfect pleasure here.

    4. All that makes the angels glad,
    In their garb of glory clad,
    Only fills me with distress
    If Thy presence do not bless.

    5. Take Thou all away from me,
    I shall still thus minded be;
    Thou who madest me Thine own
    Shalt be e’er my Joy alone.

    6. Lord, to none on earth beside
    Thee my heart I open wide;
    Enter Thou, possess it all,
    Thee alone mine own I call.

    7. Thou alone, my God and Lord,
    Art my Glory and Reward;
    Thou hast bled for me and died,
    I will be no other’s bride.

    8. Come, then, Lamb for sinners slain,
    Come and ease me of my pain;
    Evermore I cry to Thee:
    Jesus, Jesus, come to me!

    9. Patiently I wait Thy Day;
    For this gift yet, Lord, I pray,
    That, when death shall come to me,
    My sweet Jesus Thou wilt be.

                                                    J. Scheffler, c. 1657.


107

                                                                    7s 8 l

    Jesus, Lover of my soul,
      Let me to Thy bosom fly,
    While the waters nearer roll,
      While the tempest still is high.
    Hide me, O my Savior, hide,
      Till the storm of life is past;
    Safe into the haven guide;
      O receive my soul at last!

    2. Other refuge have I none;
      Hangs my helpless soul on Thee;
    Leave, ah, leave me not alone,
      Still support and comfort me!
    All my trust on Thee is stayed,
      All my help from Thee I bring;
    Cover my defenseless head
      With the shadow of Thy wing.

    3. Wilt Thou not regard my call?
      Wilt Thou not accept my prayer?
    Lo! I sink, I faint, I fall;
      Lo! on Thee I cast my care.
    Reach me out Thy gracious hand!
      While I of Thy strength receive,
    Hoping against hope I stand,
      Dying, and, behold, I live!

    4. Thou, O Christ, art all I want;
      More than all in Thee I find.
    Raise the fallen, cheer the faint,
      Heal the sick, and lead the blind.
    Just and holy is Thy name;
      I am all unrighteousness:
    False and full of sin I am,
      Thou art full of truth and grace.

    5. Plenteous grace with Thee is found,
      Grace to cover all my sin;
    Let the healing streams abound;
      Make and keep me pure within.
    Thou of life the Fountain art,
      Freely let me take of Thee;
    Spring Thou up within my heart,
      Rise to all eternity.

                                                     Charles Wesley, 1740.


108

                                                                     C. M.

    O for a thousand tongues to sing
      My great Redeemer’s praise,
    The glories of my God and King,
      The triumphs of His grace!

    2. My gracious Master and my God,
      Assist me to proclaim,
    To spread through all the earth abroad
      The honors of Thy name.

    3. Jesus! the name that charms our fears,
      That bids our sorrows cease;
    ’Tis music in the sinner’s ears,
      ’Tis life and health and peace.

    4. He breaks the power of canceled sin,
      He sets the prisoner free;
    His blood can make the foulest clean;
      His blood avails for me.

    5. Look unto Him, ye nations; own
      Your God, ye fallen race;
    Look and be saved through faith alone,
      Be justified by grace.

    6. See all your sins on Jesus laid;
      The Lamb of God was slain;
    His soul was once an offering made
      For every soul of man.

    7. Glory to God and praise and love
      Be ever, ever giv’n
    By saints below and saints above,
      The Church in earth and heav’n.

                                                     Charles Wesley, 1739.


109

                                                                   8s 10 l

    O friend of souls, how blest am I
      Whene’er Thy love my spirit calms!
    From sorrow’s dungeon forth I fly
      And hide me in Thy shelt’ring arms.
    The night of weeping flies away
    Before the heart-reviving ray
      Of love that beams from out Thy breast;
    Here is my heaven on earth begun.
    Who is not joyful that has won
      In Thee, O Lord, his joy and rest?

    2. The world may call herself my foe,
      So be it; for I trust her not,
    E’en though a friendly face she show
      And heap with her good things my lot.
    In Thee alone will I rejoice,
    Thou art the Friend, Lord, of my choice,
      For Thou art true when friendships fail;
    Mid storms of woe Thy truth is still
    My anchor; hate me as she will,
      The world shall o’er me ne’er prevail.

    3. The Law may threaten endless death
      From awful Sinai’s burning hill,
    Straightway from its consuming breath
      My soul through faith mounts higher still;
    She throws herself at Jesus’ feet
    And finds with Him a safe retreat,
      Where curse and death can never come.
    Though all foes threaten condemnation,
    Yet, Jesus, Thou art my Salvation,
      For in Thy love I find my home.

    4. Through deserts of the cross Thou leadest;
      I follow, leaning on Thy hand;
    From out the clouds Thy child Thou feedest
      And giv’st him water from the sand.
    I know Thy wondrous ways will end
    In love and blessing, Thou true Friend;
      Enough, if Thou art ever near.
    I know whom Thou wilt glorify
    And raise o’er sun and stars on high,
      Thou lead’st through depths and darkness here.

    5. To others death seems dark and grim,
      But not, Thou Life of life, to me.
    I know Thou ne’er forsakest him
      Whose heart and spirit rest in Thee.
    Oh, who would fear his journey’s close
    If from dark woods and lurking foes
      He then find safety and release?
    Nay, rather, with a joyful heart
    From this dark region I depart
      To Thy eternal light and peace.

    6. O Friend of souls, then blest indeed
      Am I when on Thy love I lean!
    The world nor pain nor death I heed,
      Since Thou, my God, my Joy hast been.
    O let this peace that Thou hast giv’n
    Be but a foretaste of Thy heav’n,
      For goodness infinite is Thine.
    Hence, world, with all thy flattering toys!
    In God alone lie all my joys;
      O rich delight, my Friend is mine!

                                W. C. Dessler, 1692; C. Winkworth, tr., a.




GOD’S WORD.


110

                                                                     L. M.

    Lord Jesus Christ, with us abide,
    For round us falls the eventide;
    Let not Thy Word, that heavenly light,
    For us be ever veiled in night.

    2. In these last days of sore distress
    Grant us, dear Lord, true steadfastness,
    That pure we keep, till life is spent,
    Thy holy Word and Sacrament.

    3. Lord Jesus, help, Thy Church uphold,
    For we are sluggish, thoughtless, cold;
    Indue Thy Word with power and grace
    And spread its truth in every place.

    4. O keep us in Thy Word, we pray;
    The guile and rage of Satan stay;
    Unto Thy Church grant, Lord, Thy grace,
    Peace, concord, patience, fearlessness.

    5. O God! how sin’s dread works abound!
    Throughout the earth no rest is found,
    And wide has falsehood’s spirit spread,
    And error boldly rears its head.

    6. Those haughty spirits, Lord, restrain
    Who o’er Thy Church with might would reign
    And always offer something new,
    Devised to change Thy doctrine true.

    7. And since the cause and glory, Lord,
    Are Thine, not ours, do Thou afford
    Us help and strength and constancy;
    With all our heart we trust in Thee.

    8. A trusty weapon is Thy Word,
    Thy Church’s buckler, shield, and sword;
    Lord, let us in this Word abide,
    That we may seek no other guide.

    9. O grant that in Thy holy Word
    We here may live and die, dear Lord;
    And when our journey endeth here,
    Receive us into glory there.

                                           N. Selnecker, 1611 (3-9 anon.).


111

                                                                     C. M.

    How precious is the Book Divine,
      By inspiration given!
    Bright as a lamp its doctrines shine
      To guide our souls to heaven.

    2. Its light, descending from above,
      Illumes this world so drear,
    Displays a Savior’s boundless love,
      And brings His glories near.

    3. It shows to man his wandering ways
      And where his feet have trod,
    And brings to view the matchless grace
      Of a forgiving God.

    4. O’er all the straight and narrow way
      Its radiant beams are cast;
    A light whose never weary ray
      Grows brightest at the last.

    5. It sweetly cheers our drooping hearts
      In this dark vale of tears;
    Life, light, and joy it still imparts
      And quells our rising fears.

    6. This lamp, through all the tedious night
      Of life shall guide our way
    Till we behold the clearer light
      Of an eternal day.

                                                    J. Fawcett, 1782, abr.


112

                                                                     C. M.

    How shall the young secure their hearts
      And guard their lives from sin?
    Thy Word the choicest rules imparts
      To keep the conscience clean.

    2. ’Tis like the sun, a heavenly light,
      That guides us all the day,
    And through the dangers of the night
      A lamp to lead our way.

    3. The starry heavens Thy rule obey,
      The earth maintains her place;
    And these Thy servants, night and day,
      Thy skill and power express.

    4. But still Thy Law and Gospel, Lord,
      Have lessons more divine;
    Not earth stands firmer than Thy Word,
      Nor stars so nobly shine.

    5. Thy Word is everlasting truth;
      How pure is every page!
    That holy Book shall guide our youth
      And well support our age.

                                                        Isaac Watts, 1719.


113

                                                                7s, 6s 8 l

    O Word of God Incarnate,
      O Wisdom from on high,
    O Truth unchanged, unchanging,
      O Light of our dark sky,—
    We praise Thee for the radiance
      That from the hallowed page,
    A lantern to our footsteps,
      Shines on from age to age.

    2. The Church from her dear Master
      Received the gift divine,
    And still that light she lifteth
      O’er all the earth to shine.
    It is the golden casket,
      Where gems of truth are stored;
    It is the heaven-drawn picture
      Of Christ, the living Word.

    3. It floateth like a banner
      Before God’s host unfurled;
    It shineth like a beacon
      Above the darkling world;
    It is the chart and compass
      That o’er life’s surging sea,
    Mid mists and rocks and quicksands,
      Still guides, O Christ, to Thee.

    4. Oh, make Thy Church, dear Savior,
      A lamp of burnished gold,
    To bear before the nations
      Thy true light as of old;
    Oh, teach Thy wandering pilgrims
      By this their path to trace,
    Till, clouds and darkness ended,
      They see Thee face to face.

                                                       W. W. How, 1867, a.


114

                                                                     L. M.

    The heavens declare Thy glory, Lord,
      In every star Thy wisdom shines;
    But when our eyes behold Thy Word,
      We read Thy name in fairer lines.

    2. The rolling sun, the changing light,
      And nights and days, Thy power confess;
    But the blest Volume Thou didst write
      Reveals Thy justice and Thy grace.

    3. Thy Gospel-heralds dare not rest
      Till through the world Thy truth has run;
    Till Christ has all the nations blest
      That see the light or feel the sun.

    4. Great Sun of Righteousness, arise;
      Bless the dark world with heavenly light;
    The Gospel makes the simple wise,
      Thy laws are pure, Thy judgments right.

    5. Thy noblest wonders here we view
      In souls renewed and sins forgiv’n.
    Lord, cleanse our sins, our souls renew,
      And make Thy Word our guide to heav’n.

                                                   Isaac Watts, 1719, abr.


115

                                                                     L. M.

    The Law of God is good and wise
    And sets His will before our eyes,
    Shows us the way of righteousness,
    And dooms to death when we transgress.

    2. Its light of holiness imparts
    The knowledge of our sinful hearts,
    That we may see our lost estate
    And seek deliv’rance ere too late.

    3. To those who help in Christ have found
    And would in works of love abound
    It shows what deeds are His delight
    And should be done as good and right.

    4. When men the offered help disdain
    And wilfully in sin remain,
    Its terror in their ear resounds
    And keeps their wickedness in bounds.

    5. The Law is good; but since the Fall
    Its holiness condemns us all;
    It dooms us for our sin to die
    And has no power to justify.

    6. To Jesus we for refuge flee,
    Who from the curse has set us free,
    And humbly worship at His throne,
    Saved by His grace through faith alone.

                                                             M. Loy, 1863.


116

                                                                     L. M.

    The Gospel shows the Father’s grace,
    Who sent His Son to save our race,
    Proclaims how Jesus lived and died
    That man might thus be justified.

    2. It sets the Lamb before our eyes
    Who made th’ atoning sacrifice
    And calls the souls with guilt opprest
    To come and find eternal rest.

    3. It brings the Savior’s righteousness
    Our souls to robe in royal dress;
    From all our guilt it brings release
    And gives the troubled conscience peace.

    4. It is the power of God to save
    From sin and Satan and the grave;
    It works the faith which firmly clings
    To all the treasures which it brings.

    5. It bears to all the tidings glad
    And bids their hearts no more be sad;
    The heavy-laden soul it cheers
    And banishes their guilty fears.

    6. May we in faith its tidings learn,
    Nor thanklessly its blessings spurn;
    May we in faith its truth confess
    And praise the Lord, our Righteousness!

                                                             M. Loy, 1863.


117

                                                                     C. M.

    Father of mercies, in Thy Word
      What endless glory shines!
    Forever be Thy name adored
      For these celestial lines.

    2. Here the Redeemer’s welcome voice
      Spreads heavenly peace around;
    And life and everlasting joys
      Attend the blissful sound.

    3. Oh, may these heavenly pages be
      My ever dear delight;
    And still new beauties may I see
      And still increasing light!

    4. Divine Instructor, gracious Lord!
      Be Thou forever near;
    Teach me to love Thy sacred Word
      And view my Savior there.

                                                        Anne Steele, 1760.


118

                                                                     L. M.

    When Israel through the desert passed,
      A fiery pillar went before
    To guide them through the dreary waste
      And lessen the fatigues they bore.

    2. Such is Thy glorious Word, O God!
      ’Tis for our light and guidance giv’n;
    It sheds its luster all abroad
      And points the path to bliss and heav’n.

    3. It fills the soul with sweet delight
      And quickens its inactive powers;
    It sets our wand’ring footsteps right,
      Displays Thy love, and kindles ours.

    4. Its promises rejoice our hearts,
      Its doctrines are divinely true;
    While highest wisdom it imparts,
      It comforts and instructs us too.

    5. Ye favored lands, that have this Word,
      Ye saints, who feel its saving power,
    Unite your tongues to praise the Lord
      And His distinguished grace adore!

                                                         B. Beddome, 1769.


119

                                                                     C. M.

    Lamp of our feet, whereby we trace
      Our path when wont to stray,
    Stream from the fount of heav’nly grace,
      Brook by the traveler’s way;

    2. Bread of our souls, whereon we feed,
      True manna from on high;
    Our guide and chart, wherein we read
      Of realms beyond the sky;

    3. Pillar of fire, through watches dark,
      Or radiant cloud by day;
    When waves would break our tossing bark,
      Our anchor and our stay:—

    4. Word of the ever-living God,
      Will of His glorious Son;
    Without thee, how could earth be trod
      Or heaven itself be won?

    5. Lord, grant us all aright to learn
      The wisdom it imparts
    And to its heavenly teaching turn
      With simple, childlike hearts.

                                                       B. Barton, 1826, a.


120

                                                                     L. M.

    We have a sure prophetic Word,
    By inspiration of the Lord;
    And though assailed on every hand,
    Jehovah’s Word shall ever stand.

    2. By powers of empire banned and burned,
    By pagan pride rejected, spurned,
    The Word still stands the Christian’s trust
    While haughty empires lie in dust.

    3. Lo! what the Word in times of old
    Of future days and deeds foretold
    Is all fulfilled, while ages roll,
    As traced on the prophetic scroll.

    4. Abiding, steadfast, firm, and sure,
    The teachings of the Word endure:
    Blest he who trusts this steadfast Word,
    His anchor holds in Christ, the Lord!

                                                      E. Cronenwett, 1880.


121

                                                          8, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7

    Christians, come, in sweetest measures,
    Sing of those who spread the treasures
      In the holy Gospel shrined;
    Blessed tidings of salvation,
    Peace on earth their proclamation,
      Love from God to lost mankind.

    2. See the rivers four that gladden
    With their streams the better Eden,
      Planted by our Savior dear:
    Christ the Fountain, these the waters.
    Drink, O Zion’s sons and daughters,
      Drink, and find salvation here.

    3. Here our souls, by Jesus sated,
    More and more shall be translated
      Earth’s temptations far above;
    Freed from sin’s abhorred dominion,
    Soaring on angelic pinion,
      They shall reach the source of love.

    4. Then shall thanks and praise ascending,
    For Thy mercies without ending,
      Rise to Thee, O Savior blest.
    With Thy gracious aid defend us,
    Let Thy guiding light attend us,
      Bring us to Thy place of rest.

                      Adam of St. Victor, 1150; R. Campbell, tr., 1850, a.


122

                                                                     L. M.

    In vain would boasting reason find
      The path to happiness and God;
    Her weak directions leave the mind
      Bewildered in a doubtful road.

    2. Jesus, Thy words alone impart
      Eternal life; on these I live;
    Here sweeter comforts cheer my heart
      Than all the powers of nature give.

    3. Here let my constant feet abide;
      Thou art the true, the living Way.
    Let Thy good Spirit be my guide
      To the bright realms of endless day.

    4. The various forms that men devise
      To shake my faith with treacherous art
    I scorn as vanity and lies
      And bind Thy Gospel to my heart.

                                                     Anne Steele, 1760, a.




THE LORD’S DAY.


123

                                                                    7s 6 l

    Father, who the light this day
      Out of darkness didst create,
    Shine upon us now, we pray,
      While within Thy courts we wait.
    Wean us from the works of night,
    Make us children of the light.

    2. Savior, who this day didst break
      From the bondage of the tomb,
    Bid our slumbering souls awake
      And dispel their doubt and gloom;
    Let us, from our bonds set free,
    Rise from sin and live to Thee.

    3. Blessed Spirit, Comforter,
      Sent this day from Christ on high,
    Lord, on us Thy gifts confer,
      Cleanse, illumine, sanctify;
    All Thine influence shed abroad;
    Lead us to the truth of God.

                                                Julia A. Elliott, 1833, a.


124

                                                  6, 6, 6, 6, 8, 8 (H. M.)

    Welcome, delightful morn,
      Thou day of sacred rest;
    I hail thy kind return:
      Lord, make these moments blest.
    From the low train of mortal toys
    I soar to reach immortal joys.

    2. Now may the King descend
      And fill His throne of grace;
    Thy scepter, Lord, extend
      While saints address Thy face;
    Let sinners feel Thy quickening Word
    And learn to know and fear the Lord.

    3. Descend, O heavenly Dove,
      With all Thy quickening powers,
    Disclose a Savior’s love,
      And bless these sacred hours.
    Then shall my soul new life obtain,
    Nor Lord’s Days e’er be spent in vain.

                                      Hayward, in Dobell’s New Sel., 1806.


125

                                                                    7s 6 l

    Safely through another week
      God has brought us on our way;
    Let us now a blessing seek,
      Waiting in His courts to-day:
    Day of all the week the best,
    Emblem of eternal rest.

    2. Mercies multiplied each hour
      Through the week our praise demand;
    Guarded by almighty power,
      Fed and guided by His hand,
    Though ungrateful we have been
    And repaying love with sin.

    3. While we pray for pardoning grace,
      Through the dear Redeemer’s name,
    Show Thy reconcilèd face,
      Take away our sin and shame;
    From our worldly cares set free,
    May we rest this day in Thee.

    4. As we come Thy name to praise,
      May we feel Thy presence near;
    May Thy glory meet our eyes
      While we in Thy house appear.
    Here afford us, Lord, a taste
    Of our everlasting feast.

    5. May Thy Gospel’s joyful sound
      Conquer sinners, comfort saints;
    Make the fruits of grace abound,
      Bring relief for all complaints.
    Thus may all our Sabbaths prove
    Till we join the Church above.

                                                        John Newton, 1774.


126

                                                                        7s

    On this day, the first of days,
    God the Father’s name we praise,
    Who, creation’s Fount and Spring,
    Did the world from darkness bring.

    2. On this day th’ eternal Son,
    Over death His triumph won;
    On this day the Spirit came
    With His gifts of living flame.

    3. Oh, that fervent love to-day
    May in every heart have sway,
    Teaching us to praise aright
    God, the Source of life and light!

    4. Father, who didst fashion me
    Image of Thyself to be,
    Fill me with Thy love divine,
    Let my every thought be Thine.

    5. Holy Jesus, may I be
    Dead and buried here with Thee,
    And, by love inflamed, arise
    Unto Thee a sacrifice.

                     _Die Parente Temporum_, 1748; H. W. Baker, tr., 1861.


127

                                                                     L. M.

    This day at Thy creating word
    First o’er the earth the light was poured.
    O Lord, this day upon us shine
    And fill our souls with light divine.

    2. This day the Lord for sinners slain
    In might victorious rose again.
    O Jesus, may we raised be
    From death of sin to life in Thee.

    3. This day the Holy Spirit came
    With fiery tongues of cloven flame.—
    O Spirit, fill our hearts this day
    With grace to hear and grace to pray.

    4. O day of light and life and grace,
    From earthly toils sweet resting-place,
    Thy hallowed hours, best gift of love,
    Give we again to God above!

                                                          W. W. How, 1854.


128

                                                                     C. M.

    With joy we hail the sacred day
      Which we have called God’s own;
    With joy the summons we obey
      To worship at His throne.

    2. Thy chosen temple, Lord, how fair!
      As here Thy servants throng
    To breathe the humble, fervent prayer
      And pour the choral song.

    3. Spirit of Grace, O deign to dwell
      Within Thy Church below;
    Make her in holiness excel,
      With pure devotion glow.

    4. Let peace within her walls be found;
      Let all her sons unite
    To spread with holy zeal around
      Her clear and shining light.

    5. Great God, we hail the sacred day
      Which we have called Thine own;
    With joy the summons we obey
      To worship at Thy throne.

                                                        H. Auber, 1833, a.


129

                                                                     C. M.

    This is the day the Lord hath made;
      He calls the hours His own;
    Let heaven rejoice, let earth be glad,
      And praise surround the throne.

    2. To-day He rose and left the dead,
      And Satan’s empire fell;
    To-day the saints His triumph spread
      And all His wonders tell.

    3. Hosanna to th’ anointed King,
      To David’s holy Son!
    Help us, O Lord; descend and bring
      Salvation from Thy throne.

    4. Blest be the Lord, who comes to men
      With messages of grace;
    Who comes in God His Father’s name
      To save our sinful race.

    5. Hosanna in the highest strains
      The Church on earth can raise!
    The highest heavens, in which He reigns,
      Shall give Him nobler praise.

                                                        Isaac Watts, 1719.




ADVENT.


130

                                                    8, 7, 8, 7, 7, 7, 8, 8

    Comfort, comfort ye My people,
      Speak ye peace, thus saith your God;
    Comfort those who sit in darkness,
      Mourning ’neath their sorrow’s load;
    Speak ye to Jerusalem
    Of the peace that waits for them;
    Tell her that her sins I cover,
    And her warfare now is over.

    2. For the Herald’s voice is crying
      In the desert far and near,
    Bidding all men to repentance,
      Since the kingdom now is here.
    Oh, that warning cry obey!
    Now prepare for God a way!
    Let the valleys rise to meet Him
    And the hills bow down to greet Him.

    3. Make ye straight what long was crooked,
      Make the rougher places plain;
    Let your hearts be true and humble,
      As befits His holy reign;
    For the glory of the Lord
    Now o’er earth is shed abroad,
    And all flesh shall see the token
    That His Word is never broken.

                               J. Olearius, 1671; C. Winkworth, tr., 1862.


131

                                                                 8, 7, 6 l

    Jesus came, the heav’ns adoring,
      Came with peace from realms on high;
    Jesus came for man’s redemption,
      Lowly came on earth to die;
        Alleluia! Alleluia!
      Came in deep humility.

    2. Jesus comes again in mercy,
      When our hearts are bowed with care;
    Jesus comes again in answer
      To an earnest, heartfelt prayer;
        Alleluia! Alleluia!
      Comes to save us from despair.

    3. Jesus comes to hearts rejoicing,
      Bringing news of sins forgiv’n;
    Jesus comes in sounds of gladness,
      Leading souls redeemed to heav’n;
        Alleluia! Alleluia!
      Now the gate of death is riv’n.

    4. Jesus comes in joy and sorrow,
      Shares alike our hopes and fears;
    Jesus comes, whate’er befalls us,
      Glads our hearts and dries our tears;
        Alleluia! Alleluia!
      Cheering e’en our failing years.

    5. Jesus comes on clouds triumphant
      When the heavens shall pass away;
    Jesus comes again in glory,
      Let us, then, our homage pay,
        Alleluia! ever singing
      Till the dawn of endless day.

                                                          G. Thring, 1864.


132

                                                                 7, 6, 8 l

    Hail to the Lord’s Anointed,
      Great David’s greater Son!
    Hail, in the time appointed,
      His reign on earth begun!
    He comes to break oppression,
      To set the captive free,
    To take away transgression,
      And rule in equity.

    2. He comes with succor speedy
      To those who suffer wrong,
    To help the poor and needy,
      And bid the weak be strong;
    To give them songs for sighing,
      Their darkness turn to light,
    Whose souls, condemned and dying,
      Were precious in His sight.

    3. He shall come down like showers
      Upon the fruitful earth;
    And love, joy, hope, like flowers,
      Spring in His path to birth.
    Before Him on the mountains
      Shall peace, the herald, go,
    And righteousness, in fountains,
      From hill to valley flow.

    4. To Him shall prayer unceasing
      And daily vows ascend,
    His kingdom still increasing,
      A kingdom without end.
    The tide of time shall never
      His covenant remove;
    His name shall stand forever,—
      That name to us is Love.

                                                   James Montgomery, 1821.


133

                                                                8, 7, 8, 7

    Hark! a thrilling voice is sounding:
      “Christ is nigh!” it seems to say;
    “Cast away the dreams of darkness,
      O ye children of the day!”

    2. Startled at the solemn warning,
      Let the earth-bound soul arise;
    Christ, her Sun, all sloth dispelling,
      Shines upon the morning skies.

    3. Lo, the Lamb, so long expected,
      Comes with pardon down from heav’n.
    Let us haste, with tears of sorrow,
      One and all, to be forgiv’n.

    4. So, when next He comes with glory,
      Wrapping all the earth in fear,
    With His mercy He may shield us
      And with words of love draw near.

                      From the Latin (c. 5th cent.); E. Caswall, tr. 1849.


134

                                                                 7, 6, 8 l

    The Bridegroom soon will call us:
      Come, all ye wedding-guests!
    May not His voice appall us
      While slumber binds our breasts!
    May all our lamps be burning
      And oil be found in store,
    That we, with Him returning,
      May open find the door!

    2. There shall we see delighted
      Our dear Redeemer’s face,
    Who leads our souls benighted
      To glory by His grace;
    The patriarchs shall meet us,
      The prophets’ holy band,
    Apostles, martyrs, greet us
      In that celestial land.

    3. They will not blush to own us
      As brothers, sisters dear,
    Love ever will be shown us
      When we with them appear.
    We all shall come before Him
      Who for us man became,
    As Lord and God adore Him,
      And ever bless His name.

    4. Our Father, rich in blessing,
      Will give us crowns of gold
    And, to His bosom pressing,
      Impart a bliss untold,
    Will welcome with embraces
      Of never-ending love,
    And deck us with His graces
      In blissful realms above.

    5. In yonder home shall never
      Be silent music’s voice;
    With hearts and lips forever
      We shall in God rejoice.
    The angels shall adore Him,
      All saints shall sing His praise,
    And bring with joy before Him
      Their sweetest heavenly lays.

    6. In mansions fair and spacious
      Will God the feast prepare
    And, ever kind and gracious,
      Bid us its riches share;
    There bliss that knows no measure
      From springs of love shall flow,
    And never-changing pleasure
      His bounty will bestow.

    7. Thus God shall from all evil
      Forever make us free,
    From sin and from the devil,
      From all adversity,
    From sickness, pain, and sadness,
      From troubles, cares, and fears,
    And grant us heavenly gladness,
      And wipe away our tears.

                                                Johann Walther, † c. 1566.


135

                                                          7, 8, 7, 8, 7, 7

    Come, Thou precious Ransom, come!
      Only Hope for sinful mortals!
    Come, O Savior of the world!
      Open are to Thee all portals;
    Come, Thy beauty let us see:
    Anxiously we wait for Thee.

    2. O great King of Glory, come!
      Let me be Thy living temple;
    Enter Thou into my heart;
      Though I am but poor and simple,
    Yet my riches then shall be
    That Thou reignest, Lord, in me.

    3. My hosannas and my palms
      Graciously receive, I pray Thee;
    Evermore, as best I can,
      Savior, I will homage pay Thee,
    And in faith I will embrace,
    Lord, Thy merit through Thy grace.

    4. Hail! Hosanna! David’s Son,
      Help, Lord, hear our supplication!
    Let Thy kingdom, scepter, crown
      Bring us blessing and salvation
    That forever we may sing:
    Hail! Hosanna! to our King.

                                       J. G. Olearius, 1644; A. Crull, tr.


136

                                                                 7, 6, 8 l

    O Lord, how shall I meet Thee,
      How welcome Thee aright?
    All nations long to greet Thee,
      My Hope, my heart’s Delight!
    O kindle, dearest Jesus,
      Thy lamp within my breast
    That I may know what pleases
      Thee, Lord, my heav’nly Guest.

    2. Thy Zion strews before Thee
      Green boughs and fairest palms,
    And I, too, will adore Thee
      With sweetest songs and psalms.
    My heart shall bloom forever
      For Thee with praises new
    And from Thy name shall never
      Withhold the honor due.

    3. What hast Thou left ungranted
      To give me glad relief?
    When soul and body panted
      In utmost depth of grief,
    In deepest degradation,
      Devoid of joy and peace,
    Then Thou, my soul’s Salvation,
      Didst come to bring release.

    4. I lay in fetters groaning,
      Thou com’st to set me free;
    I stood, my shame bemoaning,
      Thou com’st to honor me;
    A glory Thou dost give me,
      A treasure safe on high,
    That will not fail or leave me
      As earthly riches fly.

    5. Naught, naught, dear Lord, could move Thee
      To leave Thy rightful place
    Save love, for which I love Thee;
      A love that could embrace
    A world where sorrow dwelleth,
      Which sin and suffering fill,
    More than the tongue e’er telleth;—
      Yet Thou couldst love it still!

    6. Rejoice, then, ye sad-hearted,
      Who sit in deepest gloom,
    Who mourn o’er joys departed
      And tremble at your doom.
    Despair not, He is near you,
      Yea, standing at the door,
    Who best can help and cheer you
      And bid you weep no more.

    7. No care nor effort either
      Is needed day or night
    How ye may draw Him hither
      In your own strength and might.
    He comes, He comes with gladness,
      Moved by His love alone,
    To calm your fear and sadness,
      To Him they well are known.

    8. Sin’s debt, that fearful burden,
      Let not your souls distress;
    Your guilt the Lord will pardon
      And cover with His grace.
    He comes, He comes, procuring
      The peace of sin forgiv’n,
    To all God’s sons securing
      Their part and lot in heav’n.

    9. Why should the wicked move you?
      Heed not their craft and spite!
    Your Savior, who doth love you,
      Will scatter all their might.
    He comes, a King most glorious,
      And all His earthly foes
    In vain His course victorious
      Endeavor to oppose.

    10. He comes to judge the nations,
      A terror to His foes,
    A Light of consolations
      And blessed Hope to those
    Who love the Lord’s appearing.
      O glorious Sun, now come,
    Send forth Thy beams so cheering
      And guide us safely home!

                                                      Paul Gerhardt, 1653.


137

                                                                     S. M.

    The Advent of our God
      Our prayers must now employ,
    And we must meet Him on His road
      With hymns of holy joy.

    2. The everlasting Son
      Incarnate deigns to be;
    Himself a servant’s form puts on
      To set His people free.

    3. Daughter of Zion, rise
      And greet thy lowly King,
    And do not wickedly despise
      The mercies He will bring.

    4. As Judge, in clouds of light,
      He will come down again
    And all His scattered saints unite
      With Him in heaven to reign.

    5. Before that dreadful day
      May all our sins be gone;
    May the old man be put away
      And the new man put on!

    6. Praise to the Savior Son
      From the created host;
    Like praise be to the Father done
      And to the Holy Ghost.

                                                   John Chandler, 1837, a.


138

                                                    8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 6, 6

    Lift up your heads, ye mighty gates!
    Behold, the King of Glory waits;
    The King of kings is drawing near,
    The Savior of the world is here;
    Life and salvation He doth bring,
    Wherefore rejoice and gladly sing:
      We praise Thee, Father, now,
      Creator, wise art Thou!

    2. The Lord is just, a Helper tried,
    Mercy is ever at His side,
    His kingly crown is holiness,
    His scepter, pity in distress;
    The end of all our woe He brings,
    Wherefore the earth is glad and sings:
      We praise Thee, Savior, now,
      Mighty in deed art Thou!

    3. O blest the land, the city blest,
    Where Christ, the Ruler, is confessed!
    O happy hearts and happy homes
    To whom this King in triumph comes!
    The cloudless Sun of Joy He is,
    Who bringeth pure delight and bliss.
      We praise Thee, Spirit, now,
      Our Comforter art Thou!

    4. Fling wide the portals of your heart,
    Make it a temple set apart
    From earthly use for heaven’s employ,
    Adorned with prayer and love and joy;
    So shall your Sovereign enter in
    And new and nobler life begin.
      To Thee, O God, be praise
      For word and deed and grace!

    5. Redeemer, come! I open wide
    My heart to Thee; here, Lord, abide!
    Let me Thy inner presence feel,
    Thy grace and love in me reveal;
    Thy Holy Spirit guide us on
    Until our glorious goal be won!
      Eternal praise and fame
      We offer to Thy name.

                                   G. Weissel, 1633; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


139

                                                                     C. M.

    Hark the glad sound! the Savior comes,
      The Savior promised long;
    Let every heart prepare a throne
      And every voice a song.

    2. He comes the prisoners to release,
      In Satan’s bondage held;
    The gates of brass before Him burst,
      The iron fetters yield.

    3. He comes from thickest films of vice
      To clear the mental ray
    And on the eyeballs of the blind
      To pour the heav’nly day.

    4. He comes the broken heart to bind,
      The bleeding soul to cure
    And with the treasures of His grace
      T’ enrich the humble poor.

    5. Our glad hosannas, Prince of Peace,
      Thy welcome shall proclaim.
    And heaven’s eternal arches ring
      With Thy beloved name.

                                                   Philip Doddridge, 1735.


140

                                                        L. M. (with Hall.)

    Again is come the new church-year;
    Rejoice, all Christians, far and near!
    Thy King, O Zion, comes to Thee,
    Therefore rejoice eternally!
        Hallelujah!

    2. Amongst us now anew are heard
    The lessons of God’s gracious Word,
    Which shows the way to life in heaven.
    For this all praise to God be given!
        Hallelujah!

    3. May what is taught in Thy true Word
    Increase our faith in Thee, O Lord,
    And so abide in us that we
    May render endless praise to Thee!
        Hallelujah!

                                                        J. Olearius, 1671.


141

                                                                        7s

    Savior of the heathen, come,
    Virgin’s Son, here make Thy home!
    Wonder at it, heaven and earth,
    That the Lord chose such a birth.

    2. Not by human flesh and blood,
    By the Spirit of our God
    Was the Word of God made flesh—
    Woman’s blossom, sweet and fresh.

    3. Though the virgin was with child,
    Chastity proved undefiled;
    Many a virtue rare forth shone,
    God was there upon His throne.

    4. From the Father forth He came
    And returned unto the same;
    Down to hell He went alone
    And again to God’s high throne.

    5. Thou, the Father’s equal, win
    Victory in the flesh o’er sin,
    By Thy strength divine, O Lord,
    Help to our frail flesh afford.

    6. Lord, Thy manger is so bright,
    Night sends forth a novel light;
    Darkness must not enter there,
    Faith abides in light fore’er.

    7. Praise to God the Father sing,
    Praise to God the Son, our King,
    Praise to God the Spirit be
    Ever and eternally.

                      From the Latin of Ambrose; Martin Luther, 1524, abr.


142

                                                    7, 6, 7, 6, 6, 7, 7, 6

    Arise, sons of the kingdom!
      The King is drawing nigh;
    Arise and hail with gladness
      The Ruler from on high.
    Ye Christians, hasten forth!
      Your praise and homage bring Him
      And glad hosannas sing Him;
    Naught else your love is worth.

    2. Arise, ye drooping mourners!
      The King is very near;
    Away with grief and sorrow!
      For, lo! your Help is here.
    Behold, in many a place—
      O blessed consolation!—
      We find Him, our Salvation,
    In His pure means of grace.

    3. Now hear, ye bold transgressors,
      The King full well gives heed
    To all that ye are doing,
      And to the life ye lead,
    Enthralled by sin and hell;
      There’s naught in all creation
      Escapes His observation,
    He marketh all things well.

    4. Be righteous, ye His subjects,
      The King is just and true;
    Prepare for Him a highway,
      Make all things straight and new.
    He means all for our good;
      Then let us bear the crosses
      Which He Himself imposes
    In an undaunted mood.

    5. He nevermore forsaketh
      A child that feels the rod,
    Who Him his Refuge maketh
      And puts his trust in God.
    He is our sovereign King;
      E’en death itself shall never
      Those from their Master sever
    Who to His mercy cling.

    6. Arise, ye faint and fearful!
      The King now comes with might;
    His heart hath long since loved us,
      He makes our darkness light.
    Now are our sorrows o’er;
      No wrath shall e’er befall us,
      Since God in grace doth call us
    His children evermore.

    7. The King in grace remembers
      His loved ones here below
    With gifts of royal treasures,
      Yea, doth Himself bestow
    Through His blest Word and grace.
      O King, arrayed in splendor,
      To Thee all praise we’ll render
    Here and there face to face.

    8. O rich the gifts Thou bring’st us,
      Thyself made poor and weak;
    O Love beyond expression
      That thus can sinners seek!
    For this, O Lord, will we
      Our joyous tribute bring Thee
      And glad hosannas sing Thee
    And ever grateful be.

                                                       J. Rist, 1651, abr.


143

                                                                    6s 6 l

    Once He came in blessing,
    All our ills redressing,
    Came in likeness lowly,
    Son of God most holy;
    Bore the cross to save us,
    Hope and freedom gave us.

    2. Still He comes within us,
    Still His voice would win us
    From the sins that hurt us;
    Would to Truth convert us
    From our foolish errors,
    Ere He comes in terrors.

    3. Thus, if thou hast known Him,
    Not ashamed to own Him,
    Nor dost love Him coldly,
    But wilt trust Him boldly,
    He will now receive thee,
    Heal thee, and forgive thee.

    4. He who well endureth
    Bright reward secureth.
    Come then, O Lord Jesus,
    From our sins release us;
    Let us here confess Thee
    Till in heaven we bless Thee.

                          J. Horn (Roh), 1544; C. Winkworth, tr., 1862, a.


144

                                                                     L. M.

    Jesus, Thy Church with longing eyes
      For Thine expected coming waits:
    When will the promised light arise,
      And glory beam from Zion’s gates?

    2. E’en now, when tempests round us fall
      And wintry clouds o’ercast the sky,
    Thy words with pleasure we recall
      And deem that our redemption’s nigh.

    3. Come, gracious Lord, our hearts renew,
      Our foes repel, our wrongs redress,
    Man’s rooted enmity subdue,
      And crown Thy Gospel with success.

    4. O come and reign o’er every land;
      Let Satan from his throne be hurled,
    All nations bow to Thy command,
      And grace revive a dying world.

    5. Teach us in watchfulness and prayer
      To wait for the appointed hour
    And fit us by Thy grace to share
      The triumphs of Thy conquering power.

                                                    W. H. Bathhurst, 1831.




CHRISTMAS.


145

                                                          8, 6, 6, 8, 6, 6

    All my heart this night rejoices,
      As I hear Far and near
    Sweetest angel voices;
      “Christ is born,” their choirs are singing,
    Till the air Everywhere
      Now with joy is ringing.

    2. Forth to-day the Conqueror goeth,
      the foe, Sin and woe,
    Death and hell, o’erthroweth.
      God is man, man to deliver;
    His dear Son Now is one
      With our blood forever.

    3. Shall we still dread God’s displeasure,
      Who, to save, Freely gave
    Us His dearest Treasure?
      To redeem us, He hath given
    His own Son From the throne
      Of His might in heaven.

    4. Should He, who Himself imparted,
      Aught withhold From the fold,
    Leave us broken-hearted?
      Should the Son of God not love us,
    Who, to cheer Sufferers here,
      Left His throne above us?

    5. If our blessed Lord and Maker
      Hated men, Would He then
    Be of flesh partaker?
      If He in our woe delighted,
    Would He bear All the care
      Of our race benighted?

    6. He becomes the Lamb that taketh
      Sin away And for aye
    Full atonement maketh.
      For our Life His own He tenders
    And our race, By His grace,
      Meet for glory renders.

    7. Hark! a voice from yonder manger,
      Soft and sweet, Doth entreat:
    “Flee from woe and danger;
      Brethren, from all ills that grieve you
    You are freed, All you need
      I will surely give you.”

    8. Come, then, banish all your sadness,
      One and all, Great and small,
    Come with songs of gladness.
      Love Him who with love is glowing;
    Hail the Star, Near and far,
      Light and joy bestowing.

    9. Ye whose anguish knew no measure,
      Weep no more, See the door
    To celestial pleasure.
      Cling to Him, for He will guide you
    Where no cross, Pain, or loss
      Can again betide you.

    10. Hither come, ye heavy-hearted,
      Who for sin, Deep within,
    Long and sore have smarted;
      For the poisoned wounds you’re feeling
    Help is near, One is here
      Mighty for their healing.

    11. Hither come, ye poor and wretched,
      Know His will Is to fill
    Every hand outstretchèd;
      Here are riches without measure,
    Here forget All regret,
      Fill your hearts with treasure.

    12. Let me in my arms receive Thee,
      On Thy breast Let me rest,
    Savior, ne’er to leave Thee!
      Since Thou hast Thyself presented
    Now to me, I shall be
      Evermore contented.

    13. Guilt no longer can distress me;
      Son of God, Thou my load
    Bearest to release me.
      Stain in me Thou findest never;
    I am clean, All my sin
      Is removed forever.

    14. I am pure, in Thee believing,
      From Thy store Evermore
    Righteous robes receiving.
      In my heart I will enfold Thee,
    Treasure rare, Let me there,
      Loving, ever hold Thee!

    15. Thee, O Lord, with heed I’ll cherish
      While I’ve breath; E’en in death
    Shall my faith not perish.
      I shall dwell with Thee forever
    Far on high, In the joy
      That can alter never.

                                                      Paul Gerhardt, 1656.


146

                                                                        7s

    Let the earth now praise the Lord,
    Who hath truly kept His word
    And the sinners’ Help and Friend
    Now at last to us doth send.

    2. What the fathers most desired,
    What the prophets’ heart inspired,
    What they longed for many a year,
    Stands fulfilled in glory here.

    3. Abram’s promised great Reward,
    Zion’s Helper, Jacob’s Lord,
    Him of twofold race behold,
    Truly came, as long foretold.

    4. Welcome, O my Savior, now!
    Hail! my Portion, Lord, art Thou!
    Here, too, in my heart, I pray,
    O prepare Thyself a way.

    5. King of Glory, enter in!
    Cleanse it from the filth of sin,
    As Thou hast so often done;
    It belongs to Thee alone.

    6. As Thy coming was in peace,
    Noiseless, full of gentleness,
    Let the same mind dwell in me
    That was ever found in Thee.

    7. Comfort my desponding heart;
    Thou my Strength and Refuge art.
    I am weak, and cunningly
    Satan lays his snares for me.

    8. Bruise for me the Serpent’s head,
    That, set free from doubt and dread,
    I may cleave to Thee in faith,
    Safely kept through life and death;

    9. And when Thou dost come again
    As a glorious King to reign,
    I with joy may see Thy face,
    Truly ransomed by Thy grace.

                                      H. Held, 1643; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


147

                                                             8, 7, 8, 8, 4

    All praise to Jesus’ hallowed name,
    Who of virgin pure became
    True man for us! The angels sing,
    As the glad news to earth they bring,
        Hallelujah!

    2. Th’ eternal Father’s only Son
    For a manger leaves His throne;
    Disguised in our poor flesh and blood
    Is now the everlasting Good.
        Hallelujah!

    3. He whom the world could not inclose
    Doth in Mary’s lap repose,
    He is become an infant small,
    Who by His might upholdeth all.
        Hallelujah!

    4. Th’ eternal Light, come down from heaven,
    Hath to us new sunshine given;
    It shineth in the midst of night
    And maketh us the sons of light.
        Hallelujah!

    5. The Father’s Son, God ever blest,
    In the world became a guest;
    He leads us from this vale of tears
    And makes us in His kingdom heirs.
        Hallelujah!

    6. He came to earth despised and poor,
    Man to pity and restore
    And make us rich in heaven above,
    The angels’ equal, through His love.
        Hallelujah!

    7. All this He did that He might prove
    To us sinners His great love;
    For this let Christendom adore
    And praise His name forevermore.
        Hallelujah!

          Martin Luther, 1543; R. Massie, tr., a. First stanza since 1370.


148

                                                                     L. M.

    Now praise we Christ, the Holy One,
    The blessed Virgin Mary’s Son,
    Far as the glorious sun doth shine,
    E’en to the world’s remote confine.

    2. He who Himself all things did make
    A servant’s form vouchsafed to take,
    That He as man mankind might win
    And save His creatures from their sin.

    3. The grace of God, the mighty Lord,
    Upon the mother was outpoured;
    A virgin pure and undefiled
    In wondrous wise conceived a child.

    4. The noble mother bare a Son,
    For so did Gabriel’s promise run,
    Whom John confessed and leaped with joy,
    Ere yet the mother knew her boy.

    5. Upon a manger, filled with hay,
    In poverty content He lay;
    With milk was fed the Lord of all,
    Who feeds the ravens when they call.

    6. The heavenly choirs rejoice and raise
    Their voice to God in songs of praise;
    To humble shepherds is proclaimed
    The Shepherd who the world hath framed.

    7. All honor unto Christ be paid,
    Pure offspring of the favored maid,
    With Father and with Holy Ghost,
    Till time in endless time be lost!

       From the Latin of Sedulius; Martin Luther, 1524; R. Massie, tr., a.


149

                                                                7, 6, 7, 6

    A great and mighty wonder
      Our Christmas Festal brings:
    On earth, a lowly Infant,
      Behold the King of kings!

    2. The Word is made incarnate,
      Descending from on high;
    And cherubim sing anthems
      To shepherds, from the sky.

    3. And we with them triumphant
      Repeat the hymn again:
    “To God on high be glory
      And peace on earth to men!”

    4. While thus they sing your Monarch,
      Those bright angelic bands,
    Rejoice, ye vales and mountains!
      Ye oceans, clap your hands!

    5. Since all He comes to ransom,
      By all be He adored,
    The Infant born in Bethlehem,
      The Savior and the Lord!

    6. All idol forms shall perish,
      And error shall decay,
    And Christ shall wield His scepter,
      Our Lord and God, for aye.

            From the Greek of Anatolius, c. 540; J. M. Neale, tr. 1862, a.


150

                                                                     L. M.

    From heaven above to earth I come
    To bear good news to every home;
    Glad tidings of great joy I bring,
    Whereof I now will say and sing.

    2. To you this night is born a child
    Of Mary, chosen virgin mild;
    This little child, of lowly birth,
    Shall be the joy of all the earth.

    3. This is the Christ, our God and Lord,
    Who in all need shall aid afford;
    He will Himself your Savior be,
    From all your sins to make you free.

    4. He brings those blessings long ago
    Prepared by God for all below,
    That in His heavenly kingdom blest
    You may with us forever rest.

    5. These are the tokens ye shall mark:
    The swaddling-clothes and manger dark;
    There shall ye find the young Child laid
    By whom the heavens and earth were made.

    6. Now let us all with gladsome cheer
    Go with the shepherds and draw near
    To see the wondrous gift of God,
    Who hath His own dear Son bestowed.

    7. Give heed, my heart, lift up thine eyes!
    What is it in yon manger lies?
    Who is this child, so young and fair?
    Dear little Jesus lieth there.

    8. Welcome to earth, Thou noble Guest,
    Through whom the sinful world is blest!
    Thou com’st to share my misery,
    What thanks shall I return to Thee?

    9. Ah! Lord, who hast created all,
    How hast Thou made Thee weak and small
    That Thou must choose Thy infant bed
    Where humble cattle lately fed.

    10. And were the world ten times as wide,
    With gold and jewels beautified,
    It would be far too small to be
    A narrow cradle, Lord, for Thee.

    11. For velvets soft and silken stuff
    Thou hast but hay and straw so rough,
    Whereon Thou, King, so rich and great,
    As ’twere Thy heaven, art throned in state.

    12. And thus, dear Lord, it pleasèd Thee
    To make this truth quite plain to me,
    That this world’s honor, wealth, and might
    Are naught and worthless in Thy sight.

    13. Ah! dearest Jesus, holy Child,
    Make Thee a bed, soft, undefiled,
    Within my heart, that it may be
    A chamber consecrate to Thee.

    14. My heart for very joy doth leap,
    My lips no more can silence keep;
    I, too, must sing with joyful tongue
    That sweetest ancient cradle-song:

    15. Glory to God in highest heav’n,
    Who unto man His Son hath giv’n!
    While angels sing with pious mirth
    A glad New Year to all the earth.

                                                      Martin Luther, 1535.


151

                                                                     L. M.

    Rejoice, ye sons of men alway!
    God comes to you from heaven to-day;
    The Lord is born a little child
    Of Mary, chosen virgin mild.

    2. He is the Branch of Jesse’s tree,
    The Lion out of Judah He,
    The Gentiles’ Light, the promised Seed
    Who was to bruise the Serpent’s head.

    3. He brings us peace and happiness
    And heals all sorrow and distress
    Which on account of Adam’s fall
    Forever weighed upon us all.

    4. Through His low birth and holy blood
    We all are saved by Christ, true God;
    The angels’ glory we shall share
    And in His kingdom live fore’er.

                                          C. Freund, † 1591; A. Crull, tr.


152

                                              8, 7, 7, 8, 7, 7, 8, 8, 8, 8

    O rejoice, ye Christians, loudly,
      For our joy has now begun;
      Wondrous things our God hath done;
    Tell abroad His goodness proudly,
      Who our race hath honored thus
      That He deigns to dwell with us.
    Joy, O joy, beyond all gladness!
    Christ hath done away with sadness!
    Hence, all sorrow and repining,
    For the Sun of Grace is shining!

    2. See, my soul, thy Savior chooses
      Weakness here and poverty,
      In such love He comes to thee,
    Nor the hardest couch refuses;
      All He suffers for thy good,
      To redeem thee by His blood.
    Joy, O joy, beyond all gladness!
    Christ hath done away with sadness!
    Hence, all sorrow and repining,
    For the Sun of Grace is shining!

    3. Lord, how shall I thank Thee rightly?
      I acknowledge that by Thee
      I am saved eternally;
    Let me not forget it lightly,
      But to Thee through all things cleave,
      And my heart true peace receive.
    Joy, O joy, beyond all gladness!
    Christ hath done away with sadness!
    Hence, all sorrow and repining,
    For the Sun of Grace is shining!

    4. Jesus, guard and guide Thy members,
      Fill Thy brethren with Thy grace,
      Hear their prayers in every place,
    Quicken now life’s faintest embers;
      Grant all Christians, far and near,
      Holy peace, a glad New Year!
    Joy, O joy, beyond all gladness!
    Christ hath done away with sadness!
    Hence, all sorrow and repining,
    For the Sun of Grace is shining!

                                 C. Keymann, † 1662; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


153

                                                                7, 6, 7, 6

    Let us all with gladsome voice
      Praise the God of heaven,
    Who, to bid our hearts rejoice,
      His own Son hath given.

    2. To this vale of tears He comes,
      Here to serve in sadness,
    That with Him in heaven’s fair homes
      We may reign in gladness.

    3. We are rich, for He was poor;
      Is not this a wonder?
    Therefore praise God evermore
      Here on earth and yonder!

    4. O Lord Christ, our Savior dear,
      Be Thou ever near us.
    Grant us now a glad New Year;
      Amen, Jesus, hear us!

                                  U. Langhanns, c. 1560; C. Winkworth, tr.


154

                                                                    7s 8 l

    Hark! the herald-angels sing,
    “Glory to the new-born King;
    Peace on earth and mercy mild,
    God and sinners reconciled!”
    Joyful, all ye nations, rise,
    Join the triumph of the skies;
    With th’ angelic hosts proclaim,
    “Christ is born in Bethlehem!”
    Hark! the herald-angels sing,
    “Glory to the new-born King!”

    2. Veiled in flesh, the Godhead see;
    Hail, th’ incarnate Deity,
    Pleased as man with men to dwell;
    Jesus, our Emmanuel!
    Hail, the heavenly Prince of Peace!
    Hail, the Sun of Righteousness!
    Light and life to all He brings,
    Ris’n with healing in His wings.
    Hark! the herald-angels sing,
    “Glory to the new-born King!”

    3. Mild He lays His glory by,
    Born that man no more may die,
    Born to raise the sons of earth,
    Born to give them second birth.
    Come, Desire of nations, come,
    Fix in us Thy humble home;
    Oh, to all Thyself impart,
    Formed in each believing heart!
    Hark! the herald-angels sing,
    “Glory to the new-born King!”

                                                  Charles Wesley, 1739, a.


155

                                                                     C. M.

    To us a Child of hope is born,
      To us a Son is given,
    And on His shoulder ever rests
      All power in earth and heaven.

    2. His name shall be the Prince of Peace,
      The everlasting Lord,
    The Wonderful, the Counselor,
      The God by all adored.

    3. His righteous government and power
      Shall over all extend;
    On judgment and on justice based,
      His reign shall have no end.

    4. Lord Jesus, reign in us, we pray,
      And make us Thine alone,
    Who with the Father ever art
      And Holy Spirit, one.

                                                    J. Morison, 1781, abr.


156

                                                        4, 4, 11, 4, 4, 11

    We Christians may Rejoice to-day,
      When Christ was born to comfort and to save us;
    Who thus believes No longer grieves,
      For none are lost who grasp the hope He gave us.

    2. O wondrous joy, That God most high
      Should take our flesh and thus our race should honor;
    A virgin mild Hath born this Child;
      Such grace and glory God hath put upon her.

    3. Sin brought us grief; But Christ, relief,
      When down to earth He came for our salvation;
    Since God with us Is dwelling thus,
      Who dares to speak the Christian’s condemnation?

    4. Then hither throng With happy song
      To Him whose birth and death are our assurance;
    Through whom are we At last set free
      From sins and burdens that surpassed endurance.

    5. Yes, let us praise Our God and raise
      Loud hallelujahs to the skies above us;
    The bliss bestowed To-day by God
      To ceaseless thankfulness and joy should move us.

                                  Caspar Fueger, † 1617; C. Winkworth, tr.


157

                                                                     C. M.

    Praise God the Lord, ye sons of men,
      Before His highest throne,
    To-day He opens heaven again
      And gives us His own Son.

    2. He leaves His heavenly Father’s throne,
      Is born an infant small,
    And in a manger, poor and lone,
      Lies in a humble stall.

    3. He lays aside His power divine,
      A servant’s form doth take;
    In want and lowness He doth pine
      Who heaven and earth did make.

    4. He nestles at His mother’s breast,
      Her milk His food must be;
    Whom saints and angels call the Blest,
      Of David’s house is He.

    5. ’Tis He who in these latter days
      From Judah’s tribe should come,
    By whom the Lord again would raise
      His Church, His Christendom.

    6. A wondrous change which He doth make!
      He takes our flesh and blood
    And lays aside for sinners’ sake
      His majesty of God.

    7. He serves that I a lord may be;
      A great exchange, indeed!
    Could Jesus’ love do more for me
      To help me in my need?

    8. He opens us again the door
      Of Paradise to-day;
    The cherub guards the gate no more.
      To God our thanks we pay.

                                  Nikolaus Herman, 1560; A. Crull, tr., a.


158

                                                                     C. M.

    Joy to the world, the Lord is come!
      Let earth receive her King;
    Let every heart prepare Him room
      And heaven and nature sing.

    2. Joy to the earth, the Savior reigns!
      Let men their songs employ,
    While fields and floods, rocks, hills, and plains
      Repeat the sounding joy.

    3. No more let sins and sorrows grow
      Nor thorns infest the ground;
    He comes to make His blessings flow
      Far as the curse is found.

    4. He rules the world with truth and grace
      And makes the nations prove
    The glories of His righteousness
      And wonders of His love.

                                                        Isaac Watts, 1719.


159

                                                                       11s

    Come hither, ye faithful, triumphantly sing;
    Come, see in the manger our Savior and King!
    To Bethlehem hasten with joyful accord;
    O come ye, come hither, to worship the Lord!

    2. True Son of the Father, He comes from the skies;
    To be born of a virgin He does not despise.
    To Bethlehem hasten with joyful accord;
    O come ye, come hither, to worship the Lord!

    3. Hark, hark to the angels all singing in heaven,
    “To God in the highest all glory be given!”
    To Bethlehem hasten with joyful accord;
    O come ye, come hither, to worship the Lord!

    4. To Thee, then, O Jesus, this day of Thy birth,
    Be glory and honor through heaven and earth,
    True Godhead incarnate, omnipotent Word!
    O come, let us hasten to worship the Lord!

                                 Latin, 17th cent.; E. Caswall, tr., 1848.


160

                                                                8, 7, 8, 7

    Hark! what mean those holy voices
      Sweetly sounding through the skies?
    Lo! th’ angelic host rejoices,
      Heavenly hallelujahs rise.

    2. Listen to the wondrous story
      Which they chant in hymns of joy,
    Glory in the highest, glory!
      Glory be to God most high!

    3. Peace on earth, good will from heaven,
      Reaching far as man is found;
    Souls redeemed and sins forgiven!
      Loud our golden harps shall sound.

    4. Christ is born, the great Anointed;
      Heaven and earth, His praises sing!
    O receive whom God appointed
      For your Prophet, Priest, and King.

    5. Hasten, mortals, to adore Him,
      Learn His name and taste His joy,
    Till in heaven ye sing before Him,
      Glory be to God most high!

    6. Let us learn the wondrous story
      Of our great Redeemer’s birth;
    Spread the brightness of His glory
      Till it cover all the earth.

                                                          J. Cawood, 1819.


161

                                                        L. M. (with Hall.)

    Immanuel, we sing Thy praise,
    Thou Prince of Life and Fount of grace,
    Thou Flower of heaven and Star of morn,
    Thou Lord of lords, Thou Virgin-born.
        Hallelujah!

    2. With all Thy saints to Thee we sing,
    Praise, honor, thanks to Thee we bring,
    That Thou, O long-expected Guest,
    Hast come at last to make us blest!
        Hallelujah!

    3. For Thee, since first the world was made,
    So many hearts have watched and prayed;
    The patriarchs’ and prophets’ throng
    For Thee have hoped and waited long.
        Hallelujah!

    4. Above all others longed for Thee
    Thy people’s king and shepherd, he
    With whom Thou, Lord, so well wert pleased
    When with his harp Thy name he praised.
        Hallelujah!

    5. Oh, that the Savior soon would come
    To break our bonds and lead us home!
    Oh, that He might salvation bring!
    Then Jacob would rejoice and sing.
        Hallelujah!

    6. Now Thou art here, Thou Ever-blest!
    In lowly manger Thou dost rest;
    Great things Thou makest, yet art small;
    Naked Thyself, who clothest all.
        Hallelujah!

    7. All heavens are Thine, yet Thou dost come
    To sojourn in a stranger’s home;
    A mother’s milk dost not despise,
    Who art the Joy of angels’ eyes.
        Hallelujah!

    8. Thou hast set bounds to earth and sea,
    Yet swaddling-bands encircle Thee;
    Thou’rt God—a bed of straw Thou hast;
    Thou’rt man—yet art the First and Last.
        Hallelujah!

    9. From Thee above all gladness flows,
    Yet Thou must bear such bitter woes;
    The Gentiles’ Light and Hope Thou art,
    Yet findest none to soothe Thy heart.
        Hallelujah!

    10. The sweetest Friend of man Thou art,
    Yet many hate Thee in their heart;
    By Herod’s heart Thou art abhorred,
    Yet Thou art our Salvation, Lord.
        Hallelujah!

    11. But I, Thy humblest servant, may
    Confess my love and freely say,
    I love Thee truly, but I would
    That I might love Thee as I should.
        Hallelujah!

    12. I have the will, the power is weak,
    Yet, Lord, my humble offering take
    And graciously the love receive
    Which my poor heart to Thee can give.
        Hallelujah!

    13. Thou to be weak dost not disdain,
    Dost choose the things the world deems vain,
    Art poor and needy and content
    To suffer poverty and want.
        Hallelujah!

    14. Thou sleepest on the lap of earth;
    The manger where Thou at Thy birth
    Wast laid to rest, the hay, the stall,
    Were mean and miserable all.
        Hallelujah!

    15. And therefore doth my courage rise,
    Me also Thou wilt not despise;
    O dearest Lord, Thy tender grace
    Fills me with hope and happiness.
        Hallelujah!

    16. Although I’ve passed in sin my days
    And wandered far from wisdom’s ways,
    Yet Thou for this to earth hast come,
    To bring the wandering sinner home.
        Hallelujah!

    17. Had I no load of sin to bear,
    Thy grace, O Lord, I could not share;
    In vain had’st Thou been born for me
    If from God’s wrath I had been free.
        Hallelujah!

    18. Now fearlessly I come to Thee,
    From every grief Thou mak’st me free;
    Thou bear’st the wrath, dost death destroy,
    And turnest sorrow into joy.
        Hallelujah!

    19. Thou art my Head, my Lord divine;
    I am Thy member, wholly Thine,
    And by Thy Spirit’s gracious power
    Will seek to serve Thee evermore.
        Hallelujah!

    20. I’ll sing loud hallelujahs here
    With joyful spirit year by year;
    And in Thy courts of joy above
    Forever I will sing Thy love.
        Hallelujah!

                                Paul Gerhardt, 1653; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


162

                                                                     L. M.

    To shepherds, as they watched by night,
    Appeared a troop of angels bright;
    Behold the tender Babe, they said,
    In yonder lowly manger laid,

    2. At Bethlehem, in David’s town,
    As Micah did of old make known;
    ’Tis Jesus Christ, your Lord and King,
    Who doth to all salvation bring.

    3. Rejoice ye, then, that through His Son
    God is with sinners now at one;
    Made like yourselves of flesh and blood,
    Your Brother is th’ eternal God.

    4. What harm can sin and death, then, do?
    The true God now abides with you.
    Let hell and Satan rage and chafe,
    God is your Brother—ye are safe.

    5. Not one He will, nor can, forsake
    Who Him his confidence doth make;
    E’en if their worst your en’mies try,
    Ye may their powerless rage defy.

    6. Ye must prevail at last, for ye
    Have now become God’s family;
    To God forever give ye praise,
    Patient and cheerful all your days.

                                   Martin Luther, 1543; R. Massie, tr., a.




END OF YEAR.


163

                                                                    7s 8 l

    While with ceaseless course the sun
      Hasted through the former year,
    Many souls their race have run,
      Nevermore to meet us here;
    Fixed in an eternal state,
      They have done with all below;
    We a little longer wait,
      But how little, none can know.

    2. As the wingèd arrow flies
      Speedily, the mark to find;
    As the lightning from the skies
      Darts and leaves no trace behind;
    Swiftly thus our fleeting days
      Bear us down life’s rapid stream.
    Upward, Lord, our spirits raise;
      All below is but a dream.

    3. Thanks for mercies past receive,
      Pardon of our sins renew,
    Teach us henceforth how to live
      With eternity in view.
    Bless Thy Word to young and old,
      Fill us with a Savior’s love;
    And when life’s short tale is told,
      May we dwell with Thee above.

                                                        John Newton, 1774.


164

                                              8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7 (Iambic)

    Across the sky the shades of night
      This winter’s eve are fleeting;
    We deck Thine altar, Lord, with light,
      In solemn worship meeting;
    And as the year’s last hours go by,
    We raise to Thee our earnest cry,
      Once more Thy love entreating.

    2. Before the cross subdued we bow,
      To Thee our prayers addressing,
    Recounting all Thy mercies now,
      And all our sins confessing;
    Beseeching Thee this coming year
    To keep us in Thy faith and fear
      And crown us with Thy blessing.

    3. And while we pray, we lift our eyes
      To dear ones gone before us,
    Safe home with Thee in Paradise,
      Whose peace descendeth o’er us;
    And beg of Thee, when life is past
    To reunite us all at last
      With those who’ve gone before us.

    4. We gather up, in this brief hour,
      The memory of Thy mercies:
    Thy wondrous goodness, love, and power
      Our grateful song rehearses:
    For Thou hast been our Strength and Stay
    In many a dark and dreary day
      Of sorrows and reverses.

    5. In many an hour, when fear and dread,
      Like evil spells, have bound us
    And clouds were gathering overhead,
      Thy providence hath found us.
    In many a night, when seas ran high,
    Thy gracious presence, drawing nigh,
      Hath made all calm around us.

    6. Then, O great God, in years to come,
      Whatever may betide us,
    Right onward through our journey home
      Be Thou at hand to guide us;
    Nor leave us till, at close of life,
    Safe from all perils, toil, and strife.
      Heaven shall enfold and hide us.

                                                     James Hamilton, 1882.


165

                                                                        7s

    Thou who roll’st the year around,
      Crowned with mercies large and free,
    Rich Thy gifts to us abound,
      Warm our praise shall rise to Thee.

    2. Kindly to our worship bow,
      While our grateful thanks we tell,
    That, sustained by Thee, we now
      Bid the parting year farewell!

    3. All its numbered days are sped,
      All its busy scenes are o’er,
    All its joys forever fled,
      All its sorrows felt no more.

    4. Mingled with th’ eternal past,
      Its remembrance shall decay,
    Yet to be revived at last
      At the solemn Judgment Day.

    5. All our follies, Lord, forgive!
      Cleanse us from each guilty stain;
    Let Thy grace within us live
      That we spend not years in vain.

    6. Then, when life’s last eve shall come,
      Happy spirits, may we fly
    To our everlasting home,
      To our Father’s house on high!

                                                         Ray Palmer, 1858.




NEW YEAR.


166

                                                                 7, 5, 8 l

    Father, let me dedicate
      All this year to Thee,
    In whatever earthly state
      Thou wilt have me be.
    Not from sorrow, pain, or care,
      Freedom dare I claim;
    This alone shall be my prayer:
      Glorify Thy name.

    2. Can a child presume to choose
      Where or how to live?
    Can a Father’s love refuse
      All the best to give?
    More Thou givest every day
      Than the best can claim,
    Nor withholdest aught that may
      Glorify Thy name.

    3. If in mercy Thou wilt spare
      Joys that yet are mine;
    If on life, serene and fair,
      Brighter rays may shine,
    Let my glad heart, while it sings,
      Thee in all proclaim,
    And, whate’er the future brings,
      Glorify Thy name.

    4. If Thou callest to the cross
      And its shadow come,
    Turning all my gain to loss,
      Shrouding heart and home,
    Let me think how Thy dear Son
      To His glory came
    And in deepest woe pray on:
      “Glorify Thy name.”

                                                        L. Tuttiett, 1825.


167

                                                                     L. M.

    Great God, we sing that mighty Hand
    By which supported still we stand;
    The opening year Thy mercy shows;
    Let mercy crown it till it close.

    2. By day, by night, at home, abroad,
    Still we are guarded by our God,
    By His incessant bounty fed,
    By His unerring counsel led.

    3. With grateful hearts the past we own;
    The future, all to us unknown,
    We to Thy guardian care commit
    And, peaceful, leave before Thy feet.

    4. In scenes exalted or depressed
    Be Thou our Joy and Thou our Rest;
    Thy goodness all our hopes shall raise,
    Adored through all our changing days.

    5. When death shall interrupt our songs
    And seal in silence mortal tongues,
    Our Helper, God, in whom we trust,
    In better worlds our soul shall boast.

                                                   Philip Doddridge, 1755.


168

                                                                        7s

    For Thy mercy and Thy grace,
      Constant through another year,
    Hear our song of thankfulness;
      Jesus, our Redeemer, hear!

    2. Lo! our sins on Thee we cast,
      Thee, our perfect Sacrifice,
    And, forgetting all the past,
      Press unto our glorious prize.

    3. Dark the future; let Thy light
      Guide us, bright and Morning Star:
    Fierce our foes and hard the fight;
      Arm us, Savior, for the war.

    4. In our weakness and distress,
      Rock of strength, be Thou our Stay;
    In the pathless wilderness
      Be our true and living Way.

    5. Who of us death’s awful road
      In the coming year shall tread?
    With Thy rod and staff, O God,
      Comfort Thou his dying bed.

    6. Keep us faithful, keep us pure,
      Keep us evermore Thine own;
    Help, O help us to endure;
      Fit us for the promised crown.

    7. So within Thy palace gate
      We shall praise, on golden strings,
    Thee the only Potentate,
      Lord of lords and King of kings.

                                                      H. Downton, 1841, a.


169

                                                                     L. M.

    The new-born Child this early morn,
    The dear Christ-child, of virgin born,
    Again brings from His heavenly home
    A new year to all Christendom.

    2. This causes joy to angels fair,
    Who love to keep us in their care;
    They sing that in this wondrous Child
    God now with man is reconciled.

    3. Since God is reconciled with men,
    What harm can Satan do us, then?
    O’er Satan and the gates of hell
    This Christ-child shall for us prevail.

    4. He brings the year of jubilee!
    Why doubt we yet despondently?
    Rejoice! This is a happy day;
    The Christ-child drives all care away.

                             C. Schneegass, † 1597; E. Cronenwett, tr., a.


170

                                                       8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7

    O Lord, our Father, thanks to Thee
      In this new year we render,
    For Thou hast been from misery
      And dangers our Defender;
    Through all the year that now has fled
    Hast given us life and daily bread
      And peace within our borders.

    2. Lord Jesus Christ, our thanks to Thee
      In this new year we render,
    For Thou still rulest zealously
      Thy fold, with mercy tender;
    Thou hast redeemed us with Thy blood,
    Thou art our only Trust and Good,
      In life and death our Savior.

    3. Lord Holy Ghost, our thanks to Thee
      In this new year we render,
    For by Thy grace it is that we
      Enjoy Thy Word’s pure splendor;
    Thus Thou hast kindled from above
    Within our hearts true faith and love
      And other Christian virtues.

    4. Our faithful God, we cry to Thee:
      Still bless us with Thy favor,
    Blot out all our iniquity,
      And hide our sins forever;
    Grant us a happy, good New Year
    And, when the hour of death draws near,
      A blest departure. Amen.

                                      C. Schneegass, † 1597; A. Crull, tr.


171

                                                          9, 8, 9, 8, 8, 8

    Help me, O Lord! Behold, I enter
      Upon another year to-day;
    In Thee my hopes and thoughts now center,
      Renew my courage for the way:
    New life, new strength, new happiness
    I ask of Thee, O hear and bless!

    2. May every plan and undertaking
      This year be all begun with Thee;
    When I am sleeping or am waking,
      Still let me know Thou art with me;
    Abroad do Thou my footsteps guide,
    At home be ever at my side.

    3. Be this a time of grace and pardon;
      Thy rod I take with willing mind,
    But suffer naught my heart to harden;
      O let me now Thy mercy find;
    In Thee alone, my God, I live,
    Thou only canst my sins forgive.

    4. And may this year to me be holy;
      Thy grace so fill my every thought
    That all my life be pure and lowly
      And truthful as a Christian’s ought;
    So make me, while yet dwelling here,
    Pious and blest from year to year.

    5. And grant, Lord, when the year is over,
      That it for me in peace may close;
    In all things care for me and cover
      My head in time of fear and woes;
    So may I, when my years are gone,
    Appear with joy before Thy throne.

                                          J. Rist, 1642; C. Winkworth, tr.


172

                                                                     C. M.

    O God, our Help in ages past,
      Our Hope for years to come,
    Our Shelter from the stormy blast,
      And our eternal Home!

    2. Under the shadow of Thy throne
      Thy saints have dwelt secure;
    Sufficient is Thine arm alone,
      And our defense is sure.

    3. Before the hills in order stood
      Or earth received her frame,
    From everlasting Thou art God,
      To endless years the same.

    4. A thousand ages in Thy sight
      Are like an evening gone;
    Short as the watch that ends the night
      Before the rising sun.

    5. Thy word commands our flesh to dust:
      “Return, ye sons of men!”
    All nations rose from earth at first
      And turn to earth again.

    6. Time, like an ever-rolling stream,
      Bears all its sons away;
    They fly forgotten, as a dream
      Dies at the opening day.

    7. Like flowery fields the nations stand,
      Pleased with the morning light;
    The flowers beneath the mower’s hand
      Lie withering ere ’tis night.

    8. O God, our Help in ages past,
      Our Hope for years to come,
    Be Thou our Guard while troubles last
      And our eternal Home.

                                                        Isaac Watts, 1719.


173

                                                                     L. M.

    The old year now hath passed away,
    We thank Thee, Christ, our Lord, to-day
    That Thou hast kept us through the year
    When danger and distress were near.

    2. We pray Thee, O eternal Son,
    Who with the Father reign’st as one,
    To guard and rule Thy Christendom
    Through all the ages yet to come.

    3. Take not Thy saving Word away,
    Our souls’ true comfort, staff, and stay;
    Abide with us and keep us free
    From all false doctrines graciously.

    4. O help us to forsake all sin,
    A new and holier course begin;
    From last year’s sins, Lord, hide Thy face,
    In this new year grant us Thy grace,

    5. That as true Christians we may live
    Or die in peace that Thou wilt give,
    To rise again when Thou shalt come,
    And enter our eternal home.

                                J. Steuerlein, 1588; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


174

                                                                        7s

    Now let us come before Him,
    With songs and prayers adore Him,
    Who to our life from heaven
    All needed strength hath given.

    2. The stream of years is flowing,
    And we are onward going,
    From old to new surviving,
    And by His mercy thriving.

    3. In woe we often languish
    And pass through times of anguish,
    Of wars and trepidation,
    Alarming every nation.

    4. A faithful mother keepeth
    Guard while her infant sleepeth,
    Its fear and grief assuaging
    When angry storms are raging.

    5. Thus God His children shieldeth
    And full protection yieldeth;
    When need and woe distress them,
    His loving arms caress them.

    6. In vain is all our doing;
    The labor we’re pursuing
    In our hands prospers never
    Unless God watches ever.

    7. Our song to Thee ascendeth,
    Whose mercy never endeth;
    Our thanks to Thee we render,
    Who art our strong Defender.

    8. O God of mercy, hear us;
    Our Father, be Thou near us;
    Mid crosses and in sadness
    Be Thou our Fount of gladness.

    9. To all that bow before Thee
    And for Thy grace implore Thee,
    O grant Thy benediction
    And patience in affliction.

    10. With richest blessings crown us.
    In all our ways, Lord, own us;
    Give grace, who grace bestowest
    To all, e’en to the lowest.

    11. To all forlorn be Father,
    Thy erring children gather,
    And of the poor and needy
    Be Thou the Helper speedy.

    12. Grant help to all afflicted;
    And to the souls dejected,
    By melancholy haunted,
    May cheerful thoughts be granted!

    13. O Lord, assistance lend us,
    Thy Holy Spirit send us
    That He may make us glorious
    And lead to Thee victorious.

    14. All this Thy hand bestoweth,
    Thou Life, whence our life floweth;
    To me and all believers
    Grant, Lord, these New Year’s favors.

                                  Paul Gerhardt, † 1676; J. Kelly, tr., a.




CIRCUMCISION OF CHRIST.


175

                                                                     S. M.

    The year begins with Thee,
      And Thou begin’st with woe
    To let the world of sinners see
      That blood for sin must flow.

    2. Thine infant cries, O Lord,
      Thy tears upon the breast
    Are not enough; the legal sword
      Must do its stern behest.

    3. Seemeth it strange to me
      My own will to deny?
    Seemeth it sad, my soul, to thee
      Under the yoke to lie?

    4. I look, and hold my peace:
      The Giver of all good
    E’en from His birth takes no release
      From suffering, tears, and blood.

    5. That I may reap in love,
      Help me to sow in fear;
    So life a winter’s morn may prove
      To a bright endless year.

                                                        J. Keble, 1827, a.


176

                                                                     S. M.

    The ancient Law departs,
      And all its terrors cease;
    For Jesus makes with faithful hearts
      A covenant of peace.

    2. The Light of light divine,
      True brightness undefiled,
    He bears for us the shame of sin,
      A holy, spotless Child.

    3. His infant body now
      Begins our pain to feel;
    Those precious drops of blood that flow
      For death the victim seal.

    4. To-day the name is Thine
      At which we bend the knee.
    They call Thee Jesus, Child Divine;
      Our Jesus deign to be.

    5. All praise, eternal Son,
      For Thy redeeming love,
    With Father, Spirit, ever one,
      In glorious might above.

                                                      Abbé Besnault, 1736.


177

                                                                     L. M.

    O sacred day, when first was poured
    The blood of our redeeming Lord!
    O solemn day, when first began
    His sufferings for sinful man!

    2. Just born into this world of woe,
    His blood for man was made to flow.
    His future death was thus expressed;
    Thus, too, His early love confessed.

    3. From heaven descending to fulfil
    The mandates of His Father’s will,
    E’en now behold the Victim lie,
    The Lamb of God, prepared to die.

    4. Beneath the knife behold the Child,
    The Innocent, the Undefiled;
    For captives He the ransom pays,
    For lawless man the Law obeys.

    5. Lord, circumcise our hearts, we pray,
    Our fleshly natures purge away;
    Thy name, Thy likeness, may we bear;
    O stamp Thy holy image there.

                                 Abbé Besnault, 1736; J. Chandler, tr., a.


178

                                                                        7s

    Jesus! Name of wondrous love,
    Name all other names above,
    Unto which must every knee
    Bow in deep humility.

    2. Jesus! Name decreed of old,
    To the maiden mother told,
    Kneeling in her lowly cell,
    By the angel Gabriel.

    3. Jesus! Name of priceless worth
    To the fallen sons of earth,
    For the promise that it gave,—
    “Jesus shall His people save.”

    4. Jesus! Name of mercy mild,
    Given to the holy Child
    When the cup of human woe
    First He tasted here below.

    5. Jesus! Only name that’s given
    Under all the mighty heaven
    Whereby man, to sin enslaved,
    Bursts his fetters and is saved.

    6. Jesus! Name of wondrous love,
    Human name of God above.
    Pleading only this, we flee,
    Helpless, O our God, to Thee.

                                                       W. W. How, 1854, a.




EPIPHANY.


179

                                                                 7, 6, 8 l

    O Jesus, King of Glory!
      Both David’s Lord and Son!
    Thy realm endures forever,
      In heaven is fixed Thy throne;
    Help that in earth’s dominions,
      Throughout from pole to pole,
    Thy realm may spread salvation
      To each benighted soul!

    2. The Eastern sages, bringing
      Their tribute-gifts to Thee,
    Bear witness to Thy kingdom
      And humbly bow the knee.
    To Thee the star is pointing,
      To Thee, Incarnate Word;
    Hence joyously we hail Thee:
      Our Savior and our Lord!

    3. Thou art a mighty Monarch,
      As by the Word we’re told,
    Yet carest Thou but little
      For earthly goods or gold;
    On no proud steed Thou ridest,
      Thou wear’st no jeweled crown,
    Nor dwell’st in lordly castle,
      But bearest scoff and frown.

    4. Yet art Thou decked with beauty,
      With rays of glorious light;
    Thou ever teem’st with goodness,
      And all Thy ways are right.
    Vouchsafe to shield Thy people
      With Thine almighty arm
    That they may dwell in safety
      From those who mean them harm.

    5. Ah, look on me with pity,
      Though I am weak and poor,
    Admit me to Thy kingdom,
      To dwell there, blest and sure!

    I pray Thee, guide and keep me
      Safe from my bitter foes,
    From sin and death and Satan;
      Free me from all my woes.

    6. And bid Thy Word within me
      Shine as the fairest star;
    Keep sin and all false doctrine
      Forever from me far.
    Help me confess Thee truly
      And with Thy Christendom
    Here own Thee King and Savior
      And in the world to come.

                                                        Martin Behm, 1606.


180

                                                                     L. M.

    The Star proclaims the King is here;
    But, Herod, why this senseless fear?
    He takes no realms of earth away
    Who gives the realms of heavenly day.

    2. The wiser Magi see from far
    And follow on His guiding star;
    And led by light to light they press
    And by their gifts their God confess.

    3. Within the Jordan’s crystal flood
    In meekness stands the Lamb of God
    And, sinless, sanctifies the wave,
    Mankind from sin to cleanse and save.

    4. At Cana first His power is shown;
    His might the blushing waters own
    And, changing, as He speaks the word,
    Flow wine, obedient to their Lord.

    5. All glory, Jesus, be to Thee
    For this Thy glad Epiphany;
    Whom with the Father we adore
    And Holy Ghost forevermore.

          From the Latin of Sedulius, 5th cent.; J. N. Neale, tr. 1852, a.


181

                                                            11, 10, 11, 10

    Brightest and best of the sons of the morning,
      Dawn on our darkness and lend us thine aid;
    Star of the East, the horizon adorning,
      Guide where our infant Redeemer is laid.

    2. Cold on His cradle the dewdrops are shining;
      Low lies His head with the beasts of the stall:
    Angels adore Him in slumber reclining,
      Maker and Monarch and Savior of all!

    3. Say, shall we yield Him, in costly devotion,
      Odors of Edom and offerings divine,
    Gems of the mountain and pearls of the ocean,
      Myrrh from the forest, or gold from the mine?

    4. Vainly we offer each ample oblation;
      Vainly with gifts would His favor secure.
    Richer by far is the heart’s adoration;
      Dearer to God are the prayers of the poor.

    5. Brightest and best of the sons of the morning,
      Dawn on our darkness and lend us thine aid;
    Star of the East, the horizon adorning,
      Guide where our infant Redeemer is laid.

                                                     Reginald Heber, 1811.


182

                                                                 8, 7, 8 l

    Hail, Thou Source of every blessing,
      Sovereign Father of mankind!
    Gentiles now, Thy grace possessing,
      In Thy courts admission find.
    Grateful now we fall before Thee,
      In Thy Church obtain a place;
    Now by faith behold Thy glory,
      Praise Thy truth, adore Thy grace.

    2. Once far off, but now invited,
      We approach Thy sacred throne;
    In Thy covenant united,
      Reconciled, redeemed, made one.
    Now revealed to Eastern sages,
      See the star of mercy shine;
    Mystery hid in former ages,
      Mystery great of love divine.

    3. Hail, Thou all-inviting Savior!
      Gentiles now their offerings bring;
    In Thy temple seek Thy favor.
      Jesus Christ, our Lord and King.
    May we, body, soul, and spirit,
      Live devoted to Thy praise,
    Glorious realms of bliss inherit,
      Grateful anthems ever raise!

                                                         Basil Wood, 1813.


183

                                                                    7s 6 l

    As with gladness men of old
    Did the guiding star behold,
    As with joy they hailed its light,
    Leading onward, beaming bright,
    So, most gracious Lord, may we
    Evermore be led by Thee.

    2. As with joyful steps they sped
    To that lowly manger-bed.
    There to bend the knee before
    Him whom heaven and earth adore,
    So may we with willing feet
    Ever seek Thy mercy-seat.

    3. As they offered gifts most rare
    At that manger rude and bare,
    So may we with holy joy,
    Pure and free from sin’s alloy,
    All our costliest treasures bring,
    Christ, to Thee, our heavenly King.

    4. Holy Jesus, every day
    Keep us in the narrow way;
    And when earthly things are past,
    Bring our ransomed souls at last
    Where they need no star to guide,
    Where no clouds Thy glory hide.

    5. In the heavenly country bright
    Need they no created light;
    Thou its Light, its Joy, its Crown,
    Thou its Sun which goes not down;
    There forever may we sing
    Alleluias to our King!

                                                          W. C. Dix, 1860.


184

                                                                    7s 8 l

    Songs of thankfulness and praise,
    Jesus, Lord, to Thee we raise,
    Manifested by the star
    To the sages from afar,
    Branch of royal David’s stem,
    In Thy birth at Bethlehem.
    Anthems be to Thee addressed,
    God in man made manifest.

    2. Manifest at Jordan’s stream,
    Prophet, Priest, and King supreme,
    And at Cana, wedding-guest,
    In Thy Godhead manifest;
    Manifest in power divine,
    Changing water into wine.
    Anthems be to Thee addressed,
    God in man made manifest.

    3. Manifest in making whole
    Palsied limbs and fainting soul;
    Manifest in valiant fight,
    Quelling all the devil’s might;
    Manifest in gracious will,
    Ever bringing good from ill.
    Anthems be to Thee addressed,
    God in man made manifest.

    4. Sun and moon shall darkened be,
    Stars shall fall, the heavens shall flee;
    Christ will then like lightning shine,
    All will see His glorious sign;
    All will then the trumpet hear,
    All will see the Judge appear;
    Thou by all wilt be confessed,
    God in man made manifest.

    5. Grant us grace to see Thee, Lord,
    Present in Thy holy Word;
    May we imitate Thee now
    And be pure as pure art Thou,
    That we like to Thee may be
    At Thy great Epiphany
    And may praise Thee, ever blest,
    God in man made manifest.

                                                      C. Wordsworth, 1862.




PRESENTATION OF CHRIST.


185

                                                          8, 5, 8, 4, 7, 7

    In peace and joy I now depart
        At God’s disposing;
    For full of comfort is my heart,
        Soft reposing.
    So the Lord hath promised me,
      And death is but a slumber.

    2. ’Tis Christ that wrought this work for me.
        The faithful Savior,
    Whom Thou hast made mine eyes to see
        By Thy favor.
    Now I know He is my Life,
      My Help in need and dying.

    3. Him Thou hast unto all set forth
        Their great Salvation,
    And to His kingdom called the earth,
        Every nation,
    By Thy dear and wholesome Word,
      In every place resounding.

    4. He is the Hope and saving Light
        Of lands benighted;
    By Him are they who dwelt in night
        Fed and lighted;
    He is Israel’s Praise and Bliss,
      Their Joy, Reward, and Glory.

                                 Martin Luther, 1524; L. W. Bacon, tr., a.


186

                                                                 8, 7, 6 l

    In His Temple now behold Him,
      See the long-expected Lord;
    Ancient prophets had foretold Him,
      God has now fulfilled His word.
    Now to praise Him, His redeemed
      Shall break forth with one accord.

    2. In the arms of her who bore Him,
      Virgin pure, behold Him lie,
    While His aged saints adore Him
      Ere in faith and hope they die.
    Hallelujah! Hallelujah!
      Lo, th’ incarnate God most high.

    3. Jesus, by Thy presentation,
      Thou, who didst for us endure,
    Make us see our great salvation,
      Seal us with Thy promise sure,
    And present us in Thy glory
      To Thy Father, cleansed and pure.

                                                          H. J. Pye, 1853.


187

                                                                 8, 7, 6 l

    Angels, from the realms of glory,
      Wing your flight o’er all the earth;
    Ye who sang creation’s story,
      Now proclaim Messiah’s birth:
        Come and worship,
        Come and worship;
    Worship Christ, the new-born King.

    2. Shepherds, in the fields abiding,
      Watching o’er your flocks by night,
    God with man is now residing,
      Yonder shines the heav’nly Light:
        Come and worship,
        Come and worship;
    Worship Christ, the new-born King.

    3. Sages, leave your contemplations;
      Brighter visions beam afar;
    Seek the great Desire of nations,
      Ye have seen His natal star:
        Come and worship,
        Come and worship;
    Worship Christ, the new-born King.

    4. Saints, before the altar bending,
      Watching long in hope and fear,
    Suddenly the Lord descending,
      In His temple shall appear:
        Come and worship,
        Come and worship;
    Worship Christ, the new-born King.

                                                James Montgomery, 1816, a.


188

                                                                     L. M.

    O dearest Jesus, Thee I pray:
    Within my heart now make Thy stay,
    That I, like Simeon of old,
    By faith may gladly Thee enfold.

    2. Thou art my Life and Happiness,
    Whom God hath sent my soul to bless;
    O cleanse and purify my heart
    That from Thy paths I ne’er depart.

    3. Lord, with Thy light show me the way
    That never I may go astray;
    Ward off all sorrow and despair
    And let me be Thine own fore’er.

    4. Lift up Thy face upon me, Lord,
    In life and death Thy help afford;
    Then I’ll depart most cheerfully
    This life whene’er it pleaseth Thee.

                                          John Mylius, 1596; A. Crull, tr.


189

                                              8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7 (Iambic)

    Thank God! my Jesus cleanseth me
      From all sins I committed;
    He paid my debt and set me free,
      I, therefore, am acquitted
    Of sin’s and Satan’s bondage fell.
    My faith now laughs at death and hell,
      Because my life is Jesus.

    2. Why should I grieve? He who fulfilled
      The Law, thus to release us,
    He who His Father’s wrath has stilled
      By His own death, this Jesus
    Still liveth, and all that He hath
    He giveth unto me through faith;
      Is there a greater treasure?

    3. Because my Jesus cleanseth me
      From sin by His own merit,
    I am from pain and fear set free,
      Death cannot daunt my spirit;
    I trust in Jesus’ righteousness,
    His innocence and blessedness
      Are now my life and treasure.

    4. Now I, like Simeon, can end
      My life in peace and gladness,
    And to my God I can commend
      My spirit without sadness;
    For when my weary eyes I close,
    My death becomes a sweet repose,
      I see the joys of heaven.

    5. How happy, therefore, shall I be
      When life’s frail thread is broken;
    When holy angels carry me
      To joys that ne’er were spoken;
    When I behold Him face to face,
    When I have gained that blessed place,
      Prepared for me by Jesus.

    6. Lord, grant that e’er prepared I be,
      That naught from Thee me sever.
    And when I die, let me with Thee
      In glory live forever;
    Come quickly to deliver me,
    Lord, by Thy death and agony.
      Yea, come, Lord Jesus! Amen.

                                          J. Olearius, 1671; A. Crull, tr.


190

                                                                 7, 6, 8 l

    Light of the Gentile nations,
      Thy people’s Joy and Love!
    Drawn by Thy Spirit hither,
      We gladly come to prove
    Thy presence in Thy temple
      And seek with earnest mind,
    As Simeon once had waited
      His Savior God to find.

    2. Yea, Lord, Thy servants meet Thee,
      E’en now, in every place
    Where Thy true Word hath promised
      That they should see Thy face.
    Thou yet wilt gladly grant us,
      Who gather round Thee here,
    In faith’s strong arms to bear Thee,
      As did that aged seer.

    3. Be Thou our Joy, our Brightness,
      That shines mid pain and loss,
    Our Sun in times of terror,
      The Glory round our cross;
    A Glow in sinking spirits,
      A Sunbeam in distress,
    Physician, Friend, in sickness;
      In death, our Happiness.

    4. Let us, O Lord, be faithful
      Like Simeon to the end,
    So that his dying anthem
      May from our hearts ascend:
    “O Lord, now let Thy servant
      Depart in peace, I pray,
    Since I have seen my Savior,
      Have here beheld His day.”

    5. My Savior, I behold Thee
      Now with the eye of faith;
    No foe of Thee can rob me,
      Though bitter words he saith.
    Within Thy heart abiding,
      As Thou dost dwell in me,
    No pain, no death, has terrors
      To part my soul from Thee.

    6. Lord, here on earth Thou seemest
      At times to frown on me,
    And through my tears I often
      Can scarce distinguish Thee;
    But in the heavenly mansions
      Shall nothing dim my sight,
    And I shall see forever
      Thine always glorious light.

                                    J. Franck, 1674; C. Winkworth, tr., a.




PASSION OF CHRIST.


GENERAL.


191

                                              8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7

    A lamb goes uncomplaining forth,
      The guilt of all men bearing;
    ’Tis laden with the sin of earth,
      None else the burden sharing;
    It goes its way, grows weak and faint,
    To slaughter led without complaint,
      Its spotless life to offer;
    Bears shame, and stripes, and wounds, and death,
    Anguish and mockery, and saith,
      “Willing all this I suffer.”

    2. This Lamb is Christ, the soul’s great Friend
      And everlasting Savior;
    Him, Him God chose sin’s reign to end
      And bring us to His favor.
    “Go forth, My Son!” He said, “and bail
    The children who are doomed to hell
      But for Thine intercession.
    The punishment is great, and dread
    The wrath, but Thou Thy blood shalt shed
      And save them from perdition.”

    3. “Yea, Father, yea, most willingly
      I’ll bear what Thou commandest;
    My will conforms to Thy decree,
      I do what Thou demandest.”
    O wondrous Love, what hast Thou done!
    The Father offers up His Son,
      The Son, content, descendeth!
    O Love, O Love, how strong art Thou!
    In shroud and grave Thou lay’st Him low
      Whose word the mountains rendeth.

    4. Thou lay’st Him, Love, upon the cross,
      With nails and spear Him bruising;
    Thou slay’st Him as a lamb, His loss
      From soul and body oozing;
    From body ’tis the crimson flood
    Of precious sacrificial blood;
      From soul, the strength of anguish.
    My gain it is; sweet Lamb to Thee
    What can I give, whose love to me
      For me doth make Thee languish?

    5. Lord, all my life I’ll cleave to Thee,
      Thy love fore’er beholding,
    Thee ever, as Thou ever me,
      With loving arms enfolding.
    Yea, Thou shalt be my Beacon-light
    To guide me safe through death’s dark night
      And cheer my heart in sorrow.
    Henceforth myself and all that’s mine
    To Thee, my Savior, I consign,
      From whom all things I borrow.

    6. From morn till eve my theme shall be
      Thy mercy’s wondrous measure;
    To sacrifice myself to Thee,
      My foremost aim and pleasure.
    My stream of life shall flow for Thee,
    Its steadfast current ceaselessly
      In praise to Thee outpouring;
    And all that Thou hast done for me
    I’ll treasure in my memory,
      Thy gracious love adoring.

    7. Enlarge, shrine of my heart, and swell,
      To thee shall now be given
    A treasure that doth far excel
      The worth of earth and heaven.
    Away with the Arabian gold,
    With treasures of an earthly mold!
      I’ve found a better jewel.
    My priceless treasure, Lord, my God,
    Is Thy most holy, precious blood,
      Which flowed from wounds so cruel.

    8. This treasure ever I’ll employ,
      This every aid shall yield me;
    In sorrow it shall be my joy,
      In conflict it shall shield me;
    In joy, the music of my feast,
    And when all else has lost its zest,
      This manna still shall feed me;
    In thirst my drink; in want my food;
    My company in solitude,
      To comfort and to lead me.

    9. Death’s poison cannot harm me now,
      Thy blood new life bestoweth;
    My Shadow from the heat art Thou,
      When noonday’s sunlight gloweth.
    When I’m by inward grief opprest,
    On Thee my weary soul shall rest,
      As sick men on their pillows.
    Thou art my Anchor, when by woe
    My bark is driven to and fro
      On trouble’s restless billows.

    10. And when Thy glory I shall see
      And taste Thy kingdom’s pleasure,
    Thy blood my royal robe shall be
      And joy beyond all measure;
    It then shall be my glorious crown,
    Thus I’ll appear before the throne
      Of God and need not hide me;
    And shall, by Him to Thee betrothed,
    By Thee in bridal garments clothed,
      Stand as a bride beside Thee.

                                                      Paul Gerhardt, 1653.


192

                                                                 7, 6, 8 l

    Jesus, I will ponder now
      On Thy holy Passion;
    With Thy Spirit me endow
      For such meditation.
    Grant that I in love and faith
      May the image cherish
    Of Thy suffering, pain, and death,
      That I may not perish.

    2. Make me see Thy great distress,
      Anguish, and affliction,
    Bonds and stripes and wretchedness
      And Thy crucifixion;
    Make me see how scourge and rod,
      Spear and nails did wound Thee,
    How for man Thou diedst, O God,
      Who with thorns had crowned Thee.

    3. Yet, O Lord, not thus alone
      Make me see Thy Passion,
    But its cause to me make known
      And its termination.
    Ah! I also and my sin
      Wrought Thy deep affliction;
    This the cause alone hath been
      Of Thy crucifixion.

    4. Grant that I Thy Passion view
      With repentant grieving
    Nor Thee crucify anew
      By unholy living.
    How could I refuse to shun
      Every sinful pleasure
    Since for me God’s only Son
      Suffered without measure?

    5. If my sins give me alarm
      And my conscience grieve me,
    Let Thy cross my fear disarm,
      Peace of conscience give me.
    Grant that I may trust in Thee
      And Thy holy Passion.
    If His Son so loveth me,
      God must have compassion.

    6. Grant that I may willingly
      Bear with Thee my crosses,
    Learning humbleness of Thee,
      Peace mid pain and losses.
    May I give Thee love for love.
      Hear me, O my Savior,
    That I may in heaven above
      Sing Thy praise forever.

                                   Sigmund von Birken, 1653; A. Crull, tr.


193

                                                                     L. M.

    To Thee, Lord Jesus, thanks we give,
    Who diedst for us that we might live
    And through Thy holy, precious blood
    Hast made us righteous before God.

    2. We pray Thee, O true God and Man,
    Who wast for our offenses slain:
    Save us from everlasting death
    And cheer us when we yield our breath.

    3. Defend us, Lord, from sin and shame;
    Help us by Thine almighty name
    To bear our crosses patiently,
    To trust in Thy great agony,

    4. And thence the full assurance gain
    That Thou wilt e’er our Friend remain
    And not forsake us in our strife
    Until we enter into life.

                                  Chr. Fischer, c. 1568; A. Crull, tr., a.


194

                                                    8, 7, 8, 7, 7, 7, 8, 8

    Jesus, grant that balm and healing
      In Thy holy wounds I find,
    Every hour that I am feeling
      Pains of body and of mind.
    Should some evil thought upstart,
    Let Thy cross defend my heart,
    Show the peril and from sinning
    Keep me ere its first beginning.

    2. Should some lust or sharp temptation
      Prove too strong for flesh and blood,
    Let me think upon Thy Passion,
      And the breach is soon made good.
    Or should Satan make his way
    To my heart, O let me say:
    “Jesus Christ for me was wounded,”
    And the Tempter flees confounded.

    3. If the world my heart entices
      On the broad and easy road,
    Filled with mirth and pleasant vices,
      Let me think upon the load
    Thou didst once for me endure,
    That I flee all thoughts impure,
    Banishing each wild emotion,
    Calm and blest in my devotion.

    4. Yes, whate’er may pain or grieve me,
      Let Thy wounds, Lord, make me whole.
    When I’m faint, let them revive me,
      Granting new life to my soul.
    May Thy comfort render sweet
    Every bitter cup I meet,
    Thou, who by Thy death and Passion
    Hast procured my soul’s salvation!

    5. O my God, my Rock and Tower!
      Grant that in Thy death I trust,
    Knowing Death has lost his power
      Since Thou trod’st him in the dust.
    Savior, let Thine agony
    Ever help and comfort me;
    Let Thy death be my protection,
    Safety, life, and resurrection.

    6. Jesus, grant that balm and healing
      In Thy holy wounds I find,
    Every hour that I am feeling
      Pains of body and of mind;
    And when I this world must leave,
    Grant that, Lord, to Thee I cleave,
    In Thy wounds find consolation,
    And obtain my soul’s salvation.

                                                     J. Heermann, 1644, a.


195

                                                                     L. M.

    Lord Jesus Christ, my Life, my Light,
    My Strength by day, my Trust by night,
    On earth I’m but a passing guest
    And sorely with my sins opprest.

    2. Far off I see my fatherland,
    Where through Thy blood I hope to stand.
    But ere I reach that Paradise,
    A weary way before me lies.

    3. My heart sinks at the journey’s length,
    My wasted flesh has little strength,
    My soul alone still cries in me:
    “Lord, take me home, take me to Thee!”

    4. O let Thy sufferings give me power
    To meet the last and darkest hour;
    Thy sweat refresh and comfort me,
    Thy bonds and fetters make me free!

    5. The blows and stripes that fell on Thee
    Heal up the wounds of sin in me;
    Thy crown of thorns, Thy foes’ mad spite,
    Let be my glory and delight.

    6. That thirst and bitter draught of Thine
    Cause me to bear with patience mine;
    Thy piercing cry uphold my soul
    When floods of anguish o’er me roll.

    7. O let Thy holy wounds for me
    Clefts in the rock forever be
    Where as a dove my soul can hide
    And safe from Satan’s rage abide.

    8. And when my lips grow white and chill,
    Thy Spirit cry within me still
    And help my soul Thy heaven to find
    When these poor eyes grow dark and blind.

    9. And when my spirit flies away,
    Thy dying words shall be my stay.
    Let me depart with peaceful brow
    When I in death my head shall bow.

    10. Thy cross shall be my staff in life,
    Thy holy grave my rest from strife;
    The winding-sheet that covered Thee,
    Oh, let it be a shroud for me!

    11. Lord, in Thy nail-prints let me read
    That Thou to save me hast decreed,
    And grant that in Thy opened side
    My troubled soul may ever hide.

    12. Since Thou hast died, the Pure, the Just,
    I take my homeward way in trust.
    The gates of heaven, Lord, open wide
    When here I may no more abide.

    13. And when the last Great Day shall come
    And Thou, our Judge, shalt speak the doom,
    Let me with joy behold the light
    And set me then upon Thy right.

    14. Renew this wasted flesh of mine
    That like the sun it there may shine
    Among the angels pure and bright,
    Yea, like Thyself in glorious light.

    15. Ah, then I’ll have my heart’s desire,
    When, singing with the angels’ choir,
    Among the ransomed of Thy grace,
    Forever I’ll behold Thy face!

                                                        Martin Behm, 1603.


196

                                                    8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7, 7

    Christ, the Life of all the living,
      Christ, the Death of death, our foe,
    Who, Thyself for me once giving
      To the darkest depths of woe,
    Madest reconciliation
    And hast saved me from damnation:
      Thousand, thousand thanks shall be,
      Dearest Jesus, unto Thee.

    2. Thou, ah! Thou, hast taken on Thee
      Bonds and stripes, a cruel rod;
    Pain and scorn were heaped upon Thee,
      O Thou sinless Son of God!
    Thus didst Thou my soul deliver
    From the bonds of sin forever.
      Thousand, thousand thanks shall be,
      Dearest Jesus, unto Thee.

    3. Thou hast borne the smiting only
      That my wounds might all be whole;
    Thou hast suffered, sad and lonely,
      Rest to give my weary soul;
    Yea, the curse of God enduring,
    Blessing unto me securing.
      Thousand, thousand thanks shall be,
      Dearest Jesus, unto Thee.

    4. Heartless scoffers did surround Thee,
      Treating Thee with cruel scorn,
    And with piercing thorns they crowned Thee;
      All disgrace Thou, Lord, hast borne
    That as Thine Thou mightest own me
    And with heavenly glory crown me.
      Thousand, thousand thanks shall be,
      Dearest Jesus, unto Thee.

    5. Thou hast suffered men to bruise Thee
      That from pain I might be free;
    Falsely did Thy foes accuse Thee—
      Thence I gain security;
    Comfortless once Thou didst languish
    Me to comfort in my anguish.
      Thousand, thousand thanks shall be,
      Dearest Jesus, unto Thee.

    6. Thou hast suffered great affliction
      And hast borne it patiently,
    Even death by crucifixion,
      Fully to atone for me;
    Thou didst choose to be tormented
    That my doom should be prevented.
      Thousand, thousand thanks shall be,
      Dearest Jesus, unto Thee.

                                                      E. C. Homburg, 1659.


197

                                                       7, 6, 7, 6, 8, 7, 6

    When o’er my sins I sorrow,
      Lord, I will look to Thee
    And hence my comfort borrow
      That Thou wast slain for me;
    Yea, Lord, Thy precious blood was spilt
      For me, O most unworthy,
    To take away my guilt.

    2. Oh, what a marvelous offering!
      Behold! the Master spares
    His servants, and their suffering
      And grief for them He bears.
    God stoopeth from His throne on high;
      For me, His guilty creature,
    He deigns as man to die.

    3. My manifold transgression
      Henceforth can harm me none,
    Since Jesus’ bloody Passion
      For me God’s grace hath won.
    His precious blood my debts hath paid;
      Of hell and all its torments
    I am no more afraid.

    4. Therefore I will forever
      Give glory unto Thee,
    O Jesus, loving Savior,
      For what Thou didst for me.
    I’ll spend my breath in songs of thanks
      For Thy sad cry, Thy sufferings,
    Thy wrongs, Thy guiltless death.

    5. Lord, let Thy woes, Thy patience,
      My heart with strength inspire
    To vanquish all temptations
      And spurn all base desire.
    This thought I fain would cherish most—
      What pain my soul’s redemption
    Hath Thee, O Savior, cost.

    6. Whate’er may be the burden,
      The cross here on me laid,
    Be shame or want my guerdon,
      I’ll bear it with Thine aid.
    Give patience, give me strength to take
      Thee for my bright example
    And all the world forsake.

    7. And let me do to others
      As Thou hast done to me:
    Love all men as my brothers
      And serve them willingly,
    With ready heart, nor seek my own,
      But as Thou, Lord, hast helped us,
    From purest love alone.

                                  J. Gesenius, 1646; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


198

                                                             11, 11, 11, 5

    Beloved Jesus, what law hast Thou broken
    That such sharp sentence should on Thee be spoken?
    Of what great crime hast Thou to make confession,
    Of what transgression?

    2. They crown Thy head with thorns, they smite, they scourge Thee;
    With cruel mockings to the cross they urge Thee;
    They give Thee gall to drink, they still decry Thee;
    They crucify Thee.

    3. Whence come these sorrows, whence this mortal anguish?
    It is my sins for which Thou, Lord, must languish;
    Yea, all the wrath, the woe Thou dost inherit,
    ’Tis I do merit.

    4. What strangest punishment is suffered yonder?
    The Shepherd dies for sheep that love to wander;
    The Master pays the debt His servants owe Him,
    Who would not own Him.

    5. The sinless Son of God must die in sadness;
    The sinful child of man may live in gladness;
    Man forfeited his life and is acquitted,—
    God is committed.

    6. There was no spot in me by sin untainted;
    Sick with sin’s poison, all my heart had fainted;
    My heavy guilt to hell had well-nigh brought me,
    Such woe it wrought me.

    7. O wondrous love, whose depth no heart hath sounded,
    That brought Thee here, by foes and thieves surrounded!
    All worldly pleasures, heedless, I was trying
    While Thou wert dying.

    8. O mighty King, no time can dim Thy glory!
    How shall I spread abroad Thy wondrous story?
    How shall I find some worthy gifts to proffer?
    What dare I offer?

    9. For vainly doth our human wisdom ponder
    Thy woes; Thy mercy still transcends our wonder.
    Oh, how should I do aught that could delight Thee!
    Can I requite Thee?

    10. Yet unrequited, Lord, I would not leave Thee;
    I will renounce whate’er doth vex or grieve Thee
    And quench with thoughts of Thee and prayers most lowly
    All fires unholy.

    11. But since my own strength never will suffice me
    To crucify desires that still entice me,
    To all good deeds, oh, let Thy Spirit win me
    And reign within me!

    12. I think upon Thy mercy without ceasing,
    That earth’s vain joys to me no more be pleasing;
    To do Thy will shall be my sole endeavor
    Henceforth forever.

    13. Whate’er of earthly good this life may grant me
    I’ll risk for Thee; no shame, no cross, shall daunt me;
    I shall not fear what man can do to harm me
    Nor death alarm me.

    14. But, worthless is my sacrifice, I own it;
    Yet, Lord, for love’s sake Thou wilt not disown it;
    Thou wilt accept my gift in Thy great meekness
    Nor shame my weakness.

    15. And when, dear Lord, before Thy throne in heaven
    To me the crown of joy at last is given,
    Where sweetest hymns Thy saints forever raise Thee,
    I, too, shall praise Thee.

                                   From the Latin of Anselm of Canterbury;
                                J. Heermann, † 1647. C. Winkworth, tr., a.


199

                                                                    7s 6 l

    Go to dark Gethsemane,
      Ye that feel the Tempter’s power;
    Your Redeemer’s conflict see,
      Watch with Him one bitter hour;
    Turn not from His griefs away,
    Learn of Jesus Christ to pray.

    2. Follow to the judgment-hall,
      View the Lord of life arraigned;
    Oh, the wormwood and the gall!
      Oh, the pangs His soul sustained!
    Shun not suffering, shame, or loss;
    Learn of Him to bear the cross.

    3. Calvary’s mournful mountain climb;
      There, adoring at His feet,
    Mark that miracle of time,
      God’s own sacrifice complete.
    “It is finished!” hear Him cry;
    Learn of Jesus Christ to die.

    4. Early hasten to the tomb
      Where they laid His breathless clay;
    All is solitude and gloom,—
      Who hath taken Him away?
    Christ is risen! He meets our eyes.
    Savior, teach us so to rise.

                                                   James Montgomery, 1825.


200

                                                                     C. M.

    There is a fountain filled with blood,
      Drawn from Immanuel’s veins,
    And sinners, plunged beneath that flood,
      Lose all their guilty stains.

    2. The dying thief rejoiced to see
      That fountain in his day;
    And there have I, as vile as he,
      Washed all my sins away.

    3. Dear dying Lamb, Thy precious blood
      Shall never lose its power
    Till all the ransomed Church of God
      Be saved to sin no more.

    4. E’er since, by faith, I saw the stream
      Thy flowing wounds supply,
    Redeeming love has been my theme
      And shall be till I die.

    5. Then in a nobler, sweeter song
      I’ll sing Thy power to save,
    When this poor lisping, stammering tongue
      Lies silent in the grave.

                                                          W. Cowper, 1771.


201

                                                                 7, 6, 8 l

    O bleeding Head, and wounded,
      And full of pain and scorn,
    In mockery surrounded
      With cruel crown of thorn!
    O Head, once crowned with glory
      And heavenly majesty,
    But now despised and gory;
      Yet here I welcome Thee!

    2. Men spit upon and jeer Thee,
      Thou noble countenance,
    Though mighty worlds shall fear Thee
      And flee before Thy glance.
    How art Thou pale with anguish,
      With sore abuse and scorn!
    How does Thy visage languish
      Which once was bright as morn!

    3. Now from Thy cheeks has vanished
      Their color once so fair;
    From Thy red lips is banished
      The splendor that was there.
    Pale Death, with cruel rigor,
      Bereaveth Thee of life;
    Thus losest Thou Thy vigor
      And strength in this sad strife.

    4. My burden, in Thy Passion,
      Lord, Thou hast borne for me,
    For it was my transgression
      Which brought this woe on Thee.
    I cast me down before Thee,
      Wrath were my rightful lot;
    Have mercy, I implore Thee,
      Redeemer, spurn me not!

    5. My Shepherd, now receive me!
      My Guardian, own me Thine!
    Great blessings Thou didst give me,
      O Source of gifts divine!
    Thy lips have often fed me
      With milk and sweetest food;
    Thy Spirit oft has led me
      To stores of heavenly good.

    6. Here I will stand beside Thee,
      From Thee I will not part;
    O Savior, do not chide me!
      When breaks Thy loving heart,
    When soul and body languish
      In death’s last fatal grasp,
    Then, in Thy deepest anguish,
      Thee in mine arms I’ll clasp.

    7. Naught ever so much blesses,
      So much rejoices me,
    As when in Thy distresses
      I take a part with Thee.
    All, well for me if lying
      Here at Thy feet, my Life,
    I, too, with Thee were dying
      And thus might end my strife!

    8. Thanks from my heart I offer
      Thee, Jesus, dearest Friend,
    For all that Thou didst suffer;
      My good didst Thou intend.
    Ah! grant that I may ever
      To Thy truth faithful be;
    When soul and body sever,
      May I be found in Thee!

    9. When hence I must betake me,
      Lord, do not Thou depart!
    O nevermore forsake me
      When death is at my heart!
    When soul and body languish,
      O leave me not alone,
    But take away mine anguish
      By virtue of Thine own!

    10. Be Thou my Consolation
      And Shield when I must die;
    Remind me of Thy Passion
      When my last hour draws nigh.
    Mine eyes shall then behold Thee,
      Upon Thy cross shall dwell,
    My heart by faith enfold Thee.
      Who dieth thus dies well!

              From the Latin of Bernard of Clairvaux; Paul Gerhardt, 1652.


202

                                                                     L. M.

    Enslaved by sin and bound in chains,
      Beneath its dreadful tyrant sway,
    And doomed to everlasting pains,
      We wretched, guilty captives lay.

    2. Nor gold nor gems could buy our peace,
      Nor all the world’s collected store
    Suffice to purchase our release;
      A thousand worlds were all too poor.

    3. Jesus, the Lord, the mighty God,
      An all-sufficient ransom paid.
    O matchless price! His precious blood
      For vile, rebellious traitors shed.

    4. Jesus the sacrifice became
      To rescue guilty souls from hell;
    The spotless, bleeding, dying Lamb
      Beneath avenging Justice fell.

    5. Amazing goodness! love divine!
      O may our grateful hearts adore
    The matchless grace; nor yield to sin,
      Nor wear its cruel fetters more!

                                                      Anne Steele, † 1778.


GOOD FRIDAY.


203

                                                       7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 8

    O Lamb of God most holy,
      Upon the cursed tree slain;
    E’er patient, meek, and lowly,
      Though heaped with hate and disdain.
    All sins Thou borest for us,
    Else had despair reigned o’er us,
      Have mercy on us, O Jesus!

    2. O Lamb of God, most holy,
      Upon the cursed tree slain;
    E’er patient, meek, and lowly,
      Though heaped with hate and disdain.
    All sins Thou borest for us,
    Else had despair reigned o’er us,
      Have mercy on us, O Jesus!

    3. O Lamb of God, most holy,
      Upon the cursed tree slain;
    E’er patient, meek, and lowly,
      Though heaped with hate and disdain.
    All sins Thou borest for us,
    Else had despair reigned o’er us,
      Thy peace be with us, O Jesus!

                                    N. Decius, 1526; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


204

                                                                     L. M.

    When I survey the wondrous cross
      On which the Prince of Glory died,
    My richest gain I count but loss
      And pour contempt on all my pride.

    2. Forbid it, Lord, that I should boast
      Save in the death of Christ, my God;
    All the vain things that charm me most,
      I sacrifice them to His blood.

    3. See, from His head, His hands, His feet,
      Sorrow and love flow mingled down!
    Did e’er such love and sorrow meet
      Or thorns compose so rich a crown?

    4. Were the whole realm of nature mine,
      That were a tribute far too small;
    Love so amazing, so divine,
      Demands my soul, my life, my all.

                                                     Isaac Watts, 1707, a.


205

                                                          7, 7, 6, 7, 7, 8

    See, world, thy Life assailèd,
    On the accursed tree nailèd;
      Thy Savior sinks in death!
    The mighty Prince from heaven
    Himself hath freely given
      To shame and blows and cruel wrath.

    2. Come hither now and ponder,
    ’Twill fill thy soul with wonder,
      Blood streams from every pore.
    Through grief whose depth none knoweth,
    From His great heart there floweth
      Sigh after sigh of anguish o’er.

    3. Who is it that afflicts Thee?
    My Savior, what dejects Thee
      And causeth all Thy woe?
    Sin Thou committedst never,
    As we and our seed ever,
      Of deeds of evil naught dost know.

    4. I, many times transgressing,
    In number far surpassing
      The sand upon the coast,
    I thus the cause have given
    That Thou with grief art riven
      And with afflictions’ scourging host.

    5. I’ve done it, and deliver
    Me hand and foot forever
      Thou justly might’st to hell.
    The mocking to Thee offered,
    The scourging Thou hast suffered,
      My soul it was deserved it well.

    6. The load Thou takest on Thee,
    That pressed so sorely on me
      Than stone more heavily.
    A curse, Lord, Thou becamest,
    Thus blessings for me claimest;
      Thy pain must all my comfort be.

    7. Not death itself Thou fearest,
    As Surety Thou appearest
      For all my debts and me.
    For me Thy brow is crownèd
    With thorns, and Thou’rt disownèd
      By men and bear’st all patiently.

    8. Into death’s jaws Thou springest,
    Deliverance to me bringest
      From such a monster dire.
    My death away Thou takest,
    Thy grave its grave Thou makest;
      O love, O unexampled fire!

    9. I’m bound, my Savior, ever
    By ties most sacred never
      Thy service to forsake;
    With soul and body ever,
    With all my powers t’ endeavor,
      In praise and service joy to take.

    10. Not much can I be giving
    In this poor life I’m living,
      But one thing do I say:
    Thy death and sorrows ever,
    Till soul from body sever,
      My heart remember shall for aye.

    11. Before mine eyes I’ll place them
    And joyfully embrace them,
      Wherever I may be;
    They’ll be a glass revealing
    Pure innocence and sealing
      Love and unfeigned sincerity.

    12. Of sin, how great the danger;
    How it excites God’s anger;
      How doth His vengeance burn;
    How sternly He chastiseth;
    How His wrath’s flood ariseth:—
      Shall I from all Thy suff’rings learn.

    13. From them shall I be learning
    How I may be adorning
      My heart with quietness,
    And how I still should love them
    Whose malice aye doth move them
      To grieve me by their wickedness.

    14. When tongues of bad men grieve me,
    Of peace and name deprive me,
      My restive heart I’ll still,
    Their evil deeds enduring,
    Of pardon free assuring
      My neighbor for his every ill.

    15. Upon the cross I’ll nail me
    With Thee; when sins assail me
      Thou shalt my Refuge be.
    Forsaking sins that grieve Thee,
    Lord, let me never leave Thee,
      And let me find my strength in Thee.

    16. Thy groaning and Thy sighing,
    Thy thousand tears and crying,
      That once were heard from Thee,
    They’ll lead me to Thy glory,
    Where I shall joy before Thee
      And evermore at rest shall be!

                                    Paul Gerhardt, 1653; J. Kelly, tr., a.


206

                                                                     L. M.

    Thy soul, O Jesus, hallow me,
    Thy Spirit steep me all in Thee,
    Thy body, pierced by ruthless steel,
    My wretched soul and body heal.

    2. The water from Thy side that poured
    For me a cleansing bath afford,
    And all Thy blood, with life divine,
    Revive this weakened heart of mine.

    3. The sweat of death upon Thy face
    Deliver me from death’s embrace,
    And all Thy Passion, cross, and pain,
    With strength my feebleness sustain.

    4. O Christ, turn not away from me,
    Receive and hide me all in Thee,
    Within Thy holy wounds inclose,
    And keep me safe from all my foes.

    5. In death’s dark hour with me abide
    And place me, Savior, at Thy side,
    Where with Thy saints I shall adore
    And praise Thee, Lord, forevermore.

                                     J. Scheffler, † 1677; M. Loy, tr., a.


207

                                                             8, 8, 7, 8, 7

    Sev’n times our blessed Savior spoke
    When on the cross our sins He took
    And died lest man should perish.
      Let us His last and dying words
    In our remembrance cherish.

    2. “Father, forgive these men, for, lo,
    They truly know not what they do.”
    So far His love extended.
      Forgive us, Lord, for we, too, have
    Through ignorance offended.

    3. Now to the contrite thief He cries:
    “Thou, verily, in Paradise
    Shalt meet me ere to-morrow.”
      Lord, take us to Thy kingdom soon,
    Who linger here in sorrow.

    4. To weeping Mary, standing by,
    “Behold thy Son!” now hear Him cry;
    To John, “Behold thy mother!”
      Provide, O Lord, for those we leave,
    Let each befriend the other.

    5. The Savior’s fourth word was, “I thirst!”
    O mighty Prince of Life, Thy thirst
    For us and our salvation
      Is truly great; do help us, then,
    That we escape damnation.

    6. The fifth, “My God, my God, O why
    Forsake me?” Hark, the awful cry!
    Lord, Thou wast here forsaken
      That we might be received on high;
    Let this hope not be shaken.

    7. The sixth, when victory was won,
    “’Tis finished!” for Thy work was done.
    Grant, Lord, that, onward pressing,
      We may the work Thou dost impose
    Fulfil with Thine own blessing.

    8. The last, as woe and sufferings end,
    “O God, My Father, I commend
    Into Thy hands My spirit.”
      Be this, dear Lord, my dying wish;
    O heavenly Father, hear it!

    9. Whoe’er, by sense of sin opprest,
    Upon these words his thoughts will rest,
    He joy and hope obtaineth
      And, through God’s love and boundless grace,
    A peaceful conscience gaineth.

    10. O Jesus Christ, Thou Crucified,
    Who hast for our offenses died,
    Grant that we e’er may ponder
      Thy wounds, Thy cross, Thy bitter death,
    Both here below and yonder.

                              Johann Boeschenstein, 15th cent.; tr., anon.


208

                                                                6, 5, 6, 5

    Glory be to Jesus,
      Who in bitter pains
    Poured for me the life-blood
      From His sacred veins!

    2. Grace and life eternal
      In that blood I find;
    Blest be His compassion,
      Infinitely kind!

    3. Blest through endless ages
      Be the precious stream
    Which from endless torments
      Did the world redeem!

    4. Abel’s blood for vengeance
      Pleaded to the skies;
    But the blood of Jesus
      For our pardon cries.

    5. Oft as earth exulting
      Wafts its praise on high,
    Angel hosts rejoicing
      Make their glad reply.

    6. Lift we, then, our voices,
      Swell the mighty flood;
    Louder still and louder
      Praise the precious blood!

                               Italian, 18th cent.; E. Caswall, tr., 1857.


209

                                                                 8, 7, 8 l

    Stricken, smitten, and afflicted,
      See Him dying on the tree!
    ’Tis the Christ by man rejected;
      Yes, my soul, ’tis He! ’tis He!
    ’Tis the long-expected Prophet,
      David’s Son, yet David’s Lord;
    Proofs I see sufficient of it:
      ’Tis the true and faithful Word.

    2. Tell me, ye who hear Him groaning,
      Was there ever grief like His?
    Friends through fear His cause disowning,
      Foes insulting His distress;
    Many hands were raised to wound Him,
      None would interpose to save;
    But the deepest stroke that pierced Him
      Was the stroke that Justice gave.

    3. Ye who think of sin but lightly,
      Nor suppose the evil great,
    Here may view its nature rightly,
      Here its guilt may estimate.
    Mark the Sacrifice appointed!
      See who bears the awful load;
    ’Tis the WORD, the LORD’S ANOINTED,
      Son of Man and Son of God.

    4. Here we have a firm foundation;
      Here the refuge of the lost;
    Christ’s the Rock of our salvation:
      His the name of which we boast;
    Lamb of God, for sinners wounded!
      Sacrifice to cancel guilt!
    None shall ever be confounded
      Who on Him their hope have built.

                                                       Thomas Kelly, 1804.


210

                                                                 8, 7, 8 l

    Jesus, Refuge of the weary,
      Object of the spirit’s love,
    Fountain in life’s desert dreary,
      Savior from the world above;
    O how oft Thine eyes, offended,
      Gaze upon the sinner’s fall!
    Yet, upon the cross extended,
      Thou didst bear the pain of all.

    2. Do we pass that cross unheeding,
      Breathing no repentant vow,
    Though we see Thee wounded, bleeding,
      See Thy thorn-encircled brow?
    Yet Thy sinless death hath brought us
      Life eternal, peace, and rest;
    Only what Thy grace hath taught us
      Calms the sinner’s stormy breast.

    3. Jesus, may our hearts be burning
      With more fervent love for Thee;
    May our eyes be ever turning
      To Thy cross of agony;
    Till in glory, parted never
      From the blessed Savior’s side,
    Graven in our hearts forever
      Dwell the cross, the Crucified!

                                                Jerome Savonarola, † 1498.


211

                                                                     C. M.

    Behold the Savior of mankind
      Nailed to the shameful tree!
    How vast the love that Him inclined
      To bleed and die for thee!

    2. Hark how He groans while nature shakes
      And earth’s strong pillars bend!
    The Temple’s veil in sunder breaks,
      The solid marbles rend.

    3. ’Tis done; the precious ransom’s paid;
      “Receive my soul!” He cries:
    See where He bows His sacred head!
      He bows His head and dies.

    4. But soon He’ll break death’s envious chain
      And in full glory shine.
    O Lamb of God, was ever pain,
      Was ever love, like Thine?

                                                 Samuel Wesley, Sr., 1700.


212

                                                          8, 7, 8, 7, 7, 7

    Come to Calvary’s holy mountain,
      Sinners, ruined by the Fall;
    Here a pure and healing fountain
      Flows to you, to me, to all,
    In a full, perpetual tide,
    Opened when our Savior died.

    2. Come in poverty and meanness,
      Come defiled, without, within;
    From infection and uncleanness,
      From the leprosy of sin,
    Wash your robes and make them white;
    Ye shall walk with God in light.

    3. Come in sorrow and contrition,
      Wounded, impotent, and blind;
    Here the guilty free remission,
      Here the troubled peace, may find.
    Health this fountain will restore;
    He that drinks shall thirst no more.

    4. He that drinks shall live forever;
      ’Tis a soul-renewing flood.
    God is faithful; God will never
      Break His covenant of blood,
    Signed when our Redeemer died,
    Sealed when He was glorified.

                                                   James Montgomery, 1819.


213

                                                                    7s 8 l

    Savior, when in dust to Thee
    Low we bow th’ adoring knee,
    When, repentant, to the skies
    Scarce we lift our weeping eyes,
    Oh, by all Thy pains and woe,
    Suffered once for man below,
    Bending from Thy throne on high,
    Hear our solemn litany!

    2. By Thy helpless infant years,
    By Thy life of want and tears,
    By Thy days of sore distress
    In the savage wilderness,
    By the dread, mysterious hour
    Of th’ insulting Tempter’s power:
    Turn, O turn, a favoring eye,
    Hear our solemn litany!

    3. By Thine hour of dire despair,
    By Thine agony of prayer,
    By the cross, the nail, the thorn,
    Piercing spear, and torturing scorn;
    By the gloom that veiled the skies
    O’er the dreadful sacrifice:
    Listen to our humble cry,
    Hear our solemn litany!

    4. By Thy deep expiring groan;
    By the sad sepulchral stone;
    By the vault, whose dark abode
    Held in vain the rising God:
    Oh, from earth to heaven restored,
    Mighty, reascended Lord,
    Listen, listen to the cry
    Of our solemn litany!

                                                    Robert Grant, 1815, a.


214

                                                                     C. M.

    Alas! and did my Savior bleed,
      And did my Sov’reign die?
    Would He devote that sacred head
      For such a worm as I?

    2. Was it for crimes that I had done
      He groaned upon the tree?
    Amazing pity, grace unknown,
      And love beyond degree!

    3. Well might the sun in darkness hide
      And shut his glories in
    When God, the mighty Maker, died
      For man the creature’s sin.

    4. Thus might I hide my blushing face
      While His dear Cross appears,
    Dissolve my heart in thankfulness,
      And melt my eyes in tears.

    5. But drops of grief can ne’er repay
      The debt of love I owe;
    Here, Lord, I give myself away,
      ’Tis all that I can do.

                                                        Isaac Watts, 1707.


BURIAL OF JESUS.


215

                                                             4, 4, 7, 7, 6

    O darkest woe!
    Ye tears, forth flow!
      Has earth so sad a wonder?
    God the Father’s only Son
      Now is buried yonder!

    2. O sorrow dread
    Our God is dead!
      But by His expiation
    Of our guilt upon the cross
      Gained for us salvation.

    3. O child of man!
    It was the ban
      Of death on thee that brought Him
    Down to suffer for thy sins,
      And such woe hath wrought Him.

    4. See, stained with blood,
    The Lamb of God,
      The Bridegroom, lies before thee,
    Pouring out His life that He
      May to life restore thee.

    5. O Ground of faith,
    Laid low in death,
      Sweet lips now silent sleeping!
    Surely all that live must mourn
      Here with bitter weeping.

    6. O Virgin-born,
    Thy death we mourn,
      Thou lovely Star of gladness!
    Who could see Thy reeking blood
      Without grief and sadness?

    7. Yea, blest is he
    Whose heart shall be
      Fixed here, who apprehendeth
    Why the Lord of Glory thus
      To the grave descendeth.

    8. O Jesus blest,
    My Help and Rest,
      With tears I now entreat Thee:
    Make me love Thee to the last,
      Till in heaven I greet Thee!

                                       First stanza, anon.; J. Rist, 1641.


216

                                                             4, 4, 7, 7, 6

    So rest, my Rest,
    Thou Ever-blest!
      Thy grave with sinners making;
    By Thy precious death from sin
      My dead soul awaking.

    2. After Thy strife,
    Life of my life,
      Thou’rt in the tomb reposing,
    Round Thee now a rock-hewn grave,
      Rock of Ages, closing.

    3. How cold art Thou,
    My Savior, now!
      Thy fervent love hath driven
    Thee into the cold, dark grave
      That I might gain heaven.

    4. Breath of all breath!
    I know from death
      Thou wilt my dust awaken;
    Wherefore should I dread the grave
      Or my faith be shaken?

    5. To me the tomb
    Shall be a room
      Where I lie down on roses;
    Who by faith hath conquered death
      Sweetly there reposes.

    6. The body dies—
    Naught else—and lies
      In dust until victorious
    From the grave it shall arise
      Beautiful and glorious.

    7. Meantime I will,
    My Savior, still
      Deep in my bosom lay Thee,
    Ever musing on Thy death.
      Leave me not, I pray Thee!

                                                        Sal. Franck, 1716.


217

                                                                     L. M.

    Lord Jesus, who, our souls to save,
    Didst rest and slumber in the grave,
    Now grant us all in Thee to rest
    And here to live as seems Thee best.

    2. Give us the strength, the dauntless faith,
    That Thou hast purchased with Thy death
    And lead us to that glorious place
    Where we shall see the Father’s face.

    3. O Lamb of God, who once wast slain,
    We thank Thee for that bitter pain.
    Let us share in Thy death that we
    May enter into life with Thee.

                                    G. Werner, 1638; C. Winkworth, tr., a.




EASTER.


218

                                                    7, 6, 7, 6, 6, 6, 6, 6

    Awake, my heart, with gladness,
      See what to-day is done,
    How after gloom and sadness
      Comes forth the glorious Sun!
    My Savior there was laid
    Where our bed must be made
    When to the realms of light
    Our spirit wings its flight.

    2. They in the grave did sink Him,
      The Foe held jubilee;
    Before he can bethink him,
      Lo! Christ again is free,
    And “Victory!” He cries
    And waveth toward the skies
    His banner, for the field
    Is by the Hero held.

    3. Upon the grave is standing
      The Hero, looking round;
    The Foe, no more withstanding,
      His weapons on the ground
    Throws down, his hellish power
    To Christ he must give o’er
    And to the Victor’s bands
    Must yield his feet and hands.

    4. This is a sight that gladdens
      And fills my heart with glee;
    Now naughtsoever saddens
      My soul nor takes from me
    My trust or fortitude
    Or any precious good
    Which by His victory
    My Savior gained for me.

    5. Hell and its prince, the devil,
      Now of their power are shorn,
    I now am safe from evil,
      And sin I laugh to scorn.
    Grim Death with all his might
    Cannot my soul affright;
    He is a powerless form,
    Howe’er he rage and storm.

    6. The world against me rageth,
      Its fury I disdain;
    Though bitter war it wageth,
      Its work is all in vain.
    My heart from care is free,
    No trouble troubles me,
    Misfortune now is play;
    And night is bright as day.

    7. I cleave now and forever
      To Christ, a member true;
    My Head will leave me never,
      Whate’er He passeth through.
    He treads the world beneath
    His feet and conquers death
    And hell and breaks sin’s thrall;
    I’m with Him through it all.

    8. To glory He ascendeth,
      I follow Him fore’er,
    For Christ, my Head, defendeth
      His member from all care.
    No enemy I fear
    Because my Head is near;
    My Savior is my Shield,
    By Him all rage is stilled.

    9. He brings me to the portal
      That opens into bliss,
    Where, graved in words immortal,
      This golden scripture is:
    “Who there are scorned with Me
    Here with Me crowned shall be;
    Who there with Me shall die
    Shall here be raised as I!”

                                    Paul Gerhardt, 1649; J. Kelly, tr., a.


219

                                                                     C. M.

    Father of Jesus Christ, my Lord,
      My Savior, and my Head,
    I trust in Thee, whose powerful word
      Hath raised Him from the dead.

    2. Thou know’st for my offense He died
      And rose again for me,
    Fully and freely justified,
      That I might live to Thee.

    3. Eternal life to all mankind
      Thou hast in Jesus giv’n;
    And all who seek, in Him shall find
      The happiness of heav’n.

    4. Obedient faith, that waits on Thee,
      Thou never wilt reprove;
    But Thou wilt form Thy Son in me
      And perfect me in love.

    5. To Thee the glory of Thy power
      And faithfulness I give.
    I shall in Christ at that glad hour,
      And Christ in me, shall live.

                                                     Charles Wesley, 1742.


220

                                                          7, 8, 7, 8, 7, 7

    Jesus Christ, my sure Defense
      And my Savior, ever liveth;
    Knowing this, my confidence
      Rests upon the hope it giveth
    Though thy night of death be fraught
    Still with many an anxious thought.

    2. Jesus, my Redeemer, lives!
      I, too, unto life must waken;
    Endless joy my Savior gives;
      Shall my courage, then, be shaken?
    Shall I fear, or could the Head
    Rise and leave His members dead?

    3. Nay, too closely am I bound
      Unto Him by hope forever;
    Faith’s strong hand the Rock hath found,
      Grasped it, and will leave it never;
    Even death now cannot part
    From its Lord the trusting heart.

    4. I am only flesh and blood,
      And on this corruption seizeth;
    But I know my Lord and God
      From the grave my body raiseth
    That with Him eternally
    In His glory I may be.

    5. Glorified, I shall again
      With this skin then be enshrouded;
    In this body I shall then
      See my God with eyes unclouded;
    In this flesh I then shall see
    Jesus Christ eternally.

    6. Then these eyes my Lord shall know,
      My Redeemer and my Brother;
    In His love my soul shall glow,—
      I myself, and not another!
    Only there shall disappear
    Weakness in and round me here.

    7. What now sickens, mourns, and sighs
      Christ with Him in glory bringeth;
    Earthly is the seed and dies,
      Heavenly from the grave it springeth;
    Natural is the death we die,
    Spiritual our life on high.

    8. Then take comfort, nay, rejoice!
      For His members Christ will cherish;
    Fear not, they will know His voice,
      Though awhile they seem to perish,
    When the final trump is heard
    And the deaf, cold grave is stirred.

    9. Laugh to scorn the gloomy grave
      And at death no longer tremble;
    For the Lord, who comes to save,
      Round Him shall His saints assemble,
    Raising them o’er all their foes,
    Mortal weakness, fear, and woes.

    10. Only draw away your heart
      Now from pleasures base and hollow;
    Would ye there with Christ have part,
      Here His footsteps ye must follow;
    Fix your hearts beyond the skies,
    Whither ye yourselves would rise!

                                       Berlin, 1653; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


221

                                                                        7s

    “Christ the Lord is risen to-day,”
    Sons of men and angels say.
    Raise your joys and triumphs high;
    Sing, ye heavens, and, earth, reply.

    2. Love’s redeeming work is done,
    Fought the fight, the battle won;
    Lo! our Sun’s eclipse is o’er;
    Lo! He sets in blood no more.

    3. Vain the stone, the watch, the seal;
    Christ has burst the gates of hell.
    Death in vain forbids His rise;
    Christ has opened Paradise.

    4. Lives again our glorious King;
    Where, O Death, is now thy sting?
    Dying once, He all doth save;
    Where thy victory, O Grave?

    5. Soar we now where Christ has led,
    Following our exalted Head.
    Made like Him, like Him we rise;
    Ours the cross, the grave, the skies.

    6. Hail the Lord of earth and heav’n!
    Praise to Thee by both be giv’n!
    Thee we greet triumphant now;
    Hail, the Resurrection Thou!

                                                     Charles Wesley, 1739.


222

                                                          7, 8, 7, 8, 7, 7

    Jesus lives! No longer now
      Can thy terrors, Death, appal me;
    Jesus lives! by this I know
      From the grave He will recall me.
    Brighter scenes will then commence;
    This shall be my confidence.

    2. Jesus lives! To Him the throne
      High o’er heaven and earth is given.
    I shall go where He is gone,
      Live and reign with Him in heaven.
    God is pledged; weak doubtings, hence!
    This shall be my confidence.

    3. Jesus lives! For me He died,
      Hence will I, to Jesus living,
    Pure in heart and act abide,
      Praise to Him and glory giving.
    Freely God doth aid dispense;
    This shall be my confidence.

    4. Jesus lives! I know full well
      Naught from me His love shall sever;
    Life nor death nor powers of hell
      Part me now from Christ forever.
    God will be a sure Defense:
    This shall be my confidence.

    5. Jesus lives! Henceforth is death
      But the gate of life immortal;
    This shall calm my trembling breath
      When I pass its gloomy portal.
    Faith shall cry, as fails each sense,
    “Jesus is my confidence!”

                         C. F. Gellert, 1757; Frances E. Cox, tr., † 1864.


223

                                                          8, 7, 8, 7, 7, 7

    Who is this that comes from Edom,
      All His raiment stained with blood;
    To the captive speaking freedom,
      Bringing and bestowing good;
    Glorious in the garb He wears,
    Glorious in the spoil He bears?

    2. ’Tis the Savior, now victorious,
      Traveling onward in His might;
    ’Tis the Savior; O how glorious
      To His people is the sight!
    Satan conquered and the grave,
    Jesus now is strong to save.

    3. Why that blood His raiment staining?
      ’Tis the blood of many slain;
    Of His foes there’s none remaining,
      None the contest to maintain.
    Fall’n they are, no more to rise;
    All their glory prostrate lies.

    4. Mighty Victor, reign forever,
      Wear the crown so dearly won;
    Never shall Thy people, never,
      Cease to sing what Thou hast done.
    Thou hast fought Thy people’s foes;
    Thou hast healed Thy people’s woes.

                                                    Thomas Kelly, 1809, a.


224

                                                    8, 7, 8, 7, 7, 8, 7, 4

    In death’s strong grasp the Savior lay,
      For our offenses given;
    But now the Lord is ris’n to-day
      And brings us life from heaven.
    Therefore let us all rejoice,
    And praise our God with cheerful voice,
      And sing loud hallelujahs.
        Hallelujah!

    2. No son of man could conquer Death,
      Such mischief sin had wrought us,
    For innocence dwelt not on earth,
      And therefore Death had brought us
    Into thraldom from of old
    And ever grew more strong and bold
      And kept us in his bondage.
        Hallelujah!

    3. But Jesus Christ, God’s only Son,
      To our low state descended,
    The cause of Death He has undone,
      His power forever ended,
    Ruined all his right and claim,
    And left him nothing but the name,—
      His sting is lost forever.
        Hallelujah!

    4. It was a strange and dreadful fray
      When Death and Life contended;
    But it was Life that won the day,
      The reign of Death was ended.
    Holy Scripture plainly saith
    That Death is swallowed up by Death,
      Made henceforth a derision.
        Hallelujah!

    6. Here the true Paschal Lamb we see,
      Whom God so freely gave us;
    He died on the accursed tree—
      So strong His love!—to save us.
    See, His blood doth mark our door;
    Faith points to it, Death passes o’er.
      The Murderer cannot harm us.
        Hallelujah!

    6. So let us keep the festival
      With heartfelt exultation.
    Christ is Himself the Joy of all,
      The Sun of our salvation.
    By His grace He doth impart
    Eternal sunshine to the heart;
      The night of sin is ended.
        Hallelujah!

    7. Then let us feast this Easter Day
      On Christ, the Bread of heaven;
    The Word of Grace hath purged away
      The old and evil leaven;
    Christ alone our souls will feed,
    He is our meat and drink indeed,
      Faith lives upon no other.
        Hallelujah!

                                                      Martin Luther, 1524.


225

                                                           7s (with Hall.)

    Christ the Lord is risen again!
    Christ has broken death’s strong chain!
    Hark, the angels shout for joy,
    Singing evermore on high:
        Hallelujah!

    2. He who gave for us His life,
    Who for us endured the strife,
    Is our Paschal Lamb to-day.
    We, too, sing for joy and say:
        Hallelujah!

    3. He who bore all pain and loss
    Comfortless upon the cross
    Lives in glory now on high,
    Pleads for us and hears our cry:
        Hallelujah!

    4. He whose path no records tell,
    Who descended into hell,
    Who the strong man armed hath bound,
    Now in highest heaven is crowned:
        Hallelujah!

    5. He who slumbered in the grave
    Is exalted now to save;
    Now through Christendom it rings
    That the Lamb is King of kings!
        Hallelujah!

    6. Now He bids us tell mankind
    How all may salvation find,
    How poor sinners are forgiv’n,
    And through faith may enter heav’n:
        Hallelujah!

    7. Thou our Paschal Lamb indeed,
    Christ, to-day Thy people feed;
    Take our sins and guilt away
    That we all may sing for aye:
        Hallelujah!

                  Bohemian Brethren, M. Weiss, 1531; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


226

                                                        10, 6, 10, 9, 9, 4

    I am content! My Jesus liveth still,
      In whom my heart is pleased;
    He hath fulfilled the Law of God for me,
      God’s wrath He hath appeased.
    Since Him from life death could not sever,
    I also shall not die forever.
      I am content!

    2. I am content! My Jesus is my Head,
      His member I will be;
    He bowed His head, when on the cross He died,
      With cries of agony;
    How death is brought into subjection
    For me, too, by His resurrection.
      I am content!

    3. I am content! My Jesus is my Lord,
      My Prince of Life and Peace;
    His loving heart is thirsting after man’s
      Welfare and future bliss.
    Where He, my Lord and Master, liveth,
    His servant also He receiveth.
      I am content!

    4. I am content! My Jesus is my Light,
      My radiant Sun of Grace.
    His cheering rays beam blessings forth for all;
      Sweet comfort, hope, and peace.
    This Easter-sun brings life, salvation,
    And everlasting exultation.
      I am content!

    5. I am content! Lord, draw me but to Thee
      That from the dead I rise
    With Thee, my Head, and enter cheerfully
      Into Thy heavenly joys.
    The fetters of my body sever,
    Then shall my soul rejoice forever.
      I am content!

                                        J. J. Moeller, 1704; A. Crull, tr.


227

                                                                     L. M.

    Where wilt Thou go since night draws near,
    O Jesus Christ, Thou Pilgrim dear?
    Lord, make me happy, be my Guest,
    And in my heart, oh, deign to rest.

    2. Grant my request, O dearest Friend,
    For truly I Thy best intend;
    Thou knowest that Thou ever art
    A welcome Guest unto my heart.

    3. The day is now far spent and gone,
    The shades of night come quickly on;
    Then stay with me, Thou heavenly Light,
    And do not leave me in this night.

    4. Enlighten me that from the way
    That leads to heaven I may not stray,
    That I may never be misled,
    Though night of sin is round me spread.

    5. And when I on my death-bed lie,
    Help me and let me gently die.
    Abide! I will not let Thee go!
    Thou wilt not leave me, Lord, I know.

                                  E. C. Homburg, † 1681; A. Crull, tr., a.


228

                                                                     C. M.

    Welcome, Thou Victor in the strife,
      Welcome from out the cave!
    To-day we triumph in Thy life
      Around Thine empty grave.

    2. Our enemy is put to shame,
      His short-lived triumph o’er;
    Our God is with us, we exclaim;
      We fear our foe no more.

    3. The dwellings of the just resound
      With songs of victory;
    For in their midst Thou, Lord, art found
      And bringest peace with Thee.

    4. O let Thy conquering banner wave
      O’er hearts Thou makest free;
    And point the path that from the grave
      Leads heavenward up to Thee.

    5. We bury all our sin and crime
      Deep in our Savior’s tomb
    And seek the treasure there that time
      And change can ne’er consume.

    6. Fearless we lay us in the tomb
      And sleep the night away;
    For Thou art there to break the gloom
      And call us back to-day.

                                  B. Schmolck, 1712; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


229

                                                                     L. M.

    I know that my Redeemer lives!
    What comfort this sweet sentence gives!
    He lives, He lives, who once was dead,
    He lives, my ever-living Head.

    2. He lives triumphant from the grave,
    He lives eternally to save,
    He lives all-glorious in the sky,
    He lives exalted there on high.

    3. He lives to bless me with His love,
    He lives to plead for me above,
    He lives my hungry soul to feed,
    He lives to help in time of need.

    4. He lives to grant me rich supply,
    He lives to guide me with His eye,
    He lives to hear my soul’s complaint,
    He lives to comfort me when faint.

    5. He lives to silence all my fears,
    He lives to wipe away my tears,
    He lives to calm my troubled heart,
    He lives all blessings to impart.

    6. He lives, my kind, wise, heavenly Friend,
    He lives and loves me to the end;
    He lives, and while He lives, I’ll sing;
    He lives, my Prophet, Priest, and King!

    7. He lives and grants me daily breath;
    He lives, and I shall conquer death;
    He lives my mansion to prepare;
    He lives to bring me safely there.

    8. He lives, all glory to His name!
    He lives, my Jesus, still the same.
    O the sweet joy this sentence gives,
    “I know that my Redeemer lives!”

                                                      Samuel Medley, 1775.


230

                                                                     L. M.

    Lord Jesus Christ, strong Hero Thou,
    Grim death Thou hast o’erpowered now,
    Thou dost destroy hell’s gate and chain,
    Dost on the third day rise again.

    2. Thou grantest to Thy friends the grace
    To look again upon Thy face
    And showest them the glorious prize
    Won when from death Thou didst arise.

    3. Grant that we and all Christians may
    Partake of this great joy to-day
    Which by Thy resurrection Thou
    To all men freely givest now.

    4. Grant us that we may rise from sin,
    A holy life to lead begin,
    Till we, from sin and pain set free,
    In endless Easter live with Thee.

                                        B. Helder, 1620; A. Crull, tr., a.




ASCENSION.


231

                                                                 8, 7, 8 l

    See, the Conqueror mounts in triumph;
      See the King in royal state,
    Riding on the clouds, His chariot,
      To His heavenly palace gate!
    Hark! the choirs of angel voices
      Joyful alleluias sing,
    And the portals high are lifted
      To receive their heav’nly King.

    2. Who is this that comes in glory,
      With the trump of jubilee?
    Lord of battles, God of armies,—
      He hath gained the victory.
    He who on the cross did suffer,
      He who from the grave arose,
    He has vanquished sin and Satan;
      He by death has spoiled His foes.

    3. While He raised His hands in blessing,
      He was parted from His friends,
    While their eager eyes behold Him,
      He upon the clouds ascends;
    He who walked with God and pleased Him,
      Preaching truth and doom to come,
    He, our Enoch, is translated
      To His everlasting home.

    4. How our heav’nly Aaron enters
      With His blood within the veil;
    Joshua now is come to Canaan,
      And the kings before Him quail;
    Now He plants the tribes of Israel
      In their promised resting-place;
    Now our great Elijah offers
      Double portion of His grace.

    5. Thou hast raised our human nature
      On the clouds to God’s right hand;
    There we sit in heav’nly places,
      There with Thee in glory stand.
    Jesus reigns, adored by angels;
      Man with God is on the throne;
    Mighty Lord, in Thine ascension
      We by faith behold our own.

                                                      C. Wordsworth, 1862.


232

                                                                     L. M.

    Our Lord is risen from the dead,
      Our Jesus is gone up on high;
    The powers of hell are captive led,
      The Victor rises to the sky.

    2. There His triumphal chariot waits,
      And angels chant the solemn lay:
    “Lift up your heads, ye heavenly gates!
      Ye everlasting doors, give way!”

    3. Loose all your bars of massy light
      And wide unfold the radiant scene.
    He claims these mansions as His right;
      Receive the King of Glory in.

    4. Who is the King of Glory, who?
      The Lord, who all His foes o’ercame,
    The world, sin, death, and hell o’erthrew;
      And Jesus is the Conqueror’s name.

    5. Lo! His triumphal chariot waits,
      And angels chant the solemn lay:
    “Lift up your heads, ye heavenly gates;
      Ye everlasting doors, give way!”

    6. Who is the King of Glory, who?
      The Lord, of glorious power possest,
    The King of saints and angels too,
      God over all, forever blest!

                                                     Charles Wesley, 1741.


233

                                                    7, 6, 7, 6, 6, 7, 7, 6

    Lo, God to heaven ascendeth!
      Throughout its regions vast
    With shouts triumphant blendeth
      The trumpet’s thrilling blast:
    Sing praise to Christ the Lord!
      Sing praise with exultation,
      King of each heathen nation,
    The God of hosts adored!

    2. With joy is heaven resounding,
      Christ’s glad return to see;
    Behold the saints surrounding
      The Lord who set them free.
    Bright myriads, thronging, come;
      The cherub band rejoices,
      And loud seraphic voices
    Welcome Messiah home.

    3. No more the way is hidden
      Since Christ, our Head, arose;
    No more to man forbidden
      The road that heav’nward goes.
    Our Lord is gone before;
      But here He will not leave us,
      In heaven He’ll soon receive us;
    He opens wide the door.

    4. Christ is our place preparing;
      To heaven we, too, shall rise
    And, joys angelic sharing,
      Be where our Treasure lies.
    There may each heart be found,
      Where Jesus Christ has entered;
      There let our hopes be centered,
    Our course still heavenward bound!

    5. May we, His servants, thither
      In heart and mind ascend;
    And let us sing together:
      “We seek Thee, Christ, our Friend,
    Thee, God’s anointed Son,
      Our Life, and Way to heaven,
      To whom all power is given,
    Our Joy, and Hope, and Crown!”

    6. Farewell with all thy treasures,
      O world, to falsehood giv’n!
    Thy dross gives no true pleasures;
      We seek the joys of heav’n.
    The Savior is our Prize;
      He comforts us in sadness
      And fills our hearts with gladness;
    To Him we lift our eyes.

    7. When, on our vision dawning,
      Will break the wished-for hour
    Of that all-glorious morning
      When Christ shall come with power?
    O come, thou welcome day!
      When we, our Savior meeting,
      His second advent greeting,
    Shall hail the heaven-sent ray.

                                     G. W. Sacer, 1661; F. E. Cox, tr., a.


234

                                                          4, 4, 7, 4, 4, 7

    Draw us to Thee,
    For then shall we
      Walk in Thy steps forever
    And hasten on
    Where Thou art gone
      To be with Thee, dear Savior.

    2. Draw us to Thee,
    Lord, lovingly;
      Let us depart with gladness
    That we may be
    Forever free
      From sorrow, grief, and sadness.

    3. Draw us to Thee;
    O grant that we
      May find the road to heaven.
    Direct our way,
    Lest we should stray
      And from Thy paths be driven.

    4. Draw us to Thee,
    That also we
      Thy heavenly bliss inherit
    And ever dwell
    Where sin and hell
      No more can vex our spirit.

    5. Draw us to Thee
    Unceasingly,
      Into Thy kingdom take us;
    Let us fore’er
    Thy glory share,
      Thy saints and joint heirs make us.

                                         Fr. Funcke, † 1699; A. Crull, tr.


235

                                                                     L. M.

    A hymn of glory let us sing;
    New songs throughout the world shall ring:
    By a new way none ever trod
    Christ mounteth to the throne of God.

    2. May our affections thither tend
    And thither constantly ascend
    Where, seated on the Father’s throne,
    Thee reigning in the heavens we own!

    3. Be Thou our present Joy, O Lord,
    Who wilt be ever our Reward;
    And as the countless ages flee,
    May all our glory be in Thee!

    4. All glory to the Father be,
    All glory, Jesus Christ, to Thee,
    Who didst to heaven above ascend,
    And to the Spirit, without end.

                                  Bede, † 735; Elizabeth R. Charles, 1858.


236

                                                       8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7

    Since Christ has gone to heaven, His home,
      I, too, that home one day must share;
    And in this hope I overcome
      All doubt, all anguish, and despair;
    For where the Head is, well we know,
    The members He has left below
      In time He surely gathers.

    2. Since Christ has reached His glorious throne
      And mighty gifts henceforth are His,
    My heart can rest in heaven alone,
      On earth my Lord I always miss;
    I long to be with Him on high,
    My heart and thoughts forever fly
      Where is my only Treasure.

    3. From Thy ascension let such grace,
      Dear Lord, be ever found in me,
    That steadfast faith may guide my ways
      With step unfalt’ring up to Thee,
    And at Thy voice I may depart
    With joy to dwell where Thou, Lord, art;
      Lord, hear my supplication!

                                       J. Wegelin, 1637; C. Winkworth, tr.




SESSION.


237

                                                                     C. M.

    The Head that once was crowned with thorns
      Is crowned with glory now;
    A royal diadem adorns
      The mighty Victor’s brow.

    2. The highest place that heaven affords
      Is His by sovereign right,
    The King of kings and Lord of lords,
      And heaven’s eternal Light;

    3. The Joy of all who dwell above,
      The Joy of all below,
    To whom He manifests His love
      And grants His name to know.

    4. To them the cross, with all its shame,
      With all its grace, is given;
    Their name an everlasting name,
      Their joy the joy of heaven.

    5. They suffer with their Lord below,
      They reign with Him above,
    Their profit and their joy to know
      The mystery of His love.

    6. The cross He bore is life and health,
      Though shame and death to Him:
    His people’s hope, His people’s wealth,
      Their everlasting theme.

                                                       Thomas Kelly, 1820.


238

                                                          8, 7, 8, 7, 7, 7

    Hark! ten thousand harps and voices
      Sound the note of praise above;
    Jesus reigns, and Heaven rejoices,—
      Jesus reigns, the God of Love.
    See, He sits on yonder throne:
    Jesus rules the world alone.

    2. Christians, come, unite your praises
      With the angels round His throne;
    Soon, we hope, our God will raise us
      To the place where He is gone.
    Meet it is that we should sing,
    “Glory, glory, to our King!”

    3. Sing how Jesus came from heaven,
      How He bore the cross below,
    How all power to Him is given,
      How He reigns in glory now;
    ’Tis a great and endless theme,
    Oh, ’tis sweet to sing of Him!

    4. Jesus, hail! whose glory brightens
      All above and makes it fair.
    Lord of Life, Thy smile enlightens,
      Cheers, and charms Thy people here.
    When we think of love like Thine,
    Lord, we own it love divine.

    5. King of Glory, reign forever;
      Thine an everlasting crown.
    Nothing from Thy love shall sever
      Those whom Thou hast made Thine own,
    Happy objects of Thy grace,
    Destined to behold Thy face.

    6. Savior, hasten Thine appearing;
      Bring, O bring the glorious day
    When, the awful summons hearing,
      Heaven and earth shall pass away;
    Then with golden harps we’ll sing,
    “Glory, glory, to our King!”

                                                    Thomas Kelly, 1806, a.


239

                                                        L. M. (with Hall.)

    We thank Thee, Jesus, dearest Friend,
    That Thou didst into heaven ascend,
    O mighty God, Immanuel;
    Make soul and body strong and well.
        Hallelujah!

    2. Now all His Christians can rejoice
    And sing His praise with cheerful voice:
    Glory to God in heaven’s high throne,
    Our Brother is God’s only Son.
        Hallelujah!

    3. Ascended to His throne on high,
    He yet to us is always nigh;
    As God and man He ever reigns
    And infinite in power remains.
        Hallelujah!

    4. Above all heavens in glory raised,
    Forever by all angels praised,
    All human beings rules our Lord,
    All creatures must obey His word.
        Hallelujah!

    5. He rules and reigns at God’s right hand
    And has all power at His command,
    All things are subject to His rod—
    The Son of man and Son of God.
        Hallelujah!

    6. The world, sin, Satan, death, and hell
    Are vanquished by Immanuel.
    Dispute who will His mighty reign,
    He still the Victor must remain.
        Hallelujah!

    7. The man who trusts in Him is blest
    And finds in Him eternal rest;
    This world’s allurements we despise
    And fix on Christ alone our eyes.
        Hallelujah!

    8. We trust in Him, our Lord and God,
    Who hath redeemed us by His blood;
    He captive led captivity,
    From bitter death to set us free.
        Hallelujah!

    9. We, therefore, heartily rejoice
    And sing His praise with cheerful voice:
    Our Brother, our own flesh and blood,
    Is God and King, our greatest Good.
        Hallelujah!

    10. Through Him we heirs of heaven are made;
    O Brother, Christ, extend Thine aid
    That we may firmly trust in Thee
    And live through Thee eternally.
        Hallelujah!

    11. Amen, Amen, O Lord! we cry;
    Do Thou, who art exalted high,
    In Thy pure doctrine keep our hearts
    And shield us from the devil’s arts.
        Hallelujah!

                                       Praetorius’s _Musae Sioniae_, 1607.




INTERCESSION.


240

                                                  6, 6, 6, 6, 8, 8 (H. M.)

    Arise, my soul, arise,
      Shake off thy guilty fears,
    The bleeding Sacrifice
      In my behalf appears;
    Before the throne my Surety stands,
    My name is written on His hands.

    2. He ever lives above
      For me to intercede,
    His all-redeeming love,
      His precious blood to plead;
    His blood atoned for all our race
    And sprinkles now the throne of grace.

    3. Five bleeding wounds He bears,
      Received on Calvary;
    They pour effectual prayers,
      They strongly speak for me;
    Forgive him, O forgive, they cry,
    Nor let that ransomed sinner die!

    4. The Father hears Him pray,
      His dear Anointed One;
    He cannot turn away,
      Cannot refuse His Son;
    His Spirit answers to the blood
    And tells me I am born of God.

    5. My God is reconciled,
      His pardoning voice I hear;
    He owns me for His child,
      I can no longer fear;
    With confidence I now draw nigh
    And “Father, Abba, Father!” cry.

                                                  Charles Wesley, 1742, a.


241

                                                  6, 6, 6, 6, 8, 8 (H. M.)

    Th’ atoning work is done,
      The Victim’s blood is shed,
    And Jesus now is gone
      His people’s cause to plead:
    He stands in heaven their great High Priest
    And bears their names upon His breast.

    2. He sprinkled with His blood
      The mercy-seat above;
    For justice had withstood
      The purposes of love;
    But justice now withstands no more,
    And mercy yields her boundless store.

    3. No temple made with hands
      His place of service is;
    In heaven itself He stands,
      A heavenly priesthood His.
    In Him the shadows of the Law
    Are all fulfilled and now withdraw.

    4. And though awhile He be
      Hid from the eyes of men,
    His people look to see
      Their great High Priest again;
    In brightest glory He will come
    And take His waiting people home.

                                                       Thomas Kelly, 1806.


242

                                                                 8, 7, 8 l

    Hail, Thou once despisèd Jesus!
      Hail, Thou Galilean King!
    Thou didst suffer to release us;
      Thou didst free salvation bring.
    Hail, Thou agonizing Savior,
      Bearer of our sin and shame!
    By Thy merits we find favor;
      Life is given through Thy name.

    2. Paschal Lamb, by God appointed.
      All our sins on Thee were laid;
    By almighty love anointed,
      Thou hast full atonement made.
    All Thy people are forgiven
      Through the virtue of Thy blood;
    Open is the gate of heaven,
      Peace is made ’twixt man and God.

    3. Jesus, hail! enthroned in glory,
      There forever to abide;
    All the heavenly host adore Thee,
      Seated at Thy Father’s side.
    There for sinners Thou art pleading,
      There Thou dost our place prepare,
    Ever for us interceding,
      Till in glory we appear.

    4. Worship, honor, power, and blessing
      Thou art worthy to receive;
    Loudest praises, without ceasing,
      Meet it is for us to give.
    Help, ye bright angelic spirits,
      Bring your sweetest, noblest lays;
    Help to sing our Savior’s merits,
      Help to chant Immanuel’s praise.

                        John Bakewell, 1757; Stanza 3 by M. Toplady, 1776.


243

                                                                        7s

    Hail the day that sees Him rise,
    To His throne above the skies!
    Christ, the Lamb for sinners given,
    Reascends His native heaven.

    2. There the glorious triumph waits:
    Lift your heads, eternal gates;
    He hath conquered death and sin;
    Take the King of Glory in!

    3. Him though highest heaven receives,
    Still He loves the earth He leaves;
    Though returning to His throne,
    Still He calls mankind His own.

    4. See, He lifts His hands above;
    See, He shows the prints of love.
    Hark! His gracious lips bestow
    Blessings on His Church below.

    5. Still for us His death He pleads;
    Prevalent, He intercedes;
    Near Himself prepares our place,
    Harbinger of human race.

    6. There we shall with Thee remain
    Partners of Thy endless reign;
    There Thy face unclouded see,
    Find our heaven of heavens in Thee.

                                                     Charles Wesley, 1739.


244

                                                  6, 6, 6, 6, 8, 8 (H. M.)

    Jesus, my great High Priest,
      Offered His blood and died;
    My guilty conscience seeks
      No sacrifice beside.
    His powerful blood did once atone,
    And now it pleads before the throne.

    2. To this dear Surety’s hand
      Will I commit my cause;
    He answers and fulfils
      His Father’s broken laws.
    Behold my soul at freedom set;
    My Surety paid the dreadful debt.

    3. My Advocate appears
      For my defense on high;
    The Father bows His ears
      And lays His thunder by.
    Not all that hell or sin can say
    Shall turn His heart, His love, away.

    4. Should all the hosts of death
      And powers of hell unknown
    Put their most dreadful forms
      Of rage and mischief on,
    I shall be safe, for Christ displays
    Superior power and guardian grace.

                                                        Isaac Watts, 1709.


245

                                                                     C. M.

    I know that my Redeemer lives
      And ever prays for me;
    A token of His love He gives,
      A pledge of liberty.

    2. I find Him lifting up my head;
      He brings salvation near;
    His presence makes me free indeed,
      And He will soon appear.

    3. He wills that I should holy be;
      What can withstand His will?
    The counsel of His grace in me
      He surely shall fulfil.

    4. Jesus, I hang upon Thy word:
      I steadfastly believe
    Thou wilt return and claim me, Lord,
      And to Thyself receive.

    5. When God is mine and I am His,
      Of Paradise possest,
    I taste unutterable bliss
      And everlasting rest.

                                                Charles Wesley, 1742, abr.




PENTECOST.


246

                                                          8, 7, 8, 7, 7, 7

    Come, O come, Thou quickening Spirit,
      God from all eternity!
    Let us Thy blest grace inherit
      And our souls be filled with Thee;
    Then shall spirit, life, and light
    Drive away our inner night.

    2. Grant our hearts Thy heavenly treasure:
      Wisdom, counsel, purity,
    That in naught we may take pleasure
      Save in that which pleaseth Thee.
    Let Thy knowledge spread and grow,
    Working error’s overthrow.

    3. Lead us to our soul’s salvation,
      Keep us in the paths of grace,
    Shield us from the world’s temptation
      That might foil us in the race;
    When we stumble, hear our call,
    Work repentance for our fall.

    4. Let us trust Thy witness wholly
      That we children are of God
    Who rely upon Him solely
      When they pass beneath the rod;
    For the Father’s chastenings
    Bless above all earthly things.

    5. Prompt us e’er to come before Him
      Joyously with hope in view;
    Sigh in us when we implore Him,
      Ever plead for us anew;
    Then our prayer shall not be vain,
    And our faith new strength shall gain.

    6. If our soul for comfort languish
      And despondency grow strong,
    That the heart must cry in anguish:
      “O my God, my God, how long!”
    Comfort then the aching breast,
    Grant us courage, patience, rest.

    7. Mighty Spirit of reliance,
      Sure Defense in all our need,
    When the foe bids us defiance,
      Bid Thy work in us Godspeed!
    Grant us weapons for the strife
    And with victory crown our life.

    8. Guard, O God, our faith forever;
      Let not Satan, death, or shame
    Ever part us from our Savior;
      Lord, our Refuge is Thy name.
    Though our flesh would fain say Nay,
    Be Thy Word to us still Yea.

    9. And when death life’s thread is rending,
      Then assure us yet the more,
    As the heirs of life unending,
      Of the glory there in store
    Which can never be exprest,
    But with which we shall be blest.

                                                          H. Held, † 1659.


247

                                              8, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7, 4, 8, 4, 8

    O Holy Spirit, enter in,
    And in our hearts Thy work begin,
      Thy temple deign to make us;
    Sun of the soul, Thou Light Divine,
    Around and in us brightly shine,
      To joy and gladness wake us.
    That we To Thee
    Truly living, To Thee giving
    Prayer unceasing,
    May in love be still increasing.

    2. Give to Thy Word impressive power
    That in our hearts, from this good hour,
      As fire it may be glowing;
    That we confess the Father, Son,
    And Thee, the Spirit, Three in One,
      Thy glory ever showing.
    O stay And sway
    Our souls ever That they never
    May forsake Thee,
    But by faith their refuge make Thee.

    3. Thou Fountain, whence all wisdom flows
    Which God on pious hearts bestows,
      Grant us Thy consolation
    That in our pure faith’s unity
    We faithful witnesses may be
      Of grace that brings salvation.
    Hear us, Cheer us
    By Thy teaching; Let our preaching
    And our labor
    Praise Thee, Lord, and bless our neighbor.

    4. Left to ourselves, we shall but stray;
    O lead us on the narrow way,
      With wisest counsel guide us
    And give us steadfastness that we
    May ever faithful prove to Thee
      Whatever woes betide us.
    Lord, now Heal Thou
    All hearts broken And betoken
    Thou art near us,
    Whom we trust to light and cheer us.

    3. Thy heavenly strength sustain our heart
    That we may act the valiant part
      With Thee as our Reliance;
    Be Thou our Refuge and our Shield
    That we may never quit the field,
      But stand in bold defiance.
    Descend, Defend
    From all errors And earth’s terrors;
    Thy salvation
    Be our constant consolation.

    6. O mighty Rock, O Source of Life,
    Let Thy dear Word, mid doubt and strife,
      Be so within us burning
    That we be faithful unto death,
    In Thy pure love and holy faith,
      From Thee true wisdom learning.
    Thy grace And peace
    On us shower; By Thy power
    Christ confessing,
    Let us win our Savior’s blessing.

    7. O gentle Dew, from heaven now fall
    With power upon the hearts of all,
      Thy tender love instilling,
    That heart to heart more closely bound,
    In kindly deeds be fruitful found,
      The law of love fulfilling;
    Then, Lord, Discord
    Shall not grieve Thee; We receive Thee;
    Where Thou livest,
    Peace and love and joy Thou givest.

    8. Grant that our days, while life shall last,
    In purest holiness be passed,
      Be Thou our Strength forever;
    Grant that our hearts henceforth be free
    From sinful lust and vanity,
      Which us from Thee must sever.
    Keep Thou Pure now
    From offenses Heart and senses.
    Blessed Spirit,
    Let us heavenly life inherit.

                          Michael Schirmer, 1640; Stanza 2 anon., c. 1660.


248

                                                    8, 7, 8, 7, 7, 7, 8, 8

    Send, O God, a gentle shower,
      For my heart is dry as sand;
    Father, bathe Thy drooping flower,
      Water Thou Thy thirsty land;
    Let Thy Holy Spirit’s boon
    O’er me from Thy heavenly throne
    Like abundant streams be flowing,
    Blessings on my heart bestowing.

    2. By a human father, even
      Though he is by sin defiled,
    Only good gifts will be given
      Unto a beloved child;
    How much more dost Thou the same,
    For “Good Father” is Thy name!
    Thou wilt send to me Thy Spirit;
    Thy good gifts I shall inherit.

    3. Jesus, who for my salvation
      To the Father didst ascend.
    Hear my earnest supplication,
      Unto me Thy Spirit send;
    Let the Comforter for aye
    Bide with me, my Strength and Stay,
    That in faith I may not waver,
    Steadfast in the truth forever.

    4. Holy Ghost, Strength of the simple,
      O make Thine abode with me,
    Let me ever be Thy temple;
      Cheerfully I welcome Thee.
    Do Thou purify my heart,
    Cast out all things that might part
    Me from those sweet joys of heaven
    Which by Thee to faith are given.

    5. With Thy gifts my heart endowing,
      Make it new and clean and fair;
    Let in true love it be glowing,
      Living in Thy grace fore’er;
    Give me courage bold and good,
    Sanctify my flesh and blood,
    Let me, trusting in Christ’s merit,
    Worship God in truth and spirit.

    6. Thus myself I will deliver,
      Lord, to Thee; my soul shall strive
    Only after heaven forever
      Until there I shall arrive
    Where the Father and the Son
    And Thyself in heaven’s high throne
    I shall praise and all Thy treasures
    In angelic, heavenly measures.

                                           M. Kraemer, 1683; A. Crull, tr.


249

                                                                8, 8, 8, 7

    Come, God, Creator, Holy Ghost,
      And visit Thou the souls of men;
    Fill them with graces, as Thou dost,
      Thy creatures make pure again.

    2. For Comforter Thy name we call,
      Sweet Gift of God most high above,
    A holy Unction to us all,
      A living Fount, Fire, and Love.

    3. Our minds enlighten and refresh,
      Deep in our hearts let love burn bright;
    Thou know’st the weakness of our flesh;
      O strengthen us with Thy might.

    4. Thou with Thy wondrous sevenfold gifts,
      The Finger art of God’s right hand;
    The Father’s Word Thou sendest swift
      On tongues of fire to each land.

    5. Drive far from us our wily foe,
      Grant us Thy blessed peace within,
    That in Thy footsteps we may go
      And shun the dark ways of sin.

    6. Teach us to know the Father well
      And Jesus Christ, His Son, our Lord,
    That in our hearts true faith may dwell,
      Spirit of both, aye adored!

    7. To God the Father, God the Son,
      Who from the dead is risen again,
    And God the Spirit, Three in One,
      Be evermore praise. Amen.

             From the Latin _Veni, Creator Spiritus_, Martin Luther, 1524;
                                                      L. W. Bacon, tr., a.


250

                                                                     L. M.

    Spirit of mercy, truth, and love,
    O shed Thine influence from above
    And still from age to age convey
    The wonders of this sacred day.

    2. In every clime, by every tongue,
    Be God’s surpassing glory sung;
    Let all the listening earth be taught
    The wonders by our Savior wrought.

    3. Unfailing Comfort, heavenly Guide,
    Still o’er Thy holy Church preside;
    Still let mankind Thy blessings prove,
    Spirit of mercy, truth, and love.

                                                              Anon., 1774.


251

                                                                     L. M.

    O Holy Ghost, eternal God,
    Blest Comfort for life’s rugged road,
    With all my heart I pray to Thee;
    Hear my entreaty graciously.

    2. O Lord, be Thou my Comforter
    Lest in my sins I might despair;
    Protect me from the snares of hell,
    Grant that in Jesus Christ I dwell;

    3. That always I may ready be
    To serve this Master faithfully
    And own Him in true living faith
    My Lord and Savior unto death.

    4. O lead me in the narrow way
    And from the fold let me not stray,
    That when this mortal frame I leave,
    The crown of life I may receive.

                                          B. Helder, † 1635; A. Crull, tr.


252

                                                    7, 6, 7, 6, 6, 7, 7, 6

    O enter, Lord, Thy temple,
      Be Thou my spirit’s Guest,
    Who gavest me, the earth-born,
      A second birth more blest.
    Thou in the Godhead, Lord,
      Though here to dwell Thou deignest,
      Forever equal reignest,
    Art equally adored.

    2. O enter, let me know Thee
      And feel Thy power within,
    The power that breaks our fetters
      And rescues us from sin;
    So wash and cleanse Thou me
      That I may serve Thee truly
      And render honor duly
    With perfect heart to Thee.

    3. An olive wild by nature
      Thou graftedst me anew;
    Death preyed upon my vitals
      And claimed me as his due:
    But Christ’s atoning blood,
      In death true comfort granting,
      Drowned death with all his vaunting,
    In His baptismal flood.

    4. Thou art, O Holy Spirit,
      The true anointing Oil,
    Through which are consecrated
      Soul, body, ease, and toil
    To Christ, whose guardian wings,
      Where’er their lot appointed,
      Protect His own anointed,
    His prophets, priests, and kings.

    5. ’Tis Thou, O Spirit, teachest
      The soul to pray aright;
    Thy songs have sweetest music,
      Thy prayers have wondrous might;
    Unheard they cannot fall,
      They pierce the highest heaven,
      Till He His help hath given
    Who surely helpeth all.

    6. Joy is Thy gift, O Spirit,
      Thou wouldst not have us pine;
    In darkest hours Thy comfort
      Doth aye most brightly shine;
    And oh, how oft Thy voice
      Hath shed its sweetness o’er me
      And opened heaven before me
    And bid my heart rejoice!

    7. All love is Thine, O Spirit;
      Thou hatest enmity;
    Thou lovest peace and friendship,
      All strife wouldst have us flee;
    Where wrath and discord reign,
      Thy whisper inly pleadeth
      And to the heart that heedeth
    Brings love and light again.

    8. The whole wide world, O Spirit,
      Upon Thy hands doth rest;
    Our wayward hearts Thou turnest
      As it may seem Thee best;
    Once more Thy power make known,
      As Thou hast done so often,
      Convert the wicked, soften
    Thou all the hearts of stone.

    9. O Holy Spirit, hear us
      And make our sorrow cease;
    Thy scattered flock restore now
      To union, joy, and peace;
    Bid flourish once again
      The lands by men forsaken,
      The churches spoiled and shaken
    By war’s unhallowed train.

    10. On those that rule our country,
      Oh! shower Thy blessings down
    And in Thy loving-kindness
      Adorn, as with a crown,
    With piety our youth,
      With godliness our nation,
      That all, to gain salvation,
    May know Thy heavenly truth.

    11. With holy zeal then fill us
      To keep the faith still pure;
    And bless our lands and houses
      With wealth that may endure;
    And make the Foe to flee,
      Who in us with Thee striveth,
      From out our heart he driveth
    Whate’er delighteth Thee.

    12. Grant steadfastness and courage
      That bravely we contend
    Against the wiles of Satan;
      O Lord, Thy flock defend!
    Help us to battle well,
      To triumph o’er the devil,
      To overcome the evil
    And all the powers of hell.

    13. Direct our paths in all things
      According to Thy mind,
    And when this life is over
      And all must be resigned,
    O grant us then to die
      With calm and fearless spirit
      And after death inherit
    Eternal life on high.

                                                      Paul Gerhardt, 1653.


253

                                                                        7s

    Gracious Spirit, Dove Divine,
    Let Thy light within me shine;
    All my guilty fears remove,
    Fill me with Thy heavenly love.

    2. Speak Thy pardoning grace to me,
    Set the burdened sinner free;
    Lead me to the Lamb of God,
    Wash me in His precious blood.

    3. Life and peace to me impart;
    Seal salvation on my heart;
    Dwell Thyself within my breast,
    Earnest of eternal rest.

    4. Let me never from Thee stray,
    Keep me in the narrow way;
    Fill my soul with joy divine;
    Keep me, Lord, forever Thine.

                                                    John Stocker, 1777, a.


254

                                                          8, 6, 8, 6, 8, 8

    Let songs of praises fill the sky:
      Christ, our ascended Lord,
    Sends down His Spirit from on high
      According to His word:
    All hail the day of Pentecost,
    The coming of the Holy Ghost!

    2. The Spirit by His heavenly breath
      Creates new life within;
    He quickens sinners from the death
      Of trespasses and sin:
    All hail the day of Pentecost,
    The coming of the Holy Ghost!

    3. The things of Christ the Spirit takes
      And shows them unto men;
    The fallen soul His temple makes;
      God’s image stamps again:
    All hail the day of Pentecost,
    The coming of the Holy Ghost!

    4. Come, Holy Spirit, from above
      With Thy celestial fire;
    Come and with flames of zeal and love
      Our hearts and tongues inspire!
    Be this our day of Pentecost,
    The coming of the Holy Ghost!

                                                   Thomas Cotterill, 1819.


255

                                                                     C. M.

    Come, Holy Spirit, heavenly Dove,
      With all Thy quickening powers;
    Kindle a flame of sacred love
      In these cold hearts of ours.

    2. See how we grovel here below,
      Fond of these earthly toys;
    Our souls, how heavily they go
      To reach eternal joys!

    3. In vain we tune our formal songs,
      In vain we strive to rise;
    Hosannas languish on our tongues,
      And our devotion dies.

    4. Dear Lord, and shall we ever live
      At this poor, dying rate—
    Our love so cold, so faint to Thee,
      And Thine to us so great?

    5. Come, Holy Spirit, heavenly Dove,
      With all Thy quickening powers,
    Come, shed abroad a Savior’s love,
      And that shall kindle ours.

                                                        Isaac Watts, 1709.


256

                                                                6, 5, 6, 5

    Holy Spirit, hear us
      On this sacred day;
    Come to us with blessing,
      Come with us to stay.

    2. Come as once Thou camest
      To the faithful few,
    Patiently awaiting
      Jesus’ promise true.

    3. Up to heaven ascending,
      Our dear Lord has gone;
    Yet His little children
      Leaves He not alone.

    4. To His blessed promise
      Now in faith we cling.
    Comforter, most holy!
      Spread o’er us Thy wing.

    5. Lighten Thou our darkness,
      Be Thyself our Light;
    Strengthen Thou our weakness,
      Spirit of all might.

    6. Spirit of adoption,
      Make us overflow
    With Thy sevenfold blessing
      And in grace to grow.

    7. Into Christ baptizèd
      Grant that we may be,
    Day and night, dear Spirit,
      Perfected by Thee!

                                       J. Mohr, 1818; C. F. Hernamann, tr.


257

                                                 7, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 9, 9, 8

    Come, Holy Ghost, God and Lord!
    Be all Thy graces now outpoured
    On each believer’s mind and heart;
    Thy fervent love to them impart.
    Lord, by the brightness of Thy light
    Thou in the faith dost men unite
    Of every tongue and every nation;
    We, therefore, sing with exultation:
        Hallelujah! Hallelujah!

    2. Thou holy Light, Guide Divine,
    O cause the Word of Life to shine;
    Teach us to know our God aright
    And call Him Father with delight.
    From error, Lord, our souls defend
    That they on Christ alone attend,
    In Him with living faith abiding,
    In Him with all their might confiding.
        Hallelujah! Hallelujah!

    3. Thou holy Fire, Source of rest,
    Grant that, with joy and hope possest,
    We always in Thy service stay
    And trouble drive us not away.
    Lord, by Thy power prepare each heart,
    To our weak nature strength impart
    That firmly here we be contending,
    Through life and death to Thee ascending.
        Hallelujah! Hallelujah!

              From the Latin _Veni, Sancte Spiritus_; Martin Luther, 1524.


258

                                                                     S. M.

    Come, Holy Spirit, come!
      Let Thy bright beams arise;
    Dispel the sorrow from our minds,
      The darkness from our eyes.

    2. Revive our drooping faith,
      Our doubts and fears remove,
    And kindle in our breasts the flame
      Of never-dying love.

    3. Convince us of our sin,
      Then lead to Jesus’ blood,
    And to our wondering view reveal
      The mercies of our God.

    4. ’Tis Thine to cleanse the heart,
      To sanctify the soul,
    To pour fresh life on every part,
      And new-create the whole.

    5. Dwell, therefore, in our hearts;
      Our minds from bondage free;
    Then shall we know and praise and love
      The Father, Son, and Thee.

                                                        Joseph Hart, 1759.


259

                                                                        7s

    Holy Ghost, with light divine
    Shine upon this heart of mine;
    Chase the shades of night away,
    Turn the darkness into day.

    2. Let me see my Savior’s face,
    Let me all His beauties trace;
    Show those glorious truths to me
    Which are only known to Thee.

    3. Holy Ghost, with power divine
    Cleanse this guilty heart of mine;
    In Thy mercy pity me,
    From sin’s bondage set me free.

    4. Holy Ghost, with joy divine
    Cheer this saddened heart of mine;
    Yield a sacred, settled peace,
    Let it grow and still increase.

    5. Holy Spirit, all divine,
    Dwell within this heart of mine;
    Cast down every idol-throne,
    Reign supreme and reign alone.

    6. See, to Thee I yield my heart,
    Shed Thy life through every part;
    A pure temple I would be,
    Wholly dedicate to Thee.

                                                        Andrew Reed, 1817.


260

                                                           9, 9, 11, 10, 4

    Now do we pray God the Holy Ghost
    For the true faith which we need the most
    And that He defend us when life is ending
    And from exile home we shall be wending.
      Lord, have mercy!

    2. Shine in our hearts, O most precious Light,
    That we Jesus Christ may know aright,
    Clinging to our Savior, whose blood has bought us,
    Who again to our true home has brought us.
      Lord, have mercy!

    3. Thou sweetest Love, grace on us bestow,
    Set our hearts with heavenly fire aglow,
    That with hearts united we love each other,
    Of one mind, in peace with every brother.
      Lord, have mercy!

    4. Thou highest Comfort in every need!
    Grant that neither shame nor death we heed,
    That e’en then our courage may never fail us
    When at last th’ Accuser shall assail us.
      Lord, have mercy!

                              Martin Luther, 1524; Stanza 1, 13th century.




TRINITY.


261

                                                       8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7

    All glory be to God on high,
      Who hath our race befriended!
    To us no harm shall now come nigh,
      The strife at last is ended;
    God showeth His good will to men,
    And peace shall reign on earth again;
      O thank Him for His goodness!

    2. We praise, we worship Thee, we trust,
      And give Thee thanks forever,
    O Father, that Thy rule is just
      And wise and changes never.
    Thy boundless power o’er all things reigns,
    Done is whate’er Thy will ordains:
      Well for us that Thou rulest!

    3. O Jesus Christ, Thou only Son
      Of God, Thy heavenly Father,
    Who didst for all our sins atone
      And the lost sheep dost gather:
    Thou Lamb of God, to Thee on high,
    From out our depths, we sinners cry,
      Have mercy on us, Jesus!

    4. O Holy Ghost, Thou precious Gift,
      Thou Comforter unfailing,
    O’er Satan’s snares our souls uplift
      And let Thy power availing
    Avert our woes and calm our dread;
    For us the Savior’s blood was shed,
      We trust in Thee to save us.

                                    N. Decius, 1526; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


262

                                                       6, 6, 4, 6, 6, 6, 4

    Come, Thou almighty King,
    Help us Thy name to sing,
      Help us to praise!
    Father all glorious,
    O’er all victorious,
    Come and reign over us,
      Ancient of Days.

    2. Jesus, our Lord, arise,
    Scatter our enemies,
      And make them fall.
    Let Thine almighty aid
    Our sure defense be made;
    Our souls on Thee be stayed;
      Lord, hear our call!

    3. Come, Thou incarnate Word,
    Gird on Thy mighty sword,
      Our prayer attend;
    Come and Thy people bless
    And give Thy Word success;
    Spirit of Holiness,
      On us descend.

    4. Come, holy Comforter,
    Thy sacred witness bear
      In this glad hour.
    Thou, who almighty art,
    Now rule in every heart,
    And ne’er from us depart,
      Spirit of Power!

    5. To the great One in Three
    The highest praises be,
      Hence, evermore!
    His sovereign majesty
    May we in glory see
    And to eternity
      Love and adore!

                                                     Charles Wesley, 1757.


263

                                                            11, 12, 12, 10

    Holy, holy, holy! Lord God Almighty!
      Early in the morning our song shall rise to Thee;
    Holy, holy, holy! merciful and mighty!
      God in Three Persons, blessed Trinity!

    2. Holy, holy, holy! All the saints adore Thee,
      Casting down their golden crowns around the glassy sea,
    Cherubim and seraphim falling down before Thee,
      Which wert and art and evermore shalt be.

    3. Holy, holy, holy! Though the darkness hide Thee,
      Though the eye of sinful man Thy glory may not see,
    Only Thou art holy; there is none beside Thee,
      Perfect in power, in love, and purity.

    4. Holy, holy, holy! Lord God Almighty!
      All Thy works shall praise Thy name in earth and sky and sea;
    Holy, holy, holy! merciful and mighty!
      God in Three Persons, blessed Trinity!

                                                     Reginald Heber, 1827.


264

                                                 8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 7, 7

    The mystery hidden from the eyes
      Of learned men and sages,
    God hath revealed us from the skies,
      In Scripture’s holy pages,
    That He alone is King above
      All other gods whatever,
    Great, mighty, faithful, full of love,
      His people’s Shield and Savior;
    One Essence, but Three Persons.

    2. As Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
      The righteous seed adore Him;
    So named, so praised, He is the boast
      Of all who bow before Him;
    He’s Abraham’s and Isaac’s God,
      And Jacob’s, whom He knoweth,
    The Lord of hosts, who every good,
      Both night and day, bestoweth;
    Who only worketh wonders.

    3. The Father hath the Son begot,
      First-born of every creature;
    The Son took our weak flesh, but not
      Our sinfulness of nature;
    Both from the Father and the Son
      The Holy Ghost proceedeth
    From all eternity; yet none
      In might and power exceedeth;
    All equal, coeternal.

    4. Be glad, my heart, thy Portion see,
      Thy priceless Pearl and Treasure!
    He is thy Friend, supply will He
      Thy needs with bounteous measure;
    He made thee in His image, was
      For thy offenses smitten,
    With true faith fill thee, through His grace
      Doth all thy crosses sweeten
    With His dear word of promise.

    5. Rise, then, to Him, the Ever-blest,
      And learn to know Him rightly;
    Such knowledge can alone bring rest
      And make thy soul burn brightly
    With the pure flame of holy love,
      Which cheers thy course to heaven;
    For God will show thee things above
      Which here ’tis only given
    To hear of and see darkly.

    6. But woe to the ungodly race,
      In wilful blindness living,
    Rejecting God and His dear grace,
      Their hearts to creatures giving.
    On them, alas! hell’s dreadful gates
      Ere long will close forever;
    For him who God rejects and hates
      God will reject and sever
    From His eternal kingdom.

    7. O Prince of Might, Thy mercy show,
      Thou God of earth and heaven;
    To every sinner here below
      Thy saving grace be given!
    Bring back Thy sheep that go astray
      And blinded eyes enlighten,
    And turn Thou everything away
      That wickedly might frighten
    Thine own, whose faith is feeble.

    8. Grant this, that we, Thy people, may
      All reach the heavenly portals
    And in Thy kingdom sing for aye
      Mid all the blest immortals:
    That Thou, O Lord, art King alone,
      Above all gods whatever,
    The Father, Son, and Spirit, One,
      Thy people’s Shield and Savior,
    One Essence, but Three Persons!

                                                      Paul Gerhardt, 1666.


265

                                                                8, 8, 8, 6

    God of my life, Thy boundless grace
      Chose, pardoned, and adopted me;
    My Rest, my Home, my Dwelling-place:
      Father, I come to Thee.

    2. Jesus, my Hope, my Rock, my Shield,
      Whose precious blood was shed for me,
    Into Thy hands my soul I yield:
      Savior, I come to Thee.

    3. Spirit of glory and of God,
      Long hast Thou deigned my Guide to be;
    Now be Thy comfort sweet bestowed:
      My God, I come to Thee.

    4. I come to join that countless host
      Who praise Thy name unceasingly;
    Blest Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
      My God, I come to Thee.

                                                  Charlotte Elliott, 1841.


266

                                                                     L. M.

    Thou who art Three in unity,
    True God from all eternity,
    The sun is fading from our sight,
    Shine Thou on us with heavenly light.

    2. We praise Thee with the dawning day,
    To Thee at even also pray;
    With our poor song we worship Thee
    Now, ever, and eternally.

    3. Let God the Father be adored,
    And God the Son, the only Lord,
    And God the Holy Spirit be
    Adored throughout eternity!

            From the Latin of St. Ambrose; M. Luther, 1543; R. Massie, tr.


267

                                                                     C. M.

    Father of glory, to Thy name
      Immortal praise we give,
    Who dost an act of grace proclaim
      And bid us rebels live.

    2. Immortal honor to the Son,
      Who makes Thine anger cease;
    Our lives He ransomed with His own
      And died to make our peace.

    3. To Thine almighty Spirit be
      Immortal glory given,
    Whose teachings bring us near to Thee
      And train us up for heaven.

    4. Let men with their united voice
      Adore th’ eternal God
    And spread His honors and their joys
      Through nations far abroad.

    5. Let faith and love and duty join
      One grateful song to raise;
    Let saints in earth and heaven combine
      In harmony and praise.

                                                     Isaac Watts, c. 1721.


268

                                                          8, 7, 8, 7, 4, 7

    Glory be to God the Father,
      Glory be to God the Son,
    Glory be to God the Spirit;
      Great Jehovah, Three in One!
        Glory, glory,
      While eternal ages run!

    2. Glory be to Him who loved us,
      Washed us from each spot and stain;
    Glory be to Him who bought us,
      Made us kings with Him to reign!
        Glory, glory,
      To the Lamb that once was slain!

    3. Glory to the King of angels,
      Glory to the Church’s King,
    Glory to the King of nations;
      Heaven and earth, your praises bring!
        Glory, glory,
      To the King of Glory bring!

    4. Glory, blessing, praise eternal!
      Thus the choir of angels sings;
    Honor, riches, power, dominion!
      Thus its praise creation brings;
        Glory, glory,
      Glory to the King of kings!

                                                           H. Bonar, 1866.


269

                                                                     L. M.

    Father of heav’n, whose love profound
    A ransom for our souls has found,
    Before Thy throne we sinners bend;
    To us Thy pardoning love extend.

    2. Almighty Son, Incarnate Word,
    Our Prophet, Priest, Redeemer, Lord,
    Before Thy throne we sinners bend;
    To us Thy saving grace extend.

    3. Eternal Spirit, by whose breath
    The soul is raised from sin and death,
    Before Thy throne we sinners bend;
    To us Thy quickening power extend.

    4. Jehovah, Father, Spirit, Son,
    Eternal Godhead, Three in One,
    Before Thy throne we sinners bend;
    Grace, pardon, life, to us extend.

                                                          E. Cooper, 1805.


270

                                                                     S. M.

    Father, in whom we live,
      In whom we are and move,
    All glory, power, and praise receive
      For Thy creating love.

    2. O Thou Incarnate Word,
      Let all Thy ransomed race
    Unite in thanks, with one accord,
      For Thy redeeming grace.

    3. Spirit of Holiness,
      Let all Thy saints adore
    Thy sacred gifts and join to bless
      Thy heart-renewing power.

    4. Eternal Triune Lord,
      Let all the hosts above,
    Let all the sons of men record,
      And dwell upon, Thy love.

                                                     Charles Wesley, 1746.


271

                                                                   7s 14 l

    God the Father, be our Stay
      When hell’s dread powers assail us;
    Cleanse us from our sins, we pray,
      Nor in our last hour fail us.
        Keep us from the Evil One,
    Firm in the faith abiding,
    In Christ, our Savior, hiding,
    And heartily confiding.
      Let us put God’s armor on:
    With all true Christians running
    Our heavenly race and shunning
    The devil’s wiles and cunning.
      Amen, Amen, this be done,
    So sing we, Hallelujah!

    2. Jesus Christ, be Thou our Stay
      When hell’s dread powers assail us;
    Cleanse us from our sins, we pray,
      Nor in our last hour fail us.
        Keep us from the Evil One,
    Firm in the faith abiding,
    In Christ, our Savior, hiding,
    And heartily confiding.
      Let us put God’s armor on:
    With all true Christians running
    Our heavenly race and shunning
    The devil’s wiles and cunning.
      Amen, Amen, this be done,
    So sing we, Hallelujah!

    3. Holy Ghost, be Thou our Stay
      When hell’s dread powers assail us;
    Cleanse us from our sins, we pray,
      Nor in our last hour fail us.
        Keep us from the Evil One,
    Firm in the faith abiding,
    In Christ, our Savior, hiding,
    And heartily confiding.
      Let us put God’s armor on:
    With all true Christians running
    Our heavenly race and shunning
    The devil’s wiles and cunning.
      Amen, Amen, this be done,
    So sing we, Hallelujah!

                   Adapted by Martin Luther, 1524, from 15th Cent. Litany.


272

                                                    6, 7, 6, 7, 6, 6, 6, 6

    The Lord, my God, be praised,
      My Light, my Life from heaven;
    My Maker, who to me
      Hath soul and body given;
    My Father, who protects
      My life from infancy
    And mighty gifts of love
      Hath e’er bestowed on me.

    2. The Lord, my God, be praised,
      My Trust, my Life from heaven,
    The Father’s own dear Son,
      Whose life for me was given;
    Who thus atoned for me
      With His most precious blood;
    Who giveth to my faith
      The greatest heavenly good.

    3. The Lord, my God, be praised,
      My Hope, my Life from heaven,
    The Father’s Spirit, whom
      The Son to me hath given;
    He who revives my heart
      And gives me strength and power,
    Help, comfort, and support
      In sorrow’s gloomy hour.

    4. The Lord, my God, be praised,
      He who forever liveth,
    To whom the heavenly host
      E’er praise and honor giveth.
    The Lord, my God, be praised,
      In whose great name I boast,
    God Father, God the Son,
      And God the Holy Ghost.

    5. To Him we now sing praise,
      With joy our offering bringing
    And with the angel host
      The “Holy! Holy!” singing.
    To Him all Christendom
      Sings praises joyfully;
    The Lord, my God, be praised
      Throughout eternity!

                                          J. Olearius, 1671; A. Crull, tr.




REFORMATION.


273

                                                 8, 7, 8, 7, 5, 5, 5, 6, 7

    A Mighty Fortress is our God,
      A trusty Shield and Weapon;
    He helps us free from every need
      That hath us now o’ertaken.
    The old evil Foe
    Now means deadly woe;
    Deep guile and great might
    Are his dread arms in fight,
      On earth is not his equal.

    2. With might of ours can naught be done,
      Soon were our loss effected;
    But for us fights the Valiant One,
      Whom God Himself elected.
    Ask ye, Who is this?
    Jesus Christ it is,
    Of Sabaoth Lord,
    And there’s none other God,
      He holds the field forever.

    3. Though devils all the world should fill,
      All eager to devour us,
    We tremble not, we fear no ill,
      They shall not overpower us.
    This world’s prince may still
    Scowl fierce as he will,
    He can harm us none,
    He’s judged; the deed is done;
      One little word can fell him.

    4. The Word they still shall let remain
      And not a thank have for it;
    He’s by our side upon the plain
      With His good gifts and Spirit.
    And take they our life,
    Goods, fame, child, and wife:
    Let these all be gone,
    They yet have nothing won;
      The Kingdom ours remaineth.

                                                      Martin Luther, 1527.


274

                                                                     L. M.

    Lord, keep us in Thy Word and work,
    Restrain the murderous Pope and Turk,
    Who fain would tear from off Thy throne
    Christ Jesus, Thy beloved Son.

    2. Lord Jesus Christ, Thy power make known,
    For Thou art Lord of lords alone;
    Shield Thy poor Christendom that we
    May evermore sing praise to Thee.

    3. Thou Comforter of priceless worth,
    Give one mind to Thy flock on earth,
    Stand by us in our final strife,
    And lead us out of death to life.

    4. Destroy their counsels, Lord, our God,
    And smite them with an iron rod,
    And let them fall into the snare
    Which for Thy Christians they prepare,

    5. So that at last they may perceive
    That, Lord, our God, Thou still dost live
    And dost deliver mightily
    All those who put their trust in Thee.

                     Martin Luther, 1541; Stanzas 4 and 5, J. Jonas, 1544.


275

                                                                     L. M.

    Thine honor rescue, Christ, our Lord!
    Hear Zion’s sighs and help afford;
    Destroy the wiles of mighty foes,
    Who now Thy Word and truth oppose.

    2. Their craft and vaunting pomp is great;
    High beat their hearts, with power elate;
    Our dearest hopes they but deride,
    They deem us nothing in their pride.

    3. Forgive, O Lord, our sins forgive,
    Grant us Thy grace and let us live;
    Convince Thy foes throughout the land
    That godless counsels shall not stand.

    4. Preserve Thy little flock in peace,
    Nor let Thy boundless mercy cease;
    Let it to all the world appear
    That Thy true Church indeed is here.

    5. That Thou art with us loud proclaim,
    Who put’st our enemies to shame,
    Dost all their haughtiness suppress
    And help Thine own in their distress.

                                        J. Heermann, 1630; M. Loy, tr., a.


276

                                                          8, 8, 6, 8, 8, 6

    Fear not, O little flock, the Foe
    Who madly seeks your overthrow;
      Dread not his rage and power:
    What though your courage sometimes faints,
    His seeming triumph o’er God’s saints
      Lasts but a little hour.

    2. Be of good cheer; your cause belongs
    To Him who can avenge your wrongs;
      Leave it to Him, our Lord.
    Though hidden yet from mortal eyes,
    His Gideon shall for you arise,
      Uphold you and His Word.

    3. As true as God’s own Word is true,
    Not earth nor hell with all their crew
      Against us shall prevail.
    A jest and byword are they grown;
    God is with us, we are His own;
      Our victory cannot fail.

    4. Amen, Lord Jesus, grant our prayer!
    Great Captain, now Thine arm make bare,
      Fight for us once again!
    So shall Thy saints and martyrs raise
    A mighty chorus to Thy praise,
      World without end. Amen.

                      J. M. Altenburg, † 1640; C. Winkworth, tr., 1855, a.


277

                                                       8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7

    The mouth of fools doth God confess,
      But while their lips draw nigh Him,
    Their heart is full of wickedness,
      And all their deeds deny Him.
    Corrupt are they, and every one
    Abominable works hath done;
      There is not one well-doer.

    2. The Lord looked from His heavenly throne
      On all mankind below Him
    To see if there were any one
      Who truly sought to know Him,
    And all his understanding bent
    To search His holy Word, intent
      To do His will in earnest.

    3. But none there was who walked with God,
      For all aside had slidden,
    Delusive paths of folly trod,
      And followed lusts forbidden;
    Not one there was who practised good,
    Though many deemed, in haughty mood,
      Their deeds to God were pleasing.

    4. “How long, by folly blindly led,
      Will they oppress the needy
    And My own flock devour like bread?”
      So fierce are they and greedy!
    In God they put no trust at all,
    Nor on His name in trouble call,
      But be their own providers.

    5. Therefore their heart is never still,
      A constant fear dismays them,
    God is with him who doth His will,
      Who trusts Him and obeys Him;
    Ye shame the counsel of the poor
    And mock him when he doth assure
      That God is e’er his Refuge.

    6. Who shall to Israel’s outcast race
      From Zion bring salvation?
    God will Himself at length show grace
      And loose the captive nation;
    That will He do by Christ, their King;
    Let Jacob then be glad and sing
      And Israel be joyful.

                               Ps. 14. Martin Luther, 1524; R. Massie, tr.


278

                                                       8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7

    O God, from heaven look down and see,
      A sight which well may move Thee:
    Of godly men, how few there be;
      Forsaken we who love Thee!
    Withheld is Thy pure Word, the light
    Of faith itself extinguished quite
      In all the sons of Adam.

    2. Fictions they teach with cunning art
      And lies of man’s invention;
    Not grounded on God’s Word, their heart
      Breeds naught but strange dissension;
    One chooses this, another that,
    Untold division they create
      Though saintlike in appearance.

    3. May God root out all heresy
      And of false teachers rid us,
    Who proudly say: “Now, where is he
      Who would our speech forbid us!
    We have the right and might alone,
    And what we say must stand, we own
      None as our lord and master.”

    4. Therefore saith God: “I must arise
      To quell their great wrong-doing;
    To Me ascend My people’s sighs,
      And I have heard their suing.
    My saving Word shall take the field,
    Shall be the poor man’s strength and shield,
      Shall conquer all opponents.”

    5. As silver seven times furnace-tried,
      Is pure from all its drosses,
    So doth the Word of God abide
      The brighter for its crosses;
    For trial shows its worth aright
    And manifests its strength and light,
      That through all lands it shineth.

    6. O God, preserve it pure and free
      From this vile generation
    And let us be preserved by Thee
      From their abomination.
    The wicked walk on every side
    When mid Thy flock the vile abide
      In power and are exalted.

                                              Ps. 12. Martin Luther, 1524.


279

                                                             10, 10, 10, 4

    Christ, Thou the Champion of the band who own
    Thy Cross, O make Thy succor quickly known!
    The schemes of those who long our blood have sought
    Bring Thou to naught.

    2. Do Thou Thyself for us, Thy children, fight,
    Withstand the devil, quell his rage and might;
    Whate’er assails Thy members left below
    Do Thou o’erthrow.

    3. And give us Thy peace: peace in Church and school;
    Peace to the powers who o’er our country rule;
    Peace to the conscience, peace within the heart,
    Do Thou impart.

    4. So shall Thy goodness here be still adored,
    Thou Guardian of Thy little flock, dear Lord;
    And heaven and earth through all eternity
    Shall worship Thee.

                       M. A. von Loewenstern, 1644; C. Winkworth, tr. abr.


280

                                                             11, 11, 11, 5

    Ah! Lord, our God, let them not be confounded
    Who, though by want and woe and pain surrounded,
    Yet day and night still for Thy hope are sighing,
    To Thee are crying.

    2. But put to shame Thy foes who breathe defiance
    And make their own vain might their sole reliance.
    O turn in mercy to Thy generation;
    Lord, have compassion!

    3. We stand bereft of help and poor and lonely;
    ’Twere vain to trust in man. With Thee, Lord, only
    We may defeat the enemies around us
    Who seek to wound us.

    4. Thou art our Champion, who canst overthrow them
    And save the little flock now crushed below them.
    We trust in Thee; for Jesus’ sake be near us;
    Help, Helper, hear us!

                                      J. Heermann, 1630; C. Winkworth, tr.


281

                                                                     L. M.

    No change of time shall ever shock
      My firm affection, Lord, to Thee;
    For Thou hast always been a Rock,
      A Fortress, and Defense to me.

    2. Thou my Deliverer art, my God;
      My trust is in Thy mighty power.
    Thou art my Shield from foes abroad;
      At home, my Safeguard and my Tower.

    3. To Thee I will address my prayer,
      To whom all praise we justly owe;
    So shall I, by Thy watchful care,
      Be guarded safe from every foe.

    4. Let the eternal Lord be praised,
      The Rock on whose defense I rest.
    O’er highest heavens His name be raised
      Who me with His salvation blest.

                                        Ps. 18. Tate and Brady, 1698, abr.


282

                                                       8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7

    Had God not come, may Israel say,
      Had God not come to aid us,
    Our enemies before this day
      Would surely have dismayed us;
    For we are but a handful small,
    Held in contempt and scorn by all,
      All men rise up against us.

    2. Their furious Wrath, did God permit,
      Would surely have consumed us
    And in the deep and yawning pit
      With life and limb entombed us;
    Like men o’er whom dark waters roll,
    The streams had gone e’en o’er our soul
      And mightily o’erwhelmed us.

    3. Blest be the Lord, who from the pit
      Snatched us when it was gaping;
    Our souls, like birds that break the net,
      To the blue skies escaping;
    The snare is broken—we are free!
    Our help is ever, Lord, in Thee,
      The God of earth and heaven.

                          Ps. 124. Martin Luther, 1525; R. Massie, tr., a.


283

                                                                     L. M.

    When Rome had shrouded earth in night,
    God said again, Let there be light!
    And Luther with the Gospel came
    To spread the truth in Jesus’ name.

    2. When Rome the saints of God oppressed,
    And burdened souls could find no rest,
    Through Luther God deliv’rance sent
    By His pure Word and Sacrament.

    3. Though hosts against us stand arrayed,
    Christ bids us still, Be not afraid.
    Though all its powers the truth assail,
    The gates of hell shall not prevail.

    4. To-day with joyful hearts we sing
    The guardian care of Christ, our King,
    Who through His chosen instrument
    To us hath this salvation sent.

    5. O Lord, whose mercies still endure,
    Preserve to us Thy Gospel pure;
    Let it alone within us reign
    That Thine the glory may remain.

                                                             M. Loy, 1880.


284

                                                       8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7

    If God were not upon our side
      When round us foes are raging,
    Were not Himself our Help and Guide
      When bitter war they’re waging,
    Were He not Israel’s mighty Shield,
    To whom their utmost craft must yield,
      We surely must have perished.

    2. But now no human wit or might
      His chosen people frighteth;
    God sitteth in the highest height,
      And He their counsels blighteth.
    When craftiest snares and nets they lay,
    God doth His work another way
      And makes a path before us.

    3. Against our souls they rage and mock,
      Exciting great commotion;
    As billows meet with angry shock
      Out on the stormy ocean,
    So they our lives with fury seek.
    But God hath pity on the weak,
      And Him they have forgotten.

    4. They call us heretics and aye
      Their Christian name are flaunting;
    They seek to spill our blood, while they
      Their fear of God are vaunting.
    Ah, God! that precious name of Thine
    O’er many a wicked deed must shine,
      But Thou wilt once avenge it.

    5. They open wide their ravenous jaws
      And threaten to devour us,
    But thanks to God, who rules our cause,
      They shall not overpower us;
    Their snares He yet will bring to naught
    And overthrow what they have taught;
      God is too mighty for them.

    6. How richly He consoleth those
      Whom no one else befriendeth!
    The door of grace doth never close;
      Sense cannot comprehend it
    How this may be and deems all lost,
    When through this very cross a host
      Of champions God is raising.

    7. Our foes, O God, are in Thy hand,
      Thou knowest their endeavor;
    But only give us strength to stand
      And let us waver never,
    Though reason strives with faith, and still
    It fears to wholly trust Thy will
      And sees not Thy salvation.

    8. But heaven and earth, O Lord, are Thine,
      For Thou alone hast made them;
    Thy light let on Thy people shine
      And in their sorrow aid them.
    Ignite our hearts to love and faith
    That shall be steadfast e’en to death,
      Howe’er the world may murmur.

                        Ps. 124. Justus Jonas, 1524; C. Winkworth, tr., a.




ST. MICHAEL AND ALL ANGELS.


285

                                                                   10s 4 l

    Stars of the morning, so gloriously bright,
    Filled with celestial resplendence and light,
    These that, where night never followeth day,
    Raise the “Thrice holy, Lord!” ever and aye!

    2. These are Thy ministers, these dost Thou own,
    Lord God of Sabaoth, nearest Thy throne.
    These are Thy messengers; these dost Thou send,
    Help of the helpless ones, man to defend.

    3. When by Thy word earth was first poised in space,
    When the far planets first sped on their race,
    When was completed the six days’ employ,
    Then “all the sons of God shouted for joy.”

    4. Still let them succor us; still let them fight,
    Lord of angelic hosts, battling for right,
    Till, where their anthems they ceaselessly pour,
    We with the angels may bow and adore.

                 Joseph of the Studium, c. 850; J. M. Neale, tr., 1862, a.


286

                                                                     L. M.

    Lord God, we all to Thee give praise,
    Thank-offerings meet to Thee we raise,
    That Thou didst angel hosts create
    Around Thy glorious throne to wait.

    2. They glow with light and heavenly grace
    And constantly behold Thy face;
    Obedience to Thy voice they yield
    And are with godly wisdom filled.

    3. They never rest nor sleep as we;
    Their whole delight is but to be
    Forever near Thee, gracious Lord,
    Thy little flock to watch and guard.

    4. The foul old Dragon and dread Foe
    With envy, hate, and wrath doth glow;
    It always is his aim and pride
    Thy Christian people to divide.

    5. As he has blighted earth of old,
    He keeps e’en now his deathly hold,
    Chafes madly to annihilate
    All virtue, honor, Church, and State.

    6. Therefore no halt or rest he knows;
    A roaring lion round he goes,
    Or lies in wait with baneful snare
    To drive the Christians to despair.

    7. But watchful is the angel band
    That follows Christ on every hand
    And guards Thy holy Christendom
    From harm that might from Satan come.

    8. From Daniel’s case this may be seen
    When he sat in the lions’ den,
    And likewise angels rescued Lot
    That the ungodly harmed him not.

    9. When the three Hebrews were at last
    Into the fiery furnace cast,
    No power had fiercest flames to harm
    Against the rescuing angel’s arm.

    10. And thus our God, still at this day,
    From harm and many an evil way
    Keeps near us His dear angel guard,
    Placed over us as watch and ward.

    11. For this, now and eternally,
    Our praise shall rise, O God, to Thee,
    Whom all the angel hosts adore
    With joy now and forevermore.

    12. We also pray Thee to defend
    By them unto the latter end
    Thy fold, that little flock, O Lord,
    That holds in honor Thy blest Word.

                    From the Latin of Philip Melanchthon. Paul Eber, 1566.


287

                                                          8, 7, 8, 7, 7, 7

    Jesus, Brightness of the Father,
      Life and Strength of all who live!
    In the presence of the angels
      Glory in Thy name we give:
    And Thy wondrous praise rehearse,
    Singing in harmonious verse.

    2. Blessed Lord, by their protection
      Shelter us from harm this day;
    Keep us pure in flesh and spirit;
      Save us from the Foe, we pray:
    And vouchsafe us by Thy grace
    In Thy paradise a place.

    3. Glory to th’ almighty Father,
      Sing we with the heavenly host;
    Glory to the great Redeemer,
      Glory to the Holy Ghost;
    Three in One, and One in Three,
    Throughout all eternity!

                         Rhabanus Maurus, † 856; E. Caswall, tr., 1848, a.




ALL SAINTS.


288

                                                           7, 6, 8, 6, 8 l

    Ten thousand times ten thousand
      In sparkling raiment bright,
    The armies of the ransomed saints
      Throng up the steeps of light.
    ’Tis finished! all is finished,
      Their fight with death and sin;
    Fling open wide the golden gates,
      And let the victors in.

    2. What rush of alleluias
      Fills all the earth and sky!
    What ringing of a thousand harps
      Bespeaks the triumph nigh!
    O day, for which creation
      And all its tribes were made;
    O joy, for all its former woes
      A thousandfold repaid!

    3. Oh, then, what raptured greetings
      On Canaan’s happy shore;
    What knitting severed friendships up,
      Where partings are no more!
    Then eyes with joy shall sparkle
      That brimmed with tears of late;
    Orphans no longer fatherless
      Nor widows desolate.

    4. Bring near Thy great salvation,
      Thou Lamb for sinners slain;
    Fill up the roll of Thine elect,
      Then take Thy power and reign.
    Appear, Desire of nations,
      Thine exiles long for home;
    Show in the heav’ns Thy promised sign;
      Thou Prince and Savior, come!

                                                          H. Alford, 1867.


289

                                                                     S. M.

    For all Thy saints, O Lord,
      Who strove in Thee to live,
    Who followed Thee, obeyed, adored,
      Our grateful hymn receive.

    2. For all Thy saints, O Lord,
      Accept our thankful cry,
    Who counted Thee their great reward
      And strove in Thee to die.

    3. They all in life and death,
      With Thee, their Lord, in view,
    Learned from Thy Holy Spirit’s breath
      To suffer and to do.

    4. For this Thy name we bless
      And humbly pray that we
    May follow them in holiness
      And live and die in Thee.

                                                       R. Mant, 1837, abr.


290

                                                                 8, 7, 8 l

    Hark! the sound of holy voices
      Chanting o’er the crystal sea,
    Alleluia, Alleluia,
      Alleluia, Lord, to Thee!
    Multitudes which none can number
      Like the stars in glory stand,
    Clothed in white apparel, holding
      Palms of vict’ry in their hand.

    2. Patriarch, and holy prophet,
      Who prepared the way of Christ,
    King, apostle, saint, confessor,
      Martyr and evangelist,
    Saintly maiden, godly matron,
      Widows who have watched to prayer,
    Joined in holy concert, singing
      To the Lord of all, are there.

    3. They have come from tribulation
      And have washed their robes in blood,
    Washed them in the blood of Jesus;
      Tried they were, and firm they stood.
    Mocked, imprisoned, stoned, tormented,
      Sawn asunder, slain with sword,
    They have conquered death and Satan
      By the might of Christ the Lord.

    4. Marching with Thy cross, their banner,
      They have triumphed, following
    Thee, the Captain of salvation,
      Thee, their Savior and their King.
    Gladly, Lord, with Thee they suffered,
      Gladly, Lord, with Thee they died,
    And by death to life immortal
      They were born and glorified.

    5. Now they reign in heavenly glory.
      Now they walk in golden light,
    Now they drink, as from a river,
      Holy bliss and infinite.
    Love and peace they taste forever
      And all truth and knowledge see
    In the beatific vision
      Of the blessed Trinity.

                                                      C. Wordsworth, 1862.




HARVEST AND THANKSGIVING.


291

                                                                 L. M. 6 l

    O Lord, whose bounteous hand again
      Hath poured Thy gifts in plenty down,
    Who all creation dost sustain
      And all the earth with goodness crown:
    Lord of the harvest, here we own
    Our joy Thy gift, and Thine alone.

    2. O may we ne’er with thankless heart
      Forget from whom our blessings flow.
    Still, Lord, Thy heavenly grace impart;
      Still teach us what to Thee we owe.
    Lord, may our lives with fruit divine
    Return Thy care and prove us Thine.

    3. Lord, grant that each may sow to Thee;
      Grant us in endless life to reap.
    Of every heart the Guardian be;
      By day and night Thy servants keep
    That all to Thee may joy afford
    On Thy great harvest-day, O Lord.

                                                                     Anon.


292

                                                                     C. M.

    O Lord, I sing with lips and heart,
      Joy of my soul, to Thee;
    To earth Thy knowledge I impart
      As it is known to me.

    2. Thou art the Fount of grace, I know,
      And Spring so full and free,
    Whence saving health and goodness flow
      Each day so bounteously.

    3. For what have all that live and move
      Through this wide world below
    That does not from Thy bounteous love,
      O heavenly Father, flow?

    4. Who built the lofty firmament?
      Who spread th’ expanse of blue?
    By whom are to our pastures sent
      Refreshing rain and dew?

    5. Who warmeth us in cold and frost?
      Who shields us from the wind?
    Who orders it that oil and must
      We in their season find?

    6. Who is it life and health bestows?
      Who keeps us with His hand
    In golden peace, wards off war’s woes
      From our dear native land?

    7. O Lord, of this and all our store
      Thou art the Author blest;
    Thou keepest watch before our door
      While we securely rest.

    8. Thou feedest us from year to year
      And constant dost abide;
    With ready help in time of fear
      Thou standest at our side.

    9. With patience dost Thou ever chide
      And chasten’st sparingly;
    Thou castest all our sins aside
      And drown’st them in the sea.

    10. When silent woe our bosom rends,
      Thy pity sees our grief
    And gives what to our glory tends
      No less than our relief.

    11. Thou knowest when a Christian weeps
      And why his tear-drops fall;
    And in the book Thy mercy keeps
      These things are noted all.

    12. Our deepest needs dost Thou supply,
      Thou giv’st what lasts for aye;
    Thou lead’st us to our home on high
      When hence we pass away.

    13. Rejoice, my heart, be glad and sing,
      A cheerful trust maintain!
    For God, the Source of everything,
      Thy Portion will remain.

    14. He is thy Treasure, He thy Joy,
      Thy Life and Light and Lord,
    Thy Counselor when doubts annoy,
      Thy Shield and great Reward.

    15. In restless thought or blank despair
      Why spend each day and night?
    On Him who made thee cast thy care;
      He makes our burdens light.

    16. Did not His love and truth and power
      Watch o’er thy childhood’s day?
    Has He not oft in threatening hour
      Turned dreaded ills away?

    17. His wisdom never plans in vain,
      Ne’er falters or mistakes;
    All that His counsels did ordain
      A happy ending makes.

    18. Upon thy lips, then, lay thy hand
      And trust His guiding love;
    Then firm as rock thy peace shall stand
      Here and in heaven above.

                                                      Paul Gerhardt, 1653.


293

                                                                     C. M.

    We sing th’ almighty power of God,
      Who bade the mountains rise,
    Who spread the flowing seas abroad,
      And built the lofty skies.

    2. We sing the wisdom that ordained
      The sun to rule the day;
    The moon shines, too, at His command,
      And all the stars obey.

    3. We sing the goodness of the Lord,
      Who fills the earth with food;
    Who formed His creatures by a word
      And then pronounced them good.

    4. Lord, how Thy wonders are displayed
      Where’er we turn our eyes,
    Whene’er we view the ground we tread
      Or gaze upon the skies!

    5. There’s not a plant nor flower below
      But makes Thy glories known;
    And clouds arise and tempests blow
      By order from Thy throne.

    6. On Thee each moment we depend;
      If Thou withdraw, we die.
    Oh, may we ne’er that God offend
      Who is forever nigh!

                                                        Isaac Watts, 1715.


294

                                                                 8, 7, 8 l

    To Thee, O Lord, our hearts we raise
      In hymns of adoration,
    To Thee bring sacrifice of praise
      With shouts of exultation:
    Bright robes of gold the fields adorn,
      The hills with joy are ringing,
    The valleys stand so thick with corn
      That even they are singing.

    2. And now, on this our festal day,
      Thy bounteous hand confessing,
    Upon Thine altar, Lord, we lay
      The first-fruits of Thy blessing.
    By Thee the souls of men are fed
      With gifts of grace supernal,
    Thou who dost give us earthly bread,
      Give us the Bread eternal.

    3. We bear the burden of the day
      And often toil seems dreary;
    But labor ends with sunset ray,
      And rest comes for the weary.
    May we, the angel-reaping o’er,
      Stand at the last accepted,
    Christ’s golden sheaves forevermore
      To garners bright elected.

    4. Oh, blessed is that land of God
      Where saints abide forever;
    Where golden fields spread fair and broad,
      Where flows the crystal river.
    The strains of all its holy throng
      With ours to-day are blending;
    Thrice blessed is that harvest-song
      Which never hath an ending.

                                                          W. C. Dix, 1864.


295

                                                                    7s 8 l

    Come, ye thankful people, come,
    Raise the song of Harvest-home;
    All is safely gathered in
    Ere the winter storms begin;
    God, our Maker, doth provide
    For our wants to be supplied.
    Come to God’s own temple, come;
    Raise the song of Harvest-home.

    2. We ourselves are God’s own field,
    Fruit unto His praise to yield;
    Wheat and tares together sown,
    Unto joy or sorrow grown;
    First the blade and then the ear,
    Then the full corn shall appear.
    Lord of harvest, grant that we
    Wholesome grain and pure may be.

    3. For the Lord, our God, shall come
    and shall take His harvest home;
    From His field shall purge away
    All that doth offend, that day;
    Give His angels charge at last
    In the fire the tares to cast,
    But the fruitful ears to store
    In His garner evermore.

    4. Come, Thou Lord of harvest, come
    To Thy final Harvest-home;
    Gather Thou Thy people in,
    Free from sorrow, free from sin,
    There, forever purified,
    In Thy garner to abide.
    Come with all Thine angels, come,
    Raise the glorious Harvest-home!

                                                          H. Alford, 1845.


296

                                                                    7s 8 l

    Christ, by heav’nly hosts adored,
    Gracious, mighty, sov’reign Lord,
    God of nations, King of kings,
    Head of all created things,
    By the Church with joy contest,
    God o’er all forever blest;
    Pleading at Thy throne we stand,
    Save Thy people, bless our land.

    2. On our fields of grass and grain
    Send, O Lord, the kindly rain;
    O’er our wide and goodly land
    Crown the labors of each hand.
    Let Thy kind protection be
    O’er our commerce on the sea.
    Open, Lord, Thy bounteous hand,
    Bless Thy people, bless our land.

    3. Let our rulers ever be
    Men that love and honor Thee;
    Let the powers by Thee ordained
    Be in righteousness maintained;
    In the people’s hearts increase
    Love of piety and peace.
    Thus united we shall stand
    One wide, free, and happy land.

                                                        H. Harbaugh, 1860.


297

                                                                        7s

    Praise, O praise our God and King,
    Hymns of adoration sing;
    For His mercies still endure,
    Ever faithful, ever sure.

    2. Praise Him that He made the sun
    Day by day his course to run;
    For His mercies still endure,
    Ever faithful, ever sure.

    3. And the silver moon by night,
    Shining with her gentle light;
    For His mercies still endure,
    Ever faithful, ever sure.

    4. Praise Him that He gave the rain
    To mature the swelling grain;
    For His mercies still endure,
    Ever faithful, ever sure.

    5. And hath bid the fruitful field
    Crops of precious increase yield;
    For His mercies still endure,
    Ever faithful, ever sure.

    6. Praise Him for our harvest store,
    He hath filled the garner floor;
    For His mercies still endure,
    Ever faithful, ever sure.

    7. And for richer food than this,
    Pledge of everlasting bliss;
    For His mercies still endure,
    Ever faithful, ever sure.

    8. Glory to our bounteous King,
    Glory let creation sing;
    Glory to the Father, Son,
    And the Spirit, Three in One!

                                                        H. W. Baker, 1861.


298

                                                                    7s 6 l

    Praise to God, immortal praise,
    For the love that crowns our days;
    Bounteous Source of every joy,
    Let Thy praise our tongues employ.
    All to Thee, our God, we owe,
    Source whence all our blessings flow.

    2. All the plenty summer pours;
    Autumn’s rich, o’erflowing stores;
    Flocks that whiten all the plain;
    Yellow sheaves of ripened grain.
    Lord, for these our souls shall raise
    Grateful vows and solemn praise.

    3. Peace, prosperity, and health,
    Private bliss, and public wealth,
    Knowledge with its gladdening streams,
    Pure religion’s holier beams.
    Lord, for these our souls shall raise
    Grateful vows and solemn praise.

    4. As Thy prospering hand hath blest,
    May we give Thee of our best
    And by deeds of kindly love
    For Thy mercies grateful prove;
    Sinking thus through all our days,
    Praise to God, immortal praise.

                                        A. L. (Aikin) Barbauld, 1773, abr.




NATIONAL.


299

                                                                    7s 8 l

    Swell the anthem, raise the song,
    Praises to our God belong;
    Saints and angels join to sing
    Praises to the heavenly King.
    Blessings from His liberal hand
    Flow around this happy land.
    Kept by Him, no foes annoy;
    Peace and freedom we enjoy.

    2. Here, beneath a peaceful sway,
    May we cheerfully obey;
    Never feel oppression’s rod,
    Ever own and worship God.
    Hark! the voice of nature sings
    Praises to the King of kings;
    Let us join the choral song
    And the grateful notes prolong.

                                                      Nathan Strong, 1799.


300

                                                                     L. M.

    O bless, Thou heavenly Potentate,
    With wisdom, strength, the powers of state,
    That wrong and violence may cease
    And Church and home abide in peace.

    2. Bless rich and poor, the great and small,
    Both friend and foe; Lord, bless Thou all
    The family on earth in love
    And fit all for Thy home above.

    3. Thus, with Thy blessing on each hand,
    Will peace and plenty fill the land
    And righteousness spring from the earth
    And life below have higher worth.

    4. All praise to Thee, O King of kings,
    Whose grace to us such blessings brings;
    Thee, with the Father, we adore,
    And Holy Ghost, forevermore.

                                                                     Anon.


301

                                                                    7s 6 l

    What our Father does is well:
    Blessed truth His children tell!
    Though He send, for plenty, want,
    Though the harvest-store be scant,
    Yet we rest upon His love,
    Seeking better things above.

    2. What our Father does is well:
    Shall the wilful heart rebel
    If a blessing He withhold
    In the field or in the fold?
    Is He not Himself to be
    All our store eternally?

    3. What our Father does is well:
    Though He sadden hill and dell,
    Upward yet our praises rise
    For the strength His Word supplies.
    He has called us sons of God;
    Can we murmur at His rod?

    4. What our Father does is well:
    May the thought within us dwell;
    Though nor milk nor honey flow
    In our barren Canaan now,
    God can save us in our need,
    God can bless us, God can feed.

    5. Therefore unto Him we raise
    Hymns of glory, songs of praise.
    To the Father and the Son
    And the Spirit, Three in One,
    Honor, might, and glory be
    Now and through eternity.

                                B. Schmolck, 1720; H. W. Baker, tr., 1861.


302

                                                                     C. M.

    Lord, while for all mankind we pray,
      Of every clime and coast,
    Oh, hear us for our native land,
      The land we love the most!

    2. Oh, guard our shores from every foe,
      With peace our borders bless,
    With prosperous times our cities crown,
      Our fields with plenteousness!

    3. Unite us in the sacred love
      Of knowledge, truth, and Thee;
    And let our hills and valleys shout
      The songs of liberty.

    4. Here may religion, pure and mild,
      Smile on our Sabbath hours
    And piety and virtue bless
      The home of us and ours.

    5. Lord of the nations, thus to Thee
      Our country we commend;
    Be Thou her Refuge and her Trust,
      Her everlasting Friend.

                                                    John R. Wreford, 1837.


303

                                                                     C. M.

    Almighty Lord, before Thy throne
      Thy mourning people bend;
    ’Tis on Thy grace in Christ alone
      Our failing hopes depend.

    2. Dark judgments from Thy heavy hand
      Thy dreadful power display;
    Yet mercy spares our guilty land,
      And still we live to pray.

    3. How changed, alas! are truths divine
      For error, guilt, and shame!
    What impious numbers, bold in sin,
      Disgrace the Christian name!

    4. O turn us, turn us, mighty Lord!
      Convert us by Thy grace;
    Then shall our hearts obey Thy Word
      And see again Thy face.

    5. Then, should oppressing foes invade,
      We will not yield to fear,
    Secure of all-sufficient aid,
      When God in Christ is near.

                                                      Anne Steele, † 1778.


304

                                                  6, 6, 6, 6, 8, 8 (H. M.)

    To Thee, our God, we fly
      For mercy and for grace;
    Oh, hear our lowly cry
      And hide not Thou Thy face!
    O Lord, stretch forth Thy mighty hand
    And guard and bless our Fatherland.

    2. Arise, O Lord of hosts,
      Be jealous for Thy name,
    And drive from out our coasts
      The sins that put to shame.
    O Lord, stretch forth Thy mighty hand
    And guard and bless our Fatherland.

    3. Thy best gifts from on high
      In rich abundance pour
    That we may magnify
      And praise Thee more and more.
    O Lord, stretch forth Thy mighty hand
    And guard and bless our Fatherland.

    4. The powers ordained by Thee
      With heavenly wisdom bless;
    May they Thy servants be
      And rule in righteousness.
    O Lord, stretch forth Thy mighty hand
    And guard and bless our Fatherland.

    5. The Church of Thy dear Son
      Inflame with love’s pure fire;
    Bind her once more in one
      And life and truth inspire.
    O Lord, stretch forth Thy mighty hand
    And guard and bless our Fatherland.

                                                          W. W. How, 1871.


305

                                                       6, 6, 4, 6, 6, 6, 4

    God bless our native land!
    Firm may she ever stand
      Through storm and night;
    When the wild tempests rave,
    Ruler of wind and wave,
    Do Thou our country save
      By Thy great might!

    2. For her our prayer shall rise
    To God above the skies;
      On Him we wait:
    Thou, who art ever nigh,
    Guarding with watchful eye,
    To Thee aloud we cry,
      God save the State!

                                   C. T. Brooks, 1834; J. S. Dwight, 1844.




FAITH AND JUSTIFICATION.


306

                                                                 L. M. 6 l

    My hope is built on nothing less
    Than Jesus’ blood and righteousness;
    I dare not trust the sweetest frame,
    But wholly lean on Jesus’ name.
    On Christ, the solid Rock, I stand;
    All other ground is sinking sand.

    2. When darkness veils His lovely face,
    I rest on His unchanging grace;
    In every high and stormy gale
    My anchor holds within the veil.
    On Christ, the solid Rock, I stand;
    All other ground is sinking sand.

    3. His oath, His covenant, and blood
    Support me in the sinking flood;
    When every earthly prop gives way,
    He then is all my Hope and Stay.
    On Christ, the solid Rock, I stand;
    All other ground is sinking sand.

    4. When I shall launch to worlds unseen,
    Oh, may I then be found in Him,
    Dressed in His righteousness alone,
    Faultless to stand before the throne!
    On Christ, the solid Rock, I stand;
    All other ground is sinking sand.

                                                        Edward Mote, 1836.


307

                                                                     C. M.

    Lord, we confess our numerous faults,
      How great our guilt has been:
    Foolish and vain were all our thoughts,
      And all our lives were sin.

    2. But, O my soul, forever praise,
      Forever love, His name,
    Who turns thy feet from dangerous ways
      Of folly, sin, and shame.

    3. ’Tis not by works of righteousness
      Which our own hands have done,
    But we are saved by love and grace
      Abounding through His Son.

    4. ’Tis from the mercy of our God
      That all our hopes begin;
    ’Tis by the Water and the Blood
      Our souls are washed from sin.

    5. ’Tis through the purchase of His death
      Who hung upon the tree
    The Spirit is sent down to breathe
      On such dry bones as we.

    6. Raised from the dead, we live anew;
      And justified by grace,
    We shall appear in glory too
      And see our Father’s face.

                                                        Isaac Watts, 1709.


308

                                                                     C. M.

    All that I was, my sin, my guilt,
      My death, was all my own;
    All that I am, I owe to Thee,
      My gracious God, alone.

    2. The evil of my former state
      Was mine, and only mine;
    The good in which I now rejoice
      Is Thine, and only Thine.

    3. The darkness of my former state,
      The bondage, all was mine;
    The light of life in which I walk,
      The liberty, is Thine.

    4. Thy grace first made me feel my sin,
      It taught me to believe;
    Then, in believing, peace I found,
      And now I live, I live!

    5. All that I am, e’en here on earth,
      All that I hope to be
    When Jesus comes and glory dawns,
      I owe it, Lord, to Thee.

                                                           H. Bonar, 1853.


309

                                                                     L. M.

    Blest is the man, forever blest,
      Whose guilt is pardoned by his God,
    Whose sins with sorrow are confessed
      And covered with his Savior’s blood.

    2. Blest is the man to whom the Lord
      Imputes not his iniquities;
    He pleads no merit of reward
      And not on works, but grace relies.

    3. From guile his heart and lips are free,
      His humble joy, his holy fear,
    With deep repentance well agree
      And join to prove his faith sincere.

    4. How glorious is that righteousness
      That hides and cancels all his sins,
    While a bright evidence of grace
      Through his whole life appears and shines!

                                                        Isaac Watts, 1719.


310

                                                       8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7

    Dear Christians, one and all rejoice,
      With exultation springing
    And with united heart and voice
      And holy rapture singing.
    Tell how our God beheld our need
    And sing His sweet and wondrous deed;
      Right dearly it hath cost Him.

    2. Fast bound in Satan’s chains I lay,
      Death brooded darkly o’er me,
    My sin oppressed me night and day,
      Therein my mother bore me;
    And ever deeper yet I fell,
    Life had become a living hell,
      So firmly sin possessed me.

    3. My good works could avail me naught,
      For they with sin were stainèd;
    Free will against God’s judgment fought
      And dead to good remainèd;
    Grief drove me to despair, and I
    Had nothing left me but to die,
      To hell I fast was sinking.

    4. Then God beheld my wretched state
      With deep commiseration;
    He thought upon His mercy great
      And willed my soul’s salvation;
    He turned to me a Father’s heart—
    Not small the cost!—to heal my smart,
      He gave His best and dearest.

    5. He spake to His beloved Son:
      “’Tis time to have compassion;
    Then go, My heart’s most Precious One,
      And bring to man salvation;
    From sin and sorrow set him free,
    Slay bitter death for him that he
      May live with Thee forever.”

    6. The Son His Father did obey,
      And, born of virgin mother,
    He came a while on earth to stay
      That He might be my Brother.
    His mighty power He hidden bore,
    A servant’s form like mine He wore
      To lead the devil captive.

    7. He spake to me: “Hold fast by Me,
      I am thy Rock and Castle;
    I wholly give Myself for thee,
      For thee I strive and wrestle;
    For I am thine, and thou art Mine,
    Henceforth My place is also thine;
      The foe shall never part us.

    8. “The foe shall shed My precious blood,
      Me of My life bereaving.
    All this I suffer for thy good;
      Be steadfast and believing.
    Life shall from death the victory win,
    Mine innocence shall bear thy sin,
      So art thou blest forever.

    9. “Now to My Father I depart,
      From earth to heaven ascending,
    Thence heavenly wisdom to impart,
      The Holy Spirit sending;
    He shall in trouble comfort thee,
    Teach thee to know and follow Me,
      Into all truth shall guide thee.

    10. “What I have done and taught do thou
      To do and teach endeavor;
    So shall My kingdom flourish now
      And God be praised forever.
    Take heed lest men with base alloy
    The heavenly treasure should destroy;
      This counsel I bequeath thee.”

                                                      Martin Luther, 1523.


311

                                                          9, 8, 9, 8, 8, 8

    By grace I’m saved, grace free and boundless!
      My heart, believ’st thou this or not?
    Why tremblest thou with terror groundless?
      Has Scripture e’er a falsehood taught?
    Then this word also true must be:
    By grace there is a crown for thee.

    2. By grace! Our works are all rejected,
      All claims of merit pass for naught;
    The mighty Savior, long expected,
      To us this blissful truth has brought,
    That He by death redeems our race
    And we are saved alone by grace.

    3. By grace! Mark well these words’ true meaning,
      When thou dost sorrow sin-opprest.
    When Satan tempts with pride o’erweening,
      When troubled conscience sighs for rest.
    What reason cannot comprehend
    It pleases God by grace to send.

    4. By grace His Son, on earth appearing,
      Vouchsafed beneath thy woe to bend;
    Hadst thou, damnation justly fearing,
      Done aught to render Him thy Friend?
    Was’t not that He thy welfare sought
    And but by grace deliverance wrought?

    5. By grace! This ground of our salvation,
      As long as God is true, endures;
    What saints have penned by inspiration,
      What God by His own Word assures,
    What all our faith must rest upon,
    Is grace, free grace, through His dear Son.

    6. By grace! But think not, thou who livest
      Securely on in godless ways,
    That thou—though all are called—receivest
      The promised rest that wakes our praise.
    By grace none find in heaven a place
    Who live in sin in hope of grace.

    7. By grace! They who have heard this sentence
      Must all hypocrisy forego;
    For only after deep repentance
      Can any soul this treasure know;
    To sin free grace a trifle seems,
    To faith it bright with glory beams.

    8. By grace the timid hearts that languish
      Find access to the Father’s heart,
    When conflicts fierce and bitter anguish
      Bid all their joy and hopes depart.
    Where ofttimes should I strength obtain,
    Did grace my anchor not remain!

    9. By grace! On this in death I’ll rest me,
      Rejoicing e’en though feeling naught;
    I know my sin,—it oft oppressed me,—
      But Him, too, who salvation brought.
    My heart exults, grief flees apace,
    Because my soul is saved by grace.

    10. By grace! May sin and Satan hearken!
      I bear my flag of faith in hand
    And pass—for doubts my joy can’t darken—
      The Red Sea to the Promised Land.
    I cling to what my Savior taught
    And trust it, whether felt or not.

                                      C. L. Scheidt, 1742; M. Loy, tr., a.


312

                                                          9, 8, 9, 8, 8, 8

    Now I have found the sure foundation
      Where evermore my anchor grounds.
    It lay there ere the world’s creation,
      Where else but in my Savior’s wounds?
    Foundation, which unmoved shall stay
    When earth and heaven pass away.

    2. It is that mercy never-ending,
      Which all conception far transcends,
    Of Him who, with love’s arms extending,
      To wretched sinners condescends;
    Whose heart with pity still doth break
    Whether we seek Him or forsake.

    3. Our ruin God has not intended,
      Salvation He would fain bestow;
    For this His Son to earth descended
      And then to heaven again did go;
    For this so loudly evermore
    He knocketh at our heart’s closed door.

    4. O depth of love, in which, past finding,
      My sins through Christ’s blood disappear;
    This is for wounds the safest binding,
      There is no condemnation here;
    For Jesus’ blood through earth and skies
    Forever Mercy! Mercy! cries.

    5. I never will forget this crying,
      In faith I’ll trust it all my days,
    And when o’er all my sins I’m sighing,
      I towards my Father’s heart will gaze;
    For there is always to be found
    Free mercy without end and bound.

    6. Though I be robbed of every pleasure
      That soul and body can make glad,
    Bereft of every earthly treasure,
      Forlorn, forsaken, lone, and sad,—
    However far His help may be,
    His mercy yet is left to me.

    7. Though earthly cares and want oppress me
      And cause me sorrow and regret
    That things so vain can still distress me
      And give me so much trouble yet,
    Though I am bowed down to the dust,
    Still in His mercy I will trust.

    8. Though in the best of all my actions,
      In works that are admired the most,
    I must perceive great imperfections,
      I surely have no right to boast;
    Yet this sweet comfort doth abide:
    In mercy only I confide.

    9. Be it with me as He is willing,
      Whose mercy is a boundless sea;
    May He Himself my heart be stilling
      That this may ne’er forgotten be;
    Then it will rest, in joy and woe,
    On mercy while it beats below.

    10. On this foundation I unshrinking
      Will stand while I on earth remain;
    This shall engage my acting, thinking,
      While I the breath of life retain;
    Then I will sing eternally,
    Unfathomed Mercy, still of Thee.

                                                      J. A. Rothe, † 1758.


313

                                                                     L. M.

    Who shall the Lord’s elect condemn?
    ’Tis God who justifies their souls,
    And mercy, like a mighty stream,
    O’er all their sins divinely rolls.

    2. He lives! He lives! and sits above,
    Forever interceding there:
    Who shall divide us from His love,
    Or what should tempt us to despair?

    3. Shall persecution or distress,
    Famine or sword or nakedness?
    He who hath loved us bears us through
    And makes us more than conquerors too.

    4. Not all that men on earth can do,
    Nor powers on high nor powers below,
    Shall cause His mercy to remove
    Or wean our hearts from Christ, our Love.

                                                     Isaac Watts, 1707, a.


314

                                                       8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7

    Salvation unto us has come
      By God’s free grace and favor;
    Good works cannot avert our doom,
      They help and save us never:
    Faith looks to Jesus Christ alone,
    Who did for all the world atone;
      He is the Mediator.

    2. What God doth in His Law demand
      No man to Him can render,
    And so He draws His flaming brand
      To punish the offender:
    Our flesh has not those pure desires
    Which first of all the Law requires,—
      We are in condemnation.

    3. It was a false, misleading dream
      That God His Law had given
    For us to keep and merit claim
      And earn our way to heaven.
    God’s Law is but a mirror bright
    To bring the inbred sin to sight
      That lurks within our nature.

    4. By our own strength to put aside
      God’s wrath and win His blessing
    Is useless task, by many tried,
      Is only guilt increasing.
    For God hypocrisy abhors;
    Flesh with the spirit ever wars,
      For ’tis by nature evil.

    5. And yet the Law fulfilled must be,
      Or we were lost forever;
    Therefore God sent His Son that He
      Might us from death deliver;
    He all the Law for us fulfilled
    And thus His Father’s anger stilled
      Which over us impended.

    6. Since Christ hath full atonement made
      And brought to us salvation,
    Each Christian therefore may be glad
      And build on this foundation.
    Thy grace alone, dear Lord, I plead.
    Thy death my life now is indeed,
      For Thou hast paid my ransom.

    7. Not doubting this, I trust in Thee,
      Thy Word cannot be broken;
    Thou all dost call, “Come unto Me!”
      No falsehood hast Thou spoken.
    “He that believes and is baptized,
    He shall be saved,” say’st Thou, O Christ,
      “And he shall never perish.”

    8. He’s just ’fore God, and he alone,
      Who by this faith is living;
    This faith will by good works be known,
      To God the glory giving.
    Faith gives thee peace with God above,
    But thou thy neighbor, too, wilt love
      If thou art a new creature.

    9. The Law reveals the guilt of sin
      And makes man conscience-stricken;
    The Gospel then doth enter in
      The sinful soul to quicken.
    Come to the Cross, trust Christ and live;
    The Law to you no peace can give
      With all its good endeavors.

    10. From faith in Christ, whene’er ’tis right,
      Good works are surely flowing;
    The faith is dead that shuns the light,
      No good works ever showing.
    By faith alone the just shall live,
    Good works alone the proof can give
      Of love, which true faith worketh.

                             Paul Speratus, 1523, abr. Composite tr. 1910.


315

                                                                    7s 6 l

    Blessed are the sons of God,
    They are bought with Christ’s own blood;
    They are ransomed from the grave,
    Life eternal they shall have.
    With them numbered may we be
    Here and in eternity!

    2. They are justified by grace,
    They enjoy the Savior’s peace;
    All their sins are washed away,
    They shall stand in God’s great Day.
    With them numbered may we be
    Here and in eternity!

    3. They are lights upon the earth,
    Children of a heavenly birth;
    One with God, with Jesus one,
    Glory is in them begun.
    With them numbered may we be
    Here and in eternity!

                                                       J. Humphreys, 1743.


316

                                               8, 8, 6, 8, 8, 6 (C. P. M.)

    I do not come because my soul
    Is free from sin and pure and whole,
      And worthy of Thy grace;
    I do not speak to Thee because
    I’ve ever justly kept Thy laws
      And dare to meet Thy face.

    2. I know that sin and guilt combine
    To reign o’er every thought of mine
      And turn from good to ill;
    I know that when I try to be
    Upright and just and true to Thee,
      I am a sinner still.

    3. I know that often when I strive
    To keep a spark of love alive
      For Thee, the powers within
    Leap up in unsubmissive might
    And oft benumb my sense of right
      And pull me back to sin.

    4. I know that, though in doing good
    I spend my life, I never could
      Atone for all I’ve done;
    But though my sins are black as night,
    I dare to come before Thy sight
      Because I trust Thy Son.

    5. In Him alone my trust I place,
    Come boldly to Thy throne of grace,
      And there commune with Thee.
    Salvation sure, O Lord, is mine,
    And, all unworthy, I am Thine,
      For Jesus died for me.

                                                     F. B. St. John, 1878.


317

                                                          8, 7, 7, 8, 7, 7

    O how great is Thy compassion,
      Faithful Father, God of grace,
      That upon our wretchedness,
    That upon man’s sinful station
      Thou took’st pity, so that we
      Might be saved eternally!

    2. Thy great love for this hath striven
      That man from all pain shall free
      And forever blessed be.
    Yea, Thy Son Himself hath given
      And extends an earnest call
      To His Supper unto all.

    3. And for this our soul’s salvation
      Voucheth Thy good Spirit, Lord,
      In Thy Sacraments and Word;
    He doth prosper Thy vocation,
      Granteth us the gift of faith
      That we fear nor hell nor death.

    4. Lord, Thy mercy will not leave me,—
      Truth doth evermore abide,—
      Then in Thee I will confide;
    Since Thy Word cannot deceive me,
      My salvation is to me
      Well assured eternally.

    5. I will praise Thy great compassion,
      Faithful Father, God of grace,
      That upon my wretchedness,
    That upon my sinful station
      Thou took’st pity graciously;
      Evermore be praise to Thee!

                                          J. Olearius, 1671; A. Crull, tr.


318

                                                                     L. M.

    Just as I am, without one plea
    But that Thy blood was shed for me
    And that Thou bid’st me come to Thee,
      O Lamb of God, I come, I come.

    2. Just as I am and waiting not
    To rid my soul of one dark blot,
    To Thee, whose blood can cleanse each spot,
      O Lamb of God, I come, I come.

    3. Just as I am, though tossed about
    With many a conflict, many a doubt,
    Fightings and fears within, without,
      O Lamb of God, I come, I come.

    4. Just as I am, poor, wretched, blind;
    Sight, riches, healing of the mind,
    Yea, all I need, in Thee to find,
      O Lamb of God, I come, I come.

    5. Just as I am, Thou wilt receive,
    Wilt welcome, pardon, cleanse, relieve;
    Because Thy promise I believe,
      O Lamb of God, I come, I come.

    6. Just as I am, Thy love unknown
    Has broken every barrier down;
    Now to be Thine, yea, Thine alone,
      O Lamb of God, I come, I come.

                                               Charlotte Elliott, 1836, a.


319

                                                                     S. M.

    Not all the blood of beasts
      On Jewish altars slain,
    Could give the guilty conscience peace
      Or wash away the stain.

    2. But Christ, the heavenly Lamb,
      Takes all our sins away;
    A sacrifice of nobler name
      And richer blood than they.

    3. My faith would lay her hand
      On that dear head of Thine,
    While like a penitent I stand
      And there confess my sin.

    4. My soul looks back to see
      The burdens Thou didst bear
    When hanging on the cursed tree,
      And knows her guilt was there.

    5. Believing, we rejoice
      To see the curse remove;
    We bless the Lamb with cheerful voice
      And sing His bleeding love.

                                                        Isaac Watts, 1709.


320

                                                                     S. M.

    Not what these hands have done
      Can save this guilty soul;
    Not what this toiling flesh has borne
      Can make my spirit whole.

    2. Not what I feel or do
      Can give me peace with God;
    Not all my prayers and sighs and tears
      Can bear my awful load.

    3. Thy work alone, O Christ,
      Can ease this weight of sin;
    Thy blood alone, O Lamb of God,
      Can give me peace within.

    4. Thy love to me, O God,
      Not mine, O Lord, to Thee,
    Can rid me of this dark unrest
      And set my spirit free.

    5. Thy grace alone, O God,
      To me can pardon speak;
    Thy power alone, O Son of God,
      Can this sore bondage break.

    6. I bless the Christ of God;
      I rest on love divine,
    And with unfaltering lip and heart
      I call this Savior mine.

                                                           H. Bonar, 1861.


321

                                                                8, 8, 8, 6

    Drawn to the cross, which Thou hast blessed
    With healing gifts for souls distressed,
    To find in Thee my life, my rest,
      Christ Crucified, I come.

    2. Thou knowest all my griefs and fears,
    Thy grace abused, my misspent years;
    Yet now to Thee with contrite tears,
      Christ Crucified, I come.

    3. Wash me and take away each stain;
    Let nothing of my sin remain;
    For cleansing, though it be through pain,
      Christ Crucified, I come.

    4. And then for work to do for Thee,
    Which shall so sweet a service be
    That angels well might envy me,
      Christ Crucified, I come.

                                                 Genevieve M. Irons, 1880.


322

                                                                 7, 6, 8 l

    I lay my sins on Jesus,
      The spotless Lamb of God;
    He bears them all and frees us
      From the accursed load.
    I bring my guilt to Jesus,
      To wash my crimson stains
    White in His blood most precious
      Till not a spot remains.

    2. I lay my wants on Jesus;
      All fulness dwells in Him;
    He heals all my diseases,
      He doth my soul redeem.
    I lay my griefs on Jesus,
      My burdens and my cares;
    He from them all releases,
      He all my sorrows shares.

    3. I rest my soul on Jesus,
      This weary soul of mine;
    His right hand me embraces,
      I on His breast recline.
    I love the name of Jesus,
      Immanuel, Christ, the Lord;
    Like fragrance on the breezes
      His name abroad is poured.

    4. I long to be like Jesus,
      Meek, loving, lowly, mild;
    I long to be like Jesus,
      The Father’s holy Child.
    I long to be with Jesus
      Amid the heavenly throng,
    To sing with saints His praises,
      To learn the angels’ song.

                                                           H. Bonar, 1849.


323

                                                                 7, 6, 8 l

    Through Jesus’ blood and merit
      I am at peace with God;
    What, then, can daunt my spirit,
      However dark my road?
    My courage shall not fail me,
      For God is on my side;
    Though hell itself assail me,
      Its rage I may deride.

    2. There’s nothing that can sever
      Me from the love of God;
    No want, no pain whatever,
      No famine, peril, blood.
    Though thousand foes surround me
      And in their base design
    A sheep for slaughter count me,
      The victory still is mine.

    3. Yea, neither life’s temptation
      Nor death’s terrific hour,
    Nor angels of high station,
      Nor any other power,
    Nor things that now are present,
      Nor things that are to come,
    Nor height, however pleasant,
      Nor depth of deepest gloom,

    4. Nor any creature ever
      Shall from the love of God
    This wretched sinner sever;
      For in my Savior’s blood
    This love its fountain taketh;
      He hears my faithful prayer
    And nevermore forsaketh
      This child of His and heir.

                                            S. Dach, † 1659; A. Crull, tr.


324

                                                       6, 4, 6, 4, 6, 6, 4

    Nearer, my God, to Thee!
      Nearer to Thee!
    Through Word and Sacrament,
      Thou com’st to me.
    Thy grace is ever near,
    Thy Spirit ever here,
      Drawing to Thee.

    2. Ages on ages rolled
      Ere earth appeared;
    Yet Thine unmeasured love
      The way prepared.
    E’en then Thou yearn’st for me
    That I might nearer be,
      Nearer to Thee!

    3. Thy Son has come to earth
      My sin to bear,
    My every wound to heal,
      My pain to share.
    “God in the flesh” for me,
    Brings me now nearer Thee,
      Nearer to Thee!

    4. Lo! all my debt is paid,
      My guilt is gone.
    See! He has ris’n for me,
      My throne is won.
    Thanks, O my God, to Thee!
    None now can nearer be,
      Nearer to Thee!

    5. Welcome, then, to Thy home,
      Blest One in Three!
    As Thou hast promised, come!
      Come, Lord, to me!
    Work, Thou, O God, through me;
    Live, Thou, O God, in me,
      Ever in me!

    6. By the baptismal stream,
      Which made me Thine,
    By the dear flesh and blood,
      Thy love made mine,
    Purge Thou all sin from me
    That I may nearer be,
      Nearer to Thee!

    7. Surely it matters not
      What earth may bring,
    Death is of no account,
      Grace will I sing.
    Nothing remains for me
    Save to be nearer Thee,
      Nearer to Thee!

                                                       H. E. Jacobs, 1887.


325

                                                                    7s 6 l

    Rock of Ages, cleft for me,
    Let me hide myself in Thee;
    Let the water and the blood,
    From Thy riven side which flowed,
    Be of sin the double cure,
    Cleanse me from its guilt and power.

    2. Not the labors of my hands
    Can fulfil Thy Law’s demands;
    Could my zeal no respite know,
    Could my tears forever flow,
    All for sin could not atone;
    Thou must save, and Thou alone.

    3. Nothing in my hand I bring,
    Simply to Thy Cross I cling;
    Naked, come to Thee for dress;
    Helpless, look to Thee for grace;
    Foul, I to the fountain fly,—
    Wash me, Savior, or I die!

    4. While I draw this fleeting breath,
    When my eyelids close in death,
    When I soar to worlds unknown,
    See Thee on Thy judgment throne,
    Rock of Ages, cleft for me,
    Let me hide myself in Thee!

                                                   A. M. Toplady, 1776, a.


326

                                                                     L. M.

    Jesus, Thy blood and righteousness,
    My beauty are, my glorious dress;
    Midst flaming worlds, in these arrayed,
    With joy shall I lift up my head.

    2. Bold shall I stand in that great Day,
    For who aught to my charge shall lay?
    Fully through these absolved I am
    From sin and fear, from guilt and shame.

    3. The holy, meek, unspotted Lamb,
    Who from the Father’s bosom came,
    Who died for me, e’en me t’ atone,
    Now for my Lord and God I own.

    4. Lord, I believe Thy precious blood,
    Which at the mercy-seat of God
    Forever doth for sinners plead,
    For me—e’en for my soul—was shed.

    5. Lord, I believe were sinners more
    Than sands upon the ocean shore,
    Thou hast for all a ransom paid,
    For all a full atonement made.

    6. When from the dust of death I rise
    To claim my mansion in the skies,
    E’en then this shall be all my plea:
    Jesus hath lived and died for me.

    7. Jesus, be endless praise to Thee,
    Whose boundless mercy hath for me,
    For me, and all Thy hands have made,
    An everlasting ransom paid.

                                  L. v. Zinzendorf, 1739; J. Wesley, 1740.


327

                                                                     L. M.

    Our God so loved the world that He
    Gave His own Son and did decree
    That all who would in Him believe
    Should everlasting life receive.

    2. Christ Jesus is the ground of faith,
    Who was made flesh and suffered death;
    All that confide in Him alone
    Are built on this chief Corner-stone.

    3. God would not have the sinner die;
    His Son with saving grace is nigh,
    His Spirit in the Word doth teach
    How man the blessed goal may reach.

    4. Be of good cheer, for God’s own Son
    Forgives all sins which thou hast done;
    Thou’rt justified by Jesus’ blood,
    Thy Baptism grants the highest good.

    5. If thou be sick, if death draw near,
    This truth thy troubled heart can cheer:
    Christ Jesus saves my soul from death;
    That is the firmest ground of faith.

    6. Glory to God the Father, Son,
    And Holy Spirit, Three in One!
    To Thee, O blessed Trinity,
    Be praise now and eternally!

                                          J. Olearius, 1671; A. Crull, tr.


328

                                                                     S. M.

    Grace! ’tis a charming sound,
      Harmonious to the ear;
    Heav’n with the echo shall resound,
      And all the earth shall hear.

    2. Grace first contrived the way
      To save rebellious man;
    And all the steps that grace display
      Which drew the wondrous plan.

    3. Grace first inscribed my name
      In God’s eternal book;
    ’Twas grace that gave me to the Lamb,
      Who all my sorrows took.

    4. Grace led my roving feet
      To tread the heavenly road;
    And new supplies each hour I meet
      While pressing on to God.

    5. Grace taught my soul to pray
      And made my eyes o’erflow;
    ’Twas grace that kept me to this day
      And will not let me go.

    6. Grace all the work shall crown
      Through everlasting days;
    It lays in heaven the topmost stone
      And well deserves the praise.

                                                   Philip Doddridge, 1755.


329

                                                  6, 6, 6, 6, 8, 8 (H. M.)

    Thy works, not mine, O Christ,
      Speak gladness to this heart;
    They tell me all is done,
      They bid my fear depart.
    To whom, save Thee, who canst alone
    For sin atone, Lord, shall I flee?

    2. Thy cross, not mine, O Christ,
      Has borne the awful load
    Of sins that none in heaven
      Or earth could bear but God.
    To whom, save Thee, who canst alone
    For sin atone, Lord, shall I flee?

    3. Thy death, not mine, O Christ,
      Has paid the ransom due;
    Ten thousand deaths like mine
      Would have been all too few.
    To whom, save Thee, who canst alone
    For sin atone, Lord, shall I flee?

    4. Thy righteousness, O Christ,
      Alone can cover me;
    No righteousness avails
      Save that which is of Thee.
    To whom, save Thee, who canst alone
    For sin atone, Lord, shall I flee?

                                                           H. Bonar, 1857.


330

                                                                     C. M.

    O Mystery of Love Divine
      That thought and thanks o’erpowers!
    Lord Jesus, was our portion Thine,
      And is Thy portion ours?

    2. Emmanuel, didst Thou take our place
      To set us in Thine own?
    Didst Thou our low estate embrace
      To lift us to Thy throne?

    3. Didst Thou fulfil each righteous deed,
      God’s perfect will express,
    That we, th’ unfaithful ones, might plead
      Thy perfect faithfulness?

    4. On Thy pure soul did dread and gloom
      In that drear garden rise?
    Are ours the brightness and the bloom
      Of Thine own Paradise?

    5. For Thee the Father’s hidden face?
      For Thee the bitter cry?
    For us the Father’s endless grace,
      The song of victory?

    6. Our load of sin and misery
      Didst Thou, the Sinless, bear?
    Thy spotless robe of purity
      Do we, the sinners, wear?

    7. Lord Jesus, is it even so?
      Have we been lovèd thus?
    What love can we on Thee bestow
      Who hast exchanged with us?

    8. Thou, who our very place didst take,
      Dwell in our very heart.
    Thou, who Thy portion ours dost make,
      Thyself, Thyself, impart.

                                                         T. H. Gill, 1864.




SANCTIFICATION.


OBEDIENCE.


331

                                                          5, 5, 8, 8, 5, 5

    Jesus, still lead on
    Till our rest be won;
      And although the way be cheerless,
      We will follow calm and fearless.
    Guide us by Thy hand
    To our fatherland.

    2. If the way be drear,
    If the Foe be near,
      Let no faithless fears o’ertake us;
      Let not faith and hope forsake us;
    For through many a woe
    To our home we go.

    3. When we seek relief
    From a long-felt grief;
      When temptations come alluring,
      Make us patient and enduring;
    Show us that bright shore
    Where we weep no more.

    4. Jesus, still lead on
    Till our rest be won.
      Heavenly Leader, still direct us,
      Still support, control, protect us,
    Till we safely stand
    In our fatherland.

                        L. v. Zinzendorf, 1721; Jane Borthwick, tr., 1853.


332

                                                                     L. M.

    God of my life, whose gracious power
      Through various deaths my soul hath led;
    Or turned aside the fatal hour,
      Or lifted up my sinking head:

    2. In all my ways Thy hand I own,
      Thy ruling providence I see.
    O help me still my course to run
      And still direct my path to Thee.

    3. Whither, O whither should I fly
      But to my loving Savior’s breast?
    Secure within Thine arms to lie
      And safe beneath Thy wings to rest!

    4. I have no skill the snare to shun;
      But Thou, O Christ, my Wisdom art!
    I ever into ruin run;
      But Thou art greater than my heart.

    5. Foolish and impotent and blind,
      Lead me a way I have not known;
    Bring me where I my heaven may find,
      The heaven of loving Thee alone.

    6. Enlarge my heart to make Thee room;
      Enter and in me ever stay.
    The crooked then shall straight become;
      The darkness shall be lost in day.

                                                     Charles Wesley, 1740.


333

                                              8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 7, 7, 8, 7, 7

    Let us ever walk with Jesus,
      Follow His example pure,
    Flee the world, that would deceive us
      And to sin our soul allure.
    Ever in His footsteps treading,
      Body here, yet soul above,
      Full of faith and hope and love,
    Let us do the Father’s bidding.
      Faithful Lord, abide with me;
      Savior, lead, I follow Thee.

    2. Let us suffer here with Jesus,
      To His image e’er conform;
    Heaven’s glory soon will please us,
      Sunshine follow on the storm.
    Having sown in tears, in gladness
      We shall reap. With patient cheer
      Let us hope and, void of fear,
    Bide the turning of our sadness.
      Christ, I suffer here with Thee,
      There, oh, share Thy joy with me!

    3. Let us also die with Jesus.
      His death from the second death,
    From our soul’s destruction, frees us,
      Quickens us with life’s glad breath.
    Let us mortify, while living,
      Flesh and blood and die to sin;
      And the grave that shuts us in
    Shall but prove the gate to heaven.
      Jesus, here I die to Thee,
      There to live eternally.

    4. Let us also live with Jesus;
      Since He’s risen from the dead,
    Must the conquered grave release us.
      Jesus, Thou art now our Head,
    We Thy body’s cherished members.
      Where Thou livest, live shall we;
      Own us evermore to be,
    Dearest Friend, Thy loved brethren.
      Jesus, here I live to Thee,
      Yonder, too, eternally.

                                S. v. Birken, 1652; J. A. Rimbach, tr., a.


334

                                                          8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 8

    Come, follow Me, the Savior spake,
      All in My way abiding;
    Deny yourselves, the world forsake,
      Obey My call and guiding;
    O bear the cross, whate’er betide,
    Take My example for your guide.

    2. I am the Light, I light the way,
      A virtuous life displaying;
    Who comes to Me and follows, aye,
      I lead from his dark straying.
    I am the Way, and well I show
    How men should sojourn here below.

    3. My heart in lowliness abounds,
      My soul with love is glowing,
    And from My mouth are words and sounds
      Of meekness overflowing.
    My heart, My mind, My strength, My all
    To God I yield, on Him I call.

    4. I teach you to avoid and flee
      What harms your soul’s salvation,
    Your heart to purify and free
      From sin’s abomination.
    Your Rock and Fortress e’er am I
    And lead you to the life on high.

    5. But if too hot you find the fray,
      I, at your side, stand ready;
    I fight Myself, I lead the way,
      At all times firm and steady.
    A coward he who will not heed
    When the chief Captain takes the lead.

    6. Who seeks to find his soul’s welfare
      Without Me, he shall lose it;
    But who to lose it may appear,
      In God shall introduce it.
    Who bears no cross nor follows hard,
    Deserves not Me nor My reward.

    7. Then let us follow our dear Lord,
      And bear the cross appointed
    And, bravely cleaving to His Word,
      In suffering be undaunted.
    Who has not stood the battle’s strain
    The crown of life shall ne’er obtain.

                              J. Scheffler, 1668; C. W. Schaeffer, tr., a.


335

                                                                 8, 7, 8 l

    Jesus, I my cross have taken,
      All to leave and follow Thee;
    Destitute, despised, forsaken,
      Thou from hence my All shalt be.
    Perish every fond ambition,
      All I’ve sought or hoped or known;
    Yet how rich is my condition!
      God and heaven are still my own.

    2. Let the world despise and leave me,
      They have left my Savior too;
    Human hearts and looks deceive me,
      Thou art not, like them, untrue.
    And while Thou shalt smile upon me,
      God of wisdom, love, and might,
    Foes may hate and friends may shun me;
      Show Thy face, and all is bright.

    3. Go, then, earthly fame and treasure!
      Come, disaster, scorn, and pain!
    In Thy service, pain is pleasure;
      With Thy favor, loss is gain.
    I have called Thee Abba, Father!
      I have stayed my heart on Thee;
    Storms may howl, and clouds may gather,
      All must work for good to me.

    4. Man may trouble and distress me,
      ’Twill but drive me to Thy breast;
    Life with trials hard may press me,
      Heaven will bring me sweeter rest.
    Oh, ’tis not in grief to harm me
      While Thy love is left to me!
    Oh, ’twere not in joy to charm me
      Were that joy unmixed with Thee.

    5. Take, my soul, thy full salvation;
      Rise o’er sin and fear and care,
    Joy to find in every station,
      Something still to do or bear.
    Think what Spirit dwells within thee,
      What a Father’s smile is thine,
    What a Savior died to win thee,—
      Child of heaven, shouldst thou repine?

    6. Haste, then, on from grace to glory,
      Armed by faith and winged by prayer;
    Heaven’s eternal day’s before thee,
      God’s own hand shall guide thee there.
    Soon shall close thy earthly mission,
      Swift shall pass thy pilgrim days,
    Hope soon change to glad fruition,
      Faith to sight and prayer to praise.

                                                         H. F. Lyte, 1824.


336

                                                                 8, 7, 8 l

    Holy Father! Thou hast taught me
      I should live to Thee alone;
    Year by year Thy hand hath brought me
      On through dangers oft unknown.
    When I wandered, Thou hast found me;
      When I doubted, sent me light;
    Still Thine arm has been around me,
      All my paths were in Thy sight.

    2. In the world will foes assail me,
      Crafty, stronger far than I;
    And the strife will never fail me,
      Well I know, before I die.
    Therefore, Lord, I come, believing
      Thou canst give the power I need,
    Through the prayer of faith receiving
      Strength, the Spirit’s strength, indeed.

    3. I would trust in Thy protecting,
      Wholly rest upon Thine arm,
    Follow wholly Thy directing,
      Thou mine only Guard from harm!
    Keep me from mine own undoing,
      Help me turn to Thee when tried;
    Still my footsteps, Father, viewing,
      Keep me ever at Thy side.

                                                     J. M. Neale, 1842, a.


337

                                                    6, 4, 6, 4, 6, 6, 6, 4

    Savior, I follow on,
      Guided by Thee,
    Seeing not yet the hand
      That leadeth me.
    Hushed be my heart and still,
    Fear I no further ill,
    Only to meet Thy will
      My will shall be.

    2. Riven the rock for me
      Thirst to relieve,
    Manna from heaven falls
      Fresh every eve;
    Never a want severe
    Causeth my eye a tear
    But Thou dost whisper near,
      “Only believe!”

    3. Often to Marah’s brink
      Have I been brought;
    Shrinking the cup to drink,
      Help I have sought;
    And with the prayer’s ascent
    Jesus the branch hath rent,
    Quickly relief hath sent,
      Sweetening the draught.

    4. Savior, I long to walk
      Closer with Thee;
    Led by Thy guiding hand,
      Ever to be
    Constantly near Thy side,
    Quickened and purified,
    Living for Him who died
      Freely for me.

                                                     C. S. Robinson, 1862.


338

                                                                 S. M. 8 l

    O Thou who wouldst not have
      One wretched sinner die,
    Who diedst Thyself my soul to save
      From endless misery,
    Teach me my course to run,
      While yet I sojourn here,
    That when Thou comest on Thy throne
      I may with joy appear.

    2. Thou art Thyself the Way,
      Thyself in me reveal;
    So shall I pass my life’s short day
      Obedient to Thy will;
    So shall I love my God
      Because He first loved me,
    And praise Thee in Thy bright abode
      Through all eternity.

                                                  Charles Wesley, 1749, a.


339

                                               8, 8, 6, 8, 8, 6 (C. P. M.)

    May we Thy precepts, Lord, fulfil
    And do on earth our Father’s will
      As angels do above;
    Still walk in Christ, the living Way,
    With all Thy children and obey
      The law of Christian love.

    2. So may we join Thy name to bless,
    Thy grace adore, Thy power confess,
      From sin and strife to flee.
    One is our calling, one our name,
    The end of all our hopes the same,
      A crown of life with Thee.

    3. Spirit of Life, of Love and Peace,
    Unite our hearts, our joy increase,
      Thy gracious help supply.
    To each of us the blessing give
    In Christian fellowship to live,
      In joyful hope to die.

                                                    Edward Osler, 1836, a.


340

                                                          8, 7, 8, 7, 4, 7

    Guide me, O Thou great Jehovah,
      Pilgrim through this barren land;
    I am weak, but Thou art mighty,
      Hold me with Thy powerful hand:
        Bread of heaven,
    Feed me till I want no more!

    2. Open now the crystal fountain
      Whence the healing streams do flow,
    Let the fiery, cloudy pillar
      Lead me all my journey through:
        Strong Deliverer,
    Be Thou still my Strength and Shield!

    3. When I tread the verge of Jordan,
      Bid my anxious fears subside;
    Death of death and hell’s Destruction,
      Land me safe on Canaan’s side:
        Songs of praises
    I will ever give to Thee.

                               Wm. Williams, 1745; P. Williams, tr., 1771.


341

                                                                     S. M.

    The man is ever blest
      Who shuns the sinners’ ways,
    Among their counsels never stands,
      Nor takes the scorners’ place;

    2. But makes the Law of God
      His study and delight
    Amid the labors of the day
      And watches of the night.

    3. He like a tree shall thrive,
      With waters near the root;
    Fresh as the leaf his name shall live,
      His works are heavenly fruit.

    4. Not so th’ ungodly race,
      They no such blessings find;
    Their hopes shall flee like empty chaff
      Before the driving wind.

    5. How will they bear to stand
      Before that judgment-seat
    Where all the saints at Christ’s right hand
      In full assembly meet?

    6. He knows and He approves
      The way the righteous go;
    But sinners and their works shall meet
      A dreadful overthrow.

                                                        Isaac Watts, 1719.


342

                                                                     C. M.

    O that the Lord would guide my ways
      To keep His statutes still!
    O that my God would grant me grace
      To know and do His will!

    2. Order my footsteps by Thy Word
      And make my heart sincere;
    Let sin have no dominion, Lord,
      But keep my conscience clear.

    3. Assist my soul, too apt to stray,
      A stricter watch to keep;
    And should I e’er forget Thy way,
      Restore Thy wandering sheep.

    4. Make me to walk in Thy commands,—
      ’Tis a delightful road,—
    Nor let my head or heart or hands
      Offend against my God.

                                                     Isaac Watts, 1719, a.


343

                                                          7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 8

    God, from all eternity
      In Thy Son Thou didst elect me;
    Therefore, Father, graciously
      In my course to heaven direct me;
    Send to me Thy Holy Spirit
    That His gifts I may inherit.

    2. Though alive, I’m dead in sin,
      To all good things lost by nature;
    Holy Ghost, change me within,
      Make of me a new-born creature;
    For the flesh deserves damnation
    And can never gain salvation.

    3. Drive away the gloomy night
      Of my sinful meditation;
    Quench all thoughts that are not right,
      Reason hold in limitation;
    Grant that I from Thee with yearning
    Wisdom always may be learning.

    4. All desires and thoughts of mine,
      From my youth, are only evil;
    Save me by Thy power divine
      From myself and from the devil;
    Give me strength in ample measure,
    Both to will and do Thy pleasure.

    5. Such a heart create in me,
      That in Thee, O God, believing,
    At the base iniquity
      Of my sins I may be grieving;
    And when hours of woe betide me,
    In the wounds of Jesus hide me.

    6. As a branchlet in the Vine,
      In my blessed Lord, implant me;
    Ever of my Head divine
      To remain a member grant me;
    Oh, let Him, my Lord and Savior,
    Be my Life and Love forever!

    7. Faith and hope and charity
      Graciously, O Father, give me;
    Be my Guardian constantly
      That no devil e’er may grieve me;
    Grant me humbleness and gladness,
    Peace and patience in my sadness.

    8. Help me speak what’s right and just,
      And keep silence on occasion;
    Help me pray, Lord, as I must;
      Help me bear my tribulation;
    Help me die and let my spirit
    Everlasting life inherit.

                                           C. Neumann, 1680; A. Crull, tr.


344

                                                    6, 7, 6, 7, 6, 6, 6, 6

    How can I thank Thee, Lord,
      For all Thy loving-kindness?
    Thou hast so long a time
      Had patience with my blindness
    When dead in many sins
      And trespasses I lay,
    And kindled, holy God,
      Thine anger every day.

    2. Lord, Thou hast shown to me
      Divine commiseration:
    I persevered in sin,
      But Thou in great compassion;
    I did resist Thee, Lord,
      Deferring to repent;
    Thou didst defer Thy wrath
      And instant punishment.

    3. It is Thy work alone
      That now I am converted,
    Thy power o’er Satan’s work
      In me Thou hast asserted;
    Thy mercy, that doth reach
      Unto the clouds, O Lord,
    Did break my stony heart
      By Thine almighty Word.

    4. Though able to offend
      Thee, Lord, by sin and failing,
    Still to regain Thy grace
      My strength was unavailing.
    Though I could fall from grace
      And choose the way of sin,
    I had no strength to rise,
      A new life to begin.

    5. But Thou hast raised me up
      And with divine compassion
    Hast shown me, Lord, the way
      That leadeth to salvation.
    I thank Thee, Lord, that now
      My former sins I hate
    And freely—not from fear—
      Dead works abominate.

    6. That I may not backslide,
      But life in heaven inherit,
    Grant me, while here I live,
      O Lord, Thy Holy Spirit
    That He may give me strength
      In mine infirmity
    And e’er renew my heart
      To serve Thee willingly.

    7. O guide and lead me, Lord,
      While here below I wander;
    Grant that I follow Thee,
      My Guide and my Commander.
    For if I lead myself,
      I soon am led astray;
    But if Thou leadest me,
      I do my duty aye.

    8. O Father, God of Love,
      Hear now my supplication!
    Lord Jesus, Son of God,
      O grant me Thy salvation!
    And Thou, O Holy Ghost,
      Always abide with me
    That I may serve Thee here
      And there eternally!

                                       G. Gesenius, c. 1647; A. Crull, tr.


CONSECRATION.


345

                                                          9, 8, 9, 8, 8, 8

    Soul, what return has God, thy Savior,
      For all He gives thee day by day?
    O hast thou in thy gift a favor
      That can delight and please Him?—say!
    The best of offerings He requires;
    Give Him thy heart with its desires.

    2. Give God His own if aught thou’rt giving;
      Say, soul, to whom belongs thy heart?
    Can Satan, he who hates the living,
      Or any creature claim a part?—
    To Thee alone I will assign,
    O Lord, my heart and all that’s mine.

    3. Accept the gift which Thou requirest,
      The first-fruits of my heart, O God!
    The offerings Thou so much desirest,
      For which Thy Son paid with His blood.
    To Thee alone I now resign
    My heart, to be forever Thine.

    4. Whom should I give my heart’s affection
      But Thee, who givest Thine to faith?
    Thy fervent love is my protection;
      Lord, Thou hast loved me unto death.
    My heart with Thine shall ever be
    One heart throughout eternity.

                                                   C. F. Lochner, c. 1673.


346

                                                    6, 7, 6, 7, 6, 6, 6, 6

    O God, Thou faithful God,
      Thou Fount that ever flowest,
    Without whom nothing is,
      Who all good gifts bestowest,
    A pure and healthy frame
      O give me and within
    A conscience free from blame,
      A soul unhurt by sin.

    2. And grant me, Lord, to do,
      With ready heart and willing,
    Whate’er Thou shalt command,
      My calling here fulfilling;
    To do it when I ought,
      With all my strength; and bless
    The work I thus have wrought,
      For Thou must give success.

    3. O let me never speak
      What bounds of truth exceedeth;
    Grant that no idle word
      From out my mouth proceedeth;
    And grant, when in my place
      I must and ought to speak,
    My words due power and grace,
      Nor let me wound the weak.

    4. If dangers gather round,
      Still keep me calm and fearless;
    Help me to bear the cross
      When life is dark and cheerless;
    Let me subdue my foe
      By words and actions kind;
    When counsel I would know,
      Good counsel let me find.

    5. And let me with all men,
      As far as in me lieth,
    In peace and friendship live;
      And if Thy gift supplieth
    Me wealth and honor fair,
      Then this refuse me not,
    That naught be mingled there
      Of goods unjustly got.

    6. And if a longer life
      Be here on earth decreed me,
    And Thou through many a strife
      To age at last wilt lead me,
    Thy patience in me shed,
      Avert all sin and shame,
    And crown my hoary head
      With pure, untarnished fame.

    7. Let me depart this life
      Confiding in my Savior;
    Do Thou my soul receive,
      That it may live forever;
    And let my body have
      A quiet resting-place
    Beside a Christian’s grave;
      And let it sleep in peace.

    8. And on that solemn day
      When all the dead are waking,
    Stretch o’er my grave Thy hand,
      Thyself my slumbers breaking;
    Then let me hear Thy voice,
      Change Thou this earthly frame,
    And bid me aye rejoice
      With those who love Thy name.

                                                        J. Heermann, 1630.


347

                                                    6, 7, 6, 7, 6, 6, 6, 6

    O God, forsake me not!
      Thy gracious presence lend me;
    Lead Thou Thy helpless child,
      Thy Holy Spirit send me
    That I my course may run.
      Be Thou my Light, my Lot,
    My Staff, my Rock, my Shield,—
      O God, forsake me not!

    2. O God, forsake me not!
      Take not Thy Spirit from me
    And suffer not the might
      Of sin to overcome me;
    Increase my feeble faith,
      Which Thou Thyself hast wrought;
    Be Thou my Strength and Power,—
      O God, forsake me not!

    3. O God, forsake me not!
      Lord, hear my supplication!
    In every evil hour
      Help me o’ercome temptation;
    And when the Prince of hell
      My conscience seeks to blot,
    Be Thou not far from me,—
      O God, forsake me not!

    4. O God, forsake me not!
      Thy mercy I’m addressing;
    O Father, God of Love,
      Grant me Thy heavenly blessing
    To do the duty which
      To me Thou didst allot,
    To do what pleaseth Thee,—
      O God, forsake me not!

    5. O God, forsake me not!
      Lord, I am Thine forever.
    Grant me true faith in Thee;
      Grant that I leave Thee never;
    Grant me a blessed end
      When my good fight is fought,
    Help me in life and death,—
      O God, forsake me not!

                                          S. Franck, † 1725; A. Crull, tr.


348

                                                                 L. M. 6 l

    O Love, who formedst me to wear
      The image of Thy Godhead here;
    Who soughtest me with tender care
      Through all my wand’rings wild and drear,—
    O Love, I give myself to Thee,
    Thine ever, only Thine, to be.

    2. O Love, who ere life’s earliest dawn
      On me Thy choice hast gently laid;
    O Love, who here as man wast born
      And like to us in all things made,—
    O Love, I give myself to Thee,
    Thine ever, only Thine, to be.

    3. O Love, who once in time wast slain,
      Pierced through and through with bitter woe;
    O Love, who, wrestling thus, didst gain
      That we eternal joy might know,—
    O Love, I give myself to Thee,
    Thine ever, only Thine, to be.

    4. O Love, of whom in truth and light,
      The Word and Spirit, life and power,
    Whose heart was bared to them that smite,
      To shield us in our trial hour,—
    O Love, I give myself to Thee,
    Thine ever, only Thine, to be.

    5. O Love, who thus hast bound me fast
      Beneath that gentle yoke of Thine;
    Love, who hast conquered me at last,
      Enrapturing this heart of mine,—
    O Love, I give myself to Thee,
    Thine ever, only Thine, to be.

    6. O Love, who lovest me for aye,
      Who for my soul dost ever plead;
    O Love, who didst my ransom pay,
      Who for me e’er dost intercede,—
    O Love, I give myself to Thee,
    Thine ever, only Thine, to be.

    7. O Love, who once shalt bid me rise
      From out this dying life of ours;
    O Love, who once above yon skies
      Shalt set me in the fadeless bowers,—
    O Love, I give myself to Thee,
    Thine ever, only Thine, to be.

                          J. Scheffler, 1657; C. Winkworth, tr., a., 1858.


349

                                                          9, 8, 9, 8, 8, 6

    Thee will I love, my Strength, my Tower,
      Thee will I love, my Hope, my Joy,
    Thee will I love with all my power,
      With ardor time shall ne’er destroy.
    Thee will I love, O Light Divine,
    So long as life is mine.

    2. Thee will I love, my Life, my Savior,
      Who art my best and truest Friend;
    Thee will I love and praise forever,
      For never shall Thy kindness end;
    Thee will I love with all my heart,
    For Thou my Bridegroom art.

    3. Alas! that I so late have known Thee,
      Who art the Fairest and the Best,
    Nor sooner for my Lord could own Thee,
      Our highest Good, our only Rest!
    Now bitter shame and grief I prove
    O’er this my tardy love.

    4. I wandered long in willing blindness;
      I sought Thee, but I found Thee not;
    For still I shunned Thy beams of kindness,
      The creature-light filled all my thought.
    And if at last I see Thee now,
    ’Twas Thou to me didst bow!

    5. I thank Thee, Jesus, Sun from heaven,
      Whose shining hath brought light to me;
    I thank Thee, who hast richly given
      All that could make me glad and free;
    I thank Thee that my soul is healed
    By what Thy lips revealed.

    6. O keep me watchful, then, and humble
      And suffer me no more to stray;
    Uphold me when my feet would stumble,
      Nor let me loiter by the way;
    Fill all my nature with Thy light,
    O Radiance strong and bright!

    7. O teach me, Lord, to love Thee truly
      With soul and body, head and heart,
    And grant me grace that I may duly
      Practise fore’er love’s sacred art;
    Grant that my every thought may be
    Directed e’er to Thee.

    8. Thee will I love, my Crown of gladness,
      Thee will I love, my God and Lord,
    Amid the darkest depths of sadness,
      Not for the hope of high reward,
    For Thine own sake, O Light Divine,
    So long as life is mine.

                          J. Scheffler, 1657; C. Winkworth, tr., a., 1863.


350

                                                                     L. M.

    Renew me, O eternal Light,
    And let my heart and soul be bright,
    Illumined with the light of grace,
    That issues from Thy holy face.

    2. Destroy in me the lust of sin,
    From all impureness make me clean;
    O grant me power and strength, my God,
    To strive against my flesh and blood.

    3. Create in me a new heart, Lord,
    That gladly I obey Thy Word
    And naught but what Thou wilt, desire;
    With such new life my soul inspire.

    4. Grant that I only Thee may love
    And seek those things which are above,
    Till I behold Thee face to face,
    O Light eternal, through Thy grace.

                                          J. F. Ruopp, 1704; A. Crull, tr.


351

                                                       6, 6, 4, 6, 6, 6, 4

    My faith looks up to Thee,
    Thou Lamb of Calvary,
      Savior divine!
    Now hear me while I pray;
    Take all my guilt away;
    O let me from this day
      Be wholly Thine!

    2. May Thy rich grace impart
    Strength to my fainting heart,
      My zeal inspire.
    As Thou hast died for me,
    Oh, may my love to Thee
    Pure, warm, and changeless be,
      A living fire!

    3. While life’s dark maze I tread
    And griefs around me spread,
      Be Thou my Guide.
    Bid darkness turn to day,
    Wipe sorrow’s tears away,
    Nor let me ever stray
      From Thee aside.

    4. When ends life’s transient dream,
    When death’s cold, sullen stream
      Shall o’er me roll,
    Blest Savior, then, in love,
    Fear and distrust remove;
    Oh, bear me safe above,
      A ransomed soul!

                                                         Ray Palmer, 1830.


352

                                                                    6s 6 l

    Thy life was giv’n for me,
      Thy blood, O Lord, was shed,
    That I might ransomed be
      And quickened from the dead.
    Thy life was giv’n for me:
    What have I giv’n for Thee?

    2. Thy Father’s home of light.
      Thy rainbow-circled throne,
    Were left for earthly night,
      For wanderings sad and lone.
    Yea, all was left for me:
    Have I left aught for Thee?

    3. And Thou hast brought to me,
      Down from Thy home above,
    Salvation full and free,
      Thy pardon and Thy love.
    Great gifts Thou broughtest me:
    What have I brought to Thee?

    4. Oh, let my life be given,
      My years for Thee be spent,
    World’s fetters all be riven,
      And pain with joy be blent!
    Thou gavest Thyself for me;
    I give myself to Thee.

                                         F. R. Havergal, 1858, abr. and a.


353

                                                    6, 4, 6, 4, 6, 6, 6, 4

    Savior, Thy dying love
      Thou gavest me;
    Nor should I aught withhold,
      Dear Lord, from Thee.
    In love my soul would bow,
    My heart fulfil its vow,
    Some off’ring bring Thee now,
      Something for Thee.

    2. O’er the blest mercy-seat,
      Pleading for me,
    My feeble faith looks up,
      Jesus, to Thee.
    Help me the cross to bear,
    Thy wondrous love declare,
    Some song to raise or pray’r,
      Something for Thee.

    3. Give me a faithful heart—
      Likeness to Thee—
    That each departing day
      Henceforth may see
    Some work of love begun,
    Some deed of kindness done,
    Some wand’rer sought and won,
      Something for Thee.

    4. All that I am and have—
      Thy gifts so free—
    In joy, in grief, through life,
      Dear Lord, for Thee!
    And when Thy face I see,
    My ransomed soul shall be
    Through all eternity
      Something for Thee.

                                                       S. D. Phelps, 1867.


354

                                                                     C. M.

    O for a faith that will not shrink,
      Though pressed by many a foe;
    That will not tremble on the brink
      Of poverty or woe;

    2. That will not murmur nor complain
      Beneath the chastening rod,
    But in the hour of grief or pain
      Can lean upon its God;

    3. A faith that shines more bright and clear
      When tempests rage without;
    That, when in danger, knows no fear,
      In darkness feels no doubt;

    4. That bears unmoved the world’s dread frown
      Nor heeds its scornful smile;
    That sin’s wild ocean cannot drown,
      Nor Satan’s arts beguile;

    5. A faith that keeps the narrow way
      Till life’s last hour is fled
    And with a pure and heavenly ray
      Lights up a dying bed.

    6. Lord, give us such a faith as this,
      And then, whate’er may come,
    We’ll taste, e’en here, the hallowed bliss
      Of an eternal home.

                                                 W. H. Bathhurst, 1830, a.


355

                                                                        7s

    Take my life and let it be
    Consecrated, Lord, to Thee;
    Take my moments and my days,
    Let them flow in ceaseless praise.

    2. Take my hands and let them move
    At the impulse of Thy love;
    Take my feet and let them be
    Swift and beautiful for Thee.

    3. Take my voice and let me sing
    Always, only, for my King;
    Take my lips and let them be
    Filled with messages from Thee.

    4. Take my silver and my gold,
    Not a mite would I withhold;
    Take my intellect and use
    Every power as Thou shalt choose.

    5. Take my will and make it Thine,
    It shall be no longer mine;
    Take my heart, it is Thine own,
    It shall be Thy royal throne.

    6. Take my love, my Lord, I pour
    At Thy feet its treasure-store;
    Take myself, and I will be
    Ever, only, all for Thee.

                                                     F. R. Havergal, 1874.


356

                                                                7, 7, 7, 5

    Jesus, Shepherd of the sheep,
    Who Thy Father’s flock dost keep,
    Safe we wake and safe we sleep
      Guarded still by Thee.

    2. In Thy promise firm we stand,
    None can pluck us from Thy hand,
    Speak—we hear—at Thy command
      We will follow Thee.

    3. By Thy blood our souls were bought,
    By Thy life salvation wrought,
    By Thy light our feet are taught,
      Lord, to follow Thee.

    4. Father, draw us to Thy Son;
    We with joy will follow on
    Till the work of grace is done
      And, from sin set free,

    5. We, in robes of glory dressed,
    Join th’ assembly of the blest,
    Gathered to eternal rest
      In the fold with Thee.

                                                         Henry Cook, 1868.


GIVING.


357

                                                                8, 8, 8, 4

    O Lord of heaven and earth and sea,
    To Thee all praise and glory be;
    How shall we show our love to Thee,
      Who givest all?

    2. Thou didst not spare Thine only Son,
    But gav’st Him for a world undone,
    And freely with that Blessed One
      Thou givest all.

    3. Thou giv’st the Spirit’s holy dower,
    Spirit of Life and Love and Power,
    And dost His sevenfold graces shower
      Upon us all.

    4. For souls redeemed, for sins forgiven,
    For means of grace and hopes of heaven,
    What can to Thee, O Lord, be given,
      Who givest all?

    5. We lose what on ourselves we spend;
    We have, as treasure without end,
    Whatever, Lord, to Thee we lend,
      Who givest all.

    6. Whatever, Lord, we lend to Thee
    Repaid a thousandfold will be;
    Then gladly will we give to Thee,
      Who givest all.

                                                C. Wordsworth, abr., 1863.


358

                                                                 8, 7, 8 l

    Lord of Glory, Thou hast bought us
      With Thy life-blood as the price,
    Never grudging for the lost ones
      That tremendous sacrifice;
    And with that hast freely given
      Blessings countless as the sand,
    To th’ unthankful and the evil
      With Thine own unsparing hand.

    2. Grant us hearts, dear Lord, to yield Thee,
      Gladly, freely, of Thine own;
    With the sunshine of Thy goodness
      Melt our thankless hearts of stone,
    Till our cold and selfish natures,
      Warmed by Thee, at length believe
    That more happy and more blessed
      ’Tis to give than to receive.

    3. Wondrous honor hast Thou given
      To our humblest charity
    In Thine own mysterious sentence,
      “Ye have done it unto Me.”
    Can it be, O gracious Master,
      Thou dost deign for alms to sue,
    Saying by Thy poor and needy,
      “Give as I have given to you”?

    4. Lord of Glory, who hast bought us
      With Thy life-blood as the price,
    Never grudging for the lost ones
      That tremendous sacrifice,
    Give us faith to trust Thee boldly,
      Hope, to stay our souls on Thee;
    But oh! best of all Thy graces,
      Give us Thine own charity.

                                                E. S. Alderson, 1868, abr.


359

                                                                     C. M.

    Lord, lead the way the Savior went,
      By lane and cell obscure,
    And let love’s treasures still be spent,
      Like His, upon the poor.

    2. Like Him through scenes of deep distress,
      Who bore the world’s sad weight,
    We, in their crowded loneliness,
      Would seek the desolate.

    3. For Thou hast placed us side by side
      In this wide world of ill,
    And that Thy followers may be tried,
      The poor are with us still.

    4. Mean are all offerings we can make,
      But Thou hast taught us, Lord,
    If given for the Savior’s sake,
      They lose not their reward.

                                                       W. Crosswell, 1831.


360

                                                                     L. M.

    Almighty Father, heav’n and earth
      With lavish wealth before Thee bow;
    Those treasures owe to Thee their birth,
      Creator, Ruler, Giver, Thou.

    2. The wealth of earth, of sky, of sea,
      The gold, the silver, sparkling gem,
    The waving corn, the bending tree,
      Are Thine; to us Thou lendest them.

    3. To Thee, as early morning’s dew,
      Our praises, alms, and prayer shall rise,
    As rose, when joyous earth was new,
      Faith’s patriarchal sacrifice.

    4. We, Lord, would lay, at Thy behest,
      The costliest offerings on Thy shrine;
    But when we give, and give our best,
      We only give Thee what is Thine.

    5. O Father, whence all blessings come,
      O Son, Dispenser of God’s store,
    O Spirit, bear our offerings home;
      Lord, make them Thine forevermore.

                                                       E. A. Dayman, 1868.


361

                                                                     S. M.

    We give Thee but Thine own,
      Whate’er the gift may be;
    All that we have is Thine alone,
      A trust, O Lord, from Thee.

    2. May we Thy bounties thus
      As stewards true receive
    And gladly, as Thou blessest us,
      To Thee our first-fruits give!

    3. To comfort and to bless,
      To find a balm for woe,
    To tend the lone and fatherless—
      Is angels’ work below.

    4. The captive to release,
      To God the lost to bring,
    To teach the way of life and peace—
      It is a Christlike thing.

    5. And we believe Thy Word,
      Though dim our faith may be.
    Whate’er for Thine we do, O Lord,
      We do it unto Thee.

                                                     W. W. How, 1858, abr.


362

                                                                8, 8, 8, 6

    O God of mercy, God of might,
    In love and pity infinite,
    Teach us, as ever in Thy sight,
      To live our life to Thee.

    2. And Thou, who cam’st on earth to die
    That fallen man might live thereby,
    O hear us, for to Thee we cry,
      In hope, O Lord, to Thee.

    3. Teach us the lesson Thou hast taught,
    To feel for those Thy blood hath bought,
    That every word and deed and thought
      May work a work for Thee.

    4. For all are brethren, far and wide,
    Since Thou, O Lord, for all hast died;
    Then teach us, whatsoe’er betide,
      To love them all in Thee.

    5. In sickness, sorrow, want, or care,
    Whate’er it be, ’tis ours to share;
    May we, where help is needed, there
      Give help as unto Thee!

    6. And may Thy Holy Spirit move
    All those who live to live in love,
    Till Thou shalt greet in heaven above
      All those who give to Thee.

                                                          G. Thring, 1879.


TRUST.


363

                                                          8, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7

    All depends on our possessing
    God’s free love and grace and blessing,
      Though all earthly wealth depart;
    He who God for his hath taken
    Mid the changing world unshaken
      Keeps a free, heroic heart.

    2. He who hitherto hath fed me
    And to many a joy hath led me
      Is and ever shall be mine;
    He who did so gently school me,
    He who still doth guide and rule me,
      Will not leave me now to pine.

    3. Shall I weary me with fretting
    O’er vain trifles and regretting
      Things that never can remain?
    I will strive but that to win me
    Which can shed true rest within me,
      Rest the world must seek in vain.

    4. When my heart with longing sickens,
    Hope again my courage quickens,
      For my wish shall be fulfilled.
    If it please His will most tender,
    Soul and body I surrender
      Unto Him on whom I build.

    5. Well He knows how best to grant me
    All the longing hopes that haunt me;
      All things have their proper day.
    I would dictate to Him never;
    As God wills, so be it ever;
      When He wills, I will obey.

    6. If on earth He bids me linger,
    He will guide me with His finger
      Through the years that now look dim.
    All that earth has fleets and changes,
    As a river onward ranges,
      But I rest in peace on Him.

                                 Anon., 1673; C. Winkworth, tr., a., 1858.


364

                                                                     C. M.

    O God of Jacob, by whose hand
      Thy people still are fed;
    Who through this weary pilgrimage
      Hast all our fathers led;

    2. To Thee our humble vows we raise,
      To Thee address our prayer
    And in Thy kind and faithful breast
      Deposit all our care.

    3. Through each perplexing path of life
      Our wandering footsteps guide;
    Give us each day our daily bread
      And raiment fit provide.

    4. O spread Thy covering wings around
      Till all our wanderings cease
    And at our Father’s loved abode
      Our souls arrive in peace.

    5. To Thee, as to our covenant God,
      We’ll our whole selves resign
    And thankful own that all we are,
      And all we have, is Thine.

                                                Philip Doddridge, 1737, a.


365

                                                 8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 7, 4, 6, 8

    Lord, hear the voice of my complaint,
      To Thee I now commend me,
    Let not my heart and hope grow faint,
      But deign Thy grace to send me.
    True faith from Thee, my God, I seek,
      The faith that loves Thee solely,
      Keeps me lowly
    And prompt to aid the weak,
    And mark each word that Thou dost speak.

    2. Yet more from Thee I dare to claim,
      Whose goodness is unbounded;
    O let me ne’er be put to shame,
      My hope be ne’er confounded,
    But e’en in death still find Thee true,
      And in that hour, else lonely,
      Trust Thee only,
    Not aught that I can do;
    For such false trust I sore should rue.

    3. O grant that from my very heart
      My foes be all forgiven;
    Forgive my sins and heal their smart
      And grant new life from heaven.
    Thy Word, that blessed food, bestow,
      Which best the soul can nourish;
      Make it flourish
    Through all the storms of woe
    That else my faith might overthrow.

    4. Then be the world my foe or friend,
      Keep me to her a stranger,
    Thy steadfast follower to the end,
      Through pleasure and through danger;
    From Thee alone comes such high grace,
      No works of ours obtain it
      Or can gain it;
    Our pride hath here no place—
    This Thy free promise we embrace.

    5. Help me, for I am weak; I fight,
      Yet scarce can battle longer;
    I cling but to Thy grace and might,
      ’Tis Thou canst make me stronger;
    When sore temptations are my lot
      And tempests round me lower,
      Break the power:
    So, through deliverance wrought,
    I know that Thou forsak’st me not.

                                 J. Agricola, 1531; C. Winkworth, 1863, a.


366

                                     8, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7, 8, 8, 8, 8, 4, 8, 8

    O Lord, I love Thee from my heart;
    I pray Thee, ne’er from me depart,
      With tender mercy cheer me;
    I scorn the richest earthly lot,
    E’en heaven and earth attract me not,
      If only Thou be near me.
    Yea, though my heart be like to break,
    Thou shalt my Trust that naught can shake,
    My Portion and my Comfort be,
    Who by Thy blood hast purchased me,
      Lord Jesus Christ!
    My God and Lord, my God and Lord!
    Forsake me not who trust Thy Word.

    2. Yea, Lord, ’twas Thy free bounty gave
    My body, soul, and what I have
      In this poor life of labor;
    O grant that I may through Thy grace
    Use all my powers to show Thy praise
      And serve and help my neighbor.
    From all false doctrine keep me, Lord,
    From Satan’s lies and malice ward,
    In every cross uphold Thou me
    That I may bear it patiently.
      Lord Jesus Christ!
    My God and Lord, my God and Lord!
    In death Thy comfort still afford.

    3. Ah! Lord, let Thy dear angels come
    At my last end to bear me home,
      That I may die unfearing;
    And in its narrow chamber keep
    My body safe in painless sleep
      Until Thy reappearing;
    And then from death awaken me
    That these mine eyes with joy may see,
    O Son of God, Thy glorious face,
    My Savior and my Fount of grace.
      Lord Jesus Christ!
    My prayer attend, my prayer attend,
    And I will praise Thee without end.

                                                    M. Schalling, c. 1567.


367

                                                                     C. M.

    The Lord’s my Shepherd, I’ll not want;
      He makes me down to lie
    In pastures green; He leadeth me
      The quiet waters by.

    2. My soul He doth restore again
      And me to walk doth make
    Within the path of righteousness,
      E’en for His own name’s sake.

    3. Yea, though I walk in death’s dark vale,
      Yet will I fear no ill;
    For Thou art with me, and Thy rod
      And staff me comfort still.

    4. My table Thou hast furnishèd
      In presence of my foes,
    My head Thou dost with oil anoint,
      And my cup overflows.

    5. Goodness and mercy, all my life,
      Shall surely follow me;
    And in God’s house forevermore
      My dwelling-place shall be.

                                                            F. Rous, 1643.


368

                                                                     C. M.

    When I can read my title clear
      To mansions in the skies,
    I bid farewell to every fear
      And wipe my weeping eyes.

    2. Should earth against my soul engage
      And hellish darts be hurled,
    Then I can smile at Satan’s rage
      And face a frowning world.

    3. Let cares like a wild deluge come
      And storms of sorrow fall,
    May I but safely reach my home,
      My God, my heaven, my all!

    4. There shall I bathe my weary soul
      In seas of heavenly rest
    And not a wave of trouble roll
      Across my peaceful breast.

                                                        Isaac Watts, 1707.


369

                                                                     S. M.

    My spirit on Thy care,
      Blest Savior, I recline;
    Thou wilt not leave me to despair,
      For Thou art Love divine.

    2. In Thee I place my trust,
      On Thee I calmly rest;
    I know Thee good, I know Thee just,
      And count Thy choice the best.

    3. Whate’er events betide,
      Thy will they all perform;
    Safe in Thy breast my head I hide
      Nor fear the coming storm.

    4. Let good or ill befall,
      It must be good for me;
    Secure of having Thee in all,
      Of having all in Thee.

                                                         H. F. Lyte, 1834.


370

                                                                8, 5, 8, 3

    I am trusting Thee, Lord Jesus,
      Trusting only Thee;
    Trusting Thee for full salvation,
      Great and free.

    2. I am trusting Thee for pardon,
      At Thy feet I bow;
    For Thy grace and tender mercy,
      Trusting now.

    3. I am trusting Thee for cleansing
      In the crimson flood;
    Trusting Thee to make me holy
      By Thy blood.

    4. I am trusting Thee to guide me;
      Thou alone shalt lead,
    Every day and hour supplying
      All my need.

    5. I am trusting Thee for power,
      Thine can never fail;
    Words which Thou Thyself shalt give me
      Must prevail.

    6. I am trusting Thee, Lord Jesus,
      Never let me fall;
    I am trusting Thee forever
      And for all.

                                                     F. R. Havergal, 1874.


371

                                                                 7, 6, 8 l

    To Thee, O dear, dear Savior,
      My spirit turns for rest,
    My peace is in Thy favor,
      My pillow on Thy breast;
    Though all the world deceive me,
      I know that I am Thine,
    And Thou wilt never leave me,
      O blessed Savior mine.

    2. In Thee my trust abideth,
      On Thee my hope relies,
    O Thou whose love provideth
      For all beneath the skies;
    O Thou whose mercy found me,
      From bondage set me free,
    And then forever bound me
      With threefold cords to Thee.

    3. My grief is in the dulness
      With which this sluggish heart
    Doth open to the fulness
      Of all Thou wouldst impart;
    My joy is in Thy beauty
      Of holiness divine,
    My comfort in the duty
      That binds my life in Thine.

    4. Alas, that I should ever
      Have failed in love to Thee,
    The only One who never
      Forgot or slighted me!
    Oh, for a heart to love Thee
      More truly as I ought
    And nothing place above Thee
      In deed or word or thought!

    5. Oh, for that choicest blessing
      Of living in Thy love
    And thus on earth possessing
      The peace of heaven above!
    Oh, for the bliss that by it
      The soul securely knows
    The holy calm and quiet
      Of faith’s serene repose!

                                                   J. S. B. Monsell, 1863.


372

                                               8, 8, 6, 8, 8, 6 (C. P. M.)

    Where’er I go, whate’er my task,
    The counsel of my God I ask,
      Who ruleth all things right;
    Unless He give both thought and deed,
    The utmost pains can ne’er succeed,
      And vain must be man’s might.

    2. For what can all my toil avail?
    My care, my watching,—all must fail
      Unless my God is there.
    Then let Him order all for me
    As in His will He shall decree;
      On Him I cast my care.

    3. For naught can come, as naught has been,
    But what my Father has foreseen
      And what shall work my good.
    Whate’er He gives me I will take,
    Whate’er He chooses I will make
      My choice with thankful mood.

    4. I lean upon His mighty arm,
    Which shieldeth me from every harm
      And all calamity.
    If in His precepts I shall live,
    Whate’er is useful He will give;
      And naught can injure me.

    5. But only may He of His grace
    The record of my guilt efface
      And wipe out all my debt;
    Though I have sinned, He will not straight
    Pronounce His judgment, He will wait,
      Have patience with me yet.

    6. I travel to a distant land
    To serve the post wherein I stand,
      Which He hath bid me fill;
    And He will bless me with His light
    That I may serve His world aright
      And make me know His will.

    7. And though through desert wilds I fare,
    Yet Jesus Christ is with me there,
      The Lord Himself is near;
    In all my dangers He will come,
    And He who kept me safe at home
      Can keep me safely here.

    8. Yes, He will speed me on my way
    And point me where to go and stay
      And help me still and lead;
    Let me in health and safety live
    And time and wind and weather give
      And whatsoe’er I need.

    9. His holy angel being near,
    My enemies I need not fear,
      For He protects me well;
    I owe it to my faithful Guide,
    Who never yet hath left my side,
      That I in peace may dwell.

    10. When late at night my sleep I take,
    When early in the morn I wake,
      At rest, or on my way,
    In hours of weakness or in bonds,
    When, vexed with fears, my heart desponds,
      God’s Word is e’er my stay.

    11. Since, then, my course is traced by Him,
    I will not fear that future dim,
      But go, whate’er befall,
    Well knowing naught awaits me there
    Too hard for me through Him to bear;
      With Him I’ll conquer all.

    12. To Him myself I wholly give,
    At His command I die or live,
      I trust His love and power;
    And if to-morrow or to-day
    His summons come, I will obey,
      He knows the proper hour.

    13. But if it please that Love most kind,
    And if this voice within my mind
      Be whispering not in vain,
    I yet shall praise my God ere long
    In many a sweet and joyful song
      When in my home again.

    14. To those I love will He be near,
    With His consoling light appear,
      Who is my Shield and theirs;
    And He will grant beyond our thought
    What they and I alike have sought
      With tears and fervent prayers.

                           Paul Fleming, 1642; C. Winkworth, tr., 1858, a.


373

                                                                     S. M.

    Jesus, my Truth, my Way,
      My sure unerring Light,
    On Thee my feeble soul I stay,
      Which Thou wilt lead aright.

    2. My Wisdom and my Guide,
      My Counselor Thou art;
    O let me never leave Thy side
      Nor from Thy paths depart!

    3. Thou seest my feebleness;
      Jesus, be Thou my Power,
    My Help and Refuge in distress,
      My Fortress and my Tower.

    4. Give me to trust in Thee;
      Be Thou my sure Abode;
    My Horn and Rock and Buckler be,
      My Savior and my God.

    5. Myself I cannot save,
      Myself I cannot keep;
    But strength in Thee I surely have,
      Whose eyelids never sleep.

    6. My soul to Thee alone
      Now, therefore, I commend.
    Thou, Jesus, having loved Thine own,
      Wilt love me to the end!

                                                     Charles Wesley, 1749.


374

                                                                     S. M.

    The Lord my Shepherd is,
      I shall be well supplied:
    Since He is mine and I am His,
      What can I want beside?

    2. He leads me to the place
      Where heavenly pasture grows,
    Where living waters gently pass
      And full salvation flows.

    3. If e’er I go astray,
      He doth my soul reclaim
    And guides me in His own right way
      For His most holy name.

    4. While He affords His aid,
      I cannot yield to fear;
    Though I should walk through death’s dark shade,
      My Shepherd’s with me there.

    5. The bounties of Thy love
      Shall crown my following days;
    Nor from Thy house will I remove
      Nor cease to speak Thy praise.

                                                        Isaac Watts, 1719.


375

                                                                  11s 4 l

    How firm a foundation, ye saints of the Lord,
    Is laid for your faith in His excellent Word!
    What more can He say than to you He hath said,
    Who unto the Savior for refuge have fled?

    2. In every condition,—in sickness, in health,
    In poverty’s vale or abounding in wealth,
    At home and abroad, on the land, on the sea,—
    As thy days may demand, shall thy strength ever be.

    3. Fear not, I am with Thee, oh, be not dismayed;
    For I am thy God and will still give thee aid;
    I’ll strengthen thee, help thee, and cause thee to stand,
    Upheld by My righteous, omnipotent hand.

    4. When through the deep waters I call thee to go,
    The rivers of sorrow shall not overflow;
    For I will be with thee thy troubles to bless
    And sanctify to thee thy deepest distress.

    5. When through fiery trials thy pathway shall lie,
    My grace, all-sufficient, shall be thy supply;
    The flames shall not hurt thee; I only design
    Thy dross to consume and thy gold to refine.

    6. E’en down to old age all My people shall prove
    My sovereign, eternal, unchangeable love;
    And when hoary hairs shall their temples adorn,
    Like lambs they shall still in My bosom be borne.

    7. The soul that on Jesus hath leaned for repose
    I will not, I will not, desert to His foes;
    That soul, though all hell should endeavor to shake,
    I’ll never, no never, no never, forsake!

                                                               Keen, 1787.


WARFARE.


376

                                                                     L. M.

    Fight the good fight with all thy might;
    Christ is thy Strength and Christ thy Right.
    Lay hold on life, and it shall be
    Thy joy and crown eternally.

    2. Run the straight race through God’s good grace,
    Lift up thine eyes and seek His face;
    Life with its way before us lies,
    Christ is the Path and Christ the Prize.

    3. Cast care aside; upon thy Guide
    Lean, and His mercy will provide;
    Lean, and the trusting soul shall prove
    Christ is its Life and Christ its Love.

    4. Faint not, nor fear, His arms are near;
    He changeth not, and thou art dear;
    Only believe, and thou shalt see
    That Christ is all in all to thee.

                                                   J. S. B. Monsell, 1863.


377

                                                                 7, 6, 8 l

    Stand up!—stand up for Jesus!
      Ye soldiers of the Cross;
    Lift high His royal banner,
      It must not suffer loss.
    From victory unto victory
      His army shall He lead,
    Till every foe is vanquished
      And Christ is Lord indeed.

    2. Stand up!—stand up for Jesus!
      The trumpet call obey;
    Forth to the mighty conflict
      In this His glorious day.
    Ye that are men, now serve Him
      Against unnumbered foes;
    Let courage rise with danger
      And strength to strength oppose.

    3. Stand up!—stand up for Jesus!
      Stand in His strength alone;
    The arm of flesh will fail you,
      Ye dare not trust your own.
    Put on the Gospel armor,
      Each piece put on with prayer;
    Where duty calls or danger,
      Be never wanting there.

    4. Stand up!—stand up for Jesus!
      The strife will not be long;
    This day the noise of battle,
      The next, the victor’s song.
    To him that overcometh,
      A crown of life shall be;
    He with the King of Glory
      Shall reign eternally.

                                                        G. Duffield, 1858.


378

                                                                     C. M.

    Am I a soldier of the Cross,
      A follower of the Lamb?
    And shall I fear to own His cause
      Or blush to speak His name?

    2. Must I be carried to the skies
      On flowery beds of ease
    While others fought to win the prize
      And sailed through bloody seas?

    3. Are there no foes for me to face?
      Must I not stem the flood?
    Is this vile world a friend to grace,
      To help me on to God?

    4. Sure I must fight if I would reign;
      Increase my courage, Lord!
    I’ll bear the toil, endure the pain,
      Supported by Thy Word.

    5. Thy saints, in all this glorious war,
      Shall conquer, though they die;
    They see the triumph from afar
      With faith’s discerning eye.

    6. When that illustrious day shall rise
      And all Thine armies shine
    In robes of victory through the skies,
      The glory shall be Thine.

                                                     Isaac Watts, 1709, a.


379

                                                                     S. M.

    My soul, be on thy guard;
      Ten thousand foes arise,
    And hosts of sin are pressing hard
      To draw thee from the skies.

    2. O watch and fight and pray,
      The battle ne’er give o’er;
    Renew it boldly every day
      And help divine implore.

    3. Ne’er think the victory won,
      Nor lay thine armor down;
    Thine arduous work will not be done
      Till thou receive thy crown.

    4. Fight on, my soul, till death
      Shall bring thee to thy God;
    He’ll take thee at thy parting breath
      To His divine abode.

                                                       George Heath, 1781.


380

                                                                     S. M.

    Soldiers of Christ, arise
      And put your armor on;
    Strong in the strength which God supplies
      Through His eternal Son.

    2. Strong in the Lord of hosts
      And in His mighty power.
    Who in the strength of Jesus trusts
      Is more than conqueror.

    3. Stand, then, in His great might,
      With all His strength endued;
    But take, to arm you for the fight,
      The panoply of God:

    4. That, having all things done
      And all your conflicts past,
    Ye may o’ercome through Christ alone
      And stand entire at last.

    5. From strength to strength go on,
      Wrestle and fight and pray;
    Tread all the powers of darkness down
      And win the well-fought day.

    6. Still let the Spirit cry
      In all His soldiers, “Come,”
    Till Christ the Lord descends from high
      And takes the conquerors home.

                                                     Charles Wesley, 1749.


381

                                                       7, 6, 7, 6, 6, 6, 6

    Rise, my soul, to watch and pray,
      From thy sleep awake thee,
    Lest at last the evil day
      Suddenly o’ertake thee;
    For the Foe, Well we know,
    Oft his harvest reapeth
    While the Christian sleepeth.

    2. But first rouse thee and awake
      From secure indiff’rence;
    Else will follow in its wake
      Woe without deliv’rance.
    O beware! Soul, take care!
    Death in sins might find thee
    Ere thou look behind thee.

    3. Wake and watch, or else thy night
      Christ can ne’er enlighten;
    Far off still will seem the light
      That thy path should brighten;
    God demands Eyes and hands
    Open for the offers
    He so richly proffers.

    4. Watch against the devil’s snares
      Lest asleep he find thee;
    For, indeed, no pains he spares
      To deceive and blind thee;
    Satan’s prey Oft are they
    Who are soundly sleeping
    And no good watch keeping.

    5. Watch against the world that frowns
      Darkly to dismay thee;
    Watch when she thy wishes crowns,
      Smiling to betray thee;
    Watch and see Thou art free
    From false friends that charm thee
    While they seek to harm thee.

    6. Watch against thyself, my soul;
      See thou do not stifle
    Grace that should thy thoughts control
      Nor with mercy trifle.
    Pride and sin Lurk within
    All thy hopes to scatter;
    List not when they flatter.

    7. But while watching, also see
      That thou pray unceasing;
    For the Lord must make thee free,
      Strength and faith increasing,
    So to do Service true.
    Let not sloth enslave thee;
    Pray, and He will save thee.

    8. Yea, indeed, He bids us pray,
      Promising to hear us,
    E’er to be our Staff and Stay,
      Ever to be near us.
    Ere we plead Will He heed,
    Strengthen, keep, defend us,
    And deliv’rance send us.

    9. Courage, then, for all things must
      Work for good and bless us,
    If we but in prayerful trust
      To His Son address us;
    For He will Richly fill
    And His Spirit send us,
    Who to Him commend us.

    10. Therefore let us watch and pray
      Ever without ceasing,
    For we know with every day
      Dangers are increasing,
    And the end Doth impend;
    When the trumpet calleth,
    Earth in ruins falleth.

                                                    J. B. Freystein, 1704.


382

                                                                     S. M.

    Ye servants of the Lord,
      Each in his office wait,
    Observant of His heavenly Word
      And watchful at His gate.

    2. Let all your lamps be bright
      And trim the golden flame;
    Gird up your loins, as in His sight,
      For awful is His name.

    3. Watch! ’tis your Lord’s command;
      And while we speak, He’s near.
    Mark the first signal of His hand
      And ready all appear.

    4. O happy servant he
      In such a posture found!
    He shall his Lord with rapture see
      And be with honor crowned.

                                                   Philip Doddridge, 1755.


RESIGNATION.


383

                                                       8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7

    Lord, as Thou wilt, deal Thou with me,
      No other wish I cherish;
    In life and death I cling to Thee,
      O Lord, let me not perish!
    Let but Thy grace ne’er from me part,
    Else as Thou wilt; grant patient heart:
      Thy will the best is ever.

    2. Grant honor, truth, prosperity,
      And love Thy Word to ponder;
    False doctrines, Lord, keep far from me
      And grant both here and yonder
    What serves my everlasting bliss;
    Preserve me from unrighteousness
      In all my life and doings.

    3. When at Thy summons I must leave
      This world of sin and sadness,
    Grant me Thy grace, Lord, not to grieve,
      But to depart with gladness.
    My spirit I commend to Thee;
    O Lord, a blessed end give me
      Through Jesus Christ;—yea. Amen.

                                                     C. Melissander, 1574.


384

                                                                    6s 8 l

    Thy way, not mine, O Lord,
      However dark it be!
    Lead me by Thine own hand,
      Choose out my path for me.
    I dare not choose my lot;
      I would not if I might.
    Choose Thou for me, my God,
      So shall I walk aright.

    2. The kingdom that I seek
      Is Thine; so let the way
    That leads to it be Thine,
      Else I must surely stray.
    Take Thou my cup and it
      With joy or sorrow fill,
    As best to Thee may seem;
      Choose Thou my good and ill.

    3. Choose Thou for me my friends,
      My sickness or my health;
    Choose Thou my cares for me,
      My poverty or wealth.
    Not mine, not mine, the choice,
      In things or great or small;
    Be Thou my Guide, my Strength,
      My Wisdom and my All.

                                                           H. Bonar, 1857.


385

                                                    6, 7, 6, 7, 6, 6, 6, 6

    What is the world to me
      And all its vaunted pleasure
    When Thou, and Thou alone,
      Lord Jesus, art my Treasure!
    Thou only, dearest Lord,
      My soul’s Delight shalt be;
    Thou art my Peace, my Rest,—
      What is the world to me!

    2. The world is like the smoke,
      A fleeting exhalation,
    A shadow faint and dim,
      Of very short duration.
    My Jesus doth abide,
      Though all things fade and flee;
    My everlasting Rock,—
      What is the world to me!

    3. The world strives to be praised
      And honored by the mighty
    Nor will at all reflect
      How frail they are and flighty.
    But what I glory in
      Above all things is He,
    My Jesus, He alone,—
      What is the world to me!

    4. The world seeks after wealth,
      And unto Mammon offers
    Its all, content if gold
      Is hoarded in its coffers.
    I know a higher good,
      Which e’er my joy shall be;
    My Jesus is my Wealth,—
      What is the world to me!

    5. The world is sorely grieved
      Whenever it is slighted,
    As though an enemy
      Its honor would have blighted.
    Christ, I bear Thy reproach
      While thus it pleaseth Thee!
    I’m honored by my Lord,—
      What is the world to me!

    6. The world cannot extol
      Too highly sinful pleasures
    And foolishly resigns
      For them the heavenly treasures.
    Let others love the world
      To please their vanity:
    I love the Lord, my God,—
      What is the world to me!

    7. What is the world to me!
      It rapidly must vanish;
    With all its gorgeous pomp
      Pale death it cannot banish;
    Its riches pass away,
      And all its joys must flee.
    But Jesus doth abide,—
      What is the world to me!

    8. What is the world to me!
      My Jesus is my Treasure,
    My Life, my Wealth, my All,
      My Friend, my Love, my Pleasure,
    My heavenly Happiness
      And Bliss eternally.
    Once more, then, I would say,
      What is the world to me!

                                    G. M. Pfefferkorn, 1667; A. Crull, tr.


386

                                                                8, 8, 8, 4

    My God, my Father, while I stray
    Far from my home, on life’s rough way,
    O teach me from my heart to say,
      “Thy will be done!”

    2. Though dark my path and sad my lot,
    Let me be still and murmur not.
    Or breathe the prayer divinely taught,
      “Thy will be done!”

    3. What though in lonely grief I sigh
    For friends beloved, no longer nigh,
    Submissive still would I reply,
      “Thy will be done!”

    4. Though Thou hast called me to resign
    What most I prized, it ne’er was mine;
    I have but yielded what was Thine:
      “Thy will be done!”

    5. Should grief or sickness waste away
    My life in premature decay,
    My Father, still I strive to say,
      “Thy will be done!”

    6. Let but my fainting heart be blest
    With Thy sweet Spirit for its Guest;
    My God, to Thee I leave the rest:
      “Thy will be done!”

    7. Renew my will from day to day;
    Blend it with Thine and take away
    All that now makes it hard to say,
      “Thy will be done!”

    8. Then, when on earth I breathe no more,
    The prayer, oft mixed with tears before,
    I’ll sing upon a happier shore,
      “Thy will be done!”

                                                  Charlotte Elliott, 1834.


387

                                                                    6s 8 l

    My Jesus, as Thou wilt!
      Oh, may Thy will be mine!
    Into Thy hand of love
      I would my all resign.
    Through sorrow or through joy
      Conduct me as Thine own
    And help me still to say,
      My Lord, Thy will be done.

    2. My Jesus, as Thou wilt!
      If needy here and poor,
    Give me Thy people’s bread,
      Their portion rich and sure.
    The manna of Thy Word
      Let my soul feed upon;
    And if all else should fail,
      My Lord, Thy will be done.

    3. My Jesus, as Thou wilt!
      Though seen through many a tear,
    Let not my star of hope
      Grow dim or disappear,
    Since Thou on earth hast wept
      And sorrowed oft alone.
    If I must weep with Thee,
      My Lord, Thy will be done.

    4. My Jesus, as Thou wilt!
      All shall be well for me;
    Each changing future scene
      I gladly trust with Thee.
    Straight to my home above
      I travel calmly on
    And sing in life or death,
      My Lord, Thy will be done.

                           B. Schmolck, † 1737; Jane Borthwick, tr., 1854.


388

                                                                     S. M.

    Blest be Thy love, dear Lord,
      That taught us this sweet way
    Only to love Thee for Thyself
      And for that love obey.

    2. O Thou, our soul’s chief Hope,
      We to Thy mercy fly;
    Where’er we are Thou canst protect,
      Whate’er we need, supply.

    3. Whether we sleep or wake,
      To Thee we both resign;
    The darkest night is as the day
      If Thy light on us shine.

    4. Whether we live or die,
      Both we submit to Thee;
    In death we live, as well as life,
      If Thine in death we be.

                                                        John Austin, 1668.


389

                                                                     C. M.

    O Lord, my best desire fulfil
      And help me to resign
    Life, health, and comfort to Thy will
      And make Thy pleasure mine.

    2. Why should I shrink at Thy command,
      Whose love forbids my fears,
    Or tremble at the gracious hand
      That wipes away my tears?

    3. No, rather let me freely yield
      What most I prize to Thee,
    Who never hast a good withheld,
      Nor wilt withhold, from me.

    4. Thy favor, all my journey through,
      Thou art engaged to grant;
    What else I want, or think I do,
      ’Tis better still to want.

                                                          W. Cowper, 1779.




CATECHISM.


390

                                                                     L. M.

    Lord, grant that we e’er pure retain
    The catechismal doctrine plain
    As Luther taught the heavenly truth
    In simple words to tender youth.

    2. That we Thy holy Law may know
    And mourn our sin and all its woe
    And yet believe in Father, Son,
    And Holy Spirit, Three in One.

    3. That we on Thee, our Father, call,
    Who canst and wilt give help to all;
    That as Thy children we may live,
    Whom Thou in Baptism didst receive.

    4. That, if we fall, we rise again,
    Repentingly confess our sin,
    And take the Sacrament in faith.—
    Amen. God grant a happy death!

                                            L. Helmbold, 1577; M. Loy, tr.


LAW.


391

                                                             8, 8, 8, 7, 4

    That man a godly life might live,
    God did these Ten Commandments give
    By His true servant Moses, high
    Upon the Mount Sinai.
        Have mercy, Lord!

    2. I am thy God and Lord alone,
    No other god beside Me own;
    Put thy whole confidence in Me
    And love Me e’er cordially.
        Have mercy, Lord!

    3. By idle word and speech profane
    Take not My holy name in vain
    And praise but that as good and true
    Which I Myself say and do.
        Have mercy, Lord!

    4. Hallow the day which God hath blest
    That thou and all thy house may rest;
    Keep hand and heart from labor free
    That God may so work in thee.
        Have mercy, Lord!

    5. Give to thy parents honor due,
    Be dutiful, and loving too,
    And help them when their strength decays,
    So shalt thou have length of days.
        Have mercy, Lord!

    6. In sinful wrath thou shalt not kill,
    Nor hate, nor render ill for ill;
    Be patient and of gentle mood,
    And to thy foe do thou good.
        Have mercy, Lord!

    7. Be faithful to thy marriage vows,
    Thy heart give only to thy spouse;
    Thy life keep pure, and lest thou sin,
    Use temp’rance and discipline.
        Have mercy, Lord!

    8. Steal not; all usury abhor
    Nor wring their life-blood from the poor,
    But open wide thy loving hand
    To all the poor in the land.
        Have mercy, Lord!

    9. Bear not false witness nor belie
    Thy neighbor by foul calumny;
    Defend his innocence from blame;
    With charity hide his shame.
        Have mercy, Lord!

    10. Thy neighbor’s house desire thou not,
    His wife, nor aught that he hath got,
    But wish that his such good may be
    As thy heart doth wish for thee.
        Have mercy, Lord!

    11. God these commandments gave, therein
    To show thee, child of man, thy sin
    And make thee also well perceive
    How man unto God should live.
        Have mercy, Lord!

    12. Help us, Lord Jesus Christ, for we
    A Mediator have in Thee.
    Our works cannot salvation gain;
    They merit but endless pain.
        Have mercy, Lord!

                                   Martin Luther, 1524; R. Massie, tr., a.


392

                                                             8, 8, 8, 7, 4

    Wilt thou, O man, live happily
    And dwell with God eternally?
    The Ten Commandments keep, for thus
    Our God Himself biddeth us.
        Have mercy, Lord!

    2. I am thy Lord and God; take heed
    Lest other gods do thee mislead.
    Thy heart shall trust alone in Me;
    Thou shalt My own kingdom be.
        Have mercy, Lord!

    3. Honor My name in word and deed
    And call on Me in time of need.
    Hallow the Sabbath that I may
    Work in thy heart on that day.
        Have mercy, Lord!

    4. Obedient always, next to Me,
    To father and to mother be.
    Kill no man, but to wrath be slow.
    Be true to thy marriage vow.
        Have mercy, Lord!

    5. Steal not nor do thy neighbor wrong
    By bearing witness with false tongue.
    Thy neighbor’s wife desire thou not
    Nor grudge him aught he hath got.
        Have mercy, Lord!

                                   Martin Luther, 1525; R. Massie, tr., a.


CREED.


393

                                                          8, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7

    We all believe in one true God,
      Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
    Present Helper in all need,
      Praised by all the heavenly host,
    By whose mighty power alone
    All is made and wrought and done.

    2. And we believe in Jesus Christ,
      Son of God and Mary’s Son,
    Who from heaven above came down
      And leads us to heaven’s throne;
    By whose blood and death are we
    Rescued from all misery.

    3. And we confess the Holy Ghost,
      Who from both fore’er proceeds;
    Who upholds and comforts us
      In the midst of fears and needs.
    Blest and holy Trinity,
    Praise forever be to Thee!

                                                   T. Clausnitzer, † 1684.


394

                                                                   8s 10 l

    We all believe in one true God,
      Maker of the earth and heaven,
    The Father, who to us in love
      Hath the claim of children given;
    He in soul and body feeds us,
      All we want His hand provides us,
    Through all snares and perils leads us
      Watches that no harm betides us;
    He cares for us by day and night,
    All things are governed by His might.

    2. And we believe in Jesus Christ,
      His own Son, our Lord, possessing
    An equal Godhead, throne, and might,
      Through whom comes the Father’s blessing:
    Conceived of the Holy Spirit,
      Born of Mary, virgin-mother,
    That lost man might life inherit,
      Made true man, our Elder Brother,
    Was crucified for sinful men,
    And raised by God to life again.

    3. We in the Holy Ghost believe,
      Who sweet grace and comfort giveth
    And with the Father and the Son
      In eternal glory liveth;
    Who the Christian Church doth even
      Keep in unity of spirit.
    Sins are truly here forgiven
      Through the blest Redeemer’s merit.
    All flesh shall rise again, and we
    Shall live with God eternally. Amen.

                                                      Martin Luther, 1525.


PRAYER.


395

                                                                 8, 7, 8 l

    What a Friend we have in Jesus,
      All our sins and griefs to bear!
    What a privilege to carry
      Everything to God in prayer!
    Oh, what peace we often forfeit,
      Oh, what needless pain we bear,—
    All because we do not carry
      Everything to God in prayer!

    2. Have we trials and temptations?
      Is there trouble anywhere?
    We should never be discouraged,
      Take it to the Lord in prayer.
    Can we find a Friend so faithful,
      Who will all our sorrows share?
    Jesus knows our every weakness,—
      Take it to the Lord in prayer.

    3. Are we weak and heavy-laden,
      Cumbered with a load of care?
    Precious Savior, still our Refuge,—
      Take it to the Lord in prayer.
    Do thy friends despise, forsake thee?
      Take it to the Lord in prayer;
    In His arms He’ll take and shield thee,
      Thou wilt find a solace there.

                                                     Joseph Scriven, 1855.


396

                                                                 L. M. 6 l

    Our Father, Thou in heaven above,
    Who biddest us to dwell in love,
    As brothers of one family,
    And cry for all we need to Thee:
    Teach us to mean the words we say
    And from our inmost heart to pray.

    2. Thy name be hallowed! Help us, Lord,
    To keep in purity Thy Word
    And lead according to Thy name
    A holy life, untouched by blame.
    Let no false teachings do us hurt,
    All poor, deluded souls convert.

    3. Thy kingdom come! Thine let it be
    In time and through eternity!
    Oh, let Thy Holy Spirit dwell
    With us to rule and guide us well.
    From Satan’s mighty power and rage
    Preserve Thy Church from age to age.

    4. Thy will be done on earth, O Lord,
    As where in heaven Thou art adored!
    Patience in time of grief bestow,
    Obedience in weal and woe;
    Our sinful flesh and blood control
    That thwart Thy will within the soul.

    5. Give us this day our daily bread
    And all that for this life we need;
    From war and strife be our Defense,
    From famine and from pestilence,
    That we may live in godly peace,
    Unvexed by cares and avarice.

    6. Lord, all our trespasses forgive
    That they our hearts no more may grieve,
    As we forgive their trespasses
    Who unto us have done amiss.
    Thus let us dwell in charity
    And serve each other willingly.

    7. Into temptation lead us not;
    And when the Foe doth war and plot
    Against our souls on every hand,
    Then, armed with faith, O may we stand
    Against him as a valiant host,
    Through comfort of the Holy Ghost.

    8. From evil, Lord, deliver us;
    The times and days are perilous.
    Redeem us from eternal death;
    And when we yield our dying breath,
    Console us, grant us calm release,
    And take our souls to Thee in peace.

    9. Amen! that is, So let it be!
    Confirm our faith continually
    That we may doubt not, but believe
    That what we ask we shall receive;
    Thus in Thy name and at Thy word
    We say: Amen; O hear us, Lord!

                                                      Martin Luther, 1539.


397

                                                                     S. M.

    Our heavenly Father, hear
      The prayer we offer now;
    Thy name be hallowed far and near,
      To Thee all nations bow.

    2. Thy kingdom come; Thy will
      On earth be done in love,
    As saints and seraphim fulfil
      Thy holy will above.

    3. Our daily bread supply
      While by Thy word we live;
    The guilt of our iniquity
      Forgive as we forgive.

    4. From dark temptation’s power,
      From Satan’s wiles defend;
    Deliver in the evil hour
      And guide us to the end.

    5. Thine shall forever be
      Glory and power divine;
    The scepter, throne, and majesty
      Of heaven and earth are Thine.

                                                   James Montgomery, 1825.


398

                                                                     C. M.

    Prayer is the soul’s sincere desire,
      Uttered or unexpressed;
    The motion of a hidden fire
      That trembles in the breast.

    2. Prayer is the burden of a sigh,
      The falling of a tear,
    The upward glancing of an eye,
      When none but God is near.

    3. Prayer is the simplest form of speech
      That infant lips can try;
    Prayer the sublimest strains that reach
      The Majesty on high.

    4. Prayer is the contrite sinner’s voice,
      Returning from his ways,
    While angels in their songs rejoice
      And cry, “Behold, he prays!”

    5. Prayer is the Christian’s vital breath.
      The Christian’s native air,
    His watchword at the gate of death,—
      He enters heaven with prayer.

    6. The saints in prayer appear as one
      In word and deed and mind,
    While with the Father and the Son
      Sweet fellowship they find.

    7. Nor prayer is made by man alone,—
      The Holy Spirit pleads,
    And Jesus on th’ eternal throne
      For sinners intercedes.

    8. O Thou, by whom we come to God,
      The Life, the Truth, the Way,
    The path of prayer Thyself hast trod,—
      Lord, teach us how to pray!

                                                   James Montgomery, 1818.


399

                                                                     C. M.

    Approach, my soul, the mercy-seat,
      Where Jesus answers prayer;
    There humbly fall before His feet,
      For none can perish there.

    2. Thy promise is my only plea,
      With this I venture nigh;
    Thou callest burdened souls to Thee,
      And such, O Lord, am I.

    3. Bowed down beneath a load of sin,
      By Satan sorely pressed,
    By wars without and fears within,
      I come to Thee for rest.

    4. Be Thou my Shield and Hiding-place,
      That, sheltered near Thy side,
    I may my fierce Accuser face
      And tell him Thou hast died.

    5. O wondrous Love, to bleed and die,
      To bear the cross and shame,
    That guilty sinners such as I
      Might plead Thy gracious name!

                                                        John Newton, 1779.


BAPTISM.


400

                                                          9, 8, 9, 8, 8, 8

    Baptized into Thy name most holy,
      O Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
    I claim a place, though weak and lowly,
      Among Thy seed, Thy chosen host.
    Buried with Christ and dead to sin,
    Thy Spirit now shall live within.

    2. My loving Father, Thou dost take me
      To be henceforth Thy child and heir;
    My faithful Savior, Thou dost make me
      The fruit of all Thy sorrows share;
    Thou, Holy Ghost, wilt comfort me
    When darkest clouds around I see.

    3. And I have vowed to fear and love Thee
      And to obey Thee, Lord, alone;
    I felt Thy Holy Spirit move me
      And freely pledged myself Thine own,
    Renouncing sin to keep the faith
    And war with evil unto death.

    4. My faithful God, Thou failest never,
      Thy covenant surely will abide;
    O cast me not away forever
      Should I transgress it on my side;
    If I have sore my soul defiled,
    Yet still forgive, restore Thy child.

    5. Yea, all I am and love most dearly,
      To Thee I offer new the whole;
    O let me make my vows sincerely,
      Take full possession of my soul;
    Let naught within me, naught I own,
    Serve any will but Thine alone.

    6. Depart, depart, thou Prince of Darkness!
      No more by thee I’ll be enticed.
    Mine is indeed a tarnished conscience,
      But sprinkled with the blood of Christ.
    Away, vain world! O sin, away!
    Lo! I renounce you all this day.

    7. And never let my purpose falter,
      O Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
    But keep me faithful to Thine altar
      Till Thou shalt call me from my post;
    So unto Thee I’ll live and die
    And praise Thee evermore on high.

                              J. J. Rambach, † 1735; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


401

                                                 8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 7, 7

    To Jordan came our Lord, the Christ,
      To do God’s pleasure willing,
    And there was by Saint John baptized,
      All righteousness fulfilling;
    There did He consecrate a bath
      To wash away transgression
    And quench the bitterness of death
      By His own blood and Passion,
    He would a new life give us.

    2. So hear ye all and well perceive
      What God doth call a Baptism
    And what a Christian should believe
      Who error shuns and schism:
    That we should water use the Lord
      Declareth is His pleasure,
    Not simple water, but the Word
      And Spirit without measure;—
    He is the true Baptizer.

    3. To show us this, He hath His Word
      With signs and symbols given;
    On Jordan’s banks was plainly heard
      The Father’s voice from heaven:
    “This is My well-beloved Son,
      In whom My soul delighteth;
    Hear Him!” Yea, hear Him, every one,
      Whom He Himself inviteth;
    Hear and obey His teaching!

    4. In tender manhood God the Son
      In Jordan’s water standeth;
    The Holy Ghost from heaven’s throne
      In dovelike form descendeth;
    That thus the truth be not denied,
      Nor should our faith e’er waver,
    That all three Persons do preside
      At Baptism’s holy laver
    And dwell with the believer.

    5. Thus Jesus His disciples sent:
      Go, teach ye every nation,
    That, lost in sin, they must repent
      And flee from condemnation.
    He that believes and is baptized
      Shall thereby have salvation,
    A new-born man he is in Christ,
      From death free and damnation,
    He shall inherit heaven.

    6. Who in this mercy hath not faith
      Nor aught therein discerneth,
    Is yet in sin, condemned to death
      And fire that ever burneth;
    His holiness avails him not,
      Nor aught which he is doing;
    His inborn sin brings all to naught
      And maketh sure his ruin;
    Himself he cannot succor.

    7. The eye of sense alone is dim
      And nothing sees but water;
    Faith sees Christ Jesus and in Him
      The Lamb ordained for slaughter;
    It sees the cleansing fountain, red
      With the dear blood of Jesus,
    Which from the sins, inherited
      From fallen Adam, frees us
    And from our own misdoings.

                                   Martin Luther, 1543; R. Massie, tr., a.


402

                                                          7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 8

    Blessed Jesus, here we stand,
      Met to do as Thou hast spoken;
    And this child, at Thy command,
      Now we bring to Thee in token
    That to Christ it here is given;
    For of such shall be Thy heaven.

    2. Yes, Thy warning voice is plain,
      And we would obey it duly:
    “He who is not born again,
      Heart and life renewing truly,
    Born of water and the Spirit,
    Will My kingdom ne’er inherit.”

    3. Therefore hasten we to Thee;
      Take the pledge we bring, O take it!
    Let us here Thy glory see
      And in tender pity make it
    Now Thy child and leave it never,
    Thine on earth and Thine forever.

    4. Wash it, Jesus, in Thy blood
      From the sin-stain of its nature;
    Let it rise from out this flood
      Clothed in Thee, a new-born creature;
    May it, washed as Thou hast bidden,
    In Thine innocence be hidden.

    5. Turn its darkness into light,
      To Thy grace receive and save it;
    Heal the Serpent’s venomed bite
      In the font where now we lave it;
    Here let flow a Jordan river
    And from leprosy deliver.

    6. Make it, Head, Thy member now;
      Shepherd, take Thy lamb and feed it;
    Prince of Peace, its Peace be Thou;
      Way of Life, to heaven lead it;
    Vine, this branch may nothing sever,
    Graft by faith in Thee forever.

    7. Now into Thy heart we pour
      Prayers that from our hearts proceeded;
    Let our sighing heavenward soar,
      Let our warm desires be heeded.
    Write the name we now have given,
    Write it in the book of heaven.

                                      B. Schmolck, 1704; C. Winkworth, tr.


403

                                                                     L. M.

    Now Christ, the very Son of God,
    On sinners sends another flood;
    It is the water which the Lord
    Has comprehended in the Word.

    2. This flood, to cleanse sin’s leprosy,
    Mere earthly water cannot be;
    But water and God’s gracious Word
    Conjoined, this saving bath afford.

    3. “Go ye,” says Christ, “My Word proclaim,
    Baptize the nations in God’s name;
    All who are baptized and believe
    My full salvation shall receive.”

    4. God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
    To be baptized invites the host;
    He will be present, though unseen,
    From all their sins to wash them clean.

    5. So, too, by our repentance, must
    The old man, with his sins and lust,
    Be daily drowned and then arise
    A new man, righteous, pure, and wise.

    6. That by the water and the Word
    We’re born again, we thank Thee, Lord.
    In life and death Thine let us be
    And Thine in all eternity.

                         N. Selnecker, 1572; C. H. L. Schuette, tr., 1880.


404

                                                                     L. M.

    This child we dedicate to Thee,
    O God of grace and purity!
    Shield it from sin and threatening wrong
    And let Thy love its life prolong.

    2. Oh, may Thy Spirit gently draw
    Its willing soul to keep Thy Law!
    May virtue, piety, and truth
    Dawn even with its dawning youth!

    3. We, too, before Thy gracious sight,
    Once shared the blest baptismal rite
    And would renew its solemn vow
    With love and thanks and praises now.

    4. Grant that with true and faithful heart
    We still may act the Christian’s part,
    Cheered by each promise Thou hast given
    And laboring for the prize in heaven.

                                    From the German. S. Gilman, tr., 1823.


405

                                                     10, 6, 10, 6, 8, 8, 4

    Father of heaven, who hast created all
      And rulest all, we pray,
    Look on this babe, who at Thy gracious call
      Now enters on life’s way.
    Oh, make it Thine; Thy blessing give,
    That to Thy glory it may live,
      Father of heav’n!

    2. O Son of God, atoning Lord, behold,
      We bring this babe to Thee:
    Take it, O loving Shepherd, to Thy fold,
      Forever Thine to be;
    Defend it through this earthly strife
    And lead it on the path of life,
      O Son of God!

    3. O Holy Ghost, who broodest o’er the wave,
      Descend upon this child;
    Give it undying life, its spirit lave
      With waters undefiled,
    And make it evermore to be
    An heir of bliss, a shrine for Thee,
      O Holy Ghost!

    4. O Triune God, what Thou hast willed is done;
      We speak, but Thine the might.
    This babe hath hardly seen our earthly sun,
      Yet on it pour Thy light
    Of faith and hope and joyful love,
    Thou Sun of all below, above,
      O Triune God!

                                  A. Knapp, 1841; C. Winkworth, tr., 1858.


406

                                                                     S. M.

    The Savior kindly calls
      Our children to His breast;
    He folds them in His gracious arms,
      Himself declares them blest.

    2. “Let them approach,” He cries,
      “Nor scorn their humble claim;
    The heirs of heaven are such as these,
      For such as these I came.”

    3. With joy we bring them, Lord,
      Devoting them to Thee,
    Imploring that, as we are Thine,
      Thine may our offspring be.

                                                    H. U. Onderdonk, 1826.


407

                                                                     S. M.

    Stand, soldier of the Cross,
      Thy high allegiance claim
    And vow to hold the world but loss
      For Thy Redeemer’s name.

    2. Arise and be baptized
      And wash thy sins away;
    Thy league with God be solemnized,
      Thy faith confessed to-day.

    3. No more thine own, but Christ’s;
      With all the saints of old,
    Apostles, seers, evangelists,
      And martyr-throngs enrolled:

    4. In God’s whole armor strong,
      Front hell’s embattled powers.
    The warfare may be sharp and long,
      The victory must be ours.

    5. O bright the conqueror’s crown,
      The song of triumph sweet.
    When faith casts every trophy down
      At our great Captain’s feet!

                                               E. H. Bickersteth, 1870, a.


CONFIRMATION.


408

                                                                 7, 6, 8 l

    Let me be Thine forever,
      Thou faithful God and Lord;
    Let me forsake Thee never
      Nor wander from Thy Word;
    Lord, do not let me waver,
      But give me steadfastness,
    And for such grace forever
      Thy holy name I’ll bless.

    2. Lord Jesus, my Salvation,
      My Light, my Life divine,
    My only Consolation,
      O make me wholly Thine!
    For Thou hast dearly bought me
      With blood and bitter pain;
    Let me, since Thou hast sought me,
      Eternal life obtain.

    3. And Thou, O Holy Spirit,
      My Comforter and Guide,
    Grant that in Jesus’ merit
      I always may confide,
    Him to the end confessing,
      Whom I have known by faith.
    Give me Thy constant blessing
      And grant a Christian death.

                                N. Selnecker, 1572; M. Loy, tr., a., 1880.


409

                                                                 6, 5, 8 l

    In the hour of trial,
      Jesus, plead for me,
    Lest by base denial
      I depart from Thee.
    When Thou see’st me waver,
      With a look recall
    Nor from fear or favor
      Suffer me to fall.

    2. With forbidden pleasures
      Would this vain world charm
    Or its sordid treasures
      Spread to work me harm.
    Bring to my remembrance
      Sad Gethsemane
    Or, in darker semblance,
      Cross-crowned Calvary.

    3. Should Thy mercy send me
      Sorrow, toil, and woe,
    Or should pain attend me
      On my path below,
    Grant that I may never
      Fail Thy hand to see;
    Grant that I may ever
      Cast my care on Thee.

    4. When my last hour cometh,
      Fraught with strife and pain,
    When my dust returneth
      To the dust again,
    On Thy truth relying,
      Through that mortal strife,
    Jesus, take me, dying,
      To eternal life.

                                                James Montgomery, 1834, a.


410

                                                                 L. M. 8 l

    Arm these Thy soldiers, mighty Lord,
    With shield of faith and Spirit’s sword.
    Forth to the battle may they go
    And boldly fight against the foe,
    With banner of the Cross unfurled,
    And by it overcome the world;
    And so at last receive from Thee
    The palm and crown of victory.

    2. Come, ever-blessed Spirit, come
    And make Thy servants’ hearts Thy home;
    May each a living temple be,
    Hallowed forever, Lord, to Thee!
    Enrich that temple’s holy shrine
    With sevenfold gifts of grace divine;
    With wisdom, light, and knowledge bless,
    With counsel, strength, fear, godliness.

    3. O Trinity in Unity,
    One only God and Persons Three;
    In whom, through whom, by whom we live,
    To Thee we praise and glory give.
    O grant us so to use Thy grace
    That we may see Thy glorious face
    And ever with the heavenly host
    Praise Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

                                                      C. Wordsworth, 1862.


411

                                                                        7s

    Thine forever, God of Love!
    Hear us from Thy throne above,
    Thine forever may we be
    Here and in eternity.

    2. Thine forever, Lord of Life!
    Shield us through our earthly strife;
    Thou, the Life, the Truth, the Way,
    Guide us to the realms of day.

    3. Thine forever! O how blest
    They who find in Thee their rest!
    Savior, Guardian, heavenly Friend,
    O defend us to the end!

    4. Thine forever! Savior, keep
    These Thy frail and trembling sheep!
    Safe alone beneath Thy care,
    Let us all Thy goodness share.

    5. Thine forever! Thou our Guide,
    All our wants by Thee supplied,
    All our sins by Thee forgiven;
    Lead us, Lord, from earth to heaven.

                                                      Mary F. Maude, 1848.


412

                                                                     C. M.

    My God, accept my heart this day
      And make it always Thine
    That I from Thee no more may stray,
      No more from Thee decline.

    2. Before the cross of Him who died,
      Behold, I prostrate fall;
    Let every sin be crucified,
      Let Christ be all in all!

    3. Anoint me with Thy heavenly grace,
      Adopt me for Thine own,
    That I may see Thy glorious face
      And worship at Thy throne!

    4. May the dear blood, once shed for me,
      My blest atonement prove
    That I from first to last may be
      The purchase of Thy love!

    5. Let every thought and work and word
      To Thee be ever given;
    Then life shall be Thy service, Lord,
      And death the gate of heaven.

                                                         M. Bridges, 1848.


CONFESSION.


413

                                                 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 4, 8

    Lord Jesus Christ, in Thee alone
      My only hope on earth I place;
    For other comforter is none,
      No help have I but in Thy grace.
    There is no man nor creature here,
    No angel in the heavenly sphere,
    Who in my need can succor me.
    I cry to Thee,
    For Thee I trust implicitly.

    2. My sin is very sore and great,
      I mourn beneath its dreadful load;
    O free me from this heavy weight,
      My Savior, through Thy precious blood;
    And with Thy Father for me plead
    That Thou hast suffered in my stead;
    From me the burden then is rolled.
    Lord, I lay hold
    On Thy dear promises of old.

    3. And in Thy mercy now bestow
      True Christian faith on me, O Lord,
    That all the sweetness I may know
      Which in Thy holy Cross is stored,
    Love Thee o’er earthly pride or pelf,
    And love my neighbor as myself;
    And when at last is come my end,
    Be Thou my Friend,
    From Satan’s wiles my soul defend.

    4. Glory to God in highest heaven,
      The Father of eternal love;
    To His dear Son, for sinners given,
      Whose watchful grace we daily prove;
    To God the Holy Ghost on high;
    Oh, ever be His comfort nigh,
    And teach us, in His love and fear,
    To please Him here
    And serve Him in the heavenly sphere!

                         J. Schneesing, 1542; C. Winkworth, tr., a., 1858.


414

                                                          7, 8, 7, 8, 7, 7

    “Jesus sinners doth receive!”
      O may all this saying ponder
    Who in sin’s delusions live
      And from God and heaven wander!
    This alone sure hope can give—
    “Jesus sinners doth receive!”

    2. We deserve but grief and shame,
      Yet His words, rich grace revealing,
    Pardon, peace, and life proclaim;
      Here their ills have perfect healing
    Who with humble hearts believe—
    “Jesus sinners doth receive!”

    3. Sheep that from the fold did stray
      Every faithful shepherd seeketh;
    Weary souls that lost their way,
      Christ, the Shepherd, seeks and taketh
    In His arms that they may live—
    “Jesus sinners doth receive!”

    4. Come, ye sinners, one and all,
      Come, ye all have invitation;
    Come, obey His gracious call,
      Come, accept His free salvation!
    Firmly in these words believe:
    “Jesus sinners doth receive!”

    5. I, a sinner, come to Thee
      And acknowledge my transgression;
    Tender mercy show to me,
      Grant me graciously remission;
    Let these words my soul relieve:
    “Jesus sinners doth receive!”

    6. Henceforth I need fear no foe;
      Were as scarlet my transgression,
    It shall be as white as snow
      By the virtue of Thy Passion;
    For in these words I believe:
    “Jesus sinners doth receive!”

    7. Now my conscience is at ease,
      Now I fear no condemnation.
    He who grants me full release
      Hath atoned for my transgression.
    In true faith to Him I cleave,—
    “Jesus sinners doth receive!”

                                                 Erdmann Neumeister, 1718.


415

                                                       8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7

    Out of the depths I cry to Thee,
      Lord, hear my lamentation;
    Bend down Thy gracious ear to me
      And grant my supplication;
    For if Thou fix Thy searching eye
    On all sin and iniquity,
      Who, Lord, can stand before Thee?

    2. But love and grace with Thee prevail,
      O God, our sins forgiving;
    The best and holiest deeds must fail
      Of all before Thee living;
    Before Thee none can boasting stand,
    But all must fear Thy strict demand
      And live alone by mercy.

    3. My hope I rest, then, on the Lord
      And build not on my merit;
    My heart shall trust His gracious Word,
      His goodness stays my spirit.
    His precious Word assureth me
    He will my Joy and Comfort be;
      This is my firm reliance.

    4. And though it tarry till the night
      And till the morn appeareth,
    My heart still trusteth in His might,
      It doubteth not nor feareth.
    Do thus, O ye of Israel’s seed,
    Ye of the Spirit born indeed,
      Wait for your God’s appearing.

    5. Though great our sins and sore our woes,
      His grace much more aboundeth;
    His helping love no limit knows,
      Our utmost need it soundeth,
    Our Shepherd is the Lord, and He
    At last shall set His Israel free
      From all their sin and sorrow.

                                                      Martin Luther, 1524.


416

                                                          8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 8

    Lord, to Thee I make confession,
      I have sinned and gone astray,
    I have multiplied transgression,
      Chosen for myself my way.
    Led at last to see my errors,
    Lord, I tremble at Thy terrors.

    2. Yet, though conscience’ voice appall me,
      Father, I will seek Thy face;
    Though Thy child I dare not call me,
      Yet receive me to Thy grace;
    Do not for my sins forsake me,
    Let not yet Thy wrath o’ertake me.

    3. For Thy Son hath suffered for me,
      And the blood He shed for sin,
    That can heal me and restore me,
      Quench this burning fire within;
    ’Tis alone His cross can vanquish
    These dark fears and soothe this anguish.

    4. Then on Him I cast my burden,
      Sink it in the depths below!
    Let me feel Thy gracious pardon,
      Wash me, make me white as snow.
    Let Thy Spirit leave me never,
    Make me only Thine forever!

                                 J. Franck, 1649; C. Winkworth, tr., 1862.


417

                                                                     L. M.

    O Jesus, Lamb of God, who art
    The Life and Comfort of my heart,
    I, wretched sinner, come to Thee
    And bring so many sins with me.

    2. O God, my sinfulness is great,
    I groan beneath a dreadful weight;
    Yet be Thou merciful, I pray,
    Take guilt and punishment away.

    3. Saint John the Baptist biddeth me
    To cast my burden, Lord, on Thee,
    Since Thou hast left Thy heavenly throne
    That for our sins Thou might’st atone.

    4. Help me amend my ways, O Lord,
    And willingly obey Thy Word;
    Do always, then, abide with me,
    And when I die, take me to Thee.

                                     B. Helder, 1620; A. Crull, tr., 1880.


418

                                                                     L. M.

    With broken heart and contrite sigh,
    A trembling sinner, Lord, I cry;
    Thy pardoning grace is rich and free;
    O God, be merciful to me!

    2. I smite upon my troubled breast,
    With deep and conscious guilt opprest;
    Christ and His Cross my only plea;
    O God, be merciful to me!

    3. Far off I stand with tearful eyes
    Nor dare uplift them to the skies;
    But Thou dost all my anguish see;
    O God, be merciful to me!

    4. Nor alms nor deeds that I have done
    Can for a single sin atone;
    To Calvary alone I flee;
    O God, be merciful to me!

    5. And when, redeemed from sin and hell,
    With all the ransomed throng I dwell,
    My raptured song shall ever be,
    God has been merciful to me!

                                                           C. Elven, 1852.


419

                                                                     L. M.

    O Thou that hear’st when sinners cry,
    Though all my crimes before Thee lie,
    Behold them not with angry look,
    But blot their memory from Thy book.

    2. Create my nature pure within,
    And form my soul averse to sin;
    Let Thy good Spirit ne’er depart
    Nor hide Thy presence from my heart.

    3. I cannot live without Thy light,
    Cast out and banished from Thy sight;
    Thy holy joys, my God, restore
    And guard me that I fall no more.

    4. Though I have grieved Thy Spirit, Lord,
    His help and comfort still afford;
    And let me now come near Thy throne
    To plead the merits of Thy Son.

    5. A broken heart, my God, my King,
    Is all the sacrifice I bring;
    Look down, O Lord, with pitying eye
    And save the soul condemned to die.

    6. O may Thy love inspire my tongue!
    Salvation shall be all my song;
    And all my powers shall join to bless
    The Lord, my Strength and Righteousness.

                                                     Isaac Watts, 1719, a.


420

                                                                 L. M. 6 l

    Th’ abyss of many a former sin
    Encloses me and bars me in;
    Like billows my transgressions roll—
    Be Thou the Pilot of my soul—
    And to salvation’s harbor bring,
    Thou Savior and Thou glorious King!

    2. My Father’s heritage abused,
    Wasted by lust, by sin misused,
    To shame and want and misery brought,
    The slave to many a fruitless thought:—
    I cry to Thee, who lovest men,
    O pity and receive again!

    3. In hunger now, no more possest
    Of that my portion bright and blest,
    The exile and the alien see
    Who yet would fain return to Thee.
    And save me, Lord, who seeks to raise
    To Thy dear love the hymn of praise!

    4. With that saved thief my prayer I make,
    “Remember for Thy mercy’s sake!”
    With that poor publican I cry,
    “Be merciful, O God most high!”
    With that lost prodigal I fain
    Back to my home would turn again.

    5. Mourn, mourn, my soul, with earnest care
    And raise to Christ the contrite prayer:—
    O Thou, who freely wast made poor
    My sorrows and my sins to cure,
    Me, poor of all good works, embrace,
    Enriching with Thy boundless grace!

                    Joseph of the Studium, c. 860; J. M. Neale, tr., 1862.


421

                                                                8, 7, 8, 7

    Alas, my God! my sins are great,
      My conscience doth upbraid me;
    And now I find that in my strait
      No man hath power to aid me.

    2. And fled I hence in my despair
      In some lone spot to hide me,
    My griefs would still be with me there
      And peace still be denied me.

    3. Lord, Thee I seek. I merit naught,
      Yet pity and restore me;
    Be not Thy wrath, just God, my lot;
      Thy Son hath suffered for me.

    4. If pain and woe must follow sin,
      Then be my path still rougher.
    Here spare me not; if heaven I win,
      On earth I gladly suffer.

    5. But curb my heart, forgive my guilt,
      Make Thou my patience firmer;
    For they must miss the good Thou wilt
      Who at Thy chastenings murmur.

    6. Then deal with me as seems Thee best,
      Thy grace will help me bear it,
    If but at last I see Thy rest
      And with my Savior share it.

                                  M. Rutilius, 1604; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


422

                                                                     S. M.

    And wilt Thou pardon, Lord,
      A sinner such as I,
    Although Thy book his crimes record
      Of such a crimson dye?

    2. So deep are they engraved,
      So terrible their fear:
    The righteous scarcely shall be saved,
      And where shall I appear?

    3. O Thou Physician blest,
      Make clean my guilty soul
    And me, by many a sin opprest,
      Restore and keep me whole.

    4. I know not how to praise
      Thy mercy and Thy love;
    But deign Thy servant to upraise,
      And I shall learn above.

                    Joseph of the Studium, c. 860; J. M. Neale, tr., 1862.


423

                                                                     S. M.

    Out of the deep I call
      To Thee, O Lord, to Thee;
    Before Thy throne of grace I fall,
      Be merciful to me.

    2. Out of the deep I cry,
      The woeful deep of sin,
    Of evil done in days gone by,
      Of evil now within;

    3. Out of the deep of fear
      And dread of coming shame.
    From morning watch till night is near
      I plead the precious name.

    4. Lord, there is mercy now,
      As ever was, with Thee;
    Before Thy throne of grace I bow;
      Be merciful to me.

                                                        H. W. Baker, 1868.


ABSOLUTION.


424

                                                                     L. M.

    O God, Thou righteous, faithful Lord,
    I have not kept Thy holy Word,
    But sinned and oft offended Thee;
    Now I repent, it grieveth me.

    2. Thou, Father, merciful and kind,
    No pleasure in my death dost find,
    But strong desire doth in Thee burn
    That I should unto Thee return.

    3. Since Thou, dear Father, callest me,
    I, poor lost sinner, come to Thee,
    Relying on Christ’s precious blood
    Which from His holy five wounds flowed.

    4. I pray through Christ, Thine only Son,
    Who for my good our flesh put on,
    To me let Thy love never fail,
    O’er justice let Thy grace prevail.

    5. In mercy, Father, let Thy grace
    Through Jesus’ blood my sins efface;
    Then I, the poor lost child, will be
    From all my sins forever free.

    6. Grant that, according to Thy Word,
    I lead a godly life, O Lord,
    And let me, after time is o’er,
    Inherit life forevermore.

                                         Anon., 1650; A. Crull, tr., 1880.


425

                                                                     L. M.

    O faithful God, we worship Thee!
    Thou pardon’st our iniquity,
    Thou grantest help in sin’s distress,
    And soul and body Thou dost bless.

    2. Thou, through Thy servant, say’st to me:
    “Thy sins are all forgiven thee,
    Depart in peace; but sin no more
    And e’er My pardoning grace adore.”

    3. O Lord, we bless Thy gracious heart,
    For Thou Thyself dost heal our smart
    Through Christ our Savior’s precious blood,
    Which for the sake of sinners flowed.

    4. Give us Thy Spirit, peace afford
    Now and forever, gracious Lord!
    Thy Word and holy Sacrament
    Preserve to us till life is spent.

                                                       N. Selnecker, 1587.


426

                                                                     L. M.

    Yea, as I live, Jehovah saith,
    I do not wish the sinner’s death,
    But that he turn from error’s ways,
    Repent, and live through endless days.

    2. Hence Christ His servants gave command:
    “Go forth and preach in every land;
    Forgiveness to each soul extend
    That mourns, believes, and will amend.

    3. “Whose sins soever ye remit,
    I truly pardon and acquit;
    Whose sins soever ye retain,
    Condemned and guilty shall remain.

    4. “What ye shall bind, that bound shall be;
    What ye shall loose, that shall be free;
    To all alike the keys are given
    To ope and close the gates of heaven.

    5. “They who believe, when ye proclaim
    The joyful tidings in My name,
    That I for them My blood have shed,
    Are free from guilt and Judgment dread.”

    6. The words which absolution give
    Are His who died that we might live;
    The minister whom Christ has sent
    Is but His humble instrument.

    7. However great our sin may be,
    The absolution sets us free,
    Appointed by God’s own dear Son
    To bring the pardon He has won.

    8. When ministers lay on their hands,
    Absolved by Christ the sinner stands;
    He who by grace the Word believes
    The purchase of His blood receives.

    9. This is the power of holy keys,
    It binds and doth again release;
    The Church retains them at her side,
    Our mother and Christ’s holy bride.

    10. Let those who stings of conscience bear,
    Whom sin would drive to dark despair,
    To Jesus come with trustful mind
    And peace in absolution find.

    11. All praise, eternal Son, to Thee
    For absolution full and free,
    In which Thou showest forth Thy grace;
    From false indulgence guard our race.

    12. Praise God the Father and the Son
    And Holy Spirit, Three in One,
    As ’twas, is now, and so shall be,
    World without end, eternally!

                                 Nikolaus Herman, 1560; M. Loy, tr., 1880.


THE LORD’S SUPPER.


427

                                                                       10s

    Draw nigh and take the body of your Lord
    And drink the holy blood for you outpoured.
    Offered was He for greatest and for least,
    Himself the Victim and Himself the Priest.

    2. He that in this world rules His saints and shields,
    To all believers life eternal yields,
    With heavenly bread makes them that hunger whole,
    Gives living waters to the thirsting soul.

    3. Approach ye, then, with faithful hearts sincere
    And take the pledges of salvation here.
    O Judge of all, our only Savior Thou,
    In this Thy feast of love be with us now.

                                 Latin, c. 680; J. M. Neale, tr., 1851, a.


428

                                                                     L. M.

    O Jesus, bruised and wounded more
      Than bursted grape or bread of wheat,
    The Life of life without our souls,
      The Cup of our salvation sweet!

    2. We come to show Thy dying hour,
      Thy streaming vein, Thy broken flesh;
    And still the blood is warm to save,
      And still the fragrant wounds are fresh.

    3. O Heart, that with a double tide
      Of blood and water maketh pure;
    O Flesh, once offered on the cross,
      The gift that makes our pardon sure,—

    4. Let nevermore our sinful souls
      The anguish of Thy cross renew
    Nor forge again the cruel nails
      That pierced Thy victim body through.

    5. Come, Bread of heaven, to feed our souls,
      And with Thee, Jesus, enter in!
    Come, Wine of God! and as we drink
      His precious blood, wash out our sin.

                                                     Mrs. C. F. Alexander.


429

                                                                     L. M.

    My God, and is Thy table spread?
      And does Thy cup with love o’erflow?
    Thither be all Thy children led
      And let them all its sweetness know.

    2. Hail, sacred feast which Jesus makes,
      Rich banquet of His flesh and blood!
    Thrice happy he who here partakes
      That sacred stream, that heavenly food!

    3. Why are its blessings all in vain
      Before unwilling hearts displayed?
    Was not for us the Victim slain?
      Are we forbid the children’s bread?

    4. O let Thy table honored be
      And furnished well with joyful guests;
    And may each soul salvation see
      That here its sacred pledges tastes!

                                              Philip Doddridge, 1755, abr.


430

                                                                     S. M.

    Thy table I approach,
      Dear Savior, hear my prayer;
    Oh, let no unrepented sin
      Prove hurtful to me there!

    2. Lo, I confess my sins
      And mourn their wretched bands;
    A contrite heart is ever wont
      To find grace at Thy hands.

    3. Thy body and Thy blood,
      Once slain and shed for me,
    Are taken at Thy table here—
      A wondrous mystery!

    4. Here I with mouth and soul,
      Incomprehensibly,
    Shall eat the precious flesh of Christ
      In blest reality.

    5. Search not how this takes place,
      Nor whether it can be;
    God can accomplish vastly more
      Than seemeth plain to thee.

    6. Vouchsafe, O blessed Lord,
      That earth and hell combined
    May ne’er about this Sacrament
      A doubt raise in my mind!

    7. And may I never fail
      To thank Thee day and night
    For Thy true body and true blood,
      O God, my Peace and Light!

                                     G. W. Molanus, 1673; M. Loy, 1880, a.


431

                                            11, 8, 11, 8, 5, 9, 9, 6, 7, 5

    May God be praised henceforth and blest forever,
    Who, Himself both Gift and Giver,
    With His own flesh and blood our souls doth nourish;
    May they grow thereby and flourish!
      O Lord, have mercy!
    By Thy holy body, the selfsame
    Which from Thine own mother Mary came,
    By the drops Thou didst bleed,
    Help us in the hour of need.
      O Lord, have mercy!

    2. Thou hast to death Thy holy body given,
    Life to win for us in heaven;
    By stronger love, dear Lord, Thou couldst not bind us,
    Whereof this should well remind us.
      O Lord, have mercy!
    Lord, Thy love constrained Thee for our good
    Mighty things to do by Thy dear blood;
    Thou hast paid all we owed,
    Thou hast made our peace with God.
      O Lord, have mercy!

    3. May God bestow on us His grace and blessing,
    That, His holy footsteps tracing,
    We walk as brethren dear in love and union
    Nor repent this sweet Communion.
      O Lord, have mercy!
    Let not Thy good Spirit forsake us,
    Grant that heavenly-minded He make us,
    That Thy poor Church may see
    Days of peace and unity.
      O Lord, have mercy!

            1st stanza 15th cent.; Martin Luther, 1524; R. Massie, tr., a.


432

                                                                 L. M. 8 l

    Deck thyself, my soul, with gladness,
    Leave the gloomy haunts of sadness,
    Come into the daylight’s splendor,
    There with joy thy praises render
    Unto Him whose grace unbounded
    Hath this wondrous banquet founded;
    High o’er all the heavens He reigneth,
    Yet to dwell with thee He deigneth.

    2. Hasten as a bride to meet Him
    And with loving reverence greet Him;
    For with words of life immortal
    Now He knocketh at thy portal;
    Haste to ope the gates before Him,
    Saying, while thou dost adore Him,
    “Suffer, Lord, that I receive Thee,
    And I nevermore will leave Thee.”

    3. He who costly goods desireth
    To obtain much gold requireth;
    But to freely give the treasure
    Of Thy love is Thy good pleasure;
    For on earth there is no coffer
    Which as payment we might offer
    For this cup, Thy blood containing,
    And this manna, on us raining.

    4. Ah, how hungers all my spirit
    For the love I do not merit!
    Oft have I, with sighs fast thronging,
    Thought upon this food with longing,
    In the battle well-nigh worsted,
    For this cup of life have thirsted,
    For the Friend, who here invites us
    And to God Himself unites us.

    5. Now I sink before Thee lowly,
    Filled with joy most deep and holy,
    As with trembling awe and wonder
    On Thy mighty works I ponder,
    How, by mystery surrounded,
    Depths no man hath ever sounded,
    None may dare to pierce unbidden,
    Secrets that with Thee are hidden.

    6. Nay, though reason here doth ponder,
    It can never reach this wonder,
    That this bread is never lessened,
    Though it nourish thousands present,
    And that Christ His blood is giving
    With the wine we are receiving.
    Oh, these mysteries, unsounded,
    Are by God alone expounded!

    7. Sun, who all my life doth brighten,
    Light, who dost my soul enlighten,
    Joy, the sweetest man e’er knoweth,
    Fount, whence all my being floweth,—
    At Thy feet I cry, my Maker,
    Let me be a fit partaker
    Of this blessed food from heaven,
    For our good, Thy glory, given.

    8. Lord, Thy fervent love hath driven
    Thee to leave Thy throne in heaven,
    For us on the cross to languish
    And to die in bitter anguish,
    To forego all joy and gladness
    And to shed Thy blood in sadness,
    Which we drink now; grant that never
    We forget Thy love, dear Savior!

    9. Jesus, Bread of life, I pray Thee,
    Let me gladly here obey Thee,
    Never to my hurt invited,
    Be Thy love with love requited;
    From this banquet let me measure,
    Lord, how vast and deep love’s treasure.
    Through the gifts Thou here dost give me
    As Thy guest in heaven receive me.

                                        J. Franck, 1649; C. Winkworth, tr.


433

                                                                        7s

    Lo, upon the altar lies
    Bread of heaven from the skies,
    Food to mortal wanderers given,
    To the sons and heirs of heaven.

    2. Jesus, Shepherd of the sheep!
    Thou Thy flock in safety keep.
    Living Bread! Thy life supply;
    Strengthen us, or else we die.

    3. Thou, who feedest us below,
    Source of all we have or know,
    Grant that with Thy saints above
    We may reach Thy feast of love!

                            Thomas Aquinas, † 1274; E. Caswall, tr., 1848.


434

                                                                     L. M.

    The death of Jesus Christ, our Lord,
    We celebrate with one accord;
    It is our comfort in distress,
    Our heart’s sweet joy and happiness.

    2. He blotted out with His own blood
    The judgment that against us stood;
    He full atonement for us made,
    And all our debt He fully paid.

    3. That this is so and ever true
    He gives an earnest ever new,
    In this His holy Supper here
    We taste His love so sweet, so near.

    4. For His true body, as He said,
    And His true blood, for sinners shed,
    In this communion we receive;
    His sacred Word we do believe.

    5. A precious food this is indeed,—
    It never faileth, such we need,—
    A heavenly manna for our soul,
    That we may safely reach our goal.

    6. Then blessed is each worthy guest
    Who in this promise finds His rest;
    For Jesus will in love abide
    With those who do in Him confide:

    7. The guest that comes with true intent
    To turn to God and to repent,
    To live for Christ, to die to sin,
    And thus a holy life begin.

    8. Who does unworthy here appear,
    Does not believe nor is sincere,
    Salvation here he cannot find.
    May we this warning bear in mind!

    9. O Jesus Christ, our Brother dear,
    Unto Thy cross we now draw near;
    Thy sacred wounds indeed make whole
    A wounded and afflicted soul.

    10. Help us sincerely to believe
    That we Thy mercy do receive
    And in Thy grace do find our rest.
    Amen. He who believes is blest.

                                      H. Spegel, 1686; J. O. Wallin, 1814.


435

                                                                 7, 6, 8 l

    O living Bread from heaven,
      How hast Thou fed Thy guest!
    The gifts Thou now hast given
      Have filled my heart with rest.
    O wondrous Food of blessing!
      O Cup that heals our woes!
    My heart, this gift possessing,
      In thankful song o’erflows.

    2. My Lord, Thou here hast led me
      Within Thy holiest place
    And there Thyself hast fed me
      With treasures of Thy grace;
    And Thou hast freely given
      What earth could never buy,
    The Bread of life from heaven,
      That now I shall not die.

    3. Thou givest all I wanted.
      The food can death destroy,
    And Thou hast freely granted
      The cup of endless joy.
    Ah, Lord, I do not merit
      The favor Thou hast shown,
    And all my soul and spirit
      Bow down before Thy throne.

    4. Lord, grant me that, thus strengthened
      With heavenly food, while here
    My course on earth is lengthened,
      I serve with holy fear;
    And when Thou call’st my spirit
      To leave this world below,
    I enter, through Thy merit,
      Where joys unmingled flow.

                               J. Rist, 1651, a.; C. Winkworth, tr., 1858.


436

                                                       8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7

    Lord Jesus, Thou art truly good;
      Thou spread’st for our salvation
    Thy body and Thy blood as food
      And giv’st us invitation;
    As weary souls, with sin opprest,
    We come to Thee for needed rest,
      For counsel and forgiveness.

    2. Although Thou didst ascend to heaven,
      Where angels bow before Thee,
    And now to mortals ’tis not given
      By sight here to adore Thee,
    Until begins Thy Judgment grand,
    When we before Thy throne shall stand
      And cheerfully behold Thee;

    3. Yet art Thou ever with us, Lord,
      And with Thy congregation
    And not confined—so says Thy Word—
      To any habitation.
    Firm as a rock Thy Word still stands,
    Unshaken by the en’mies’ hands
      Though they be e’er so cunning.

    4. Thou say’st: “This is My body; eat
      And orally receive Me.
    This is My blood; drink all of it
      And henceforth never leave Me.”
    What Thou hast spoken true must be;
    Thou art almighty, and with Thee
      Impossible is nothing.

    5. Although my reason cannot see
      How in so many places
    Thy body at one time may be,
      Yet faith Thy Word embraces.
    How it can be I leave to Thee;
    Thy Word alone sufficeth me,
      For Thou wilt that we trust it.

    6. Lord, I believe in simple trust,
      Strength in my weakness give me,
    For I am naught but sinful dust,
      Nor of Thy Word bereave me!
    Thy Baptism, Supper, and Thy Word
    My consolation are, O Lord,
      For they contain my treasure.

    7. Grant that we worthily receive
      Thy Supper, Lord, our Savior,
    That for our sins we truly grieve
      And prove by our behavior
    That we obtained Thy saving grace
    And trust in it throughout our days;
      Then will our life be godly.

    8. For Thy consoling Supper, Lord,
      Be praised throughout all ages!
    Preserve it, for with one accord
      The world against it rages.
    Grant that Thy body and Thy blood
    May be my comfort and sweet food
      In my last moments. Amen.

                                S. Kinner, 1638; E. Cronenwett, tr., 1880.


437

                                                                     L. M.

    An awful mystery is here
    To challenge faith and waken fear;
    The Savior comes as food divine,
    Concealed in earthly bread and wine.

    2. This world is loveless—but above,
    What wondrous boundlessness of love!
    The King of Glory stoops to me
    My spirit’s Life and Strength to be.

    3. In consecrated wine and bread
    No eye perceives the mystery dread;
    But Jesus’ words are strong and clear:
    “My body and My blood are here.”

    4. How dull are all the powers of sense,
    Employed on proofs of love immense!
    The richest food remains unseen,
    And highest gifts appear how mean!

    5. But here we have no boon on earth,
    And faith alone discerns its worth;
    The Word, not sense, must be our guide
    And faith assure, since sight’s denied.

    6. Lord, show us still that Thou art good
    And grant us evermore this food;
    Give faith to ev’ry wav’ring soul
    And make each wounded spirit whole.

                                                             M. Loy, 1880.


438

                                                                     L. M.

    Invited, Lord, by boundless grace,
    I stood a guest before Thy face;
    As host Thou spread’st no common food;
    Here is Thy body and Thy blood!

    2. How holy is this Sacrament,
    Where pardon, peace, and life are spent!
    This bread and cup my lips have pressed;
    Thou blessedst, and my soul is blessed.

    3. Now lettest Thou Thy guest depart
    With full assurance in his heart;
    For such communion, Lord, with Thee
    May a new life my offering be!

    4. When Thou shalt in Thy glory come
    To gather all Thy people home,
    Then let me, as Thy heavenly guest,
    In anthems praise Thee with the blest!

                                                   E. Cronenwett, c. 1880.


439

                                                                     L. M.

    ’Twas on that dark, that doleful night,
      When powers of earth and hell arose
    Against the Son of God’s delight,
      And friends betrayed Him to His foes.

    2. Before the mournful scene began,
      He took the bread and blessed and brake;
    What love through all His actions ran!
      What wondrous words of grace He spake!

    3. “This is My body, broke for sin;
      Receive and eat the living food”;
    Then took the cup and blessed the wine:
      “’Tis the new covenant in My blood.”

    4. “Do this,” He said, “till time shall end,
      In memory of your dying Friend.
    Meet at My table and record
      The love of your departed Lord.”

    5. Jesus, Thy feast we celebrate;
      We show Thy death, we sing Thy name,
    Till Thou return and we shall eat
      The marriage supper of the Lamb.

                                                     Isaac Watts, 1709, a.


440

                                                                     L. M.

    At Thy command, our dearest Lord,
      Here we attend Thy dying feast;
    Thy blood, like wine, adorns the board,
      And Thine own flesh feeds every guest.

    2. Our faith adores Thy bleeding love
      And trusts for life in One that died;
    We hope for heavenly crowns above
      From a Redeemer crucified.

    3. Let the vain world pronounce it shame
      And fling their scandals on the cause;
    We come to boast our Savior’s name
      And make our triumphs in His cross.

    4. With joy we tell the scoffing age,
      He that was dead has left His tomb;
    He lives above their utmost rage,
      And we are waiting till He come.

                                                        Isaac Watts, 1707.


441

                                                                8, 8, 7, 8

    Jesus Christ, our blessed Savior,
    Turned away God’s wrath forever;
    Suffering pains no tongue can tell,
    He saved us from the pains of hell.

    2. To remind us that, to save us,
    He hath died, His flesh He gave us
    With this bread, a quick’ning food,
    And with this wine His precious blood.

    3. Whoso to this board repaireth
    Take good heed how he prepareth;
    Death instead of life shall he
    Receive who comes unworthily.

    4. Thou shalt hold with faith unshaken
    That this food is to be taken
    By the sick who are distressed,
    By those whose heart is sin-oppressed.

    5. Christ says: “Come, ye heavy-laden,
    I your weary hearts will gladden;
    They that are yet strong and well,
    Despise the best physician’s skill.

    6. “Couldst thou earn thine own salvation,
    Useless were My death and Passion;
    This feast is not spread for thee
    If thine own helper thou wilt be.”

    7. If thou this believest truly
    And confession makest duly,
    Thou a welcome guest art here,
    This heavenly food thy soul shall cheer.

    8. But the fruits must not be missing,
    Love thy neighbor without ceasing;
    That true love let him receive
    Which here to thee thy God doth give.

                                   John Huss, † 1415; Martin Luther, 1524.


HOME, MARRIAGE, CHILDREN.


442

                                                                7, 6, 7, 6

    The voice that breathed o’er Eden,
      That earliest wedding-day,
    The primal marriage blessing,—
      It hath not passed away.

    2. Still in the pure espousal
      Of Christian man and maid,
    The Holy Three are with us,
      The threefold grace is said.

    3. Be present, loving Father,
      To give away this bride,
    As Eve Thou gav’st to Adam
      Out of his own pierced side.

    4. Be present, Son of Mary,
      To join their loving hands,
    As Thou didst bind two natures
      In Thine eternal bands.

    5. Be present, Holiest Spirit,
      To bless them as they kneel,
    As Thou for Christ, the Bridegroom,
      The heavenly spouse dost seal.

    6. O spread Thy pure wings o’er them,
      Let no ill power find place,
    When onward to Thine altar
      Their hallowed path they trace,

    7. To cast their crowns before Thee
      In perfect sacrifice,
    Till to the home of gladness
      With Christ’s own Bride they rise.

                                                        J. Keble, 1857, a.


443

                                                                 C. M. 8 l

    Lord, who at Cana’s wedding-feast
      Didst as a Guest appear,
    Thou dearer far than earthly guest,
      Vouchsafe Thy presence here;
    For holy Thou indeed dost prove
      The marriage-vow to be,
    Proclaiming it a type of love
      Between the Church and Thee.

    2. The holiest vow that man can make,
      The golden thread in life,
    The bond that none may dare to break,
      That bindeth man and wife;
    Which, blessed by Thee, whate’er betides,
      No evil shall destroy,
    Through care-worn days each care divides,
      And doubles every joy.

    3. On those who now before Thee kneel,
      O Lord, Thy blessing pour,
    That each may wake the other’s zeal
      To love Thee more and more.
    Oh, grant them here in peace to live,
      In purity and love,
    And, this world leaving, to receive
      A crown of life above.

                                                       A. Thrupp, 1853, a.


444

                                                            11, 10, 11, 10

    O perfect Love, all human thought transcending,
      Lowly we kneel in pray’r before Thy throne,
    That theirs may be the love which knows no ending,
      Whom Thou forevermore dost join in one.

    2. O perfect Life, be Thou their full assurance
      Of tender charity and steadfast faith,
    Of patient hope and quiet, brave endurance,
      With childlike trust, that fears nor pain nor death.

    3. Grant them the joy which brightens earthly sorrow;
      Grant them the peace which calms all earthly strife,
    And to life’s day the glorious unknown morrow
      That dawns upon eternal love and life.

                                              Dorothy F. Bloomfield, 1883.


445

                                                                     L. M.

    O blest the house, whate’er befall,
    Where Jesus Christ is all in all;
    Yea, if He were not dwelling there,
    How poor and dark and void it were!

    2. O blest that house where faith ye find,
    And all within have set their mind
    To trust their God and serve Him still
    And do in all His holy will!

    3. O blest the parents who give heed
    Unto their children’s foremost need
    And weary not of care or cost!
    To them and heaven shall none be lost.

    4. Blest such a house, it prospers well,
    In peace and joy the parents dwell,
    And in their children’s lot is shown
    How richly God can bless His own.

    5. Then here will I and mine to-day
    A solemn covenant make and say:
    Though all the world forsake Thy Word,
    I and my house will serve the Lord.

                              C. C. von Pfeil, 1782; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


446

                                                                     L. M.

    Happy the man who feareth God,
    Whose feet His holy ways have trod;
    Thine own good hand shall nourish thee,
    And well and happy shalt thou be.

    2. Lo! to that man these blessings cleave
    Who in God’s holy fear doth live;
    From him the ancient curse hath fled
    By Adam’s race inherited.

    3. Out of Mount Zion God shall send
    And crown with joy thy latter end,
    That thou Jerusalem may’st see
    In favor and prosperity.

    4. He shall be with thee in thy ways
    And give thee health and strength of days;
    Yea, thou shalt children’s children see,
    And peace on Israel shall be.

    5. Praise God the Father, God the Son,
    And God the Spirit, Three in One;
    As ’twas through ages heretofore,
    Is now, and shall be evermore.

                                 Martin Luther, 1524; R. Massie, tr., abr.


447

                                                                 8, 7, 6 l

    Gracious Savior, gentle Shepherd,
      Children all are dear to Thee;
    Gathered with Thine arms and carried
      In Thy bosom may they be;
    Sweetly, fondly, safely tended,
      From all want and danger free.

    2. Tender Shepherd, never leave them
      From Thy fold to go astray;
    By Thy warning love directed,
      May they walk the narrow way!
    Thus direct them, thus defend them,
      Lest they fall an easy prey.

    3. Cleanse their hearts from sinful folly
      In the stream Thy love supplied,
    Mingled stream of blood and water
      Flowing from Thy wounded side;
    And to heavenly pastures lead them,
      Where Thine own still waters glide.

    4. Let Thy holy Word instruct them;
      Fill their minds with heavenly light;
    Let Thy powerful grace constrain them
      To approve whate’er is right;
    Let them feel Thy yoke is easy,
      Let them prove Thy burden light.

    5. Taught to lisp Thy holy praises
      Which on earth Thy children sing,
    Both with lips and hearts, unfeignèd,
      Glad thank-offerings may they bring;
    Then with all the saints in glory
      Join to praise their Lord and King.

                                                     Jane E. Leeson, 1857.


448

                                                       6, 6, 4, 6, 6, 6, 4

    Shepherd of tender youth,
    Guiding in love and truth
      Through devious ways;
    Christ, our triumphant King,
    We come Thy name to sing
    And here our children bring
      To join Thy praise.

    2. Thou art our holy Lord,
    O all-subduing Word,
      Healer of strife.
    Thou didst Thyself abase
    That from sin’s deep disgrace
    Thou mightest save our race
      And give us life.

    3. Thou art the great High Priest;
    Thou hast prepared the feast
      Of holy love;
    And in our mortal pain
    None calls on Thee in vain;
    Help Thou dost not disdain,
      Help from above.

    4. Ever be near our side,
    Our Shepherd and our Guide,
      Our Staff and Song;
    Jesus, Thou Christ of God,
    By Thine enduring Word
    Lead us where Thou hast trod,
      Make our faith strong.

    5. So now, and till we die,
    Sound we Thy praises high
      And joyful sing;
    Let all the holy throng
    Who to Thy Church belong
    Unite and swell the song
      To Christ, our King!

                      Clement of Alexandria, 211; H. M. Dexter, tr., 1846.


449

                                                                8, 7, 8, 7

    Savior, who Thy flock art feeding
      With the Shepherd’s kindest care,
    All the feeble gently leading,
      While the lambs Thy bosom share,—

    2. Now, these little ones receiving,
      Fold them in Thy gracious arm;
    There, we know, Thy Word believing,
      Only there secure from harm.

    3. Never, from Thy pasture roving,
      Let them be the Lion’s prey;
    Let Thy tenderness, so loving,
      Keep them through life’s dangerous way.

    4. Then within Thy fold eternal
      Let them find a resting-place,
    Feed in pastures ever vernal,
      Drink the rivers of Thy grace.

                                                  W. A. Muehlenberg, 1826.




CHURCH.


LAYING OF CORNER-STONE.


450

                                                                     L. M.

    O Lord of hosts, whose glory fills
    The bounds of the eternal hills
    And yet vouchsaf’st, in Christian lands,
    To dwell in temples made with hands;

    2. Grant that all we who here to-day
    Rejoicing this foundation lay
    May be in very deed Thine own,
    Built on the precious Corner-stone.

    3. The heads that guide endue with skill,
    The hands that work preserve from ill,
    That we, who these foundations lay
    May raise the top-stone in its day.

    4. But now and ever, Lord, protect
    The temple of Thine own elect;
    Be Thou in them and they in Thee,
    O ever-blessed Trinity!

                                                   J. M. Neale, 1844, abr.


451

                                                                 8, 7, 8 l

    In the name which earth and heaven
      Ever worship, praise, and fear,
    Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
      Shall a house be builded here.
    Here with prayer its deep foundations,
      In the faith of Christ, we lay,
    Trusting by His help to crown it
      With the top-stone in its day.

    2. Here as in their due succession
      Stone on stone the workmen place;
    Thus, we pray, unseen, but surely,
      Jesus, build us up in grace;
    Till, within these walls completed,
      We complete in Thee are found
    And to Thee, the one Foundation,
      Strong and living stones, are bound.

    3. Fair shall be Thine earthly temple;
      Here the careless passer-by
    Shall bethink him, in its beauty,
      Of the holier house on high;
    Weary hearts and troubled spirits
      Here shall find a still retreat;
    Sinful souls shall bring their burden
      Here to the Absolver’s feet.

    4. Yet with truer, nobler beauty,
      Lord, we pray, this house adorn,
    Where Thy Bride, Thy Church redeemèd,
      Robes her for her marriage morn;
    Clothed in garments of salvation,
      Rich with gems of heavenly grace,
    Spouse of Christ, arrayed and waiting
      Till she may behold His face.

    5. Here in due and solemn order
      May her ceaseless prayer arise;
    Here may strains of holy gladness
      Lift her heart above the skies;
    Here the Word of Life be spoken;
      Here the child of God be sealed;
    Here the Bread of Heaven be broken,
      “Till He come,” Himself revealed.

    6. Praise to Thee, O Master Builder,
      Maker of the earth and skies;
    Praise to Thee, in whom Thy temple,
      Fitly framed together, lies;
    Praise to Thee, eternal Spirit,
      Binding all that lives in one,
    Till our earthly praise be ended
      And th’ eternal song begun!

                                                     J. Ellerton, 1871, a.


452

                                                                     C. M.

    Behold the sure Foundation-stone
      Which God in Zion lays
    To build our heavenly hopes upon
      And His eternal praise!

    2. Chosen of God, to sinners dear,
      Let saints adore the name;
    They trust their whole salvation here,
      Nor shall they suffer shame.

    3. The foolish builders, scribe and priest,
      Reject it with disdain;
    Yet on this Rock the Church shall rest
      And envy rage in vain.

    4. What though the gates of hell withstood,
      Yet must this building rise;
    ’Tis Thine own work, Almighty God,
      And wondrous in our eyes.

                                                        Isaac Watts, 1719.


453

                                                  6, 6, 6, 6, 8, 8 (H. M.)

    Christ is our Corner-stone,
      On Him alone we build:
    With His true saints alone
      The courts of heav’n are filled;
    On His great love our hopes we place,
    Of present grace and joys above.

    2. Oh, then with hymns of praise
      These hallowed courts shall ring;
    Our voices we will raise
      The Three in One to sing
    And thus proclaim in joyful song,
    Both loud and long, that glorious name.

    3. Here, gracious God, do Thou
      Forevermore draw nigh;
    Accept each faithful vow
      And mark each suppliant sigh;
    In copious shower, on all who pray,
    Each holy day, Thy blessing pour.

    4. Here may we gain from heaven
      The grace which we implore,
    And may that grace, once given,
      Be with us evermore,
    Until that day when all the blest
    To endless rest are called away!

                 From the Latin, 6th or 7th cent.; J. Chandler, tr., 1837.


DEDICATION OF CHURCH.


454

                                                                 8, 7, 6 l

    Christ, Thou art the sure Foundation,
      Thou the Head and Corner-stone;
    Chosen of the Lord and precious,
      Binding all the Church in one;
    Thou Thy Zion’s Help forever
      And her Confidence alone.

    2. To this temple, where we call Thee,
      Come, O Lord of hosts, to-day;
    With Thy wonted loving-kindness
      Hear Thy servants as they pray;
    And Thy fullest benediction
      Shed within these walls alway.

    3. Here vouchsafe to all Thy servants
      What they ask of Thee to gain,
    What they gain from Thee forever
      With the blessed to retain,
    And hereafter in Thy glory
      Evermore with Thee to reign.

    4. Praise and honor to the Father,
      Praise and honor to the Son,
    Praise and honor to the Spirit,
      Ever Three and ever One;
    One in might and one in glory,
      While eternal ages run.

                                     From the Latin; J. M. Neale, 1851, a.


455

                                                                     L. M.

    Come, Jesus, from the sapphire throne,
      Where Thy redeemed behold Thy face;
    Enter this temple, now Thine own,
      And let Thy glory fill the place.

    2. We praise Thee that to-day we see
      Its sacred walls before Thee stand;
    ’Tis Thine for us; ’tis ours for Thee,
      Reared by Thy kind, assisting hand.

    3. Oft as returns the day of rest,
      Let heartfelt worship here ascend;
    With Thine own joy fill every breast,
      With Thine own power Thy Word attend.

    4. Here in the dark and sorrowing day
      Bid Thou the throbbing heart be still;
    Oh, wipe the mourner’s tears away
      And give new strength to meet Thy will!

    5. When at Thine altar we shall meet
      And keep the feast of dying love,
    Be our communion ever sweet
      With Thee and with Thy Church above.

    6. Come, faithful Shepherd, feed Thy sheep;
      In Thine own arms the lambs infold;
    Give help to climb the heavenward steep
      Till Thy full glory we behold.

                                             Ray Palmer, 1875, a. and abr.


456

                                                                     L. M.

    Eternal Son of God, O Thou,
    Before whom earth and heaven bow,
    Regard Thy people as they raise
    To Thee their songs of prayer and praise.

    2. This house they dedicate to Thee
    That here Thy glory they may see,
    Thy body and Thy blood they here
    Receive their fainting souls to cheer.

    3. Here in baptismal water pure
    They find for sin a gracious cure;
    Their children here to Thee they bring,
    O Thou our death-subduing King.

    4. Here sin’s diseases healing find;
    The weak grow strong, light cheers the blind;
    The troubled heart with peace is blest,
    And weariness finds heavenly rest.

    5. When tempests shake the world around,
    The rock-built Church secure is found;
    The gates of hell may here assail
    Whom Christ defends, but not prevail.

    6. To God the Father, God the Son,
    And God the Spirit, Three in One,
    Be praise! Do Thou, whom we adore,
    Teach us to praise Thee evermore.

                                                From the Latin, tr., 1880.


457

                                                  6, 6, 6, 6, 8, 8 (H. M.)

    In loud, exalted strains,
      The King of Glory praise;
    O’er heav’n and earth He reigns
      Through everlasting days;
    But Zion, with His presence blest,
    Is His delight, His chosen rest.

    2. O King of Glory, come
      And with Thy favor crown
    This temple as Thy home,
      This people as Thy own;
    Beneath this roof vouchsafe to show
    How God can dwell with men below.

    3. Now let Thine ear attend
      Our supplicating cries;
    Now let our praise ascend,
      Accepted, to the skies;
    Now let Thy Gospel’s joyful sound
    Spread its celestial influence round.

    4. Here may the listening throng
      Imbibe Thy truth and love,
    Here Christians join the song
      Of seraphim above,
    Till all who humbly seek Thy face
    Rejoice in Thy abounding grace.

                                                         B. Francis, 1774.


458

                                                                     S. M.

    Great is the Lord, our God,
      And let His praise be great;
    He makes the Church His own abode,
      His most delightful seat.

    2. In Zion God is known,
      A Refuge in distress;
    How bright has His salvation shone
      Through all her palaces!

    3. Oft have our fathers told,
      Our eyes have often seen,
    How well our God secures the fold
      Where His own sheep have been.

    4. In every new distress
      We’ll to His house repair;
    We’ll think upon His wondrous grace
      And seek deliverance there.

                                                   Isaac Watts, 1719, abr.


459

                                                                     L. M.

    Here in Thy name, eternal God,
      We build this earthly house for Thee;
    Oh, choose it for Thy fixed abode
      And keep it from all error free!

    2. Here, when Thy people seek Thy face
      And dying sinners pray to live,
    Hear Thou in heaven, Thy dwelling-place;
      And when Thou hearest, Lord, forgive.

    3. Here, when Thy messengers proclaim
      The blessed Gospel of Thy Son,
    Still by the power of His great name
      Be mighty signs and wonders done.

    4. When children’s voices raise the song,
      “Hosanna to the heavenly King!”
    Let heaven with earth the strain prolong,
      Hosanna! let the angels sing.

    5. Thy glory never hence depart;
      Yet choose not, Lord, this house alone:
    Thy kingdom come to every heart,
      In every bosom fix Thy throne.

                                                   James Montgomery, 1822.


THE COMMUNION OF SAINTS.


460

                                                                     L. M.

    There is within this heart of mine
    A little church, with sacred shrine,
    And stained forever with the blood
    Of Jesus Christ, the Lamb of God.

    2. Here dwelleth God the Father, Son,
    And Holy Spirit, Three in One;
    He is my soul’s beloved Guest
    And grants my heart true peace and rest.

    3. This little church looks poor and odd;
    But being the abode of God,
    It has a glorious, peerless grace:
    It is God’s royal dwelling-place.

    4. This little church, Lord, I commend
    Unto Thy care and pray: Defend
    And shield it from calamity,
    Dwell there now and eternally.

          From the Latin of B. Walther; B. Derschau, † 1639; A. Crull, tr.


461

                                                                8, 7, 8, 7

    Lord, in Thy kingdom there shall be
      No aliens from each other,
    But even as he loves himself
      Each saint shall love his brother.

    2. When in Thy courts below we meet
      To mourn our sinful living
    And with united hearts repeat
      Confession, creed, thanksgiving:

    3. Make us to hear in each sweet word
      Thy Holy Spirit calling
    To oneness with Thy Church and Thee,
      That heavenly bond forestalling.

    4. One Baptism and one faith have we,
      One Spirit sent to win us,
    One Lord, one Father, and one God,
      Above and through and in us.

    5. Never, by schism or by sin,
      May we that union sever,
    Till all, to perfect stature grown,
      Are one with Thee forever!

                                                       J. Anstice, † 1836.


462

                                                                     S. M.

    Blest be the tie that binds
      Our hearts in Christian love;
    The fellowship of kindred minds
      Is like to that above.

    2. Before our Father’s throne
      We pour our ardent prayers;
    Our fears, our hopes, our aims are one,
      Our comforts and our cares.

    3. We share our mutual woes;
      Our mutual burdens bear;
    And often for each other flows
      The sympathizing tear.

    4. When we asunder part,
      It gives us inward pain;
    But we shall still be joined in heart
      And hope to meet again.

    5. This glorious hope revives
      Our courage by the way,
    While each in expectation lives
      And longs to see the day.

    6. From sorrow, toil, and pain,
      And sin we shall be free;
    And perfect love and friendship reign
      Through all eternity.

                                                         J. Fawcett, 1772.


463

                                                                     C. M.

    The saints on earth and those above
      But one communion make;
    Joined to their Lord, in bonds of love,
      All of His grace partake.

    2. One family, we dwell in Him,
      One Church above, beneath;
    Though now divided by the stream,
      The narrow stream, of death.

    3. One army of the living God,
      To His commands we bow;
    Part of the host have passed the flood,
      And part are crossing now.

    4. Lo, thousands to their endless home
      Are swiftly borne away;
    And we are to the margin come
      And soon must launch as they.

    5. Lord Jesus, be our constant Guide;
      Then, when the word is given,
    Bid death’s cold flood its waves divide
      And land us safe in heaven.

                           Isaac Watts, 1709, and Charles Wesley, 1759, a.


GLORY OF THE CHURCH.


464

                                                                 8, 7, 8 l

    Glorious things of thee are spoken,
      Zion, city of our God;
    He whose word cannot be broken
      Formed thee for His own abode:
    On the Rock of Ages founded,
      What can shake thy sure repose?
    With salvation’s walls surrounded,
      Thou may’st smile at all thy foes.

    2. See, the streams of living waters
      Springing from eternal love
    Well supply thy sons and daughters
      And all fear of want remove.
    Who can faint while such a river
      Ever flows their thirst t’assuage—
    Grace, which, like the Lord, the Giver,
      Never fails from age to age?

    3. Savior, since of Zion’s city
      I, through grace, a member am,
    Let the world deride or pity,
      I will glory in Thy name.
    Fading is the worldling’s pleasure,
      All his boasted pomp and show;
    Solid joys and lasting treasure
      None but Zion’s children know.

                                                        John Newton, 1779.


465

                                                          8, 7, 8, 7, 4, 7

    Zion stands with hills surrounded,
      Zion, kept by power divine;
    All her foes shall be confounded,
      Though the world in arms combine.
        Happy Zion,
      What a happy lot is thine!

    2. Every human tie may perish,
      Friend to friend unfaithful prove,
    Brothers cease their own to cherish,
      Heaven and earth at last remove;
        But no changes
      Can attend Jehovah’s love.

    3. In the furnace God may prove thee,
      Thence to bring thee forth more bright,
    But can never cease to love thee;
      Thou art precious in His sight;
        God is with thee,
      God, thine everlasting Light.

                                                       Thomas Kelly, 1806.


466

                                                                 7, 6, 8 l

    The Church’s one foundation
      Is Jesus Christ, her Lord;
    She is His new creation
      By water and the Word.
    From heav’n He came and sought her
      To be His holy bride;
    With His own blood He bought her,
      And for her life He died.

    2. Elect from every nation,
      Yet one o’er all the earth,
    Her charter of salvation
      One Lord, one faith, one birth.
    One holy name she blesses,
      Partakes one holy food,
    And to one hope she presses,
      With every grace endued.

    3. Though with a scornful wonder
      Men see her sore oppressed,
    By schisms rent asunder,
      By heresies distressed,
    Yet saints their watch are keeping,
      Their cry goes up, “How long?”
    And soon the night of weeping
      Shall be the morn of song.

    4. Mid toil and tribulation
      And tumult of her war
    She waits the consummation
      Of peace forevermore,
    Till with the vision glorious
      Her longing eyes are blest
    And the great Church victorious
      Shall be the Church at rest.

    5. Yet she on earth hath union
      With God, the Three in One,
    And mystic, sweet communion
      With those whose rest is won.
    O happy ones and holy!
      Lord, give us grace that we,
    Like them, the meek and lowly,
      On high may dwell with Thee.

                                                        S. J. Stone, 1866.


467

                                                                8, 7, 8, 7

    Hark! the Church proclaims her honor,
      And her strength is only this;
    God hath laid her choice upon her,
      And the work she doth is His.

    2. He His Church has firmly founded,
      He will guard what He began;
    We, by sin and foes surrounded,
      Build her bulwarks as we can.

    3. Frail and fleeting are our powers,
      Short our days, our foresight dim,
    And we own the choice not ours,
      We were chosen first by Him.

    4. Onward, then! for naught despairing;
      Calm we follow at His word,
    Thus through joy and sorrow bearing
      Faithful witness to our Lord.

    5. Though we here must strive in weakness,
      Though in tears we often bend,
    What His might began in meekness
      Shall achieve a glorious end.

                              S. Preiswerk, 1844; C. Winkworth, tr., 1858.


468

                                                                     S. M.

    I love Thy Zion, Lord,
      The house of Thine abode,
    The Church our blest Redeemer saved
      With His own precious blood.

    2. I love Thy Church, O God!
      Her walls before Thee stand,
    Dear as the apple of Thine eye,
      And graven on Thy hand.

    3. Should I with scoffers join
      Her altars to abuse?
    No! better far my tongue were dumb,
      My hand its skill should lose.

    4. For her my tears shall fall,
      For her my prayers ascend,
    To her my cares and toils be given
      Till toils and cares shall end.

    5. Beyond my highest joy
      I prize her heavenly ways,
    Her sweet communion, solemn vows,
      Her hymns of love and praise.

    6. Jesus, Thou Friend Divine,
      Our Savior and our King,
    Thy hand from every snare and foe
      Shall great deliverance bring.

    7. Sure as Thy truth shall last,
      To Zion shall be given
    The brightest glories earth can yield
      And brighter bliss of heaven.

                                                       T. Dwight, 1800, a.


469

                                                  6, 6, 6, 6, 8, 8 (H. M.)

    Lord of the worlds above,
      How pleasant and how fair
    The dwellings of Thy love,
      Thine earthly temples are!
    To Thine abode
      My heart aspires,
      With warm desires
    To see my God.

    2. Oh, happy souls who pray
      Where God appoints to hear!
    Oh, happy men who pay
      Their constant service there!
    They praise Thee still;
      And happy they
      Who love the way
    To Zion’s hill.

    3. They go from strength to strength
      Through this dark vale of tears,
    Till each arrives at length,
      Till each in heaven appears.
    Oh, glorious seat,
      When God, our King,
      Shall thither bring
    Our willing feet!

                                                        Isaac Watts, 1719.


MISSIONS.


470

                                                                 8, 7, 6 l

    Saints of God, the dawn is brightening,
      Token of our coming Lord;
    O’er the earth the field is whitening;
      Louder rings the Master’s word:
        Pray for reapers
      In the harvest of the Lord!

    2. Now, O Lord, fulfil Thy pleasure,
      Breathe upon Thy chosen band,
    And, with Pentecostal measure,
      Send forth reapers o’er our land,
        Faithful reapers,
      Gathering sheaves for Thy right hand.

    3. Broad the shadow of our nation,
      Eager millions hither roam;
    Lo! they wait for Thy salvation.
      Come, Lord Jesus, quickly come;
        By Thy Spirit
      Bring Thy ransomed people home.

    4. Soon shall end the time of weeping,
      Soon the reaping time will come,
    Heaven and earth together keeping
      God’s eternal Harvest-home.
        Saints and angels
      Shout the world’s great Harvest-home.

                                                         M. Maxwell, 1849.


471

                                                                 7, 6, 8 l

    The morning light is breaking;
      The darkness disappears;
    The sons of earth are waking
      To penitential tears;
    Each breeze that sweeps the ocean
      Brings tidings from afar
    Of nations in commotion,
      Prepared for Zion’s war.

    2. See heathen nations bending
      Before the God we love,
    And thousand hearts ascending
      In gratitude above;
    While sinners, now confessing,
      The Gospel call obey
    And seek the Savior’s blessing,
      A nation in a day.

    3. Blest river of salvation,
      Pursue thy onward way;
    Flow thou to every nation,
      Nor in thy richness stay;
    Stay not till all the lowly
      Triumphant reach their home;
    Stay not till all the holy
      Proclaim, “The Lord is come!”

                                                        S. F. Smith, 1832.


472

                                                                 7, 6, 8 l

    Our country’s voice is pleading,
      Ye men of God, arise!
    His providence is leading,
      The land before you lies;
    Day-gleams are o’er it brightening,
      And promise clothes the soil;
    Wide fields, for harvest whitening,
      Invite the reaper’s toil.

    2. Go where the waves are breaking
      On California’s shore,
    Christ’s precious Gospel taking,
      More rich than golden ore;
    On Alleghany’s mountains,
      Through all the Western vale,
    Beside Missouri’s fountains,
      Rehearse the wondrous tale.

    3. His love of Christ unfolding,
      Speed on from east to west,
    Till all, His Cross beholding,
      In Him are fully blessed.
    Great Author of salvation,
      Haste, haste the glorious day,
    When we, a ransomed nation,
      Thy scepter shall obey.

                                                  Maria F. Anderson, 1848.


473

                                                                     L. M.

    O Spirit of the living God,
      In all Thy plenitude of grace,
    Where’er the foot of man hath trod,
      Descend on our apostate race.

    2. Give tongues of fire and hearts of love
      To preach the reconciling Word;
    Give power and unction from above
      Where’er the joyful sound is heard.

    3. Be darkness, at Thy coming, light;
      Confusion—order, in Thy path;
    Souls without strength inspire with might;
      Bid mercy triumph over wrath.

    4. O Spirit of the Lord, prepare
      A sinful world their God to meet;
    Breathe Thou abroad like morning air
      Till hearts of stone begin to beat.

    5. Baptize the nations; far and nigh
      The triumphs of the Cross record;
    The name of Jesus glorify
      Till every kindred call Him Lord.

    6. God from eternity hath willed
      All flesh shall His salvation see;
    So be the Father’s love fulfilled,
      The Savior’s sufferings crowned through Thee.

                                                   James Montgomery, 1825.


474

                                                                 7, 6, 8 l

    From Greenland’s icy mountains,
      From India’s coral strand,
    Where Afric’s sunny fountains
      Roll down their golden sand;
    From many an ancient river,
      From many a palmy plain,
    They call us to deliver
      Their land from error’s chain.

    2. What though the spicy breezes
      Blow soft o’er Ceylon’s isle,
    Though every prospect pleases
      And only man is vile;
    In vain with lavish kindness
      The gifts of God are strown;
    The heathen in his blindness
      Bows down to wood and stone.

    3. Shall we, whose souls are lighted
      With wisdom from on high,—
    Shall we to men benighted
      The lamp of life deny?
    Salvation, O salvation!
      The joyful sound proclaim
    Till earth’s remotest nation
      Has learned Messiah’s name.

    4. Waft, waft, ye winds, His story,
      And you, ye waters, roll,
    Till, like a sea of glory,
      It spreads from pole to pole;
    Till o’er our ransomed nature
      The Lamb for sinners slain,
    Redeemer, King, Creator,
      In bliss returns to reign.

                                                     Reginald Heber, 1819.


475

                                                                     L. M.

    O Christ, our true and only Light,
    Enlighten those who sit in night;
    Let those afar now hear Thy voice
    And in Thy fold with us rejoice.

    2. Fill with the radiance of Thy grace
    The souls now lost in error’s maze
    And all whom in their secret minds
    Some dark delusion haunts and blinds.

    3. And all who else have strayed from Thee,
    O gently seek! Thy healing be
    To every wounded conscience given
    And let them also share Thy heaven.

    4. O make the deaf to hear Thy Word
    And teach the dumb to speak, dear Lord,
    Who dare not yet the faith avow,
    Though secretly they hold it now.

    5. Shine on the darkened and the cold,
    Recall the wanderers from Thy fold,
    Unite all those who walk apart,
    Confirm the weak and doubting heart.

    6. So they with us may evermore
    Such grace with wondering thanks adore,
    And endless praise to Thee be given
    By all Thy Church in earth and heaven.

                                      J. Heermann, 1630; C. Winkworth, tr.


476

                                                                 8, 7, 8 l

    Hark! the voice of Jesus crying,
      “Who will go and work to-day?
    Fields are white and harvests waiting,
      Who will bear the sheaves away?”
    Loud and long the Master calleth,
      Rich reward He offers thee;
    Who will answer, gladly saying,
      “Here am I, send me, send me”?

    2. If you cannot cross the ocean
      And the heathen lands explore,
    You can find the heathen nearer,
      You can help them at your door;
    If you cannot give your thousands,
      You can give the widow’s mite;
    And the least you give for Jesus
      Will be precious in His sight.

    3. If you cannot speak like angels,
      If you cannot preach like Paul,
    You can tell the love of Jesus,
      You can say He died for all.
    If you cannot rouse the wicked
      With the Judgment’s dread alarms,
    You can lead the little children
      To the Savior’s waiting arms.

    4. Let none hear you idly saying,
      “There is nothing I can do,”
    While the souls of men are dying
      And the Master calls for you.
    Take the task He gives you gladly,
      Let His work your pleasure be;
    Answer quickly when He calleth,
      “Here am I, send me, send me!”

                                                           D. March, 1868.


477

                                                                 8, 7, 8 l

    Savior, sprinkle many nations;
      Fruitful let Thy sorrows be;
    By Thy pains and consolations
      Draw the Gentiles unto Thee!
    Of Thy Cross the wondrous story,
      Be it to the nations told;
    Let them see Thee in Thy glory
      And Thy mercy manifold.

    2. Let to mortals all be given
      Thee to know and life to gain,
    Thee the very God of heaven,
      Thee the Man for sinners slain!
    Speak Thou, through the Gospel-tiding,
      Peace to every human breast;
    Grant to all in Thee confiding
      Mercy, solace, hope, and rest.

    3. Great the need in every nation,
      Dense the darkness of sin’s night;
    Let Thy Spirit bring salvation,
      Love’s pure flame, and wisdom’s light.
    Give the Word, Thy preachers strengthen
      With the prophets’ power of old,
    Help them Zion’s cords to lengthen,
      All Thy wandering sheep to fold!

                 A. C. Coxe, 1851; Stanzas 2 and 3 a., W. G. Polack, 1927.


478

                                                                       10s

    Rise, crowned with light, imperial Salem, rise!
    Exalt thy towering head and lift thine eyes;
    See heaven its sparkling portals wide display
    And break upon thee in a flood of day.

    2. See a long race thy spacious court adorn;
    See future sons and daughters, yet unborn,
    In crowding ranks on every side arise,
    Demanding life, impatient for the skies.

    3. See barbarous nations at thy gates attend,
    Walk in the light and in thy temple bend;
    See thy bright altars thronged with prostrate kings,
    While every land its joyful tribute brings.

    4. The seas shall waste, the skies to smoke decay,
    Rocks fall to dust, and mountains melt away;
    But fixed this Word, this saving power, remains;
    Thy realms shall last, thy own Messiah reigns.

                                                     Alexander Pope, 1720.


479

                                                                     L. M.

    Look from Thy sphere of endless day,
      O God of mercy and of might!
    In pity look on those who stray
      Benighted in this land of light.

    2. In peopled vale, in lonely glen,
      In crowded mart, by stream or sea,
    How many of the sons of men
      Hear not the message sent from Thee!

    3. Send forth Thy heralds, Lord, to call
      The thoughtless young, the hardened old,
    A scattered, homeless flock, till all
      Be gathered to Thy peaceful fold.

    4. Send them Thy mighty Word to speak,
      Till faith shall dawn and doubt depart,
    To awe the bold, to stay the weak,
      And bind and heal the broken heart.

    5. Then all these wastes, a dreary scene,
      That makes us sadden as we gaze,
    Shall grow with living waters green
      And lift to heaven the voice of praise.

                                           William Cullen Bryant, 1840, a.


480

                                                 8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 7, 7

    May God bestow on us His grace,
      With blessings rich provide us,
    And may the brightness of His face,
      To life eternal guide us,
    That we His gracious work may know
      And what is His good pleasure,
    And also to the heathen show
      Christ’s riches without measure
    And unto God convert them.

    2. Thine over all shall be the praise
      And thanks of every nation,
    And all the world with joy shall raise
      The voice of exultation;
    For Thou shalt judge the earth, O Lord,
      Nor suffer sin to flourish;
    Thy people’s pasture is Thy Word
      Their souls to feed and nourish,
    In righteous paths to keep them.

    3. O let the people praise Thy worth,
      In all good works increasing;
    The land shall plenteous fruit bring forth,
      Thy Word is rich in blessing.
    May God the Father, God the Son,
      And God the Spirit bless us!
    Let all the world praise Him alone,
      Let solemn awe possess us.
    Now let our hearts say, Amen.

                                                      Martin Luther, 1524.


481

                                                                 L. M. 6 l

    Awake, Thou Spirit, who didst fire
      The watchmen of the Church’s youth,
    Who faced the foe’s envenomed ire,
      Who witnessed day and night Thy truth,
    Whose voices loud are ringing still
    And bringing hosts to know Thy will.

    2. Lord, let our earnest prayer be heard,
      The prayer Thy Son hath bid us pray;
    For, lo, Thy children’s hearts are stirred
      In every land in this our day
    To cry with fervent soul to Thee,
    O help us, Lord! So let it be!

    3. O haste to help ere we are lost!
      Send preachers forth, in spirit strong,
    Armed with Thy Word, a dauntless host,
      Bold to attack the rule of wrong;
    Let them the earth for Thee reclaim,
    Thy heritage, to know Thy name.

    4. Would there were help within our walls!
      O let Thy Spirit come again,
    Before whom every barrier falls;
      And now once more shine forth as then.
    O rend the heavens and make us free!
    Come, Lord, and bring us back to Thee!

    5. And let Thy Word have speedy course,
      Through every land be glorified,
    Till all the heathen know its force
      And fill Thy churches far and wide.
    Spread Thou the conquest of Thy Word
    And let Thy kingdom come, O Lord!

    6. The Church’s desert paths restore;
      Let stumbling-blocks that in them lie
    Hinder Thy Word henceforth no more;
      Error destroy, and heresy,
    And let Thy Church, from hirelings free,
    Bloom as a garden fair to Thee.

                        C. H. Bogatzky, 1750; C. Winkworth, tr., a., 1855.


482

                                                                        7s

    Soldiers of the Cross, arise,
      Gird you with your armor bright;
    Mighty are your enemies,
      Hard the battle ye must fight.

    2. O’er a faithless, fallen world
      Raise your banner in the sky;
    Let it float there wide unfurled;
      Bear it onward, lift it high.

    3. Mid the homes of want and woe,
      Strangers to the living Word,
    Let the Savior’s heralds go,
      Let the voice of hope be heard.

    4. Where the shadows deepest lie,
      Carry truth’s unsullied ray;
    Where are crimes of blackest dye,
      There the saving sign display.

    5. To the weary and the worn
      Tell of realms where sorrows cease;
    To the outcast and forlorn
      Speak of mercy and of peace.

    6. Guard the helpless; seek the strayed;
      Comfort troubles; banish grief;
    In the might of God arrayed,
      Scatter sin and unbelief.

    7. Be the banner still unfurled,
      Still unsheathed the Spirit’s Sword,
    Till the kingdoms of the world
      Are the kingdom of the Lord.

                                                          W. W. How, 1854.


483

                                                                     L. M.

    Jesus shall reign where’er the sun
    Does his successive journeys run;
    His kingdom stretch from shore to shore
    Till moons shall wax and wane no more.

    2. To Him shall endless prayer be made
    And endless praises crown His head;
    His name, like sweet perfume, shall rise
    With every morning sacrifice.

    3. People and realms of every tongue
    Dwell on His love with sweetest song;
    And infant voices shall proclaim
    Their early blessings on His name.

    4. Blessings abound where’er He reigns;
    The prisoner leaps to loose his chains,
    The weary find eternal rest,
    And all the sons of want are blest.

    5. Where He displays His healing power,
    Death and the curse are known no more;
    In Him the tribes of Adam boast
    More blessings than their father lost.

    6. Let every creature rise and bring
    Peculiar honors to our King;
    Angels descend with songs again,
    And earth repeat the loud Amen.

                                                        Isaac Watts, 1719.


484

                                                                8, 8, 8, 6

    Send Thou, O Lord, to every place
    Swift messengers before Thy face,
    The heralds of Thy wondrous grace,
      Where Thou Thyself wilt come.

    2. Send men whose eyes have seen the King,
    Men in whose ears His sweet words ring;
    Send such Thy lost ones home to bring;
      Send them where Thou wilt come,—

    3. To bring good news to souls in sin,
    The bruised and broken hearts to win;
    In every place to bring them in
      Where Thou Thyself wilt come.

    4. Thou who hast died, Thy victory claim;
    Assert, O Christ, Thy glory’s name
    And far to lands of pagan shame
      Send men where Thou wilt come.

    5. Gird each one with the Spirit’s Sword,
    The sword of Thine own deathless Word,
    And make them conquerors, conquering Lord,
      Where Thou Thyself wilt come.

    6. Raise up, O Lord the Holy Ghost,
    From this broad land a mighty host,
    Their war-cry, “We will seek the lost
      Where Thou, O Christ, wilt come!”

                                                   Mrs. M. E. Gates, 1889.


THE MINISTRY.


485

                                               8, 8, 6, 8, 8, 6 (C. P. M.)

    Lord of the Church, we humbly pray
    For those who guide us in Thy way
      And speak Thy holy Word;
    With love divine their hearts inspire
    And touch their lips with hallowed fire
      And needful strength afford.

    2. Help them to preach the Truth of God,
    Redemption through the Savior’s blood,
      Nor let the Spirit cease
    On all the Church His gifts to shower,—
    To them a messenger of power;
      To us, of life and peace.

    3. So may they live to Thee alone;
    Then hear the welcome word, “Well done!”
      And take their crown above;
    Enter into their Master’s joy
    And all eternity employ
      In praise and bliss and love.

                                                           E. Osler, 1836.


486

                                                                       10s

    God of the prophets, bless the prophets’ sons;
      Elijah’s mantle o’er Elisha cast;
    Each age its solemn task may claim but once;
      Make each a nobler, stronger than the last!

    2. Anoint them prophets! Make their ears attent
      To Thy divinest speech; their hearts awake
    To human need; their lips make eloquent
      T’assure the right and every evil break.

    3. Anoint them priests! Strong intercessors they
      For pardon and for charity and peace!
    Ah, if with them the world might pass, astray,
      Into the dear Christ’s life of sacrifice!

    4. Anoint them kings; aye, kindly kings, O Lord!
      Anoint them with the Spirit of Thy Son!
    Theirs not a jeweled crown, a blood-stained sword;
      Theirs, by sweet love, for Christ a kingdom won!

    5. Make them apostles, heralds of Thy Cross!
      Forth may they go to tell all realms Thy grace.
    Inspired of Thee, may they count all but loss
      And stand at last with joy before Thy face.

    6. O mighty age of prophet-kings, return!
      O truth, O faith, enrich our urgent time!
    Lord Jesus Christ, again with us sojourn;
      A weary world awaits Thy reign sublime!

                                                         D. Wortman, 1884.


487

                                                                 S. M. 8 l

    Lord, when at Thy command
      The Word of Life we sow,
    Watered by Thy almighty hand,
      The seed shall surely grow;
    The virtue of Thy grace
      A large increase shall give
    And multiply the faithful race
      Who to Thy glory live.

    2. Now, then, the ceaseless shower
      Of Gospel-blessings send
    And let the soul-converting power
      Thy ministers attend;
    On multitudes confer
      The heart-renewing love
    And by the joy of grace prepare
      For fuller joys above.

                                                           Charles Wesley.


488

                                                                     L. M.

    Lord, pour Thy Spirit from on high
      And Thine ordainèd servants bless;
    Graces and gifts to each supply
      And clothe Thy priests with righteousness.

    2. Within Thy temple when they stand
      To teach the truth as taught by Thee,
    Savior, like stars in Thy right hand,
      Let all Thy Church’s pastors be.

    3. Wisdom and zeal and faith impart,
      Firmness and meekness from above,
    To bear Thy people in their heart
      And love the souls whom Thou dost love;

    4. To watch and pray and never faint
      By day and night strict guard to keep,
    To warn the sinner, cheer the saint,
      To feed Thy lambs, and fold Thy sheep.

    5. So, when their work is finished here,
      They may in hope their charge resign;
    So, when their Master shall appear,
      They may with crowns of glory shine.

                                                   James Montgomery, 1833.


489

                                                                     L. M.

    We bid thee welcome in the name
      Of Jesus, our exalted Head.
    Come as a servant,—so He came,—
      And we receive thee in His stead.

    2. Come as a shepherd; guard and keep
      This fold from hell and earth and sin;
    Nourish the lambs and feed the sheep;
      The wounded heal, the lost bring in.

    3. Come as a teacher sent from God,
      Charged His whole counsel to declare;
    Lift o’er our ranks the prophet’s rod
      While we uphold thy hands with prayer.

    4. Come as a messenger of peace,
      Filled with the Spirit, fired with love;
    Live to behold our large increase
      And die to meet us all above.

                                                         James Montgomery.


490

                                                                     S. M.

    How beauteous are their feet
      Who stand on Zion’s hill;
    Who bring salvation on their tongues
      And words of peace reveal!

    2. How charming is their voice!
      How sweet their tidings are!
    “Zion, behold thy Savior-King!
      He reigns and triumphs here.”

    3. How happy are our ears
      That hear this joyful sound
    Which kings and prophets waited for
      And sought, but never found!

    4. How blessed are our eyes
      That see this heavenly light!
    Prophets and kings desired it long,
      But died without the sight.

    5. The watchmen join their voice
      And tuneful notes employ;
    Jerusalem breaks forth in songs,
      And deserts learn the joy.

    6. The Lord makes bare His arm
      Through all the earth abroad.
    Let every nation now behold
      Their Savior and their God.

                                                        Isaac Watts, 1707.


491

                                                                     S. M.

    Lord of the harvest, hear
      Thy needy servants cry;
    Answer our faith’s effectual prayer
      And all our wants supply.

    2. On Thee we humbly wait,
      Our wants are in Thy view.
    The harvest, truly, Lord, is great,
      The laborers are few.

    3. Convert and send forth more
      Into Thy Church abroad
    And let them speak Thy Word of Power
      As workers with their God.

    4. Oh, let them spread Thy name,
      Their mission fully prove,
    Thy universal grace proclaim,
      Thine all-redeeming love!

                                                     Charles Wesley, 1742.


492

                                                                 L. M. 6 l

    Thou who the night in prayer didst spend
    And then didst Thine apostles send,
    And bidd’st us pray the harvest’s Lord
    To send forth sowers of Thy Word,—
    Hear and Thy chosen servants bless
    With sevenfold gifts of holiness.

    2. Oh, may Thy pastors faithful be,
    Not laboring for themselves, but Thee!
    Give grace to feed with wholesome food
    The sheep and lambs bought by Thy blood,
    To tend Thy flock, and thus to prove
    How dearly they the Shepherd love.

    3. Oh, may Thy people faithful be,
    And in Thy pastors honor Thee,
    And with them work, and for them pray,
    And gladly Thee in them obey;
    Receive the prophet of the Lord
    And gain the prophet’s own reward!

    4. So may we, when our work is done,
    Together stand before Thy throne
    And joyful hearts and voices raise
    In one united song of praise,
    With all the bright celestial host,
    To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

                                                            C. Wordsworth.


493

                                                                     L. M.

    Bow down Thine ear, almighty Lord,
      And hear Thy Church’s suppliant cry
    For all who preach Thy saving Word
      And wait upon Thy ministry.

    2. In mercy, Father, now give heed
      And pour Thy quickening Spirit’s breath
    On those whom Thou dost call to feed
      Thy flock redeemed by Jesus’ death.

    3. O Savior, from Thy piercèd hand
      Shed o’er them all Thy gifts divine
    That those who in Thy presence stand
      May do Thy will with love like Thine.

    4. Blest Spirit, in their hearts abide
      And give them grace to watch and pray,
    That, as they seek Thy flock to guide,
      Themselves may keep the narrow way.

    5. O God, Thy strength and mercy send
      To shield them in their strife with sin;
    Grant them, enduring to the end,
      The crown of life at last to win.

                                                       T. E. Powell, 1864.




CROSS AND COMFORT.


494

                                                                 8, 7, 8 l

    Whate’er God will, let that be done;
      His will is ever wisest;
    His grace will all thy hope outrun
      Who to that faith arisest.
    The gracious Lord Will help afford,
      He chastens with forbearing;
    Who God believes And to Him cleaves,
      Shall not be left despairing.

    2. My God is my sure Confidence,
      My Hope, and my Existence;
    His counsel is beyond my sense,
      Yet I’ll not make resistance.
    His Word declares The very hairs
      Upon my head are numbered;
    His mercy large Holds me in charge,
      With care that never slumbered.

    3. The time has come when at His will
      My life in this world ceases;
    I think upon it and am still,
      Let come whate’er He pleases.
    To Him I trust My soul, my dust,
      When flesh and spirit sever;
    The Christ we sing Has plucked the sting
      Away from death forever.

    4. Yet one thing, Lord, I ask of Thee,
      O grant my supplication:
    When Satan sorely tempteth me,
      Save me from desperation.
    O God, my Lord, True to Thy Word,
      Do Thou my soul deliver!
    Who doth believe, He shall receive.
      Thy name be praised forever!

                                   Anon., 1554; N. L. Frothingham, tr., a.


495

                                                             8, 8, 7, 8, 7

    In Thee, Lord, have I put my trust,
    Leave me not helpless in the dust,
      Let me not be confounded;
    Let in Thy Word My faith, O Lord,
      Be always firmly grounded.

    2. Bow down Thy gracious ear to me
    And hear my prayers, Lord, speedily,
      O grant me Thy protection!
    For woes and fear Surround me here;
      Help me in my affliction.

    3. My God and Shield, now let Thy power
    Be unto me a mighty tower,
      Whence bravely I defend me
    Against the foes That round me close;
      O Lord, assistance lend me!

    4. Thy Word hath said, Thou art my Rock,
    The Fortress that can fear no shock,
      My Help, my Life, my Treasure;
    Howe’er distress And dangers press,
      All must perform Thy pleasure.

    5. The world for me has falsely set
    Full many a secret snare and net,
      Dark lies, and sore temptations.
    Lord, hear my prayers And break these snares
      And hellish machinations.

    6. With Thee, Lord, would I cast my lot;
    My God, my God, forsake me not;
      For, Lord, I am commending
    My soul to Thee; Deliver me
      Now and when life is ending.

    7. All honor, praise, and majesty
    To Father, Son, and Spirit be,
      Our God forever glorious,
    In whose rich grace We’ll run our race
      Till we depart victorious.

                         Ps. 31. Adam Reusner, 1533; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


496

                                                                     C. M.

    Lord, it belongs not to my care,
      Whether I die or live;
    To love and serve Thee is my share,
      And this Thy grace must give.

    2. If life be long, I will be glad
      That I may long obey;
    If short, yet why should I be sad
      To soar to endless day?

    3. Christ leads me through no darker rooms
      Than He went through before;
    He that into God’s kingdom comes
      Must enter by this door.

    4. Come, Lord, when grace has made me meet
      Thy blessed face to see;
    For if Thy work on earth is sweet,
      What will Thy glory be?

    5. Then shall I end my sad complaints
      And weary, sinful days
    And join with the triumphant saints
      That sing Jehovah’s praise.

    6. My knowledge of that life is small,
      The eye of faith is dim;
    But ’tis enough that Christ knows all
      And I shall be with Him.

                                                  Richard Baxter, 1681, a.


497

                                                                     C. M.

    O Thou, from whom all goodness flows,
      I lift my heart to Thee;
    In all my sorrows, conflicts, woes,
      Dear Lord, remember me!

    2. When on my aching, burdened heart
      My sins lie heavily,
    My pardon speak, new peace impart;
      In love remember me.

    3. Temptations sore obstruct my way,
      And ills I cannot flee.
    O give me strength, Lord, as my day;
      For good remember me.

    4. Distressed with pain, disease, and grief,
      This feeble body see;
    Grant patience, rest, and kind relief;
      Hear and remember me!

    5. When in the solemn hour of death
      I wait Thy just decree,
    Be this the prayer of my last breath,
      Good Lord, remember me!

    6. And when before Thy throne I stand
      And lift my soul to Thee,
    Then with the saints at Thy right hand,
      Good Lord, remember me!

                              Thomas Haweis and Thomas Cotterill, 1792, a.


498

                                                          9, 8, 9, 8, 8, 8

    If thou but suffer God to guide thee
      And hope in Him through all thy ways,
    He’ll give thee strength, whate’er betide thee,
      And bear thee through the evil days.
    Who trusts in God’s unchanging love
    Builds on the Rock that naught can move.

    2. What can these anxious cares avail thee,
      These never-ceasing moans and sighs?
    What can it help if thou bewail thee
      O’er each dark moment as it flies?
    Our cross and trials do but press
    The heavier for our bitterness.

    3. Be patient and await His leisure
      In cheerful hope, with heart content,
    To take whate’er thy Father’s pleasure
      And His discerning love hath sent,
    Nor doubt our inmost wants are known
    To Him who chose us for His own.

    4. He knows the time for joy and, truly,
      Will send it when He sees it meet;
    When He has tried and purged thee duly
      And finds thee free from all deceit,
    He comes to thee all unaware
    And makes thee own His loving care.

    5. Nor think amid the heat of trial
      That God hath cast thee off unheard;
    That he whose hopes meet no denial
      Must surely be of God preferred;
    Time passes and much change doth bring
    And sets a bound to everything.

    6. All are alike before the Highest;
      ’Tis easy to our God, we know,
    To raise thee up, though low thou liest,
      To make the rich man poor and low.
    True wonders still by Him are wrought
    Who setteth up and brings to naught.

    7. Sing, pray, and keep His ways unswerving;
      So do thine own part faithfully
    And trust His Word, though undeserving,
      Thou yet shalt find it true for thee.
    God never will forsake in need
    The soul that trusts in Him indeed.

                       Ps. 55, 23. George Neumark, 1657; C. Winkworth, tr.


499

                                                          9, 8, 9, 8, 8, 8

    I leave all things to God’s direction,
      He loveth me in weal and woe;
    His will is good, true His affection,
      With tender love His heart doth glow.
    My Fortress and my Rock is He:
    What pleaseth God, that pleaseth me.

    2. My God hath all things in His keeping,
      He is the ever faithful Friend;
    He grants me laughter after weeping,
      And all His ways in blessings end.
    His love endures eternally:
    What pleaseth God, that pleaseth me.

    3. The will of God shall be my pleasure
      While here on earth is mine abode;
    My will is wrong beyond all measure,
      It doth not will what pleaseth God.
    The Christian’s maxim e’er must be:
    What pleaseth God, that pleaseth me.

    4. God knows what must be done to save me,
      His love for me will never cease;
    For He upon His palms did grave me
      With purest gold of loving grace.
    Away, my own will, off with thee!
    What pleaseth God, that pleaseth me.

    5. My God desires the soul’s salvation,
      Me also He desires to save;
    Therefore, with Christian resignation,
      All earthly troubles I will brave.
    His will be done eternally:
    What pleaseth God, that pleaseth me.

                                          Anon., 17th cent.; A. Crull, tr.


500

                                                                        7s

    Oft in sorrow, oft in woe,
    Onward, Christians, onward go!
    Bear the toil, maintain the strife,
    Strengthened with the Bread of Life.

    2. Let not sorrow dim your eye;
    Soon shall every tear be dry.
    Let not woe your course impede;
    Great your help if great your need.

    3. Let your drooping hearts be glad;
    March, in heavenly armor clad.
    Fight, nor think the battle long;
    Victory soon shall tune your song.

    4. Onward, then, to battle move!
    More than conquerors you shall prove;
    Though begirt with many a foe,
    Onward, Christians, onward go!

                                                     H. K. White, 1806, a.


501

                                                          8, 6, 6, 8, 6, 6

    Why should sorrow ever grieve me;
      Christ is near, What can here
    E’er of Him deprive me?
      Who can rob me of my heaven
    That God’s Son As my own
      To my faith hath given?

    2. Naked was I and unswathèd
      When on earth At my birth
    My first breath I breathèd.
      Naked hence shall I betake me
    When I go From earth’s woe
      And my breath forsakes me.

    3. Naught—not e’en the life I’m living—
      Is my own, God alone
    All to me is giving.
      Must I, then, His own restore Him?
    Though bereft Of each gift,
      Still shall I adore Him.

    4. Though a heavy cross I’m bearing
      And my heart Feels the smart,
    Shall I be despairing?
      God can help me, who doth send it;
    He doth know All my woe
      And how best to end it.

    5. God oft gives me days of gladness;
      Shall I grieve If He give
    Seasons, too, of sadness?
      God is good and tempers ever
    Every hurt; Me desert
      Wholly can He never.

    6. Though united world and devil,
      All their power Can no more
    Do than mock and cavil.
      Let derision now employ them,
    Christ e’en here Will appear
      And ’fore all destroy them.

    7. True believers, shrinking never,
      Where they dwell, Should reveal
    Their true colors ever.
      When approaching death would scare them,
    Still should they Patient stay
      And with courage bear them.

    8. Death can never kill us even,
      But relief From all grief
    To us then is given.
      It doth close life’s mournful story,
    Makes a way That we may
      Pass to heavenly glory.

    9. There I’ll reap enduring pleasure,
      After woe Here below
    Suffered in large measure.
      Lasting good we find here never,
    All the earth Deemeth worth
      Vanisheth forever.

    10. What is all this life possesseth?
      But a hand Full of sand
    That the heart distresseth.
      Noble gifts that pall me never
    Christ so free There gives me
      To enjoy forever.

    11. Lord, Thou Fount of joy forever,
      Thou art mine, I am Thine,
    No one can us sever.
      I am Thine, because Thou gavest
    Life and blood For my good,
      By Thy death me savest.

    12. Thou art mine, I love and own Thee,
      Ne’er shall I, Light of joy,
    From my heart dethrone Thee.
      Let me, let me, soon behold Thee
    Face to face,—Thy embrace,
      May it soon enfold me!

                                    Paul Gerhardt, 1653; J. Kelly, tr., a.


502

                                                                     C. M.

    Dear Refuge of my weary soul,
      On Thee, when sorrows rise,
    On Thee, when waves of trouble roll,
      My fainting hope relies.

    2. To Thee I tell each rising grief,
      For Thou alone canst heal;
    Thy Word can bring a sweet relief
      For every pain I feel.

    3. Hast Thou not bid me seek Thy face?
      And shall I seek in vain?
    And can the ear of pardoning grace
      Be deaf when I complain?

    4. No, still the ear of saving grace
      Attends the mourner’s prayer;
    O may I ever find access
      To breathe my sorrows there!

                                                        Anne Steele, 1760.


503

                                                                     L. M.

    O God, my days are dark indeed,
    How oft this aching heart must bleed;
    The narrow way,—how filled with pain,
    That I must pass, ere heaven I gain!

    2. How hard to teach this flesh and blood
    To seek alone th’ eternal God!
    Ah! whither now for comfort turn?
    For Thee, my Jesus, do I yearn.

    3. In Thee have I, howe’er distrest,
    Found ever counsel, aid, and rest!
    I cannot all forsaken be
    While still my heart can trust in Thee.

    4. Thine office and Thy person show
    That Thou great miracles canst do;
    Miraculous was, Lord, Thy birth
    When Thou wert born a child on earth.

    5. And by Thy death Thou mak’st me free
    So strangely from all misery.
    Jesus, my only God and Lord,
    What sweetness in Thy name is stored!

    6. No grief can ever be so sore
    But Thy sweet name can cheer me more;
    So keen no sorrow’s rankling dart
    But Thy sweet name can heal my heart.

    7. Although my flesh and heart may fail,
    I’ll heed it not, I shall not quail;
    My Savior, if I have but Thee,
    I shall be blest eternally.

    8. With heart and soul I’m Thine fore’er;
    Sin, death, and hell I need not fear;
    The world can show no truth like Thine,
    And therefore will I not repine.

    9. I know Thou wilt forsake me not,
    Thy truth is fixed, though dark my lot;
    Thou art my Shepherd, and Thy sheep
    From harm forever Thou wilt keep.

    10. Jesus, my Boast, my Light, my Joy,
    The Treasure naught can e’er destroy,
    No words, no song that I can frame
    Speak half the sweetness of Thy name.

    11. They only all its power shall prove
    Whose hearts have learned Thy faith and love;
    How many a time I’ve sadly said,
    Far better were it I were dead;

    12. Far better ne’er the light to see
    If I had not this joy in Thee;
    For he who hath not Thee in faith,
    His very life is merely death.

    13. Jesus, my Bridegroom and my Crown,
    If Thou but smile, the world may frown;
    In Thee lie depths of joy untold,
    Far richer than the richest gold.

    14. Whenever I but think of Thee,
    Thy dews drop down and solace me;
    Whene’er I hope in Thee, my Friend,
    Thy comfort and Thy peace descend.

    15. Whene’er in grief I pray and sing,
    I feel new courage in me spring;
    Thy Spirit witnesses that this
    Is foretaste of eternal bliss.

    16. Therefore, while life remains in me,
    I’ll bear Thy cross and follow Thee.
    Grant me a patient, willing mood;
    I know that it shall work my good.

    17. Help me to do my task aright,
    That it may stand before Thy sight;
    Let me this flesh and blood control,
    From sin and shame preserve my soul.

    18. O keep me steadfast in the faith,
    Then I am Thine in life and death.
    Jesus, my Comfort, bend to me;
    Ah, would I were e’en now with Thee!

                                                       Conrad Hojer, 1597.


504

                                                                     S. M.

    In weariness and pain,
      By sins and fears opprest,
    I turn me to my Rest again,
      My soul’s eternal Rest.

    2. The Lamb that died for me
      And still my load doth bear;
    To Jesus’ streaming wounds I flee
      And find my quiet there.

    3. Jesus, was ever grief,
      Was ever love, like Thine?
    Thy sorrow, Lord, is my relief,
      Thy life hath ransomed mine.

    4. O may I rise with Thee
      And soar to things above
    And spend a blest eternity
      In praise of dying love!

                                                  Charles Wesley, 1749, a.


505

                                                    8, 7, 8, 7, 7, 7, 8, 8

    Zion mourns in fear and anguish,
      Zion, city of our God.
    “Ah!” she saith, “how sore I languish,
      Bowed beneath so hard a load!
    God hath now forsook me quite
    And forgot my evil plight.”
    Nay, the Lord, who chose thee, spares thee,
    For within His heart He bears thee.

    2. “Once,” she mourns, “He promised plainly
      That His help should aye be near,
    Yet I now must seek Him vainly
      In my days of woe and fear.
    Will He, then, forevermore
    Keep His anger and no more
    Help His chosen generation
    In its present tribulation?”

    3. “Zion, surely I have loved thee!”
      Thus to her the Highest saith.
    “Although many woes have proved thee
      And thy soul is sad to death,
    Yet now cast thy griefs behind;
    Where wilt thou a mother find
    For her own child not providing
    Or in hatred with it chiding?

    4. “And if thou couldst find a mother
      Who forgot her infant’s claim
    Or whose wrath her love could smother,
      Yet would I be still the same;
    For My truth is pledged to thee,
    Zion, thou art dear to Me;
    I within My heart have set thee,
    And I never can forget thee.

    5. “Let not Satan make thee craven;
      He can fight, but cannot harm.
    On My hands thy name is graven,
    And thy shield is still My arm.
    How, then, could it ever be
    That I failed to think of thee,
    Build the wall of My own city
    And look down on thee with pity?

    6. “Thou before My eyes art ever,
      In My bosom thou art laid
    As a nursing child, and never
      Shalt thou lack My timely aid.
    Me and thee no time nor stress,
    War, nor danger, nor distress,
    No, nor Satan’s self shall sever,—
    Only be thou faithful ever.”

                                  J. Heermann, 1636; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


506

                                                    8, 7, 8, 7, 7, 7, 8, 8

    Let not such a thought e’er pain thee
      As that thou art cast away,
    But within God’s Word restrain thee,
      That far otherwise doth say.
    E’en though thou unrighteous art,
    True and faithful is God’s heart.
    Hast thou death deserved forever?
    God’s appeased, despond thou never!

    2. Thou art, as is every other,
      Tainted by the poison sin,
    That the Serpent and our father
      Adam, by the Fall, brought in.
    But if God’s voice thou dost hear,
    “Turn to Me, do good,” ne’er fear,
    Be of good cheer, He thy yearning
    Will regard, thy prayer ne’er spurning.

    3. He is not a bear or lion
      Thirsting only for thy blood,
    Faithful is thy God in Zion,
      Gentle ever is His mood.
    God aye as a Father feels,
    He’s afflicted by our ills;
    Our misfortune sorrow gives Him,
    And our dying ever grieves Him.

    4. “Truly,” saith He, “as I’m living,
      I the death of none desire,
    But that men, themselves upgiving,
      May be rescued from sin’s mire.”
    When a prodigal returns,
    God’s heart then with rapture burns,
    Wills that not the least one even
    Ever from His flock be driven.

    5. Shepherd was so faithful never,
      Seeking sheep that go astray.
    Couldest thou God’s heart see ever
      How He cares for them alway,
    How it thirsts and sighs and burns
    After him who from Him turns,
    From His people’s midst doth wander,
    Love would make thee weep and ponder.

    6. God the good not only loveth,
      Those who in His house now dwell,
    But His heart compassion moveth
      For those whom the Prince of hell
    Hath enslaved, the cruel foe,
    Who men’s hearts with hate to glow
    Makes ’gainst Him, who when He ever
    Moves His foot, can make earth quiver.

    7. Deep His love and most enduring,
      His desire is ever great;
    He is calling and alluring
      Us to enter heaven’s gate.
    When they come, whoe’er they be,
    Seeking now that liberty
    From the devil’s fangs be given,
    Glad are all the hosts of heaven.

    8. God and all those with Him dwelling,
      ’Fore whom heaven must hush its voice
    When their Maker’s praise forth telling,
      O’er our penitence rejoice;
    But what has been done amiss
    Covered now and buried is,
    All offense to Him we’ve given,—
    All, yea all, is now forgiven.

    9. From no lake so much is gushing,
      No depth is so deep at all,
    With such force no stream is rushing,
      All compared with God is small;
    Naught is like His grace so great,
    That remits our mighty debt,
    That He ever throweth over
    All our lives e’en as a cover.

    10. Soul, why art thou sad and dreary?
      Rest now and contented be!
    Why wilt thou thyself so weary
      When there is no need for thee?
    Though thy sins appear to thee
    Like a vast and shoreless sea,
    If with God’s heart thou compare them,
    ’Twill a trifle seem to bear them.

    11. Could we myriad worlds discover,
      All sunk in apostasy,
    Had the sins there o’er and over
      Every one been done by thee,
    Oh! still there were less by far
    Than the light of grace so clear
    Could on earth extinguish ever,
    God from greater could deliver.

    12. Of such wondrous love and favor
      Open wide the door to me;
    Everywhere and aye, my Savior,
      Tasted be Thy grace by me.
    Love me, Lord, and let me be
    Nearer ever drawn to Thee
    That I may embrace and love Thee,
    Nevermore to anger move Thee.

                                        Paul Gerhardt, 1653; J. Kelly, tr.


507

                                                       8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 7, 7

    Whatever God ordains is good!
      His righteous will abideth;
    I will be still whate’er He doth
      And follow where He guideth.
    He is my God; Though dark my road,
    He knoweth how to shield me,
    Wherefore to Him I yield me.

    2. Whatever God ordains is good!
      He never will deceive me;
    He leads me by the proper path,
      I know He will not leave me,
    And take content What He hath sent;
    His hand that sends my sadness
    Will turn my tears to gladness.

    3. Whatever God ordains is good!
      His loving thought attends me;
    No poisoned draught the cup can be
      That my Physician sends me,
    But medicine; God true has been.
    Of doubt, then, I’ll divest me
    And on His goodness rest me.

    4. Whatever God ordains is good!
      My Life, my Light, can never
    Intend me harm; then, to His care
      I give myself forever
    In weal or woe; For well I know
    Some day I shall see clearly
    That God did love me dearly.

    5. Whatever God ordains is good!
      Though now this cup in drinking
    May bitter to my taste appear
      I take it all unshrinking;
    For to my heart God will impart
    A timely balm of healing
    And end each painful feeling.

    6. Whatever God ordains is good!
      Here shall my stand be taken;
    Though sorrow, need, or death be mine,
      Yet am I not forsaken;
    My Father’s care Is round me there,
    His arms embrace and shield me;
    Then to my God I yield me.

                             Samuel Rodigast, 1675; C. Winkworth, 1863, a.


508

                                                          6, 6, 7, 7, 7, 7

    In God, my faithful God,
    I trust when dark my road;
    Though many woes o’ertake me,
    Yet He will not forsake me;
    His love it is doth send them
    And, when ’tis best, will end them.

    2. My sins assail me sore,
    But I despair no more.
    I build on Christ, who loves me;
    From this Rock nothing moves me.
    To Him I all surrender,
    To Him, my soul’s Defender.

    3. If death my portion be,
    Then death is gain to me,
    And Christ my Life forever,
    From whom death cannot sever;
    Come when it may, He’ll shield me,
    To Him I wholly yield me.

    4. O Jesus Christ, my Lord,
    So meek in deed and word,
    Thou once didst die to save us,
    Because Thou fain wouldst have us
    After this life of sadness
    The heirs of heavenly gladness.

    5. “So be it,” then I say
    With all my heart each day.
    We, too, dear Lord, adore Thee,
    We sing for joy before Thee.
    Guide us while here we wander
    Till safely landed yonder.

                              S. Weingaertner, 1607; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


509

                                                    7, 6, 7, 6, 6, 7, 7, 6

    From God shall naught divide me,
      For He is true for aye
    And on my path will guide me,
      Who else should often stray;
    His ever-bounteous hand
      By night and day is heedful
      And gives me what is needful,
    Where’er I go or stand.

    2. When man’s help and affection
      Shall unavailing prove,
    God grants me His protection
      And proves His power and love;
    He helps me in my need,
      Delivers me from evil,
      From sin and death and devil;
    He is my Friend indeed.

    3. If sorrow comes, He sent it,
      In Him I put my trust;
    I never shall repent it,
      For He is true and just
    And endeth every ill;
      My life and soul I render
      To God, my strong Defender;
    Let Him do as He will.

    4. Whate’er shall be His pleasure
      Is surely best for me;
    He sent His dearest Treasure
      That our weak hearts may see
    His good and gracious will.
      In His own Son He gave us
      Whate’er can bless and save us;
    Praise Him who loves us still!

    5. O praise Him, for He never
      Forgets our daily need;
    O blest the hour whenever
      Our thoughts to Him can speed;
    Yea, all the time we spend
      Without Him is but wasted,
      Till we His joy have tasted,
    The joy that hath no end.

    6. The world away is passing
      With all its pomp and pride;
    All we have been amassing
      No longer may abide.
    But in our earthly bed,
      When safely we are sleeping,
      God hath us in His keeping,
    To wake us from the dead.

    7. Our soul shall never perish,
      But in yon paradise
    The joys of heaven shall cherish.
      Our body shall arise
    Pure, holy, new-born, free
      From every sin and evil;
      The tempting of the devil
    We then no more shall see.

    8. Then, though on earth I suffer
      Much trial, well I know
    I merit ways still rougher,
      And ’tis to heaven I go.
    For Christ I know and love,
      To Him I now am hasting,
      And gladness everlasting
    With Him my heart shall prove.

    9. Such is His will that made us.
      The Father seeks our good;
    The Son of sin doth rid us,
      And saves us by His blood;
    His Spirit rules our ways,
      Through faith in us abiding,
      To heaven our footsteps guiding.
    To Him be thanks and praise!

                                                        L. Helmbold, 1563.


510

                                                                8, 7, 8, 7

    God is Love; His mercy brightens
      All the path in which we rove;
    Bliss He wakes, and woe He lightens:
      God is Wisdom, God is Love.

    2. Chance and change are busy ever,
      Man decays, and ages move,
    But His mercy waneth never:
      God is Wisdom, God is Love.

    3. E’en the hour that darkest seemeth
      Will His changeless goodness prove;
    From the gloom His brightness streameth:
      God is Wisdom, God is Love.

    4. He with earthly cares entwineth
      Hope and comfort from above;
    Everywhere His glory shineth:
      God is Wisdom, God is Love.

                                                         J. Bowring, 1825.


511

                                                                 8, 7, 8 l

    Who puts his trust In God most just
      Hath built his house securely;
    He who relies On Jesus Christ,
      Heaven shall be his most surely.
    Then fixed on Thee My trust shall be,
      For Thy truth cannot alter;
    While mine Thou art Not death’s worst smart
      Shall make my courage falter.

    2. Though fiercest foes My course oppose,
      A dauntless front I’ll show them;
    My Champion Thou, Lord Christ, art now,
      Who soon shalt overthrow them;
    And if but Thee I have in me
      With Thy good gifts and Spirit,
    Nor death nor hell, I know full well,
      Shall hurt me, through Thy merit.

    3. I rest me here Without a fear;
      By Thee shall all be given
    That I can need, O Friend indeed,
      For this life or for heaven.
    O keep me true, My heart renew,
      My soul and flesh deliver!
    Lord, hear my prayer And in Thy care
      Keep me in peace forever.

                                     J. Magdeburg, 1572; C. Winkworth, tr.


512

                                                            11, 10, 11, 10

    Come, ye disconsolate, where’er ye languish,
      Come to the mercy-seat, fervently kneel;
    Here bring your wounded hearts, here tell your anguish;
      Earth has no sorrow that Heaven cannot heal.

    2. Joy of the desolate, light of the straying,
      Hope of the penitent, fadeless and pure,
    Here speaks the Comforter, tenderly saying,
      Earth has no sorrow that Heaven cannot cure.

    3. Here see the Bread of Life, see water flowing
      Forth from the throne of God, pure from above.
    Come to the feast of love; come, ever knowing
      Earth has no sorrow but Heaven can remove.

                                               T. Moore, 1816. Stanza 3 a.


513

                                              4, 7, 8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7, 7

    God liveth still!
    Soul, despair not, fear no ill!
    God is good; from His compassion
      Earthly help and comfort flow;
    Strong is His right hand to fashion
      All things well for man below.
    Trial, oft the most distressing,
    In the end has proved a blessing.
    Wherefore, then, my soul, despair?
    God still lives, who heareth prayer.

    2. God liveth still!
    Soul, despair not, fear no ill!
    He who gave the eye its vision,
      Shall He slumber once or sleep?
    He who gave the ear its mission,
      Hears He not His children weep?
    God is God; His ear attendeth
    When the sigh our bosom rendeth.
    Wherefore, then, my soul, despair?
    God still lives, who heareth prayer.

    3. God liveth still!
    Soul, despair not, fear no ill!
    He who gives the clouds their measure,
      Stretching out the heavens alone;
    He who stores the earth with treasure,
      Is not far from every one.
    God in the hour of need defendeth
    Him whose heart in love ascendeth.
    Wherefore, then, my soul, despair?
    God still lives, who heareth prayer.

    4. God liveth still!
    Soul, despair not, fear no ill!
    Is thy cross too great and pond’rous,
      Cast on Him thy grievous load;
    God is great, His love is wondrous,
      He will speed thee on the road.
    For His truth endureth ever,
    And His mercy ceaseth never.
    Wherefore, then, my soul, despair?
    God still lives, who heareth prayer.

    5. God liveth still!
    Soul, despair not, fear no ill!
    Is the yoke of sin too galling?
      Christ Himself has set thee free,
    Borne for thee their weight appalling,
      Cast them in oblivion’s sea!
    In thy deepest grief and sadness
    He can grant thee joy and gladness.
    Wherefore, then, my soul, despair?
    God still lives, who heareth prayer.

    6. God liveth still!
    Soul, despair not, fear no ill!
    When the world would let thee perish,
      Pathless all thy tangled way,
    God the nearer draws to cherish
      Him who makes the Lord his Stay.
    Children oft that most He loveth
    Thus with strictest rod He proveth.
    Wherefore, then, my soul, despair?
    God still lives, who heareth prayer.

    7. God liveth still!
    Soul, despair not, fear no ill!
    Heaven’s huge vault may cleave asunder,
      Earth’s round globe in ruins burst,
    Satan’s fellest rage may thunder,
      Death and hell may spend their worst;
    Yet will God keep safe and surely
    Those who trust in Him securely.
    Wherefore, then, my soul, despair?
    God still lives, who heareth prayer.

    8. God liveth still!
    Soul, despair not, fear no ill!
    Be thy life until its ending
      Full of thorns, of grief, or need,
    God, in love the trial sending,
      Thus His child would heavenwards lead.
    For this life’s long night of sadness
    He will give thee peace and gladness.
    Wherefore, then, my soul, despair?
    God still lives, who heareth prayer.

                                      J. F. Zihn, 1782; F. E. Cox, tr., a.


514

                                                                     L. M.

    Thy ways, O Lord, with wise design
      Are framed upon Thy throne above,
    And every dark and bending line
      Meets in the center of Thy love.

    2. With feeble light and half obscure,
      Poor mortals Thine arrangements view,
    Not knowing that the least are sure
      And the mysterious just and true.

    3. Thy flock, Thine own peculiar care,
      Though now they seem to roam uneyed,
    Are led or driven only where
      They best and safest may abide.

    4. They neither know nor trace the way;
      But whilst they trust Thy guardian eye,
    Their feet shall ne’er to ruin stray,
      Nor shall the weakest fail or die.

    5. My favored soul shall meekly learn
      To lay her reason at Thy throne;
    Too weak Thy secrets to discern,
      I’ll trust Thee for my guide alone.

                                                      Ambrose Serle, 1786.


515

                                                                     L. M.

    When in the hour of utmost need
    We know not where to look for aid;
    When days and nights of anxious thought
    Nor help nor counsel yet have brought,

    2. Then this our comfort is alone,
    That we may meet before Thy throne
    And cry, O faithful God, to Thee
    For rescue from our misery;

    3. To Thee may raise our hearts and eyes,
    Repenting sore with bitter sighs,
    And seek Thy pardon for our sin
    And respite from our griefs within.

    4. For Thou hast promised graciously
    To hear all those who cry to Thee,
    Through Him whose name alone is great,
    Our Savior and our Advocate.

    5. And thus we come, O God, to-day
    And all our woes before Thee lay;
    For tried, afflicted, lo! we stand,
    Perils and foes on every hand.

    6. Ah! hide not for our sins Thy face,
    Absolve us through Thy boundless grace,
    Be with us in our anguish still,
    Free us at last from every ill,

    7. That so with all our hearts we may
    Once more our glad thanksgivings pay
    And walk obedient to Thy Word
    And now and ever praise Thee, Lord.

                                        Paul Eber, 1547; C. Winkworth, tr.


516

                                                                        7s

    Seems it in my anguish lone
    As if God forsook His own,
    Yet I hold the knowledge fast
    God will surely help at last.

    2. Though awhile it be delayed,
    He denieth not His aid;
    Though it come not oft with speed,
    It will surely come at need.

    3. As a father not too soon
    Grants his child the longed-for boon,
    So our God gives when He will;
    Wait His pleasure and be still.

    4. I can rest in thoughts of Him
    When all courage else grows dim,
    For I know my soul shall prove
    His is more than father’s love.

    5. Would the powers of ill affright,
    I can smile at all their might;
    Or the cross be pressing sore,
    God, my God, lives evermore.

    6. Man may hate me causelessly,
    Man may plot to ruin me,
    Foes my heart may pierce and rend;
    God in heaven is still my Friend.

    7. Earth against me may declare,
    For her love I do not care;
    Though the world bear me a grudge,
    God, my Father, is my Judge.

    8. Earth may all her gifts deny,
    Safe my treasure is on high;
    And if heaven at last be mine,
    All things else I can resign.

    9. I renounce thee willingly,
    World, I hate what pleases thee.
    Baneful every gift of thine;
    Only be, my God, still mine.

    10. Ah! Lord, if but Thee I have,
    Naught of other good I crave;
    Bright is even death’s dark road
    If but Thou art there, my God.

                                  C. Titius, † 1703; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


517

                                                                     L. M.

    Lord God, who art my Father dear,
    I pray in Jesus’ name: O hear
    What, trusting in His promised Word,
    I humbly ask of Thee, good Lord.

    2. Grant us Thy Word, Thy Spirit give,
    That by His grace we godly live;
    Give shelter, peace, good friends, and food,
    Protect our native land, O God.

    3. Save us from sin and Satan’s fraud,
    Deliver us from evil, God,
    Be with us in our dying hour;
    Thine is the kingdom, glory, power.

    4. Lord, at Thy word Amen I say;
    Increase my feeble faith, I pray.
    Thou lead’st me with a father’s care;
    Oh, let me be Thy child and heir!

                                       J. Mathesius, † 1565; A. Crull, tr.


518

                                                                     S. M.

    Beloved, “It is well!”
      God’s ways are always right;
    And perfect love is o’er them all
      Though far above our sight.

    2. Beloved, “It is well!”
      Though deep and sore the smart,
    The hand that wounds knows how to bind
      And heal the broken heart.

    3. Beloved, “It is well!”
      Though sorrow clouds our way,
    ’Twill only make the joy more dear
      That ushers in the day.

    4. Beloved, “It is well!”
      The path that Jesus trod,
    Though rough and strait and dark it be,
      Leads home to heaven and God.

                                                        G. W. Doane, 1833.


519

                                                                     S. M.

    My Father! cheering name!
      O may I call Thee mine!
    Give me with humble hope to claim
      A portion so divine.

    2. Whate’er Thy will denies
      I calmly would resign;
    For Thou art just and good and wise,—
      Oh, bend my will to Thine!

    3. Whate’er Thy will ordains,
      Oh, give me strength to bear!
    Still let me know a Father reigns
      And trust a Father’s care.

    4. Thy ways are little known
      To my weak, erring sight;
    Yet shall my soul, believing, own
      That all Thy ways are right.

                                                     Anne Steele, 1760, a.


520

                                                    6, 4, 6, 4, 6, 6, 6, 4

    Nearer, my God, to Thee,
      Nearer to Thee!
    E’en though it be a cross
      That raiseth me,
    Still all my song shall be,
    Nearer, my God, to Thee,
      Nearer, my God, to Thee,
      Nearer to Thee!

    2. Nearer, my Lord, to Thee,
      Nearer to Thee!
    Who to Thy cross didst come
      Dying for me.
    Strengthen my willing feet,
    Hold me in service sweet
      Nearer, O Christ, to Thee,
      Nearer to Thee!

    3. Nearer, O Comforter,
      Nearer to Thee!
    Who with my loving Lord
      Dwellest with me.
    Grant me Thy fellowship,
    Help me each day to keep
      Nearer, my Guide, to Thee,
      Nearer to Thee!

    4. But to be nearer still,
      Bring me, O God,
    Not by the visioned steeps
      Angels have trod.
    Here where Thy cross I see,
    Jesus, I wait for Thee,
      Then evermore to be
      Nearer to Thee!

                          Sarah F. Adams, 1841; a. by H. D. Ganse, † 1891.


521

                                                                 C. M. 8 l

    And let this feeble body fail
      And let it faint or die;
    My soul shall quit the mournful vale
      And soar to worlds on high;
    Shall join the disembodied saints
      And find its long-sought rest,
    That only bliss for which it pants,
      In my Redeemer’s breast.

    2. In hope of that immortal crown
      I now the cross sustain
    And gladly wander up and down
      And smile at toil and pain.
    I suffer on my threescore years
      Till my Deliverer come
    And wipe away His servant’s tears
      And take His exile home.

    3. Oh, what hath Jesus bought for me!
      Before my ravished eyes
    Rivers of life divine I see
      And trees of paradise!
    I see a world of spirits bright
      Who reap the pleasures there;
    They all are robed in spotless white,
      And conquering palms they bear.

    4. Oh, what are all my sufferings here
      If, Lord, Thou count me meet
    With that enraptured host t’appear
      And worship at Thy feet!
    Give joy or grief, give ease or pain,
      Take life or friends away,
    But let me find them all again
      In that eternal day.

                                                  Charles Wesley, 1759, a.


522

                                                                     L. M.

    God of my life, to Thee I call;
    Afflicted, at Thy feet I fall:
    When the great water-floods prevail,
    Leave not my trembling heart to fail.

    2. Friend of the friendless and the faint,
    Where should I lodge my deep complaint?
    Where but with Thee, whose open door
    Invites the helpless and the poor?

    3. Did ever mourner plead with Thee,
    And Thou refuse that mourner’s plea?
    Does not the word still fixed remain,
    That none shall seek Thy face in vain?

    4. That were a grief I could not bear,
    Didst Thou not hear and answer prayer;
    But a prayer-hearing, answering God
    Supports me under every load.

    5. Fair is the lot that’s cast for me;
    I have an Advocate with Thee;
    They whom the world caresses most
    Have no such privilege to boast.

    6. Poor though I be, despised, forgot,
    Yet God, my God, forgets me not;
    And he is safe and must succeed
    For whom the Lord Himself does plead.

                                                       W. Cowper, 1779, a.


523

                                                                     L. M.

    Help me, O Lord, in fear and need,
    Have mercy, to my prayer give heed!
    I know Thou lov’st me still as Thine,
    Though world and hell ’gainst me combine.

    2. My God and Lord, I trust in Thee;
    What need I if Thou art with me?
    And Thou, Lord Jesus Christ, art mine;
    My God and Savior, I am Thine.

    3. Therefore my happiness is great;
    I am content, for Thee I wait,
    Trust wholly in Thy name, and then
    I know Thy help is sure. Amen.

                                                      Martin Moller, 1598.


524

                                                                     C. M.

    God moves in a mysterious way
      His wonders to perform;
    He plants His footsteps in the sea
      And rides upon the storm.

    2. Deep in unfathomable mines
      Of never-failing skill
    He treasures up His bright designs
      And works His sovereign will.

    3. Ye fearful saints, fresh courage take;
      The clouds ye so much dread
    Are big with mercy and shall break
      In blessings on your head.

    4. Judge not the Lord by feeble sense,
      But trust Him for His grace;
    Behind a frowning providence
      He hides a smiling face.

    5. His purposes will ripen fast,
      Unfolding every hour;
    The bud may have a bitter taste,
      But sweet will be the flower.

    6. Blind unbelief is sure to err
      And scan His work in vain;
    God is His own interpreter,
      And He will make it plain.

                                                          W. Cowper, 1772.


525

                                                                 7, 6, 8 l

    Commit whatever grieves thee
      At heart, and all thy ways,
    To Him who never leaves thee,
      On whom creation stays,
    Who freest courses maketh
      For clouds and air and wind,
    Who care and counsel taketh
      A path for thee to find.

    2. On God repose forever
      If thou wouldst prosper sure;
    On his work gaze thou ever,
      If thine is to endure.
    By anxious care and grieving,
      By self-consuming pain,
    God is not moved to giving;
      By prayer must thou obtain.

    3. Thy grace, that ever floweth,
      O Father, what is good
    Or evil, ever knoweth,
      To mortal flesh and blood.
    What to Thine eye all-seeing,
      And to Thy counsel wise
    Seems good must into being,
      O mighty Prince, arise.

    4. For means it fails Thee never,
      Thou always find’st a way,
    Thy deeds are blessing ever,
      Thy path like brightest day.
    Thy work no one can hinder,
      Thy labor cannot rest,
    If Thou design’st Thy tender
      Children should all be blessed.

    5. Though all the power of evil
      Should rise up to resist,
    Without a doubt or cavil
      God never will desist;
    His undertakings ever
      At length He carries through;
    What He designs He never
      Can fail at all to do.

    6. Hope on, thou heart, grief-riven,
      In hope courageous be;
    Where anguish thee had driven
      Thou shalt deliverance see.
    God from thy pit of sadness
      Shall raise thee graciously;
    Wait, and the sun of gladness
      Thine eyes shall early see.

    7. Arise, to pain and anguish
      A long good night now say;
    Drive all that makes thee languish
      In grief and woe away.
    Not thine ’tis to endeavor
      The ruler’s part to play;
    God sits as Ruler ever,
      Guides all things well each day.

    8. Let Him alone and tarry,
      He is a Prince all-wise,
    He shall Himself so carry
      ’Twill strange seem in thine eyes,
    When He, as Him beseemeth,
      In wonderful decree,
    Shall as Himself good deemeth,
      O’errule what grieveth thee.

    9. He may, a while still staying,
      His comforts keep from thee
    And, on His part delaying,
      Seem to have utterly
    Forgotten and forsaken
      And put thee out of mind,
    Though grief hath thee o’ertaken,
      No time for thee to find.

    10. But if thou never shrinkest
      And true dost still remain,
    He’ll come when least thou thinkest
      And set thee free again,
    Thee from the load deliver,
      That burdeneth thy heart,
    That thou hast carried never
      For any evil part.

    11. Hail! child of faith, who gainest
      The victory alway,
    Who honor’s crown obtainest,
      That never fades away.
    God in thy hand will give thee
      One day the glorious palm;
    Who ne’er in grief did leave thee,
      To Him thou’lt sing thy psalm.

    12. O Lord, no longer lengthen
      Our time of misery;
    Our hands and feet do strengthen;
      And until death may we
    By Thee be watched and cared for,
      In faithfulness and love.
    So come we where prepared for
      Us is our blessed abode.

                                    Paul Gerhardt, 1656; J. Kelly, tr., a.


526

                                                                 7, 6, 8 l

    If God Himself be for me,
      I may a host defy,
    For when I pray, before me
      My foes confounded fly.
    If Christ, my Head and Master,
      Befriend me from above,
    What foe or what disaster
      Can drive me from His love?

    2. This I believe—yea, rather,
      Of this I make my boast,
    That God is my dear Father,
      The Friend who loves me most;
    And that, whate’er betide me,
      My Savior is at hand
    Through stormy seas to guide me
      And bring me safe to land.

    3. I build on this foundation,
      That Jesus and His blood
    Alone are my salvation,
      The true, eternal good;
    Without Him all that pleases
      Is valueless on earth;
    The gifts I owe to Jesus
      Alone my love are worth.

    4. My Jesus is my Splendor,
      My soul’s bright-beaming Sun;
    Were He not my Defender
      Before God’s awful throne,
    I never should find favor
      And mercy in His sight,
    But be destroyed forever,
      As darkness by the light.

    5. He canceled my offenses
      And saved my soul from death;
    ’Tis He who ever cleanses
      Me from my sins through faith.
    In Him I can be cheerful,
      Bold, and undaunted aye;
    In Him I am not fearful
      Of God’s great Judgment Day.

    6. Naught, naught can e’er condemn me
      Nor set my hope aside;
    Now hell no more can claim me,
      Its fury I deride.
    No sentence e’er reproves me,
      No ill destroys my peace,
    For Christ, my Savior, loves me
      And screens me with His grace.

    7. His Spirit in me dwelleth,
      And o’er my mind He reigns.
    All sorrow He dispelleth
      And soothes away all pains.
    He crowns His work with blessing
      And helpeth me to cry,
    “My Father!” without ceasing,
      To Him who dwells on high.

    8. To mine His Spirit speaketh
      Sweet words of holy cheer,
    How God, to Him that seeketh
      For rest, is always near,
    And how He hath erected
      A city fair and new,
    Where what our faith expected
      We evermore shall view.

    9. In yonder home doth flourish
      My heritage, my lot;
    Though here I die and perish,
      My heaven shall fail me not.
    Though care my life oft saddens
      And causeth tears to flow,
    The light of Jesus gladdens
      And sweetens every woe.

    10. Who clings with resolution
      To Him whom Satan hates
    Must look for persecution;
      For him the burden waits
    Of mockery, shame, and losses,
      Heaped on his guiltless head;
    A thousand plagues and crosses
      Shall be his daily bread.

    11. All this I am prepared for,
      Yet am I not afraid;
    By Thee shall all be cared for,
      To whom my vows were paid.
    Though life and limb it cost me
      And everything I have,
    Unshaken shall I trust Thee,
      Thee never shall I leave.

    12. Though earth be rent asunder,
      Thou’rt mine eternally;
    Not fire nor sword nor thunder
      Shall sever me from Thee;
    Not hunger, thirst, nor danger,
      Not pain nor poverty,
    Nor mighty princes’ anger,
      Shall ever hinder me.

    13. No angel and no gladness,
      No throne, no pomp, no show,
    No love, no hate, no sadness,
      No pain, no depth of woe,
    No scheme of man’s contrivance,
      However small or great,
    Shall draw me from Thy guidance
      Nor from Thee separate.

    14. My heart for joy is springing
      And can no more be sad,
    ’Tis full of mirth and singing,
      Sees naught but sunshine glad.
    The Sun that cheers my spirit
      Is Jesus Christ, my King;
    That which I shall inherit
      Hereafter, makes me sing.

                    Rom. 8, 31-39. Paul Gerhardt, 1664; R. Massie, tr., a.




DEATH AND BURIAL.


527

                                                                     L. M.

    Lord Jesus Christ, true man and God,
    Who borest anguish, scorn, the rod,
    And diedst at last upon the tree
    To gain Thy Father’s grace for me:

    2. I pray Thee, through that bitter woe,
    Let me, a sinner, mercy know
    When comes the hour of failing breath
    And I must wrestle, Lord, with death;

    3. When from my sight all fades away,
    And when my tongue no more can say,
    And when mine ears no more can hear,
    And when my heart is racked with fear;

    4. When all my mind is darkened o’er,
    And human help can do no more;—
    Then come, Lord Jesus, come with speed,
    And help me in the hour of need.

    5. Lead me from this dark vale beneath
    And shorten then the pangs of death;
    All evil spirits drive away,
    But let Thy Spirit with me stay,

    6. Until my soul the body leave;
    Then in Thy hands my soul receive
    And let the earth the body keep
    Till the Last Day shall break its sleep.

    7. Joyful my resurrection be,
    Thou in the Judgment plead for me
    And hide my sins, Lord, from Thy face
    And give me life, of Thy dear grace!

    8. Implicitly I trust Thee, Lord,
    For Thou hast promised in Thy Word:
    “In truth I tell you, who receives
    My Word, and keeps it, and believes,

    9. “Shall never fall God’s wrath beneath,
    Shall never taste eternal death;
    Though here he must return to dust,
    He still is noways therefore lost;

    10. “For I will with a mighty hand
    Deliver him from death’s strong band
    And lift him hence that he shall be
    Forever in My realm with Me,

    11. “Forever living there in bliss.”
    Oh, let us not that glory miss!
    Dear Lord, forgive us all our guilt,
    Help us to wait until Thou wilt

    12. That we depart; and let our faith
    Be brave and conquer e’en in death,
    Firm resting in Thy sacred Word
    Until we sleep in Thee, our Lord.

                                 Paul Eber, 1565; C. Winkworth, tr., 1855.


528

                                                       8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7

    When my last hour is close at hand
      And I must hence betake me,
    Lord Jesus Christ, beside me stand,
      Nor let Thy help forsake me;
    To Thy blest hands I now commend
    My soul, at this my earthly end,
    And Thou wilt safely keep it.

    2. My sins, dear Lord, disturb me sore,
      My conscience cannot slumber;
    But though as sands upon the shore
      My sins may be in number,
    I will not quail, but think of Thee;
    Thy death, Thy sorrow, borne for me,
    Thy sufferings, shall uphold me.

    3. I have been grafted in the Vine
      And hence my comfort borrow,
    For Thou wilt surely keep me Thine
      Through fear and pain and sorrow;
    Yea, though I die, I die to Thee,
    Who through Thy death hast won for me
    The right to life eternal.

    4. Since Thou from death didst rise again,
      In death Thou wilt not leave me;
    Lord, Thy ascension soothes my pain,
      No fear of death shall grieve me;
    For Thou wilt have me where Thou art,
    And so with joy I can depart
    To be with Thee forever.

    5. And so I stretch mine arms to Thee
      And gladly hence betake me;
    Peaceful and calm my sleep shall be,
      No human voice can wake me.
    But Christ is with me through the strife,
    And He will bear me into life
    And open heaven before me.

                              Nikolaus Herman, 1560; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


529

                                                                7, 6, 7, 6

    For me to live is Jesus,
      To die is gain for me,
    To Him I gladly yield me
      And die right cheerfully.

    2. From hence I go with gladness
      To Christ my Brother’s side
    That I may soon be with Him
      And e’er with Him abide.

    3. I have o’ercome life’s crosses;
      Grief, pain, and sorrow cease;
    Through His five wounds most holy
      With God I am at peace.

    4. When all my powers are breaking,
      My breath comes heavily,
    Nor word more I can utter,
      Lord, hear my sighs to Thee!

    5. When reason, sense, and thinking
      Fail like a flickering light,
    That to and fro doth waver
      Ere ’tis extinguished quite,

    6. Then let me softly, gently,
      Lord, fall asleep in Thee,
    When by Thy will and counsel
      My last hour comes to me.

    7. As to the oak the ivy,
      So let me cleave to Thee
    And live in heavenly glory
      With Thee eternally.

    8. Amen! This wilt Thou, Jesus,
      Grant graciously to me;
    Endow me with Thy Spirit
      That I die happily.

                                    Anon., 1609; E. Cronenwett, tr., 1880.


530

                                                    8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7, 7

    Hark! a voice saith, “All are mortal.”
      Yea, all flesh must fade as grass,
    Only through death’s gloomy portal
      To a better land we pass;
    This frail body here must perish
    Ere the heavenly joys it cherish,
    Ere it gain the free reward
    For the ransomed of the Lord.

    2. Therefore, when my God doth choose it,
      Willingly I’ll yield my life,
    Nor will grieve that I should lose it,
      For with sorrows it was rife;
    In my dear Redeemer’s merit
    Peace hath found my troubled spirit,
    And in death my comfort is
    Jesus’ death—sweet comfort this!

    3. For my sake He went before me,
      And His death is now my gain;
    Peace and hope He conquered for me;
      So without regret or pain,
    Yea, with joy I’ll quit earth’s sadness
    For the beauteous heaven of gladness,
    Where I shall eternally
    See the holy Trinity.

    4. There is joy beyond our telling,
      Where so many saints have gone;
    Thousands, thousands, there are dwelling,
      Worshiping before the throne;
    There the seraphim are shining,
    Evermore in chorus joining:
    “Holy, holy, holy, Lord!
    Triune God, for aye adored!”

    5. There great men, of sacred story,
      Prophets, patriarchs, are met;
    There apostles, too, in glory
      Fill twelve thrones by Jesus set;
    All the saints that have ascended
    Age on age, through time extended,
    There in blissful concert sing
    Hallelujahs to their King.

    6. O Jerusalem, how glorious
      Dost thou shine, thou city fair!
    Lo! I hear the tones victorious
      Ever sweetly sounding there!
    O the bliss that there surprises!
    Lo! the sun of morn now rises,
    And the breaking day I see
    That shall never end for me!

    7. Yea, I see what here was told me,
      See that wondrous glory shine;
    Feel the spotless robes enfold me,
      Know a golden crown is mine.
    Thus before the throne so glorious
    Now I stand, a soul victorious,
    Gazing on that joy for aye
    That shall never pass away.

                               J. G. Albinus, 1652; C. Winkworth, 1863, a.


531

                                                                     S. M.

    One sweetly solemn thought
      Comes to me o’er and o’er,—
    Nearer my home to-day am I
      Than e’er I’ve been before;

    2. Nearer my Father’s house,
      Where many mansions be;
    Nearer to-day the great white throne;
      Nearer the crystal sea;

    3. Nearer the bound of life
      Where burdens are laid down;
    Nearer to leave the heavy cross;
      Nearer to gain the crown.

    4. But, lying dark between,
      Winding down through the night,
    There rolls the silent, unknown stream
      That leads at last to light.

    5. E’en now, perchance, my feet
      Are slipping on the brink,
    And I to-day am nearer home,
      Nearer than now I think.

    6. Father, perfect my trust;
      Strengthen my spirit’s faith;
    Nor let me stand at last alone
      Upon the shore of death.

                                                        Phoebe Cary, 1852.


532

                                                                 7, 6, 8 l

    Farewell! I say with gladness,
      False, evil world, farewell!
    Thy life is sin and sadness,
      With thee I would not dwell;
    In heaven are better pleasures,
      I long for that bright sphere
    Where God grants endless treasures
      To those that served Him here.

    2. Do with me as it pleases
      Thy heart, O Son of God!
    When anguish on me seizes,
      Help me to bear my load;
    Nor then my sorrows lengthen,
      But take me hence on high;
    My fearful spirit strengthen
      And let me calmly die.

    3. When all around is darkling,
      Thy name and cross, still bright,
    Deep in my heart are sparkling
      Like stars in blackest night.
    Appear Thou in Thy sorrow,
      For Thine was woe indeed,
    And from Thy cross I borrow
      All comfort heart can need.

    4. Thou diedst for me,—O hide me
      When tempests round me roll;
    Through all my foes, O guide me,
      Receive my trembling soul.
    If I but grasp Thee firmer,
      What matters pain when past?
    Hath he a cause to murmur
      Who reaches heaven at last?

    5. O write my name, I pray Thee,
      Now in the book of life;
    So let me here obey Thee
      And there, where joys are rife,
    Forever bloom before Thee,
      Thy perfect freedom prove,
    And tell, as I adore Thee,
      How faithful was Thy love.

                                 V. Herberger, 1613; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


533

                                                                     S. M.

    It is not death to die,
      To leave this weary road,
    And midst the brotherhood on high
      To be at home with God.

    2. It is not death to close
      The eye long dimmed by tears
    And wake in glorious repose
      To spend eternal years.

    3. It is not death to bear
      The wrench that sets us free
    From dungeon chain, to breathe the air
      Of boundless liberty.

    4. It is not death to fling
      Aside this sinful dust
    And rise, on strong, exulting wing,
      To live among the just.

    5. Jesus, Thou Prince of Life,
      Thy chosen cannot die;
    Like Thee, they conquer in the strife
      To reign with Thee on high.

                           M. A. C. Malan, 1832; G. W. Bethune, tr., 1847.


534

                                                                     S. M.

    And must this body die,
      This mortal frame decay?
    And must these active limbs of mine
      Lie moldering in the clay?

    2. God, my Redeemer, lives
      And ever from the skies
    Looks down and watches all my dust
      Till He shall bid it rise.

    3. Arrayed in glorious grace
      Shall these vile bodies shine
    And every shape and every face
      Look heavenly and divine.

    4. These lively hopes we owe
      To Jesus’ dying love;
    We would adore His grace below
      And sing His power above.

    5. Dear Lord, accept the praise
      Of these our humble songs
    Till tunes of nobler sound we raise
      With our immortal tongues.

                                                        Isaac Watts, 1709.


535

                                                                       11s

    I would not live alway; I ask not to stay
    Where storm after storm rises dark o’er the way;
    The few lurid mornings that dawn on us here
    Are enough for life’s woes, full enough for its cheer.

    2. I would not live alway; thus fettered by sin,
    Temptation without and corruption within;
    E’en the rapture of pardon is mingled with fears
    And the cup of thanksgiving with penitent tears.

    3. I would not live alway; no, welcome the tomb;
    Since Jesus hath lain there, I dread not its gloom.
    There sweet be my rest till He bid me arise
    To hail Him in triumph descending the skies.

    4. Who, who would live alway, away from his God?
    Away from yon heaven, that blissful abode,
    Where the rivers of pleasure flow o’er the bright plains,
    And the noontide of glory eternally reigns;

    5. Where the saints of all ages in harmony meet,
    Their Savior and brethren transported to greet,
    While the anthems of rapture unceasingly roll
    And the smile of the Lord is the feast of the soul?

                                                  W. A. Muehlenberg, 1826.


536

                                                                        7s

    Hark! a voice divides the sky:
      Happy are the faithful dead,
    In the Lord who sweetly die;
      They from all their toils are freed.

    2. Them the Spirit hath declared
      Blest, unutterably blest;
    Jesus is their great Reward,
      Jesus is their endless Rest.

    3. Followed by their works, they go
      Where their Head had gone before;
    Reconciled by grace below,
      Grace hath opened mercy’s door.

    4. Justified through faith alone,
      Here they knew their sins forgiven;
    Here they laid their burden down,
      Hallowed and made meet for heaven.

    5. When from flesh the spirit freed,
      Hastens homeward to return,
    Mortals cry, “A man is dead!”
      Angels sing, “A child is born!”

                                                     Charles Wesley, 1742.


537

                                                          7, 8, 7, 8, 7, 7

    Gentle Shepherd, Thou hast stilled
      Now Thy little lamb’s brief weeping;
    Ah! how peaceful, pale, and mild,
      In its narrow bed ’tis sleeping,
    And no sigh of anguish sore
    Heaves that little bosom more.

    2. In this world of care and pain,
      Lord, Thou wouldst no longer leave it;
    To the sunny, heavenly plain
      Dost Thou now with joy receive it;
    Clothed in robes of spotless white,
    Now it dwells with Thee in light.

    3. Ah, Lord Jesus, grant that we
      Where it lives may soon be living,
    And the lovely pastures see
      That its heavenly food are giving;
    Then the gain of death we prove
    Though Thou take what most we love.

                            J. W. Meinhold, 1835; C. Winkworth, tr., 1853.


538

                                                                     L. M.

    Now lay we calmly in the grave
    This form, whereof no doubt we have
    That it shall rise again that day
    In glorious triumph o’er decay.

    2. And so to earth again we trust
    What came from dust and turns to dust
    And from the dust shall surely rise
    When the last trumpet fills the skies.

    3. His soul forever lives in God,
    Whose grace his pardon hath bestowed,
    Who through His Son redeemed him here
    From bondage unto sin and fear.

    4. His trials and his griefs are past;
    A blessed end is his at last;
    He bore Christ’s yoke and did His will;
    And though he died, he liveth still.

    5. He lives where none do mourn and weep,
    And calmly shall his body sleep.
    ’Tis God shall death Himself destroy
    And raise it into glorious joy.

    6. He suffered pain and grief below,
    Christ heals him now from all his woe.
    For him hath endless joy begun;
    He shines in glory like the sun.

    7. Then let us leave him to his rest
    And homeward turn, for he is blest;
    And we must well our souls prepare,
    For death may seize us everywhere.

    8. So help us, Christ, our Hope in loss;
    Thou hast redeemed us by Thy cross
    From endless death and misery;
    We praise, we bless, we worship Thee.

            M. Weiss, 1531; Stanza 8, Martin Luther; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


539

                                                                     L. M.

    Now hush your cries and shed no tear,
    On such death none should look with fear;
    He died a faithful Christian man,
    And with his death true life began.

    2. Coffin and grave we deck with care,
    His body reverently bear;
    It is not dead, but rests in God
    And softly sleeps beneath the sod.

    3. It seems as all were over now,—
    The heavy limbs, the soulless brow,—
    Yet through these rigid limbs once more
    A noble life ere long shall pour.

    4. These bones, now dead, again shall feel
    New warmth and vigor through them steal,
    And reunited they shall soar
    On high to live forevermore.

    5. This body, lying stiff and stark,
    Shall soon rise upward from the dark
    And swiftly mount up to the skies,
    E’en as the spirit heavenward flies.

    6. The buried grain of wheat must die,
    Withered and worthless long must lie,
    Yet springs to light all sweet and fair
    And proper fruits shall rightly bear.

    7. E’en so this body, made of dust,
    To earth we once again entrust,
    Where it shall slumber free from pain
    Till from the dead it rise again.

    8. God breathed into this house of clay
    The spirit that hath passed away;
    The righteous mind, the noble heart,
    The living faith, did Christ impart.

    9. Now earth has hid it from our eyes
    Till God shall bid it wake and rise,
    Who ne’er the creature will forget,
    On whom His image He hath set.

    10. Ah, would that promised day were here
    When Christ will once again appear
    And bring them to their heavenly home
    Who have been buried in the tomb!

     “Deus, ignee fons animarum.” Tr. from the German, C. Winkworth, 1856.


540

                                                                     L. M.

    Asleep in Jesus! Blessed sleep,
    From which none ever wakes to weep;
    A calm and undisturbed repose,
    Unbroken by the last of foes.

    2. Asleep in Jesus! Oh, how sweet
    To be for such a slumber meet,
    With holy confidence to sing
    That death has lost his venomed sting.

    3. Asleep in Jesus! Peaceful rest,
    Whose waking is supremely blest;
    No fear, no woe, shall dim that hour
    That manifests the Savior’s power.

    4. Asleep in Jesus! Oh, for me
    May such a blissful refuge be!
    Securely shall my ashes lie
    And wait the summons from on high.

                                               Margaret Mackay, 1832, abr.


541

                                                                     S. M.

    Jesus, I live to Thee,
      The Loveliest and Best;
    My life in Thee, Thy life in me,
      In Thy blest love I rest.

    2. Jesus, I die to Thee
      Whenever death shall come;
    To die in Thee is life to me
      In my eternal home.

    3. Whether to live or die,
      I know not which is best;
    To live in Thee is bliss to me,
      To die is endless rest.

    4. Living or dying, Lord;
      I ask but to be Thine;
    My life in Thee, Thy life in me,
      Make heaven forever mine!

                                                        H. Harbaugh, 1850.


542

                                                                     C. M.

    Why do we mourn departing friends
      Or shake at death’s alarms?
    ’Tis but the voice that Jesus sends
      To call them to His arms.

    2. Are we not tending upward, too,
      As fast as time can move?
    Nor would we wish the hours more slow
      To keep us from our love.

    3. Why should we tremble to convey
      Their bodies to the tomb?
    There the dear flesh of Jesus lay
      And scattered all the gloom.

    4. The graves of all the saints He blessed
      And softened every bed;
    Where should the dying members rest
      But with their dying Head?

    5. Thence He arose, ascending high,
      And showed our feet the way.
    Up to the Lord we, too, shall fly
      At the great rising-day.

    6. Then let the last loud trumpet sound
      And bid our kindred rise;
    Awake, ye nations under ground!
      Ye saints, ascend the skies!

                                                        Isaac Watts, 1709.


543

                                                                 L. M. 6 l

    O Lord, my God, I cry to Thee,
    In my distress Thou helpest me.
    My soul and body I commend
    Into Thy hands; Thine angel send
    To guide me home and cheer my heart
    Since Thou dost call me to depart.

    2. O Jesus Christ, Thou Lamb of God,
    Once slain to take away our load,
    Now let Thy cross, Thine agony,
    Avail to save and solace me;
    Thy death to open heaven and there
    Bid me the joy of angels share.

    3. O Holy Spirit, at the end,
    Sweet Comforter, be Thou my Friend,
    When death and hell assail me sore,
    Leave me, O leave me nevermore,
    But bear me safely through the strife,
    As Thou hast promised, into life.

                               N. Selnecker, † 1592; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


544

                                                                    8s 6 l

    Who knows how near my end may be?
      Time speeds away, and death comes on;
    How swiftly, ah, how suddenly,
      May death be here and life be gone!
    My God, for Jesus’ sake I pray
    Thy peace may bless my dying day.

    2. The world that smiled when morn was come
      May change for me ere close of eve;
    So long as earth is still my home,
      In peril of my death I live.
    My God, for Jesus’ sake I pray
    Thy peace may bless my dying day.

    3. Teach me to ponder oft my end,
      And ere the hour of death appears,
    To cast my soul on Christ, her Friend,
      Nor spare repentant cries and tears.
    My God, for Jesus’ sake I pray
    Thy peace may bless my dying day.

    4. And let me now so order all
      That ever ready I may be
    To say with joy, Whate’er befall,
      Lord, do Thou as Thou wilt with me.
    My God, for Jesus’ sake I pray
    Thy peace may bless my dying day.

    5. Let heaven to me be ever sweet,
      And this world bitter let me find,
    That I, mid all its toil and heat,
      May keep eternity in mind.
    My God, for Jesus’ sake I pray
    Thy peace may bless my dying day.

    6. O Father, cover all my sins
      With Jesus’ merits, who alone
    The pardon that I covet wins
      And makes His long-sought rest my own.
    My God, for Jesus’ sake I pray
    Thy peace may bless my dying day.

    7. His sorrows and His cross I know
      Make deathbeds soft and light the grave;
    They comfort in the hour of woe,
      They give me all I fain would have.
    My God, for Jesus’ sake I pray
    Thy peace may bless my dying day.

    8. From Him can naught my soul divide,
      Nor life nor death can part us now;
    I thrust my hand into His side
      And say, My Lord and God art Thou!
    My God, for Jesus’ sake I pray
    Thy peace may bless my dying day.

    9. In Holy Baptism long ago
      I joined me to the living Vine;
    Thou lovest me in Him, I know,
      In Him Thou dost accept me Thine.
    My God, for Jesus’ sake I pray
    Thy peace may bless my dying day.

    10. And I have eaten His own flesh
      And drunk His blood,—nor can I be
    Forsaken now nor doubt afresh
      I am in Him and He in me.
    My God, for Jesus’ sake I pray
    Thy peace may bless my dying day.

    11. Then death may come or tarry yet,
      I know in Christ I perish not;
    He never will His own forget,
      He gives me robes without a spot.
    My God, for Jesus’ sake I pray
    Thy peace may bless my dying day.

    12. And thus I live in God at peace
      And die without a thought of fear,
    Content to take what God decrees,
      For through His Son my faith is clear.
    His grace shall be in death my stay,
    And peace shall bless my dying day.

                Countess Emilie Juliane, 1686; C. Winkworth, tr., 1858, a.


545

                                                                 L. M. 6 l

    I fall asleep in Jesus’ wounds,
    There pardon for my sins abounds;
    Yea, Jesus’ blood and righteousness
    My jewels are, my glorious dress,
    Wherein before my God I’ll stand
    When I shall reach the heavenly land.

    2. With peace and joy I now depart,
    God’s child I am with all my heart;
    I thank thee, Death, thou leadest me
    To that true life where I would be.
    So cleansed by Christ, I fear not death.
    Lord Jesus, strengthen Thou my faith!

                   Probably Paul Eber, † 1569; C. Winkworth, 1869, tr., a.


546

                                                                7, 7, 7, 5

    When the day of toil is done,
    When the race of life is run,
    Father, grant Thy wearied one
      Rest forevermore.

    2. When the strife of sin is stilled,
    When the foe within is killed,
    Be Thy gracious word fulfilled,
      “Peace forevermore.”

    3. When the darkness melts away
    At the breaking of the day,
    Bid us hail the cheering ray,
      Light forevermore.

    4. When the heart, by sorrow tried,
    Feels at length its throbs subside,
    Bring us where all tears are dried,
      Joy forevermore.

    5. When for vanished days we yearn,
    Days that never can return,
    Teach us in Thy love to learn
      Love forevermore.

    6. When the breath of life is flown,
    When the grave must claim its own,
    Lord of life, be ours Thy crown,—
      Life forevermore.

                                                        J. Ellerton, 1871.


547

                                                             10, 10, 5, 10

    O how blest are ye whose toils are ended!
    Who through death have unto God ascended!
    Ye have arisen
    From the cares which keep us still in prison.

    2. We are still as in a dungeon living,
    Still oppressed with sorrow and misgiving;
    Our undertakings
    Are but toils and troubles and heartbreakings.

    3. Ye, meanwhile, are in your chambers sleeping,
    Quiet, and set free from all our weeping;
    No cross or sadness
    There can hinder your untroubled gladness.

    4. Christ has wiped away your tears forever;
    Ye have that for which we still endeavor;
    To you are chanted
    Songs that ne’er to mortal ears were granted.

    5. Ah! who would, then, not depart with gladness
    To inherit heaven for earthly sadness?
    Who here would languish
    Longer in bewailing and in anguish?

    6. Come, O Christ, and loose the chains that bind us!
    Lead us forth and cast this world behind us!
    With Thee, th’ Anointed,
    Finds the soul its joy and rest appointed.

                                  S. Dach, 1635; H. W. Longfellow, tr., a.




JUDGMENT.


548

                                                                 8, 7, 6 l

    O’er the distant mountains breaking
      Comes the redd’ning dawn of day;
    Rise, my soul, from sleep awaking,
      Rise, and sing, and watch, and pray;
        |: ’Tis thy Savior, :|
      On His bright returning way.

    2. O Thou long-expected, weary
      Waits my anxious soul for Thee;
    Life is dark, and earth is dreary,
      Where Thy light I do not see;
        |: O my Savior, :|
      When wilt Thou return to me?

    3. Nearer is my soul’s salvation,
      Spent the night, the day at hand;
    Keep me in my lowly station,
      Watching for Thee, till I stand,
        |: O my Savior, :|
      In Thy bright, Thy promised land.

    4. With my lamp well trimmed and burning,
      Swift to hear and loath to roam,
    Watching for Thy glad returning
      To restore me to my home.
        |: Come, my Savior, :|
      Thou hast promised: quickly come.

                                                J. S. B. Monsell, 1863, a.


549

                                                    8, 9, 8, 6, 6, 4, 8, 8

    Wake, awake, for night is flying,
    The watchmen on the heights are crying:
      Awake, Jerusalem, arise!
    Midnight hears the welcome voices,
    And at the thrilling cry rejoices;
      O where are ye, ye virgins wise?
    The Bridegroom comes, awake!
    Your lamps with gladness take!
      Hallelujah!
    With bridal care Yourselves prepare
    To meet the Bridegroom, who is near!

    2. Zion hears the watchmen singing,
    And all her heart with joy is springing,
      She wakes, she rises from her gloom;
    For her Lord comes down all glorious,
    The strong in grace, in truth victorious,
      Her Star is risen, her Light is come!
    Now come, Thou Blessed One,
    Lord Jesus, God’s own Son,
      Hail! Hosanna!
    The joyful call We answer all,
    And follow to the nuptial hall.

    3. Glory unto Thee be given,
    By men and by the host of heaven,
      With harp and cymbal’s clearest tone;
    Of one pearl each shining portal,
    Where we are with the choir immortal
      Of angels round Thy dazzling throne.
    Nor eye hath seen, nor ear
    Hath yet attained to hear
      Such great glory;
    Therefore will we Eternally
    Sing hymns of joy and praise to Thee.

                                              Ph. Nicolai, 1599; Comp. tr.


550

                                                                     L. M.

    Let thoughtless thousands choose the road
    That leads the soul away from God;
    This happiness, dear Lord, be mine,
    To live and die entirely Thine.

    2. On Christ, by faith, I fain would live,
    From Him my life, my all, receive,
    To Him devote my fleeting hours,
    Serve Him alone with all my powers.

    3. Christ is my everlasting All;
    To Him I look, on Him I call;
    He will my every want supply
    In time and through eternity.

    4. Soon will the Lord, my Life, appear;
    Soon shall I end my trials here,
    Leave sin and sorrow, death and pain;
    To live is Christ, to die is gain.

    5. Soon will the saints in glory meet,
    Soon walk through every golden street,
    And sing on every blissful plain,—
    To live is Christ, to die is gain.

                                                         J. Haskins, 1789.


551

                                                                     L. M.

    That day of wrath, that dreadful day,
    When heaven and earth shall pass away!
    What power shall be the sinner’s stay?
    How shall he meet that dreadful day?

    2. When, shriveling like a parchèd scroll,
    The flaming heavens together roll;
    When louder yet, and yet more dread,
    Swells the high trump that wakes the dead:

    3. Lord, on that day, that wrathful day,
    When man to Judgment wakes from clay,
    Be Thou the trembling sinner’s stay,
    Though heaven and earth shall pass away.

                      Thomas of Celano, 13th cent.; Walter Scott, 1805, a.


552

                                                       8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7

    The day is surely drawing near
      When God’s Son, the Anointed,
    Shall with great majesty appear
      As Judge of all appointed.
    All mirth and laughter then shall cease,
    When flames on flames will still increase,
      As the Apostle teacheth.

    2. A trumpet loud shall then resound,
      And all the earth be shaken;
    Then all who in their graves are found
      Shall from their sleep awaken;
    But all that live shall in that hour
    By the Almighty’s boundless power
      Be changed at His commanding.

    3. A book is opened then to all,
      A record truly telling
    What each hath done, both great and small,
      When he on earth was dwelling;
    And every heart be clearly seen,
    And all be known as they have been,
      In thoughts and words and actions.

    4. Then woe to those who scorned the Lord
      And sought but carnal pleasures,
    Who here despised His precious Word
      And loved their earthly treasures!
    With shame and trembling they will stand
    And at the Judge’s stern command
      To Satan be delivered.

    5. O Jesus, who my debt didst pay
      And for my sin wast smitten,
    Within the book of life, O may
      My name be also written!
    I will not doubt; I trust in Thee,
    From Satan Thou hast made me free
      And from all condemnation.

    6. Therefore my Intercessor be,
      And for Thy bloody merit
    Declare my name from judgment free,
      With all who life inherit;
    That I may see Thee face to face
    With all Thy saints in that blest place
      Which Thou for us hast purchased.

    7. O Jesus Christ, do not delay,
      But hasten our salvation!
    We often tremble on our way
      In fear and tribulation.
    Then hear us when we cry to Thee;
    Come, mighty Judge, and make us free
      From every evil! Amen.

                          B. Ringwaldt, † 1599; P. A. Peter, 1880, tr., a.


553

                                                       8, 7, 8, 7, 8, 8, 7

    Great God, what do I see and hear?
      The end of things created;
    The Judge of mankind doth appear
      On clouds of glory seated;
    The trumpet sounds; the graves restore
    The dead which they contained before:
      Prepare, my soul, to meet Him.

    2. The dead in Christ shall first arise
      At the last trumpet’s sounding,
    Caught up to meet Him in the skies;
      With joy their Lord surrounding;
    No gloomy fears their souls dismay;
    His presence sheds eternal day
      On those prepared to meet Him.

    3. But sinners, filled with guilty fears,
      Behold His wrath prevailing,
    For they shall rise and find their tears
      And sighs are unavailing;
    The day of grace is past and gone;
    Trembling they stand before the throne,
      All unprepared to meet Him.

    4. O Christ, who diedst and yet dost live,
      To me impart Thy merit;
    My pardon seal, my sins forgive,
      And cleanse me by Thy Spirit.
    Beneath Thy cross I view the day
    When heaven and earth shall pass away,
      And thus prepare to meet Thee.

                                                      W. B. Collyer, 1812.


554

                                                                     S. M.

    And will the Judge descend?
      And must the dead arise
    And not a single soul escape
      His all-discerning eyes?

    2. And from His righteous lips
      Shall this dread sentence sound;
    And, through the numerous guilty throng,
      Spread black despair around?

    3. “Depart from Me, accursed,
      To everlasting flame,
    For rebel angels first prepared,
      Where mercy never came.”

    4. How will my heart endure
      The terrors of that day,
    When earth and heaven before His face
      Astonished shrink away?

    5. But ere that trumpet shakes
      The mansions of the dead,
    Hark, from the Gospel’s cheering sound
      What joyful tidings spread!

    6. Ye sinners, seek His grace
      Whose wrath ye cannot bear;
    Fly to the shelter of His cross
      And find salvation there.

                                                 Philip Doddridge, † 1751.


555

                                                                    8s 3 l

    Day of wrath, that day of mourning!
    See fulfilled the Prophet’s warning,
    Heaven and earth in ashes burning!

    2. O what fear man’s bosom rendeth
    When from heaven the Judge descendeth
    On whose sentence all dependeth!

    3. Wondrous sound the trumpet flingeth,
    Through earth’s sepulchers it ringeth,
    All before the throne it bringeth.

    4. Death is struck and nature quaking;
    All creation is awaking,
    To its Judge an answer making.

    5. Lo, the book, exactly worded,
    Wherein all hath been recorded;
    Thence shall judgment be awarded.

    6. When the Judge His seat attaineth,
    And each hidden deed arraigneth,
    Nothing unavenged remaineth.

    7. What shall I, frail man, be pleading?
    Who for me be interceding,
    When the just are mercy needing?

    8. King of majesty tremendous,
    Who dost free salvation send us,
    Fount of pity, then befriend us!

    9. Think, kind Jesus! my salvation
    Caused Thy wondrous incarnation;
    Leave me not to reprobation!

    10. Faint and weary Thou hast sought me,
    On the cross of suffering bought me;
    Shall such grace in vain be brought me?

    11. Righteous Judge of retribution,
    Grant Thy gift of absolution
    Ere that day’s dread execution.

    12. Guilty, now I pour my moaning,
    All my shame with anguish owning:
    Spare, O God, Thy suppliant groaning!

    13. Thou the women gav’st remission,
    Heard’st the dying thief’s petition;
    Hopeless else were my condition.

    14. Worthless are my prayers and sighing,
    Yet, good Lord, in grace complying,
    Rescue me from fires undying!

    15. With Thy favored sheep, O place me!
    Nor amid the goats abase me;
    But to Thy right hand upraise me.

    16. While the wicked are confounded,
    Doomed to flames of woe unbounded,
    Call me, with Thy saints surrounded.

    17. Bows my heart in meek submission,
    Strewn with ashes of contrition.
    Succor Thou my lost condition!

    18. Day of sorrow, day of weeping,
    When, in dust no longer sleeping,
    Man awakes in Thy dread keeping!

    19. To the rest Thou didst prepare me,
    On Thy cross, O Christ, upbear me!
    Spare, O God, in mercy spare me!

                     Thomas of Celano, c. 1250; W. J. Irons, tr., 1848, a.




HEAVEN.


556

                                                                 7, 6, 8 l

    Jerusalem the golden,
      With milk and honey blest!
    Beneath thy contemplation
      Sink heart and voice opprest.
    I know not, O I know not
      What joys await us there,
    What radiancy of glory,
      What bliss beyond compare!

    2. There is the throne of David;
      And there, from care released,
    The songs of them that triumph,
      The shout of them that feast;
    And they who, with their Leader,
      Have conquered in the fight,
    Forever and forever,
      Are clad in robes of white!

    3. Exult, O dust and ashes!
      The Lord shall be thy Part;
    His only, His forever,
      Thou shalt be and thou art!
    Jesus, in mercy bring us
      Soon to that land of rest;
    Who art, with God the Father
      And Spirit, ever blest!

                     Bernard of Cluny, 12th cent.; J. M. Neale, tr., 1851.


557

                                                                 7, 6, 8 l

    Brief life is here our portion;
      Brief sorrow, short-lived care;
    The life that knows no ending,
      The tearless life, is there.
    O happy retribution!
      Short toil, eternal rest;
    For mortals and for sinners
      A mansion with the blest!

    2. And now we fight the battle,
      But then shall wear the crown
    Of full and everlasting
      And passionless renown;
    And now we watch and struggle,
      And now we live in hope,
    And Zion in her anguish
      With Babylon must cope.

    3. But He whom now we trust in
      Shall then be seen and known;
    And they that know and see Him
      Shall have Him for their own.
    And there is David’s fountain
      And life in fullest glow;
    And there the light is golden,
      And milk and honey flow.

    4. The morning shall awaken,
      And shadows shall decay,
    And each true-hearted servant
      Shall shine as doth the day;
    Yes! God, my King and Portion,
      In fulness of His grace,
    We then shall see forever
      And worship face to face.

    5. O sweet and blessed country,
      The home of God’s elect!
    O sweet and blessed country
      That eager hearts expect!
    Jesus, in mercy bring us
      To that dear land of rest;
    Who art, with God the Father
      And Spirit, ever blest.

                     Bernard of Cluny, 12th cent.; J. M. Neale, tr., 1851.


558

                                                                     C. M.

    Jerusalem, my happy home,
      Name ever dear to me,
    When shall my labors have an end
      In joy and peace and thee?

    2. When shall these eyes thy heaven-built walls
      And pearly gates behold;
    Thy bulwarks with salvation strong
      And streets of shining gold?

    3. O when, thou city of my God,
      Shall I thy courts ascend,
    Where evermore the angels sing,
      Where sabbaths have no end?

    4. There happier bowers than Eden’s bloom,
      Nor sin nor sorrow know;
    Blest seats! through rude and stormy scenes
      I onward press to you.

    5. Why should I shrink from pain and woe
      Or feel at death dismay?
    I’ve Canaan’s goodly land in view
      And realms of endless day.

    6. Apostles, martyrs, prophets, there
      Around my Savior stand;
    And soon my friends in Christ below
      Will join the glorious band.

                                        From an ancient hymn, anon., 1801.


559

                                                  10, 6, 10, 6, 7, 6, 7, 6

    Jerusalem, thou city fair and high,
      Would God I were in thee!
    My longing heart fain, fain to thee would fly,
      It will not stay with me;
    Far over vale and mountain,
      Far over field and plain,
    It hastes to seek its Fountain
      And quit this world of pain.

    2. O happy day, and yet far happier hour,
      When wilt thou come at last,
    When fearless to my Father’s love and power,
      Whose promise standeth fast,
    My soul I gladly render?
      For surely will His hand
    Lead her, with guidance tender,
      To heaven, her fatherland.

    3. A moment’s space, and gently, wondrously,
      Released from earthly ties,
    Elijah’s chariot bears her up to thee,
      Through all these lower skies
    To yonder shining regions,
      While down to meet her come
    The blessed angel legions
      And bid her welcome home.

    4. O Zion, hail! Bright city, now unfold
      The gates of grace to me!
    How many a time I longed for thee of old,
      Ere yet I was set free
    From yon dark life of sadness,
      Yon world of shadowy naught,
    And God had given the gladness,
      The heritage I sought.

    5. O what the tribe, or what the glorious host,
      Comes sweeping swiftly down?
    The chosen ones on earth who wrought the most,
      The Church’s brightest crown,
    Our Lord hath sent to meet me,
      As in the far-off years
    Their words oft came to greet me
      In yonder land of tears.

    6. The patriarchs’ and prophets’ noble train,
      With all Christ’s followers true,
    Who bore the cross and could the worst disdain
      That tyrants dared to do,
    I see them shine forever,
      All glorious as the sun,
    Mid light that fadeth never,
      Their perfect freedom won.

    7. And when within that lovely paradise
      At last I safely dwell,
    From out my soul what songs of bliss shall rise,
      What joy my lips shall tell,
    While holy saints are singing
      Hosannas o’er and o’er,
    Pure hallelujahs ringing
      Around me evermore!

    8. Innumerous choirs before the shining throne
      Their joyful anthems raise,
    Till heaven’s glad halls are echoing with the tone
      Of that great hymn of praise,
    And all its host rejoices,
      And all its blessed throng
    Unite their myriad voices
      In one eternal song.

                                J. M. Meyfart, 1626; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


560

                                                                     C. M.

    There is a land of pure delight,
      Where saints immortal reign;
    Eternal day excludes the night,
      And pleasures banish pain.

    2. There everlasting spring abides,
      And never-withering flowers;
    Death, like a narrow sea, divides
      This heavenly land from ours.

    3. Sweet fields, beyond the swelling flood,
      Stand dressed in living green;
    So to the Jews old Canaan stood,
      While Jordan rolled between.

    4. But timorous mortals start and shrink
      To cross this narrow sea,
    And linger, shivering, on the brink
      And fear to launch away.

    5. O could we make our doubts remove,
      Those gloomy doubts that rise,
    And view the Canaan that we love,
      With unbeclouded eyes:

    6. Could we but climb where Moses stood
      And view the landscape o’er,
    Not Jordan’s stream nor death’s cold flood
      Should fright us from the shore.

                                                        Isaac Watts, 1707.


561

                                                    8, 6, 8, 6, 6, 6, 6, 6

    O Paradise, O Paradise,
      Who doth not crave for rest?
    Who would not seek the happy land
      Where they that loved are blest;
    Where loyal hearts, and true,
      Stand ever in the light,
    All rapture through and through,
      In God’s most holy sight?

    2. O Paradise, O Paradise,
      The world is growing old;
    Who would not be at rest and free
      Where love is never cold;
    Where loyal hearts, and true,
      Stand ever in the light,
    All rapture through and through,
      In God’s most holy sight?

    3. O Paradise, O Paradise,
      I greatly long to see
    The special place my dearest Lord
      In love prepares for me;
    Where loyal hearts, and true,
      Stand ever in the light,
    All rapture through and through,
      In God’s most holy sight.

    4. Lord Jesus, King of Paradise,
      Oh, keep me in Thy love
    And guide me to that happy land
      Of perfect rest above,
    Where loyal hearts, and true,
      Stand ever in the light,
    All rapture through and through,
      In God’s most holy sight.

                                                        F. W. Faber, 1862.


562

                                                                 7, 6, 8 l

    The Homeland! O the Homeland!
      The land of souls free born!
    No gloomy night is known there,
      But aye the fadeless morn.
    I’m sighing for that country,
      My heart is aching here;
    There is no pain in the Homeland,
      To which I’m drawing near.

    2. My Lord is in the Homeland,
      With angels bright and fair;
    No sinful thing nor evil,
      Can ever enter there.
    The music of the ransomed
      Is ringing in my ears;
    And when I think of the Homeland,
      My eyes are wet with tears.

    3. For loved ones in the Homeland
      Are waiting me to come
    Where neither death nor sorrow
      Invades their holy home.
    O dear, dear native country!
      O rest and peace above!
    Christ bring us all to the Homeland
      Of His eternal love.

                                                       H. R. Haweis, 1855.


563

                                                    6, 4, 6, 4, 6, 6, 6, 4

    I’m but a stranger here,
      Heav’n is my home;
    Earth is a desert drear,
      Heav’n is my home;
    Danger and sorrow stand
    Round me on every hand;
    Heav’n is my fatherland,
      Heav’n is my home.

    2. What though the tempest rage,
      Heav’n is my home;
    Short is my pilgrimage,
      Heav’n is my home;
    And time’s wild wintry blast
    Soon shall be overpast;
    I shall reach home at last,—
      Heav’n is my home.

    3. There at my Savior’s side—
      Heav’n is my home—
    I shall be glorified,—
      Heav’n is my home.
    There are the good and blest,
    Those I love most and best;
    And there I, too, shall rest,—
      Heav’n is my home.

    4. Therefore I murmur not—
      Heav’n is my home—
    Whate’er my earthly lot,—
      Heav’n is my home;
    And I shall surely stand
    There at my Lord’s right hand,—
    Heav’n is my fatherland,
      Heav’n is my home.

                                                    T. R. Taylor, 1836, a.


564

                                                             8, 6, 8, 8, 6

    There is an hour of peaceful rest,
      To mourning wanderers given;
    There is a joy for souls distrest,
    A balm for every wounded breast:
      ’Tis found above—in heaven.

    2. There is a soft, a downy bed,
      ’Tis fair as breath of even;
    A couch for weary mortals spread
    Where they may rest the aching head
      And find repose—in heaven.

    3. There is a home for weary souls,
      By sin and sorrow driven,—
    When tossed on life’s tempestuous shoals,
    Where storms arise and ocean rolls,
      And all is drear—but heaven.

    4. There faith lifts up her cheerful eye,
      To brighter prospects given;
    And views the tempest passing by,
    The evening shadows quickly fly,
      And all serene—in heaven.

    5. There fragrant flowers immortal bloom,
      And joys supreme are given;
    There rays divine disperse the gloom;
    Beyond the confines of the tomb
      Appears the dawn of heaven.

                                                       W. B. Tappan, 1818.


565

                                                                 9, 8, 6 l

    A slumber I know, in Jesus’ name,
      A rest from all toil and sorrow;
    Earth tenderly takes my weary frame
      To sleep till the blissful morrow;
    In heaven my soul with God abides,
    Forgotten are cares and trials.

    2. An even I know, serene and blest,
      And oft is my spirit longing,
    When, weary and worn, it finds no rest
      While woes on the way are thronging;
    Oft longing to see the journey’s end,
    And rest in a blissful slumber.

    3. A morning I know, so bright and fair,
      When tidings of joy shall wake us,
    When anthems from high shall fill the air
      And God to His glory take us;
    When Jesus shall bid us rise from sleep—
    How joyous that hour of awaking!

    4. Oh, dear is that morning fair to me!
      And oft, o’er the mountains beaming,
    In spirit its heavenly light I see,
      As golden the peaks are gleaming.
    For joy I must sing as birds at dawn
    Their carols in lofty lindens.

    5. The Savior then comes unto our graves;
      His mighty command is given.
    Then break from the deep the ocean waves,
      Each tomb and restraint is riven.
    All earth hears the cry, Ye dead, come forth!
    In glory we go to meet Him.

                                                   M. B. Landstad, † 1880.


566

                                                                   8s 10 l

    Yes, there remaineth still a rest!
      Arise, sad heart, that darkly pines,
    By heavy care and pain opprest,
      On whom no sun of gladness shines;
    Look to the Lamb! In yon bright fields
    Thou’lt know the joy His presence yields.
      Cast off thy load and thither haste;
    Soon shalt thou fight and bleed no more,
    Soon, soon thy weary course be o’er,
      And deep the rest thou then shalt taste.

    2. The rest appointed thee of God,
      The rest that naught shall break or move,
    That ere this earth by man was trod,
      Was set apart for thee by Love.
    Our Savior gave His life to win
    This rest for thee; O enter in!
      Hear how His voice sounds far and wide,
    “Ye weary souls, no more delay,
    Loiter not faithless by the way;
      Here in My peace and rest abide!”

    3. Ye heavy-laden, come to Him!
      Ye who are bent with many a load,
    Come from your prisons drear and dim,
      Toil thus not sadly on your road!
    Ye’ve borne the burden of the day,
    And hear ye not the Savior say:
      “I am your Refuge and your Rest”?
    His children ye, of heavenly birth,
    Howe’er may rage sin, hell, or earth,
      Here ye are safe, here calmly blest.

    4. O what contentment fills the breast
      Of wanderers through the desert plains
    If they have found a place to rest,
      To quench their thirst and cure their pains!
    How welcome is a humble bed,
    Where they may rest their weary head,
      To persons that are sick and sore!
    Such hours of sweet repose soon fly.
    But there remains a rest on high
      Where we shall rest forevermore.

    5. Yonder in joy the sheaves we bring,
      Whose seed was sown on earth in tears;
    There in our Father’s house we sing
      The song too sweet for mortal ears.
    Sorrow and sighing all are past,
    And pain and death are fled at last.
      There with the lamb of God we dwell,
    He leads us to the crystal river,
    He wipes away all tears forever;
      What there is ours no tongue can tell.

    6. Nor thirst nor hunger pains us there,
      The time of recompense is come,
    Nor cold nor scorching heat we bear,
      We’re sheltered in our Savior’s home.
    The Lamb is in the midst; and those
    Who followed Him through shame and woes
      Are crowned with honor, joy, and peace.
    The dry bones gather life again,
    One Sabbath over all shall reign,
      Wherein all toil and labor cease.

    7. There is untroubled calm and light,
      No gnawing care shall mar our rest;
    Ye weary, heed this word aright;
      Come, lean upon your Savior’s breast!
    Fain would I linger here no more,
    Fain to yon happier world upsoar,
      And join that bright, expectant band.
    O raise, my soul, the joyful song
    That rings through yon triumphant throng;
      Thy perfect rest is nigh at hand.

                                  J. S. Kunth, 1733; C. Winkworth, tr., a.


567

                                                                     S. M.

    “Forever with the Lord!”
      Amen! so let it be;
    Life from the dead is in that word,
      ’Tis immortality.

    2. Here in the body pent,
      Absent from Him I roam,
    Yet nightly pitch my moving tent
      A day’s march nearer home.

    3. My Father’s house on high,
      Home of my soul! how near
    At times to faith’s foreseeing eye
      The golden gates appear!

    4. Ah! then my spirit faints
      To reach the land I love,
    The bright inheritance of saints,
      Jerusalem above!

    5. “Forever with the Lord!”
      Father, if ’tis Thy will,
    The promise of that faithful word
      E’en here to me fulfil.

    6. Be Thou at my right hand,
      Then I can never fail;
    Uphold Thou me, and I shall stand;
      Fight, and I must prevail.

    7. So when my latest breath
      Shall rend the veil in twain,
    By death I shall escape from death
      And life eternal gain.

    8. Knowing as I am known,
      How shall I love that word
    And oft repeat before the throne,
      “Forever with the Lord!”

                                                   James Montgomery, 1835.




CHANTS.


568

Gloria in Excelsis.

    _Congregation_:—

Glory be to | God on high, | and on earth | peace, good | will toward |
men! ||

    _Choir or Congregation_:—

We | praise Thee, we | bless Thee, we | wor-ship | Thee, we | glo-ri-fy
| Thee, we | give thanks to | Thee for Thy great | glo-ry. O | Lord God,
| heavenly King, | God the Fa-ther Al- | might-y! O | Lord the only-be-
| got-ten Son, | Jesus Christ, | O Lord God, Thou | Lamb of God, Son |
of the Fa-ther, | that tak-est a- | way the sin of the | world, have |
mer-cy up- | on us! || Thou, that | tak-est a-way the | sin of the world,
re-| ceive our | prayer! Thou that | sit-test at the | right hand of
| God the | Father, have | mer-cy up- | on us! For | Thou on-ly art |
ho-ly, Thou | on-ly art the | Lord, Thou | on-ly, O | Christ, with the |
Ho-ly | Ghost, | art most | high in the | glo-ry of | God the | Fa-ther.
| A- | men.


569

Levavi Oculos.

1. I will lift up mine _eyes_ un- | to the | hills || From _whence_ |
com-eth | my — | help.

2. My help _com_eth | from the | Lord || Who hath | made — | heaven and |
earth.

3. He will not _suf_fer thy | foot to be | moved. || _He_ that | keepeth
thee | will not | slumber.

4. Behold, _He_ that | keep-eth | Israel || _Shall_ | nei-ther | slumber
nor | sleep.

5. The _Lord_ Him- | self is thy | Keeper: || The _Lord_ is thy De- |
fense up-on | thy right | hand,

6. So that the sun shall not _burn_ | thee by | day || _Nor_ the | moon —
| by — | night.

7. The Lord shall pre_serve_ thee | from all | evil || _He_ | shall pre-
| serve thy | soul.

8. The Lord shall preserve thy going _out_ and thy | coming | in || From
_this_ time | forth for- | ev-er- | more.

Glory be to the _Fa_ther | and to the | Son || _and_ | to the | Ho-ly |
Ghost,

As it was in the beginning, is _now_, and | ev-er | shall be, || _world_
without | end! — _A-_ — | _men_.


570

Benedictus.

1. Blessed be the Lord _God_ of | Is-ra- | el, || for He hath _visit_ed |
and re- | deem-ed His | people:

2. And hath raised up a _mighty_ sal- | va-tion | for us || in the
_house_ | of His | servant | David;

3. As He spake by the _mouth_ of His | ho-ly | prophets || which have
_been_ | since the | world be- | gan;

4. That we should be _saved_ | from our | enemies || and from the _hand_
of | all that | hate — | us;

5. To perform the mercy _promis_ed to | our fore- | fathers, || and to
re_mem_ber His | ho-ly | Cov-e- | nant:

6. To perform the oath which He sware to our fore-_fa_ther | A-bra- | ham
|| that | He would | give —| us;

7. That we, being delivered out of the _hand_ of our | en-e- | mies, ||
might _serve_ | Him with- | out — | fear,

8. In holiness and _right_eous- | ness be- | fore Him || _all_ the | days
of | our — | life.

9. And thou, child, shalt be called the _prophet_ | of the | Highest, ||
for thou shalt go before the face of the _Lord_ | to pre- | pare His |
ways;

10. To give knowledge of sal_va_tion | unto His | people || _for_ the re-
| mis-sion | of their | sins,

11. Through the tender _mer_cy | of our | God || whereby the Day-spring
_from_ on | high hath | visit-ed | us;

12. To give light to them that sit in darkness and _in_ the | shadow of |
death || and to guide our _feet_ | into the | way of | peace.

Glory be to the _Fa_ther | and to the | Son || _and_ | to the | Ho-ly |
Ghost,

As it was in the beginning, is _now_, and | ever | shall be, || _world_
without | end! — | _A-_ — | _men_.


571

Te Deum Laudamus.

1. We _praise_ | Thee, O | God, || we ac_knowl_edge | Thee to | be the |
Lord.

2. All the _earth_ doth | wor-ship | Thee, || _the_ | Fa-ther | ev-er- |
lasting.

3. To Thee all _an_gels | cry a- | loud, || the _Heavens_ and | all the |
powers there- | in.

4. To Thee cheru_bim_ and | Ser-a- | phim || _con-_ | tin-ual- | ly do |
cry,

5. _Ho_ly | ho-ly | holy, || _Lord_ | God of | Sab-a- | oth;

6. Heaven and earth are _full_ of the | maj-es- | ty || _of_ | Thy — |
glo- — | ry.

7. The glorious _com_pany | of the a- | postles || _praise_ | — — | — — |
Thee.

8. The goodly _fel_lowship | of the | prophets || _praise_ | — — | — — |
Thee.

9. The _no_ble | army of | martyrs || _praise_ | — — | — — | Thee.

10. The holy _Church_ throughout | all the | world || _doth_ | — ac- |
knowl-edge | Thee;

11. _The_ | Fa- — ther || _of_ an | in-finite | maj-es | ty;

12. _Thine_ a- | dor-able, | true, || _and_ | on- — | — ly | Son;

13. Al_so_ the | Holy | Ghost, || _the_ | Com- — | fort- — | er.

14. _Thou_ art the King of | Glory, || O | — — | — — | Christ!

15. Thou art the _ev_er- | last-ing | Son || _of_ | — the | Fa- — | ther.

16. When Thou tookest upon _Thee_ to de- | liv-er | man, || Thou didst
humble Thy_self_ to be | born — | of a | virgin.

17. When Thou hadst over_come_ the | sharpness of | death, || Thou didst
open the _king_dom of | heaven to | all be- | lievers.

18. Thou sittest at the _right_ | hand of | God || _in_ the | glo-ry | of
the | Father.

19. We be_lieve_ that | Thou shalt | come || _to_ | be — | our — | Judge.

20. We therefore _pray_ Thee, | Help Thy | servants, || whom Thou hast
_redeem_ed | with Thy | precious | blood!

21. Make them to be _num_bered | with Thy | saints || _in_ | glo-ry |
ev-er- | lasting.

22. O _Lord_, | save Thy | people || _and_ | bless Thine | her-it- | age!

23. _Gov-_ | — ern | them || _and_ | lift them | up for- | ever!

24. _Day_ | by — | day || _we_ | mag-ni | fy — | Thee;

25. _And_ we | worship Thy | name || _ev_er, | world with- | out — | end.

26. _Vouch-_ | safe, O | Lord, || to keep _us_ this | day with- | out — |
sin.

27. O _Lord_, have | mercy up- | on us, || _have_ | mercy up- | on — us!

28. O Lord, let Thy _mer_cy | be up- | on us, || _as_ our | trust — | is
in | Thee.

29. O Lord, in _Thee_ | have I | trusted; || _let_ me | nev-er | be con-
| founded!


572

Magnificat.

1. My soul doth _mag_ni- | fy the | Lord, || and my spirit _hath_ re- |
joiced in | God, my | Savior.

2. _For_ He | hath re- | garded || the _low_li- | ness | of | His hand- |
maiden.

3. _For_, be- | hold, from | henceforth || all _gen_er- | a-tions shall |
call me | blessed.

4. For He that is _mighty_ hath | magni-fied | me, || _and_ | ho-ly | is
His | name.

5. And His mer_cy_ is on | them that | fear Him || _through-_ | out all |
gen-er- | ations.

6. He hath showed _strength_ | with His | arm; || He hath scattered the
proud in the im_ag_i- | na-tion | of their | hearts.

7. He hath put down the _mighty_ | from their | seats || and _hath_ ex- |
alted the | humble and | meek.

8. He hath filled the _hun_gry | with good | things, || and the _rich_ He
hath | sent — | empty a- | way.

9. He, remembering His mercy, hath holpen His _ser_vant | Is-ra- | el,
|| as He promised to our fore-fathers, Abra_ham_ | and his | seed for- |
ever.

Glory be to the _Fa_ther | and to the | Son || _and_ | to the | Ho-ly |
Ghost,

As it was in the beginning, is _now_, and | ev-er | shall be, || _world_
without | end! — | _A-_ — | _men_.


573

Dominus Regit Me.

1. The _Lord_ | is my | Shepherd, || I | shall | not | want.

2. He maketh me to lie _down_ in | green | pastures; || He leadeth _me_
be- | side the | still — | waters.

3. _He_ re- | storeth my | soul; || He leadeth me in the paths of
righteous_ness_ | for His | name’s | sake.

4. Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of _death_, I will
| fear no | evil; || for Thou art with me; Thy _rod_ and Thy | staff,
they | comfort | me.

5. Thou preparest a table before me in the _pres_ence | of mine |
enemies; || Thou anointest my head with _oil_; my | cup | run-neth | over.

6. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the _days_ | of my |
life, || and I will dwell in the _house_ | of the | Lord for- | ever.

Glory be to the _Fa_ther | and to the | Son || _and_ | to the | Ho-ly |
Ghost,

As it was in the beginning, is _now_, and | ev-er | shall be, || _world_
without | end! — | _A-_ — | _men_.


574

De Profundis.

1. Out of the deep have I called unto _Thee_, O | Lord! || _Lord_, hear
my | voice!

2. O let Thine ears con_sid_er | well || the voice of _my_ com- | plaint.

3. If Thou, Lord, wilt be extreme to mark what is _done_ a- | miss, || O
Lord, who _may_ a- | bide it?

4. For there is mer_cy_ with | Thee; || therefore shalt _Thou_ be |
feared.

5. I look for the Lord; my soul doth _wait_ for | Him; || in His _Word_
is my | trust.

6. My soul _fleeth_ unto the | Lord || before the morning watch, I say,
before the _morn_ing | watch.

7. O Israel, trust in the Lord; for with the _Lord_ there is | mercy, ||
and with Him is plent_eous_ re- | demption.

8. And He shall re_deem_ Isra- | el || from _all_ his sins.

Glory be to the _Fa_ther | and to the | Son || _and_ | to the | Ho-ly |
Ghost,

As it was in the beginning, is _now_, and | ev-er | shall be, || _world_
without | end! — | _A-_ — | _men_.


575

Venite, Exultemus.

1. O come, let us sing | unto the | Lord; || let us make a joyful noise
to the | Rock of | our sal- | vation!

2. Let us come before His presence | with thanks- | giving, || and make a
joyful | noise unto | Him with | psalms.

3. For the Lord is a | great | God || and a great | King a- | bove all |
gods.

4. In His hand are the deep places | of the | earth; || the strength of
the | hills is | His | also.

5. The sea is His, and | He | made it; || and His hands | form-ed | the |
dry | land.

6. O come, let us worship | and bow | down; || let us kneel be- | fore
the | Lord, our | Maker!

7. For He | is our | God, || and we are the people of His pasture | and
the | sheep of His | hand.

Glory be to the _Fa_ther | and to the | Son || _and_ | to the | Ho-ly |
Ghost,

As it was in the beginning, is _now_, and | ev-er | shall be, || _world_
without | end! — | _A-_ — | _men_.


576

The Lord’s Prayer.

1. Our Fa_ther_ which | art in | heaven! || _Hal_lowed | be — | Thy — |
name.

2. _Thy_ | kingdom | come. || Thy will be done in _earth_ | as it | is in
| heaven.

3. Give us this _day_ our | daily | bread. || And forgive us our _debts_
as | we for- | give our | debtors.

4. And lead us _not_ | into temp- | tation, || but de- | liv-er | us from
| evil.

5. For Thine is the king_dom_ and the | power and the | glory || _for-_ |
ever. | _A-_ — | _men_.


577

The Beatitudes.

1. Bless_ed_ are the | poor in | spirit, || _for_ | theirs is the |
kingdom of | heaven.

2. Bless_ed_ are | they that | mourn, || _for_ | they — | shall be |
comforted.

3. Bless_ed_ | are the | meek, || _for_ | they shall in- | herit the |
earth.

4. Blessed are they which do hunger and _thirst_ after | right-eous- |
ness, || _for_ | they — | shall be | filled.

5. Bless_ed_ are the | mer-ci- | ful, || _for_ | they shall ob- | tain |
mercy.

6. Bless_ed_ are the | pure in | heart, || _for_ | they shall | see | God.

7. Bless_ed_ are the | peace- | makers, || for they shall be _call_ed the
| children | of | God.

8. Blessed are they which are persecut_ed_ for | righteous-ness’ | sake,
|| _for_ | theirs is the | kingdom of | heaven.

9. Blessed are ye when men shall revile _you_, and | perse-cute | you, ||
and shall say all manner of evil _against_ you | false-ly | for My | sake.

10. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is _your_ re- | ward in |
heaven; || for so persecuted _they_ the | prophets which | were be- |
fore you.

Glory be to the _Fa_ther | and to the | Son || _and_ | to the | Ho-ly |
Ghost,

As it was in the beginning, is _now_, and | ev-er | shall be, || _world_
without | end! — | _A-_ — | _men_.




DOXOLOGIES.


578

                                                                     L. M.

    Praise God, from whom all blessings flow;
    Praise Him, all creatures here below;
    Praise Him above, ye heavenly host:
    Praise Father, Son, and Holy Ghost!


579

                                                                 L. M. 6 l

    To God the Father, God the Son,
    And God the Spirit, Three in One,
    Be glory in the highest given
    By all on earth and all in heaven,
    As was through ages heretofore,
    Is now, and shall be evermore.


580

                                                                     C. M.

    To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
      The God whom we adore,
    Be glory as it was, is now,
      And shall be evermore.


581

                                                                6, 5, 6, 5

    Father, Son, and Spirit,
      Endless One in Three,
    Now, henceforth, forever,
      Glory be to Thee!


582

                                                                7, 6, 7, 6

    To Father, Son, and Spirit,
      Eternal One and Three,
    As was and is forever,
      All praise and glory be.


583

                                                      TROCHAIC, 7, 6, 7, 6

    Glory be to God Most High,
      Glory to the Savior,
    Glory to the Holy Ghost,
      Now, henceforth, forever.


584

                                                                 7, 6, 8 l

    O mighty God and holy,
      Fount of unchanging grace,
    Whose mercy ever shineth—
      The brightness of Thy face;
    To Thee all praise and glory,
      Thou God of love and might:
    The Father, Son, and Spirit—
      Thou uncreated Light!


585

                                                                        7s

    Thee, eternal God Most High,
    Thee we laud and magnify;
    Glorious o’er the heavenly host—
    Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.


586

                                                              TROCHAIC, 7s

    Holy Father, holy Son,
    Holy Spirit, Three in One!
    Glory, as of old, to Thee
    Now and evermore shall be.


587

                                                                     S. M.

    To God the Father, Son,
      And Spirit, One in Three,
    Be glory as it was, is now,
      And shall forever be.


588

                                                  6, 6, 6, 6, 8, 8 (H. M.)

    O Blessed, Holy One!
      All worship, praise, and love
    To Thee—the Father, Son,
      And Spirit—God above!
    Let earth and heaven with one accord
    Sing Thine eternal glory, Lord!


589

                                                                     S. M.

    Eternal, holy Lord!
      Thy name we glorify—
    The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost—
      Jehovah, God Most High!


590

                                                                8, 7, 8, 7

    Praise the Father, earth and heaven,
      Praise the Son, the Spirit praise,
    As it was, and is, be given
      Glory through eternal days.


591

                                                                 8, 7, 6 l

    Praise and honor to the Father,
      Praise and honor to the Son,
    Praise and honor to the Spirit,
      Ever Three and ever One,
    One in might and one in glory
      While eternal ages run.


592

                                                          8, 7, 8, 7, 4, 7

    Glory be to God the Father,
      Glory be to God the Son,
    Glory be to God the Spirit,
      Great Jehovah, Three in One:
        Glory, glory,
      While eternal ages run.


593

                                                          8, 7, 8, 7, 4, 7

    Great Jehovah, we adore Thee,
      God the Father, God the Son,
    God the Spirit, joined in glory
      On the same eternal throne;
        Endless praises
      To Jehovah, Three in One.


594

                                                          8, 7, 8, 7, 7, 7

    Glory be to God the Father,
      Glory be to God the Son,
    Glory be to God the Spirit,
      Everlasting Three in One:
    Thee let heaven and earth adore,
    Now, henceforth, and evermore.




VERSICLES FOR FESTIVAL SEASONS AND GENERAL OCCASIONS.


List I.

     1. The eyes of all wait upon Thee.
        And Thou givest them their meat in due season.

     2. The Lord is merciful and gracious. Hallelujah!
        Slow to anger and plenteous in mercy. Hallelujah!

     3. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest,
        That He would send forth laborers into His harvest.

     4. Ask, and ye shall receive,
        That your Joy may be full.

     5. O give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good. Hallelujah!
        For His mercy endureth forever. Hallelujah!

     6. It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord,
        And to sing praises unto Thy name, O Most High.

     7. Lord, Thou hast heard the desire of the humble.
        Thou wilt preserve their heart; Thou wilt cause Thine ear to hear.

     8. The Lord will give strength unto His people. Hallelujah!
        The Lord will bless His people with peace. Hallelujah!

     9. They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament.
          Hallelujah!
        And they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars forever
          and ever. Hallelujah!

    10. By Me kings reign and princes decree justice.
        By Me princes rule and nobles, even all the judges of the earth.

    11. He shall give His angels charge over thee
        To keep thee in all thy ways.

    12. The Lord God is a Sun and Shield; the Lord will give grace and
          glory. Hallelujah!
        No good thing will He withhold from them that walk uprightly.
          Hallelujah!

    13. Sanctify us through Thy truth. Hallelujah!
        Thy Word is truth. Hallelujah!

    14. Lord, teach me to do Thy will. Hallelujah!
        Let Thy good Spirit lead me in the right way. Hallelujah!

    15. Show me Thy ways, O Lord. Hallelujah!
        Teach me Thy paths. Hallelujah!

    16. Save Thy people and bless Thine inheritance;
        Feed them also and lift them up forever.

    17. Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of Thy name.
        Deliver us and purge away our sins for Thy name’s sake.

    18. I have trusted in Thy mercy.
        My heart shall rejoice in Thy salvation.

    19. Suffer the little children to come unto Me and forbid them not;
        For of such is the kingdom of heaven.

    20. Bless the Lord, O my soul; and all that is within me, bless His
          holy name. Hallelujah!
        Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all His benefits.
          Hallelujah!

    21. Call upon Me in the day of trouble.
        I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify Me.

    22. Make me to understand the way of Thy precepts.
        Strengthen Thou me according to Thy Word.


List II.


GENERAL.

    23. =_Minister_=: The Lord be with you.
        =_Congregation_=: And with thy spirit.


ADVENT.

    24. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel. Hallelujah!
        For He hath visited and redeemed His people. Hallelujah!

    25. Hosanna to the Son of David! Hallelujah!
        Hosanna in the highest! Hallelujah!

    26. Lift up your heads, O ye gates; and be ye lift up, ye everlasting
          doors! Hallelujah!
        And the King of Glory shall come in. Hallelujah!

    27. Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty, God hath shined.
          Hallelujah!
        Our God shall come. Hallelujah!

    28. Prepare ye the way of the Lord. Hallelujah!
        Make His paths straight. Hallelujah!


CHRISTMAS.

    29. Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy. Hallelujah!
        Which shall be to all people. Hallelujah!

    30. Blessed be He that cometh in the name of the Lord. Hallelujah!
        God is the Lord, which hath showed us light. Hallelujah!

    31. The Word was made flesh. Hallelujah!
        And dwelt among us. Hallelujah!

    32. Unto us a Child is born. Hallelujah!
        Unto us a Son is given. Hallelujah!

    33. Unto you is born this day a Savior. Hallelujah!
        Which is Christ the Lord. Hallelujah!


NEW YEAR.

    34. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me bless His
          holy name. Hallelujah!
        Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all His benefits.
          Hallelujah!

    35. Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace. Hallelujah!
        For mine eyes have seen Thy salvation. Hallelujah!

    36. Show me Thy ways, O Lord.
        Teach me Thy paths.

    37. Thou shalt call His name Jesus. Hallelujah.
        For He shall save His people from their sins. Hallelujah!


EPIPHANY.

    38. All they from Sheba shall come. Hallelujah!
        They shall bring gold and incense. Hallelujah!

    39. Arise, shine, for thy light is come. Hallelujah!
        And the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. Hallelujah!

    40. O praise the Lord, all ye nations. Hallelujah!
        Praise Him, all ye people. Hallelujah!

    41. There shall come a Star out of Jacob. Hallelujah!
        And a Scepter shall rise out of Israel. Hallelujah!


THE PASSION SEASON.

    42. Christ became obedient unto death;
        Even the death of the cross.

    43. God spared not His own Son;
        But delivered Him up for us all.

    44. He was wounded for our transgressions;
        He was bruised for our iniquities.

    45. Surely He hath borne our griefs
        And carried our sorrows.

    46. The chastisement of our peace was upon Him,
        And with His stripes we are healed.


HOLY THURSDAY.

    47. As often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup,
        Ye do show the Lord’s death till He come.

    48. He hath made His wonderful works to be remembered.
        The Lord is gracious and full of compassion.


EASTER.

    49. Christ was delivered for our offenses. Hallelujah!
        And was raised again for our justification. Hallelujah!

    50. Death is swallowed up in victory. Hallelujah!
        Thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory! Hallelujah!

    51. I know that my Redeemer liveth. Hallelujah!
        And that He shall stand at the latter day upon the earth.
          Hallelujah!

    52. Jesus Christ hath abolished death. Hallelujah!
        And hath brought life and immortality to light. Hallelujah!

    53. O death, where is thy sting? Hallelujah!
        O grave, where is thy victory? Hallelujah!

    54. The Lord is risen. Hallelujah!
        The Lord is risen indeed. Hallelujah!

    55. This is the day which the Lord hath made. Hallelujah!
        We will rejoice and be glad in it. Hallelujah!


ASCENSION DAY.

    56. Christ hath ascended on high. Hallelujah!
        He hath led captivity captive. Hallelujah!

    57. God is gone up with a shout. Hallelujah!
        The Lord with the sound of a trumpet. Hallelujah!


WHITSUNTIDE.

    58. Create in me a clean heart, O God.
        And renew a right spirit within me.

    59. God is the Lord which hath showed us light. Hallelujah!
        Thou art my God, and I will praise Thee. Hallelujah!

    60. The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost. Hallelujah!
        He shall teach you all things. Hallelujah!


THE FESTIVAL OF TRINITY.

    61. Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts. Hallelujah!
        The whole earth is full of His glory. Hallelujah!

    62. We praise God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Hallelujah!
        We praise Him now and evermore. Hallelujah!


ST. MICHAEL’S AND ALL ANGELS’.

    63. Bless ye the Lord, all ye His hosts. Hallelujah!
        Ye ministers of His that do His pleasure. Hallelujah!

    64. He shall give His angels charge over thee. Hallelujah!
        To keep thee in all thy ways. Hallelujah!


THE FESTIVAL OF HARVEST OR THANKSGIVING.

    65. It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord. Hallelujah!
        And to sing praises unto Thy name, O Most High. Hallelujah!

    66. O give thanks unto the Lord: for He is good. Hallelujah!
        For His mercy endureth forever. Hallelujah!

    67. Praise Him for His mighty acts. Hallelujah!
        Praise Him according to His excellent greatness. Hallelujah!

    68. The eyes of all wait upon Thee, O Lord. Hallelujah!
        And Thou givest them their meat in due season. Hallelujah!


THE FESTIVAL OF REFORMATION.

    69. Do good in Thy good pleasure unto Zion. Hallelujah!
        Build Thou the walls of Jerusalem. Hallelujah!

    70. Stand fast therefore in the liberty
        Wherewith Christ hath made you free.

    71. The Lord, our God, be with us
        As He was with our fathers.

    72. Thy Word is a lamp unto my feet. Hallelujah!
        And a light unto my path. Hallelujah!


A DAY OF HUMILIATION AND PRAYER.

    73. Enter not into judgment with Thy servant, O Lord;
        For in Thy sight shall no man living be justified.

    74. Have mercy upon me, O God, according to Thy loving-kindness.
        According unto the multitude of Thy tender mercies blot out my
          transgressions.

    75. Lord, deal not with us after our sins,
        Nor reward us according to our iniquities.

    76. We have sinned with our fathers.
        We have committed iniquity, we have done wickedly.


FAITH AND JUSTIFICATION.

    77. Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven. Hallelujah!
        Whose sin is covered. Hallelujah!

    78. O Lord, I have trusted in Thy mercy. Hallelujah!
        My ear shall rejoice in Thy salvation. Hallelujah!

    79. The Lord hath clothed me with the garments of salvation.
          Hallelujah!
        He hath covered me with the robe of righteousness. Hallelujah!

    80. The Lord is merciful and gracious. Hallelujah!
        Slow to anger and plenteous in mercy. Hallelujah!

    81. We have trusted in Thy mercy.
        Our heart shall rejoice In Thy salvation.

    82. With the heart man believeth unto righteousness.
        And with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.


SANCTIFICATION.

    83. Sanctify us, O Lord, through Thy truth.
        Thy Word is truth.

    84. Show me Thy ways, O Lord.
        Teach me Thy paths.

    85. Teach me, O Lord, to do Thy will.
        Thy good Spirit lead me into the land of uprightness.

    86. Teach me Thy way, O Lord; I will walk in Thy truth.
        Unite my heart to fear Thy name.


CHURCH AND MISSIONS.

    87. How amiable are Thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts! Hallelujah!
        My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of the Lord.
          Hallelujah!

    88. Lord, I have loved the habitation of Thy house. Hallelujah!
        And the place where Thine honor dwelleth. Hallelujah!

    89. Lord, preserve unto us Thy Word.
        Thy Word is unto us the joy and rejoicing of our hearts.

    90. Pray ye the Lord of the harvest
        That He would send forth laborers into His harvest.

    91. Save Thy people, O Lord, and bless Thine inheritance.
        Feed them also and lift them up forever.

    92. The Gentiles shall come to thy light. Hallelujah!
        And kings to the brightness of thy rising. Hallelujah!

    93. Their voice is gone out through all the earth. Hallelujah!
        And their words to the end of the world. Hallelujah!

    94. The Lord God is a Sun and Shield, the Lord will give grace and
          glory. Hallelujah!
        No good thing will He withhold from them that walk uprightly.
          Hallelujah!

    95. The Lord will give strength unto His people. Hallelujah!
        The Lord will bless His people with peace. Hallelujah!


FOR OTHER OCCASIONS.

    96. Ask, and ye shall receive,
        That your joy may be full.

    97. Be thou faithful unto death,
        And I will give thee the crown of life.

    98. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord.
        They rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.

    99. Call upon Me in the day of trouble.
        I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify Me.

    100. Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of Thy name.
         And deliver us and purge away our sins for Thy name’s sake.

    101. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord. Hallelujah!
         My soul shall be joyful in my God. Hallelujah!

    102. My soul doth magnify the Lord. Hallelujah!
         And my spirit hath rejoiced in God, my Savior. Hallelujah!

    103. Serve the Lord with gladness. Hallelujah!
         Come before His presence with singing. Hallelujah!

    104. Suffer the little children to come unto Me, and forbid them not.
         For of such is the kingdom of God.

    105. The Lord is my Shepherd. Hallelujah!
         I shall not want. Hallelujah!

    106. The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon Him. Hallelujah!
         To all that call upon Him in truth. Hallelujah!

    107. The Lord shall judge the world with righteousness. Hallelujah!
         And the people with His truth. Hallelujah!

    108. The Word of the Lord is right. Hallelujah!
         And all His works are done in truth. Hallelujah!

    109. They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament.
         And they that turn many to righteousness as the stars forever
           and ever.

    110. This is the day which the Lord hath made. Hallelujah!
         We will rejoice and be glad in it. Hallelujah!

    111. Turn Thou us, and we shall be turned.
         For Thou art the Lord, our God.

    112. We have here no continuing city.
         But we seek one to come.




Morning Prayer.


In the name of God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Amen.

I thank Thee, my heavenly Father, through Jesus Christ, Thy dear Son,
that Thou hast kept me this night from all harm and danger; and I pray
Thee that Thou wouldst keep me this day also from sin and every evil,
that all my doings and life may please Thee. For into Thy hands I commend
myself, my body and soul, and all things. Let Thy holy angel be with me
that the wicked Foe may have no power over me. Amen.

       *       *       *       *       *

O Thou crucified Lord Jesus Christ, who, as the truly patient Lamb of
God, didst suffer for me the most shameful death on the cross and with
Thy precious blood didst redeem me from all sins, from death, and from
the power of the devil: I pray Thee, give me the assurance of this
redemption through Thy Word, govern my heart with Thy Holy Spirit,
preserve me with Thy divine love, and hide me this day, both soul and
body, in Thy holy wounds. Wash me clean from all my sins, teach me to
live a life of good works, and finally lead me from this world of sorrows
to Thine eternal joy and glory, Thou most faithful Savior, Jesus Christ,
mine only Comfort, Hope, and Life. Amen.




Evening Prayer.


In the name of God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Amen.

I thank Thee, my heavenly Father, through Jesus Christ, Thy dear Son,
that Thou hast graciously kept me this day; and I pray Thee that Thou
wouldst forgive me all my sins where I have done wrong, and graciously
keep me this night. For into Thy hands I commend myself, my body and
soul, and all things. Let Thy holy angel be with me that the wicked Foe
may have no power over me. Amen.

       *       *       *       *       *

O Lord Jesus Christ, Thou patient Lamb of God, Thou holy Sacrificial
Offering for all my sins, and not for mine only, but for the sins of the
whole world: I most heartily thank Thee that Thou hast graciously kept
both my body and soul under Thy protecting care this day; and I pray Thee
that Thou wouldst graciously pardon and forgive all my sins which I have
committed this day, both through the weakness of my old evil nature and
the temptations of the Evil Spirit, all of which sorely oppress my heart
and conscience. Cover me this night with the wings of Thy grace and grant
that my body may sleep in safety while my soul watches for Thy glorious
coming to Judgment, ready to enter Thy blessed Kingdom of Glory. Grant
this, O Lord, for the sake of Thy suffering and death. Amen.




Before Meals.


The eyes of all wait upon Thee, O Lord, and Thou givest them their meat
in due season; Thou openest Thine hand and satisfiest the desire of every
living thing.

Lord God, heavenly Father, bless us and these Thy gifts which we receive
from Thy bountiful goodness; through Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen.




After Meals.


O give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good; for His mercy endureth
forever. He giveth food to all flesh: He giveth to the beast his food
and to the young ravens which cry. He delighteth not in the strength of
the horse. He taketh not pleasure in the legs of a man. The Lord taketh
pleasure in them that fear Him, in those that hope in His mercy.

We thank Thee, Lord God, heavenly Father, through Jesus Christ, our Lord,
for all Thy benefits, who livest and reignest forever and ever. Amen.




A Short Form for Holy Baptism in Cases of Necessity.


In urgent cases, in the absence of the pastor, any Christian may
administer Holy Baptism.

Take water, call the child by its name, pour or sprinkle the water on the
child, saying:—

=I baptize thee in the name of God the Father and of the Son and of the
Holy Ghost. Amen.=

If there is time, the baptism may be preceded by the following _prayer_:—

Eternal, merciful God! We pray Thee, extend Thy goodness and mercy unto
this child who now asks; open the door to it who knocks, that it may
enjoy the everlasting blessing of Thy heavenly washing and may come to
the eternal kingdom which Thou hast prepared through Christ, our Lord.
Amen.

Our Father who art in heaven. Hallowed be Thy name. Thy kingdom come.
Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily
bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass
against us. And lead us not into temptation. But deliver us from evil.
For Thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory forever and ever.
Amen.




CONTENTS.


                                         PAGE

    Morning Service, or the Communion       3
    Evening Service                        18
    Early Service, or Matins               22

                 THE HYMNS.

                                         HYMN

    Beginning of Worship                    1
    Close of Worship                        9
    Morning                                19
    Evening                                30
    Invitation                             46
    Praise                                 59
    The Redeemer                           81
    God’s Word                            110
    The Lord’s Day                        123
    Advent                                130
    Christmas                             145
    End of Year                           163
    New Year                              166
    Circumcision                          175
    Epiphany                              179
    Presentation                          185
    Passion:—
      General                             191
      Good Friday                         203
      Burial of Jesus                     215
    Easter                                218
    Ascension                             231
    Session                               237
    Intercession                          240
    Pentecost                             246
    Trinity                               261
    Festival of the Reformation           273
    St. Michael and All Angels            285
    All Saints                            288
    Harvest and Thanksgiving              291
    National                              299
    Faith and Justification               306
    Sanctification:—
      Obedience                           331
      Consecration                        345
      Giving                              357
      Trust                               363
      Warfare                             376
      Resignation                         383
    Catechism                             390
      Law                                 391
      Creed                               393
      Prayer                              395
      Baptism                             400
      Confirmation                        408
      Confession                          413
      Absolution                          424
      The Lord’s Supper                   427
      Marriage, Family, Children          442
    Church:—
      Laying of Corner-Stone              450
      Dedication of Church                454
      The Communion of Saints             460
      Glory of the Church                 464
      Missions                            470
      The Ministry                        485
    Cross and Comfort                     494
    Death and Burial                      527
    Judgment                              548
    Heaven                                556
    Chants                                568
    Doxologies                            578

                                         PAGE

    Versicles                             533
    Morning Prayer                        542
    Evening Prayer                        543
    Prayer before Meals                   544
    Prayer after Meals                    544
    Short Form for Baptism                545
    First Lines of Hymns                  548
    First Lines of Chants                 559
    First Lines of Doxologies             559
    Authors and Translators               560




INDEX OF FIRST LINES.


  Abide, O dearest Jesus, 9

  Abide with me; fast falls the eventide, 40

  Across the sky the shades of night, 164

  Again is come the new church-year, 140

  A great and mighty wonder, 149

  Ah! Lord, our God, let them not be confounded, 280

  A hymn of glory let us sing, 235

  A Lamb goes uncomplaining forth, 191

  Alas, and did my Savior bleed, 214

  Alas, my God, my sins are great, 421

  All depends on our possessing, 363

  All glory be to God on high, 261

  All hall the power of Jesus’ name, 93

  All my heart this night rejoices, 145

  All praise to Jesus’ hallowed name, 147

  All that I was, my sin, my guilt, 308

  Almighty Father, heaven and earth, 360

  Almighty God, Thy Word is cast, 13

  Almighty Lord, before Thy throne, 303

  Am I a soldier of the Cross, 378

  A mighty Fortress is our God, 273

  An awful mystery is here, 437

  And let this feeble body fail, 521

  And must this body die, 534

  And will the Judge descend, 554

  And wilt Thou pardon, Lord, 422

  Angels from the realms of glory, 187

  Approach, my soul, the mercy-seat, 399

  Arise, my soul, arise, 240

  Arise, sons of the kingdom, 142

  Arm these, Thy soldiers, mighty Lord, 410

  Asleep in Jesus, blessed sleep, 540

  A slumber I know, in Jesus’ name, 565

  As with gladness men of old, 183

  At Thy command, our dearest Lord, 440

  Awake, my heart, with gladness, 218

  Awake, my soul, and with the sun, 29

  Awake, my soul, to joyful lays, 92

  Awake, Thou Spirit, who didst fire, 481


  Baptised into Thy name most holy, 400

  Before Jehovah’s awful throne, 78

  Before Thy throne I now appear, 35

  Behold a Stranger at the door, 51

  Behold the Savior of mankind, 211

  Behold the sure Foundation-stone, 452

  Beloved, it is well, 518

  Beloved Jesus, what law hast Thou broken, 198

  Blessed are the sons of God, 315

  Blessed Jesus, at Thy word, 3

  Blessed Jesus, here we stand, 402

  Blest be the tie that binds, 462

  Blest be Thy love, dear Lord, 388

  Blest is the man, forever blest, 309

  Bow down Thine ear, 493

  Brief life is here our portion, 557

  Brightest and best of the sons of the morning, 181

  By grace I’m saved, grace free and boundless, 311


  Chief of sinners though I be, 99

  Christ, by heavenly hosts adored, 296

  Christ, everlasting Source of light, 34

  Christians, come, in sweetest measures, 121

  Christ is our Corner-stone, 453

  Christ, the Life of all the living, 196

  Christ, the Lord, is risen again, 225

  Christ, the Lord, is risen to-day, 221

  Christ, Thou art the sure Foundation, 454

  Christ, Thou the Champion of the band who own, 279

  Christ, whose glory fills the skies, 100

  Come, follow Me, the Savior spake, 334

  Come, God Creator, Holy Ghost, 249

  Come hither, ye faithful, triumphantly sing, 159

  Come, Holy Ghost, God and Lord, 257

  Come, Holy Spirit, come, 258

  Come, Holy Spirit, heavenly Dove, 255

  Come, Jesus, from the sapphire throne, 455

  Come, let us join our cheerful songs, 102

  Come, my soul, thy suit prepare, 56

  Come, O come, Thou quickening Spirit, 246

  Come, Thou Almighty King, 262

  Come, Thou precious Ransom, come, 135

  Come to Calvary’s holy mountain, 212

  Come unto Me, ye weary, 49

  Come, ye disconsolate, where’er ye languish, 512

  Come, ye thankful people, come, 295

  Come, ye weary sinners, come, 58

  Comfort, comfort ye My people, 130

  Commit whatever grieves thee, 525

  Crown Him with many crowns, 104


  Day of wrath, that day of mourning, 555

  Dear Christians, one and all rejoice, 310

  Dear Refuge of my weary soul, 502

  Deck thyself, my soul, with gladness, 432

  Delay not, delay not, O sinner, 57

  Draw nigh and take the body of your Lord, 427

  Drawn to the cross, 321

  Draw us to Thee, 234


  Enslaved by sin and bound in chains, 202

  Eternal Son of God, O Thou, 456

  Every morning mercies new, 28


  Farewell I say with gladness, 532

  Father, in whom we live, 270

  Father, let me dedicate, 166

  Father of Glory, to Thy name, 267

  Father of heaven, who hast created all, 405

  Father of heaven, whose love profound, 269

  Father of Jesus Christ, my Lord, 219

  Father of mercies, in Thy Word, 117

  Father, who the light this day, 123

  Fear not, O little flock, the Foe, 276

  Fight the good fight, 376

  For all Thy saints, O Lord, 289

  Forever with the Lord, 567

  For me to live is Jesus, 529

  For Thy mercy and Thy grace, 168

  From all that dwell below the skies, 79

  From God shall naught divide me, 509

  From Greenland’s icy mountains, 474

  From heaven above to earth I come, 150


  Gentle Shepherd, Thou hast stilled, 537

  Give to our God immortal praise, 70

  Glorious things of thee are spoken, 464

  Glory be to God the Father, 268

  Glory be to Jesus, 208

  Glory to Thee, my God, this night, 36

  Go to dark Gethsemane, 199

  God bless our native land, 305

  God, from all eternity, 343

  God is love, His mercy brightens, 510

  God liveth still, 513

  God moves in a mysterious way, 524

  God of mercy, God of grace, 71

  God of my life, Thy boundless grace, 265

  God of my life, to Thee I call, 522

  God of my life, whose gracious power, 332

  God of the prophets, bless the prophets’ sons, 486

  God the Father, be our Stay, 271

  God, who madest earth and heaven, 23

  God, who madest earth and heaven, Darkness, 44

  Grace, ’tis a charming sound, 328

  Gracious Savior, gentle Shepherd, 447

  Gracious Spirit, Dove Divine, 253

  Great God, we sing that mighty Hand, 167

  Great God, what do I see and hear, 553

  Great is the Lord, our God, 458

  Guide me, O Thou great Jehovah, 340


  Had God not come, may Israel say, 282

  Hail the day that sees Him rise, 243

  Hail, Thou once despised Jesus, 242

  Hail, Thou Source of every blessing, 182

  Hail to the Lord’s Anointed, 132

  Happy the man who feareth God, 446

  Hark, a thrilling voice is sounding, 133

  Hark, a voice divides the sky, 536

  Hark, a voice saith, all are mortal, 530

  Hark, ten thousand harps and voices, 238

  Hark, the Church proclaims her honor, 467

  Hark, the glad sound, the Savior comes, 139

  Hark! the herald-angels sing, 154

  Hark! the sound of holy voices, 290

  Hark! the voice of Jesus crying, 476

  Hark! what mean those holy voices, 160

  Hasten, O sinner, to be wise, 55

  Help, Helper, help in fear and need, 523

  Help us, O Lord, behold, we enter, 171

  Here in Thy name, eternal God, 450

  Holy Father, Thou hast taught me, 336

  Holy Ghost, with light divine, 259

  Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, 263

  Holy Spirit, hear us, 256

  How beauteous are their feet, 490

  How can I thank Thee, Lord, 344

  How firm a foundation, ye saints of the Lord, 375

  How lovely now the morning star, 24

  How precious is the Book Divine, 111

  How shall the young secure their hearts, 112

  How sweet the name of Jesus sounds, 96


  I am content! my Jesus liveth still, 226

  I am trusting Thee, Lord Jesus, 370

  I do not come because my soul, 316

  I fall asleep in Jesus’ wounds, 545

  If God Himself be for me, 526

  If God were not upon our side, 284

  If thou but suffer God to guide thee, 498

  I heard the voice of Jesus say, 46

  I know that my Redeemer lives and ever prays, 245

  I know that my Redeemer lives, what, 229

  I lay my sins on Jesus, 322

  I leave all things to God’s direction, 499

  I leave Thee not! Thou art my Jesus ever, 87

  I’ll praise my Maker whilst I’ve breath, 73

  I love Thy Zion, Lord, 468

  I’m but a stranger here, 563

  Immanuel, we sing Thy praise, 161

  In death’s strong grasp the Savior lay, 224

  In God, my faithful God, 508

  In His temple now behold Him, 186

  In loud, exalted strains, 457

  In peace and joy I now depart, 185

  In the Cross of Christ I glory, 95

  In Thee, Lord, have I put my trust, 495

  In the hour of trial, 409

  In the name which earth and heaven, 451

  In vain would boasting reason find, 122

  Invited, Lord, by boundless grace, 438

  In weariness and pain, 504

  It is not death to die, 533

  I was a wandering sheep, 105

  I will sing my Maker’s praises, 65

  I would not live alway; I ask not to stay, 535


  Jehovah, let me now adore Thee, 67

  Jerusalem, my happy home, 558

  Jerusalem, the golden, 556

  Jerusalem, thou city fair and high, 559

  Jesus, and shall it ever be, 91

  Jesus, Brightness of the Father, 287

  Jesus came, the heav’ns adoring, 131

  Jesus Christ, my sure Defense, 220

  Jesus Christ, our blessed Savior, 441

  Jesus, grant that balm and healing, 194

  Jesus, I live to Thee, 541

  Jesus, I my cross have taken, 335

  Jesus, I will ponder now, 192

  Jesus, Jesus, Jesus only, 86

  Jesus lives; no longer now, 222

  Jesus, Lover of my soul, 107

  Jesus, my great High Priest, 244

  Jesus, my Truth, my Way, 373

  Jesus, name of wondrous love, 178

  Jesus, priceless Treasure, 82

  Jesus, Refuge of the weary, 210

  Jesus, Savior, come to me, 106

  Jesus shall reign where’er the sun, 483

  Jesus, Shepherd of the sheep, 356

  Jesus sinners doth receive, 414

  Jesus, still lead on, 331

  Jesus, the very thought of Thee, 98

  Jesus, Thou art mine forever, 97

  Jesus, Thou my heart’s Delight, 89

  Jesus, Thy blood and righteousness, 326

  Jesus, Thy boundless love to me, 84

  Jesus, Thy Church with longing eyes, 144

  Joy to the world, the Lord is come, 158

  Just as I am, without one plea, 318


  Lamb of God, we fall before Thee, 81

  Lamp of our feet, whereby we trace, 119

  Let every ear attend, 53

  Let me be Thine forever, 408

  Let not such a thought e’er pain thee, 506

  Let songs of praises fill the sky, 254

  Let the earth now praise the Lord, 146

  Let thoughtless thousands choose the road, 550

  Let us all with gladsome voice, 153

  Let us ever walk with Jesus, 333

  Lift up your heads, ye mighty gates, 138

  Light of the Gentile nations, 190

  Lo, God to heaven ascendeth, 233

  Look from Thy sphere of endless day, 479

  Lord, as Thou wilt, deal Thou with me, 383

  Lord, dismiss us with Thy blessing, 17

  Lord God, we all to Thee give praise, 286

  Lord God, who art my Father dear, 517

  Lord, grant that we e’er pure retain, 390

  Lord, hear the voice of my complaint, 365

  Lord, in Thy kingdom there shall be, 461

  Lord, it belongs not to my care, 496

  Lord Jesus Christ, in Thee alone, 413

  Lord Jesus Christ, my Life, my Light, 195

  Lord Jesus Christ, strong Hero Thou, 230

  Lord Jesus Christ, to us attend, 1

  Lord Jesus Christ, true Man and God, 527

  Lord Jesus Christ, with us abide, 110

  Lord Jesus, Thou art truly good, 436

  Lord Jesus, who our souls to save, 217

  Lord, keep us in Thy Word and work, 274

  Lord, lead the way the Savior went, 359

  Lord of Glory, Thou hast bought us, 358

  Lord of my life, O may Thy praise, 27

  Lord of my life, whose tender care, 18

  Lord of the Church, we humbly pray, 485

  Lord of the harvest, hear, 491

  Lord of the worlds above, 469

  Lord, open Thou my heart to hear, 2

  Lord, pour Thy Spirit from on high, 488

  Lord, ’tis not that I did choose Thee, 69

  Lord, to Thee I make confession, 416

  Lord, we come before Thee now, 7

  Lord, we confess our numerous faults, 307

  Lord, when at Thy command, 487

  Lord, when we bend before Thy throne, 6

  Lord, while for all mankind we pray, 302

  Lord, who at Cana’s wedding-feast, 443

  Lo, upon the altar lies, 433


  May God be praised henceforth and blest forever, 431

  May God bestow on us His grace, 480

  May we Thy precepts, Lord, fulfil, 339

  My dear Jesus I’ll not leave, 88

  My faith looks up to Thee, 351

  My Father! cheering name!, 519

  My God, accept my heart this day, 412

  My God, and is Thy table spread, 429

  My God, my Father, while I stray, 386

  My hope is built on nothing less, 306

  My inmost heart now raises, 22

  My Jesus, as Thou wilt, 387

  My soul, be on thy guard, 379

  My soul, now bless thy Maker, 59

  My soul, repeat His praise, 77

  My Spirit on Thy care, 369


  Nearer, my God, to Thee, 520

  Nearer, my God, to Thee, through Word, 324

  No change of time shall ever shock, 281

  Not all the blood of beasts, 319

  Not what these hands have done, 320

  Now, Christ, the very Son of God, 403

  Now do we pray God the Holy Ghost, 260

  Now God be with us, for the night is closing, 38

  Now hush your cries and shed no tear, 539

  Now I have found the sure foundation, 312

  Now lay we calmly in the grave, 538

  Now let us come before Him, 174

  Now may He who from the dead, 15

  Now our worship sweet is o’er, 10

  Now praise we Christ, the Holy One, 148

  Now rest beneath night’s shadows, 33

  Now thank we all our God, 64

  Now the day is over, 45

  Now the shades of night are gone, 26


  O bleeding Head, and wounded, 201

  O bless the Lord, my soul, 76

  O bless, Thou heavenly Potentate, 300

  O blest the house, 445

  O Christ, our true and only Light, 475

  O darkest woe, 215

  O dearest Jesus, Thee I pray, 188

  O enter, Lord, Thy temple, 252

  O’er the distant mountains breaking, 548

  O faithful God, we worship Thee, 425

  O for a faith that will not shrink, 354

  O for a thousand tongues to sing, 108

  O Friend of souls, how blest am I, 109

  Oft in sorrow, oft in woe, 500

  O God, forsake me not, 347

  O God, from heaven look down and see, 278

  O God, my days are dark indeed, 503

  O God of Jacob, by whose hand, 364

  O God of mercy, God of might, 362

  O God, our Help in ages past, 172

  O God, Thou faithful God, 346

  O God, Thou righteous, faithful Lord, 424

  O holy, blessed Trinity, 20

  O Holy Ghost, eternal God, 251

  O Holy Spirit, enter in, 247

  O how blest are ye whose toils are ended, 547

  O how great is Thy compassion, 317

  O Jesus, bruised and wounded more, 428

  O Jesus, King most wonderful, 90

  O Jesus, King of Glory, 179

  O Jesus, Lamb of God, who art, 417

  O Lamb of God, most holy, 203

  O living Bread from heaven, 435

  O Lord, how shall I meet Thee, 136

  O Lord, I love Thee from my heart, 366

  O Lord, I sing with mouth and heart, 292

  O Lord, my best desire fulfil, 389

  O Lord, my God, I cry to Thee, 543

  O Lord of heaven and earth and sea, 357

  O Lord of hosts, whose glory fills, 450

  O Lord, our Father, thanks to Thee, 170

  O Lord, whose bounteous hand again, 291

  O Love, who formedst me to wear, 348

  O Morning Star, how fair, 103

  O mystery of Love Divine, 330

  Once He came in blessing, 143

  One sweetly solemn thought, 531

  One thing needful! then, Lord Jesus, 83

  On this day, the first of days, 126

  On what has now been sown, 11

  O Paradise, O Paradise, 561

  Open now Thy gates of beauty, 5

  O perfect Love, 444

  O rejoice, ye Christians, loudly, 152

  O sacred day, 177

  O Spirit of the living God, 473

  O that I had a thousand voices, 62

  O that the Lord would guide my ways, 342

  O Thou from whom all goodness flows, 497

  O Thou that hear’st when sinners cry, 419

  O Thou who wouldst not have, 338

  Our country’s voice is pleading, 472

  Our Father, Thou in heaven above, 396

  Our God so loved the world that He, 327

  Our heavenly Father, hear, 397

  Our Lord is risen from the dead, 232

  Out of the deep I call, 423

  Out of the depths I cry to Thee, 415

  O Word of God incarnate, 113


  Praise God the Lord, ye sons of men, 157

  Praise, O praise our God and King, 297

  Praise to God, immortal praise, 298

  Praise to the Lord, the Almighty, the King of creation, 63

  Prayer is the soul’s sincere desire, 398


  Rejoice, ye sons of men, alway, 151

  Renew me, O eternal Light, 350

  Return, O wanderer, return, 54

  Rise, crowned with light, imperial Salem, rise, 478

  Rise, my soul, to watch and pray, 381

  Rock of Ages, cleft for me, 325


  Safely through another week, 125

  Saints of God, the dawn is brightening, 470

  Salvation unto us has come, 314

  Savior, again to Thy dear name we raise, 16

  Savior, all my sins confessing, 14

  Savior, breathe an evening blessing, 37

  Savior, I follow on, 337

  Savior of the heathen, come, 141

  Savior, sprinkle many nations, 477

  Savior, Thy dying love, 353

  Savior, when in dust to Thee, 213

  Savior, who Thy flock art feeding, 449

  Seems it in my anguish lone, 516

  See, the Conqueror mounts in triumph, 231

  See, world, thy Life assailed, 205

  Send, O God, a gentle shower, 248

  Send Thou, O Lord, to every place, 484

  Seven times our blessed Savior spoke, 207

  Shepherd of tender youth, 448

  Since Christ has gone to heaven, His home, 236

  Since now the day has reached its close, 30

  Sink not yet, my soul, to slumber, 31

  Sinners, turn; why will ye die, 48

  Soldiers of Christ, arise, 380

  Soldiers of the Cross, arise, 482

  Songs of immortal praise belong, 61

  Songs of praise the angels sang, 68

  Songs of thankfulness and praise, 184

  So rest, my Rest, 216

  Soul, what return has God, thy Savior, 345

  Spirit of mercy, truth, and love, 250

  Stand, soldier of the Cross, 407

  Stand up!—stand up for Jesus!, 377

  Stars of the morning, so gloriously bright, 285

  Stricken, smitten, and afflicted, 209

  Sun of my soul, Thou Savior dear, 42

  Sweet Savior, bless us ere we go, 12

  Swell the anthem, raise the song, 299


  Take my life and let it be, 355

  Ten thousand times ten thousand, 288

  Th’ abyss of many a former sin, 420

  Thank God, my Jesus cleanseth me, 189

  That day of wrath, that dreadful day, 551

  That man a godly life might live, 391

  Th’ atoning work is done, 241

  The advent of our God, 137

  The ancient Law departs, 176

  The Bridegroom soon will call us, 134

  The Church’s one foundation, 466

  The day is past and gone, 41

  The day is surely drawing near, 552

  The death of Jesus Christ, our Lord, 434

  The Gospel shows the Father’s grace, 116

  The happy sunshine now is gone, 32

  The Head that once was crowned with thorns, 237

  The heavens declare Thy glory, Lord, 114

  The Homeland! O the Homeland, 562

  The Law of God is good and wise, 115

  The Lord hath helped me hitherto, 80

  The Lord, my God, be praised, 272

  The Lord my pasture shall prepare, 85

  The Lord my Shepherd is, 374

  The Lord’s my Shepherd, I’ll not want, 367

  The man is ever blest, 341

  The morning light is breaking, 471

  The mouth of fools doth God confess, 277

  The mystery hidden from the eyes, 264

  The new-born Child this early morn, 169

  The old year now hath passed away, 173

  The saints on earth and those above, 463

  The Savior calls, let every ear, 47

  The Savior kindly calls, 406

  The Spirit in our hearts, 52

  The Star proclaims the King is here, 180

  The voice that breathed o’er Eden, 442

  The year begins with Thee, 175

  Thee we adore, eternal Lord, 66

  Thee will I love, my Strength, my Tower, 349

  There is a fountain filled with blood, 200

  There is a land of pure delight, 560

  There is an hour of peaceful rest, 564

  There is within this heart of mine, 460

  Thine forever! God of Love, 411

  Thine honor rescue, Christ, our Lord, 275

  This child we dedicate to Thee, 404

  This day at Thy creating word, 127

  This is the day the Lord hath made, 129

  Thou art the Way, to Thee alone, 94

  Thou who art Three in unity, 266

  Thou, who roll’st the year around, 165

  Thou, who the night in prayer didst spend, 492

  Through all the changing scenes of life, 75

  Through Jesus’ bloody merit, 323

  Through the day Thy love hath spared us, 43

  Thus far the Lord has led me on, 39

  Thy life was giv’n for me, 352

  Thy presence, gracious God, afford, 4

  Thy soul, O Jesus, hallow me, 206

  Thy table I approach, 430

  Thy way, not mine, O Lord, 384

  Thy ways, O Lord, with wise design, 514

  Thy works, not mine, O Christ, 329

  To-day Thy mercy calls us, 50

  To God be glory, peace on earth, 74

  To God the Father of all love, 60

  To Jordan came our Lord, the Christ, 401

  To our Redeemer’s glorious name, 101

  To shepherds, as they watched by night, 162

  To Thee, Lord Jesus, thanks we give, 193

  To Thee, O dear, dear Savior, 371

  To Thee, O Lord, our hearts we raise, 294

  To Thee, our God, we fly, 304

  To Thy temple I repair, 8

  To us a Child of hope is born, 155

  ’Twas on that dark, that doleful night, 439


  Wake, awake, for night is flying, 549

  We all believe in one true God, Father, 393

  We all believe in one true God, Maker, 394

  We bid thee welcome in the name, 489

  We Christians may rejoice to-day, 156

  We give Thee but Thine own, 361

  We have a sure prophetic Word, 120

  We lift our hearts to Thee, 25

  We sing th’ almighty power of God, 293

  We thank Thee, Jesus, dearest Friend, 239

  Welcome, delightful morn, 124

  Welcome, Thou Victor in the strife, 228

  What a Friend we have in Jesus, 395

  Whate’er God will, let that be done, 494

  Whatever God ordains is good, 507

  What is the world to me, 385

  What our Father does is well, 301

  When all Thy mercies, O my God, 72

  When I can read my title clear, 368

  When in the hour of utmost need, 515

  When Israel through the desert passed, 118

  When I survey the wondrous cross, 204

  When my last hour is close at hand, 528

  When o’er my sins I sorrow, 197

  When Rome had shrouded earth in night, 283

  When streaming from the eastern skies, 19

  When the day of toil is done, 546

  Where’er I go, whate’er my task, 372

  Where wilt thou go, since night draws near, 227

  While with ceaseless course the sun, 163

  While yet the morn is breaking, 21

  Who is this that comes from Edom, 223

  Who knows how near my end may be, 544

  Who puts his trust, 511

  Who shall the Lord’s elect condemn, 313

  Why do we mourn departing friends, 542

  Why should sorrow ever grieve me, 501

  Wilt thou, O man, live happily, 392

  With broken heart and contrite sigh, 418

  With joy we hall the sacred day, 128


  Yea, as I live, Jehovah saith, 426

  Ye servants of the Lord, 382

  Yes, there remaineth yet a rest, 566


  Zion mourns in fear and anguish, 505

  Zion stands with hills surrounded, 465




Index of Selections for Chanting.


  Glory be to God on High. (Gloria In Excelsis.), 568

  I will Lift Up Mine Eyes. (Levavi Oculos.), 569

  Blessed be the Lord God. (Benedictus.), 570

  We Praise Thee, O God. (Te Deum Laudamus.),571

  My Soul doth Magnify the Lord. (Magnificat.),572

  The Lord Is My Shepherd. (Dominus Regit Me.),573

  Out of the Deep. (De Profundis.), 574

  O Come, Let Us Sing. (Venite, Exultemus.), 575

  Our Father, which Art in Heaven. (Lord’s Prayer.), 576

  Blessed Are the Poor. (The Beatitudes.), 577




Index of Doxologies.


  Praise God, from Whom All Blessings Flow, 578

  To God the Father, God the Son, 579

  To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, 580

  Father, Son, and Spirit, 581

  To Father, Son, and Spirit, 582

  Glory be to God Most High, 583

  O Mighty God and Holy, 584

  Thee, Eternal God Most High, 585

  Holy Father, Holy Son, 586

  To God the Father, Son, 587

  O Blessed, Holy One, 588

  Eternal, Holy Lord, 589

  Praise the Father, Earth and Heaven, 590

  Praise and Honor to the Father, 591

  Glory be to God the Father, 592

  Great Jehovah, We Adore Thee, 593

  Glory be to God the Father, 594




INDEX OF AUTHORS AND TRANSLATORS.


(The numbers after the names indicate the hymns.)

  Adam of St. Victor, 121.

  Adams, S. F., 520.

  Addison, Joseph, 72, 85.

  Albert, H., 23.

  Albinus, J. G., 530.

  Alderson, E. S., 358.

  Alexander, J. W., 87 (tr.).

  Alexander, Mrs. C. F., 428.

  Alford, H., 288, 295.

  Allen, O., 50.

  Altenburg, J. M., 276.

  Ambrosius, 34, 141.

  Anatolius, 149.

  Anderson, Maria F., 472.

  Anna, Countess of Stolberg, 529.

  Anonymous, 18, 74, 215 (1), 220, 250, 291, 300, 363, 408 (2, 3), 424,
        453, 456, 494, 499, 529, 539, 553, 558.

  Anselm of Canterbury, 198.

  Anstice, J., 461.

  Aquinas, Thomas, 433.

  Auber, H., 128.

  Austin, John, 388.


  Bacon, L. W., 185 (tr.), 249 (tr.).

  Baker, H. W., 126 (tr.), 297, 301 (tr.), 423.

  Bakewell, John, 242.

  Barbauld, Mrs. A. L., 298.

  Baring-Gould, Sabine, 45.

  Barton, B., 119.

  Bathhurst, Wm. Hiley, 144, 354.

  Baxter, Richard, 496.

  Beddome, B., 118.

  Behm, Martin, 20, 179, 195.

  Bernard of Clairvaux, 90, 98, 201.

  Bernard of Cluny, 556, 557.

  Besnault, Abbé, 176, 177.

  Bethune, G. W., 533 (tr.).

  Bickersteth, E. H., 407.

  Birken, Sigmund von (Betullus), 192, 333.

  Bloomfield, Dorothy F., 444.

  Bodo von Hodenberg, 35.

  Boeschenstein. J., 207.

  Bogatzky, C. H., 481.

  Bohemian Brethren, 38, 225 (M. Weiss).

  Bonar, Horatius, 46, 105, 268, 308, 320, 322, 329, 384.

  Borthwick, Jane, 331 (tr.), 387 (tr.).

  Bowring, Sir John, 95, 510.

  Brady, Nicholas (cf. Nahum Tate), 75, 281.

  Bridges, Matthew, 104, 412.

  Brooks, C. T., 305.

  Bryant, W. C., 479.


  Campbell, R., 121 (tr.).

  Carlyle, J. D., 6.

  Cary, Phoebe, 531.

  Caswall, Edw., 90, 98, 133, 159, 208, 287, 433 (all translations).

  Cawood, J., 13, 160.

  Celano, Thomas de, 551, 555.

  Chandler, J., 137, 177 (tr.), 453 (tr.).

  Charles, E. R., 235.

  Clausnitzer, Tobias, 3, 393.

  Clement of Alexandria, 448.

  Collyer, Wm. B., 54, 553 (2, 3).

  Condor, Josiah, 69.

  Cook, Henry, 356.

  Cooper, E., 269.

  Cotterill, Thomas, 66 (additional stanzas), 254, 497 (with T. Haweis).

  Cowper, Wm., 200, 389, 522, 524.

  Cox, Francis Elizabeth, 24, 83, 222, 233, 513 (all translations).

  Coxe, A. C., 477, 1.

  Crasselius, B., 67.

  Cronenwett, E., 120, 169 (tr.), 436 (tr.), 438, 520 (tr.).

  Crosswell, W., 359.

  Crull, A., 9, 80, 86, 135, 151, 157, 170, 188, 189, 192, 193, 226,
        227, 230, 234, 248, 251, 272, 317, 323, 327, 343, 344, 347,
        350, 385, 417, 424, 460, 499, 517 (all translations).


  Dach, S., 323, 547.

  Dayman, E. A., 360.

  Decius, N., 203, 261.

  Derschau, B., 460.

  Dessler, W. C., 87, 109.

  Dexter, H. M., 448 (tr.).

  Dix, W. C., 49, 183, 294.

  Doane, Geo. W., 94, 518.

  Doddridge, Philip, 139, 167, 328, 364, 382, 429, 554.

  Downton, H., 168.

  Duffield, G., 377.

  Dwight, J., 468.

  Dwight, J. S., 305.


  Eber, Paul, 286 (tr.), 515, 527, 545.

  Edmeston, J., 37.

  Ellerton, J., 16, 451, 546.

  Elliott, Charlotte, 265, 318, 386.

  Elliott, Julia, A., 123.

  Elven, C., 418.

  Emilie Juliane, Countess, 80, 544.


  Faber, F. W., 12, 561.

  Fawcett, John, 4, 17, 111, 462.

  Fischer, Chr., 193.

  Fleming, Paul, 372.

  Flittner, J., 89.

  Francis, B., 91, 457.

  Franck, J., 82, 190, 416, 432.

  Franck, Sal., 216, 347.

  Freund, Cornelius, 151.

  Freystein, J. B., 381.

  Frothingham, N. L., 494.

  Fueger, C., 156.

  Funcke, F., 234.


  Ganse, H. D., 520.

  Gates, Mrs. M. E., 484.

  Gellert, Christian, 222.

  Gerhardt, Paul, 33, 65, 84, 136, 145, 161, 174, 191, 201, 205, 218,
        252, 264, 292, 501, 506, 525, 526.

  Gesenius, J., 35, 197, 344.

  Gill, Thomas H., 330.

  Gilman, S., 404 (tr.).

  Grant, R., 213.

  Graumann, J., 59.

  Grigg, J., 51, 91.


  Hamilton, James, 164.

  Hammond, W., 7.

  Harbaugh, H., 296, 541.

  Hart, J., 81, 258.

  Haskins, J., 550.

  Hastings, T., 3, 57, 512.

  Havergal, F. R., 352, 355, 370.

  Haweis, H. R., 562.

  Haweis, T., 14, 497 (with T. Cotterill).

  Hayward, 124.

  Heath, George, 379.

  Heber, R., 44, 181, 263, 474.

  Heermann, Johann, 194, 198, 275, 280, 346, 475, 505.

  Held, H., 146, 246.

  Helder, B., 188, 230, 251, 417.

  Helmbold, L., 390, 509.

  Herberger, V., 532.

  Herman, N., 32, 157, 426, 528, 539.

  Hernamann, Claudia F., 266 (tr.).

  Herzog, J. F., 30.

  Hojer, Conrad, 503.

  Homburg, E. C., 195, 227.

  Horn, J., 143.

  How, W. W., 113, 127, 178, 304, 361, 482.

  Humphreys, J., 315.

  Huss, John, 441.


  Irons, G. M., 321.

  Irons, W. J., 555 (tr.).


  Jacobi, J. C., 23 (tr.).

  Jacobs, H. E., 324.

  Jonas, Justus, 274 (4, 5), 284.

  Joseph of the Studium, 285, 420, 422.


  Keble, J., 42, 175, 442.

  Keen, 375.

  Kelly, J., 174, 205, 218, 501, 506, 525 (all translations).

  Kelly, T., 43, 209, 223, 237, 238, 241, 465.

  Ken, Thomas, 29, 36, 578.

  Keymann, C., 88, 152.

  Kinner, S., 436.

  Knapp, A., 405.

  Kraemer, M., 248.

  Kunth, J. S., 566.


  Landstad, M. B., 565.

  Langhanns, Urban, 153.

  Leeson, J. E., 447.

  Leland, John, 41.

  Lochner, K. F., 345.

  Loewenstern, M. A. von, 279.

  Longfellow, H. W., 547 (tr.).

  Loy, M., 10 (tr.), 97, 115, 116, 206 (tr.), 275 (tr.), 283, 311
        (tr.), 390 (tr.), 426 (tr.), 430 (tr.), 437.

  Ludaemilia Elizabeth, Countess of Schwarzburg, 86.

  Luther, Martin, 141, 147, 148, 150, 162, 185, 224, 249, 257, 260,
        266, 271, 273, 274, 277, 278, 282, 310, 391, 392, 394, 396,
        401, 415, 431, 441, 446, 480, 538.

  Lyte, H. F., 40, 71, 335, 369.


  Mackay, Mrs. M., 540.

  Magdeburg, J., 511.

  Malan, M. A. C., 533.

  Mant, R., 289.

  March, D., 476.

  Massie, R., 147, 148, 162, 266, 277, 282, 391, 392, 401, 431, 446,
        526 (all translations).

  Mathesius, J., 22, 517.

  Maude, M. F., 411.

  Maurus, Rhabanus, 287.

  Maxwell, M., 470.

  McComb, Wm., 99.

  Medley, Samuel, 92, 229.

  Meinhold, J. W., 537.

  Melissander, Caspar, 388.

  Mentzer, J., 62.

  Meusslin, W., 34.

  Meyfart, J. M., 559.

  Moeller, J. J., 226.

  Mohr, J., 256.

  Molanus, G. W., 430.

  Moller, M., 523.

  Monsell, J. S. B., 371, 376, 548.

  Montgomery, James, 8, 68, 132, 187, 199, 212, 397, 398, 409, 459,
        473, 488, 489, 567.

  Moore, T., 512.

  Morison, J., 155.

  Mote, E., 306.

  Muehlenberg, W. A., 449, 535.

  Muehlmann, J., 21, 511.

  Mylius, J., 188.


  Neale, J. M., 149, 180, 285, 336, 420, 422, 427, 450, 454, 556, 557.

  Neander, J., 63.

  Neumann, C., 343.

  Neumark, G., 498.

  Neumeister, Erdmann, 414.

  Newton, J., 11, 15, 56, 96, 125, 163, 399, 464.

  Nicolai, P., 103, 549.


  Occom, Samson, 26.

  Olearius, J., 2, 130, 140, 189, 272, 317, 327.

  Olearius, J. G., 135.

  Onderdonk, H. U., 52, 406.

  Osler, E., 339, 485.


  Palmer, Ray, 165, 351, 455.

  Perronet, E., 93.

  Peter, P. A., 552 (tr.).

  Pfefferkorn, G. M., 385.

  Pfeil, C. H. von, 445.

  Phelps, S. D., 353.

  Phillimore, G., 28.

  Polack, W. G., 477 (2, 3).

  Pope, Alexander, 478.

  Powell, T. E., 493.

  Praetorius’s _Musae Sioniae_, 239.

  Preiswerk, S., 467.

  Pye, H. J., 186.


  Rambach, J. J., 400.

  Reed, A., 259.

  Reusner, A., 495.

  Rimbach, J. A., 89 (tr.), 333 (tr.).

  Rinckart, M., 64.

  Ringwaldt, B., 552.

  Rist, J., 31, 142, 171, 215, 435.

  Robinson, C. S., 337.

  Rodigast, S., 507.

  Rothe, J. A., 312.

  Rous, F., 367.

  Ruopp, J. F., 350.

  Russell, A. T., 23 (tr.).

  Rutilius, M., 421.


  Sacer, G. W., 233.

  St. John, F. B., 316.

  Savonarola, Jerome, 210.

  Schaeffer, C. W., 334 (tr.).

  Schalling, M., 366.

  Scheffler, J. (Angelus), 106, 206, 334, 348, 349.

  Scheidt, C. L., 311.

  Schenck, M. H., 10.

  Schirmer, M., 247.

  Schmolck, B., 5, 228, 301, 387, 402.

  Schneegass, C., 169, 170.

  Schneesing, John, 413.

  Schroeder, J. H., 83.

  Schuette, C. H. L., 20 (tr.), 403 (tr.).

  Schuetz, J. J., 60.

  Scott, Thomas, 55.

  Scott, Sir Walter, 551.

  Scriven, J., 395.

  Sedulius, 148, 180.

  Selnecker, N., 110, 403, 408, 425, 543.

  Serle, Ambrose, 514.

  Shrubsole, Wm., 19.

  Smith, S. F., 471.

  Spegel, H., 434.

  Speratus, Paul, 314, 365.

  Steele, Anne, 27, 47, 101, 117, 122, 202, 303, 502, 519.

  Stegmann, J., 9.

  Steuerlein, J., 173.

  Stocker, J., 253.

  Stone, S. J., 466.

  Strong, Nathan, 299.


  Tappan, W. B., 564.

  Tate, Nahum (cf. Nicholas Brady), 75, 281.

  Taylor, T. R., 563.

  Thring, G., 131, 362.

  Thrupp, A., 443.

  Titius, C., 516.

  Toplady, A. M., 242, 325.

  Tuttiett, L., 166.


  Wallin, J. O., 434.

  Walther, B., 460.

  Walther, J., 134.

  Watts, Isaac, 39, 53, 61, 70, 73, 76, 77, 78, 79, 102, 112, 114, 129,
        158, 172, 204, 214, 244, 255, 267, 293, 309, 313, 319, 341,
        342, 368, 374, 378, 419, 439, 440, 452, 458, 469, 483, 490,
        534, 542, 560.

  Wegelin, J., 236.

  Weingaertner, S., 508.

  Weiss, M., 538.

  Weissel, G., 138.

  Werner, G., 217.

  Wesley, Charles, 25, 48, 58, 100, 107, 108, 154, 219, 221, 232, 240,
        243, 245, 262, 270, 332, 338, 373, 380, 463, 487, 491, 504,
        521, 531.

  Wesley, John, 84 (tr.), 326 (tr.).

  Wesley, Samuel, Sr., 211.

  Whately, Richard, 44.

  White, H. K., 500.

  Wiesenmeyer, B., 24.

  William, Duke of Saxe-Weimar, 1.

  Williams, Peter, 340 (tr.).

  Williams, Wm., 340.

  Winkworth, Catherine, 3, 5, 38, 59, 64, 67, 82, 103, 109, 130, 138,
        143, 146, 152, 153, 156, 161, 171, 173, 190, 197, 198, 203,
        217, 220, 225, 228, 236, 261, 276, 279, 280, 284, 348, 349,
        363, 365, 372, 400, 402, 405, 413, 416, 421, 432, 435, 445,
        467, 475, 481, 495, 498, 505, 507, 508, 511, 515, 516, 527,
        528, 530, 532, 537, 538, 539, 543, 544, 545, 559, 566 (all
        translations).

  Wood, Basil, 182.

  Wordsworth, C., 184, 231, 290, 357, 410, 492.

  Wortman, D., 486.

  Wreford, J. R., 302.


  Zihn, J. F., 513.

  Zinzendorf, Count Ludwig von, 326, 331.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN HYMN-BOOK ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


