The Project Gutenberg eBook of Horton Genealogy
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Horton Genealogy

Author: Geo. F. Horton

Release date: October 11, 2016 [eBook #53259]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Cindy Horton, John Campbell and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HORTON GENEALOGY ***

  TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  A superscript is denoted by ^x or ^{xx}.

  All changes noted in the ERRATA (at the front of the book) have been
  applied to the etext.

  As the ERRATA states: "Errors in spelling, and occasionally
  discrepancies in dates may be found, but their correction will
  readily suggest itself to the reader." Errors in dates, even
  seemingly obvious ones, have not been corrected.

  The lists of children in the book are predominantly given in a
  compact run-on format, probably to save printing space. All lists
  have been unwrapped, indented and presented on separate lines in
  this etext.

  The two Indexes are incomplete and contain many errors. With a few
  exceptions these errors have not been adjusted; one valid page
  number has been added to an entry when none was present in the
  original Index.

  Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been
  corrected after careful comparison with other occurrences within
  the text and consultation of external sources.

  More detail of changes made can be found at the end of the book.




  "GATHER THE CHILDREN."

  HORTON GENEALOGY;

  OR

  CHRONICLES

  OF THE

  DESCENDANTS OF BARNABAS HORTON,

  OF SOUTHOLD, L. I., 1640.


  COMPILED BY GEO. F. HORTON, M.D.


  PHILADELPHIA:
  PUBLISHED BY THE HOME CIRCLE PUBLISHING CO.
  1876.




_ERRATA._


    Page 11, line 25, for _Zenia_ read _Zeruiah_, and in the same
    line read _case_ instead of _cose_.

    Page 18, line 13, for _Elizabeth_ read _Elijah_, and in the
    same line read _Pamela_ instead of _Jarnella_.

    Page 26, line 6, for _Elizabeth_ read _Jemima_.

    Page 68, line 4, for _1698_ read _1689_, and in the 9th line
    instead of _1776_ read _1767_.

    Page 100, line 32, read _Rowena Nancy M., Capt. Familton, Harry
    M., unmarried_.

Errors in spelling, and occasionally discrepancies in dates may
be found, but their correction will readily suggest itself to the
reader.


[Illustration: Horton.]

_HORTON ARMS. DERBYSHIRE._


    A stag's head cabossed, _silver_; attired, _gold_; and, for
    distinction, a canton ermine.

    Crest, out of the waves of the sea _proper_, a tilting spear
    erect, _gold_; enfiled with a dolphin, _silver_, finned,
    _gold_, and charged with a shell.

[_Cabossed_ means cut off short so as not to show the neck; _attired_
denotes the horns; _canton ermine_, means the black spots upon the
white field in the left-hand corner. In the picture the artist has
not given the shell upon the dolphin.]

Motto.--"QUOD VULT, VALDE VULT,"--_What he wills, he wills cordially
and without stint._

Arms are hereditary, but the mottoes are not, and may be changed to
suit the taste or fancy of any family. There are other Arms of the
Horton family, varying somewhat from the above. The date of the grant
of the arms I have not found--probably many centuries ago.




PREFACE--INTRODUCTION.


We give BARNABAS HORTON as the _Preface_ and Introduction to this
little volume of Chronicles. He was probably the son of Joseph
Horton, of Leicestershire, England, and born in the little hamlet of
Mousely of that shire. Of his history before he came to America very
little is known. He came over in the ship "_Swallow_" in 1633-38.
He landed at Hampton, Mass. How long he remained at Hampton is not
known. But in 1640 we find him with his wife and two children in New
Haven, Conn., in company with the Rev. John Youngs, William Welles,
Esq., Peter Hallock, John Tuthill, Richard Terry, Thomas Mapes,
Matthias Corwin, Robert Ackerly, Jacob Corey, John Conklin, Isaac
Arnold, and John Budd, and on the 21st day of Oct., 1640, assisted
by the venerable Rev. John Davenport and Gov. Eaton, they organized
themselves into a Congregational Church, and sailed to the east end
of Long Island, now Southold. They had all been members of Puritan
churches in England, and all had families with them except Peter
Hallock. They doubtless had been on the island previous to this time
and looked out their homes. On nearing the shore they cast lots to
decide who should first set foot on the land. The lot fell on Peter
Hallock, and the place where he stepped upon the land has ever since
been known as Hallock's Landing.

On coming ashore, they all knelt down and engaged in prayer, Peter
Hallock leading, as had been determined by the lot. These were the
first persons of any civilized nation that had ever attempted to
settle on the east end of Long Island. _See Griffin's Journal._

Barnabas Horton was a man of deep-toned piety, and a warm advocate
of civil and religious freedom. He was one of the most prominent and
influential men of Southold. He was for many years a magistrate, and
several times a member of the General Court at New Haven and Harford.
He built the first framed dwelling-house ever erected on the east of
Long Island, and that house is still (1875) standing and occupied. It
is a shingle-house, that is, shingles are used for weather-boards,
and the sides have never been reshingled, and the roof but once,
according to the statement of Jonathan Goldsmith Horton, the last
Horton occupant of the old house.

It is said that Barnabas Horton I. was large in stature, and of a
ruddy complexion, and of fine social qualities.

His tombstone is of English blue marble, five feet long and about
three feet wide. It is placed horizontally over the grave. The stone
was re-lettered about fifty or sixty years ago by Jonathan G. Horton.
It is elevated about eighteen inches from the ground, on a good stone
base. The original base was of brick, but it had all crumbled down
many years ago. The present base was put under the stone at the time
it was re-lettered by Jonathan G. Horton.

The inscription surrounds the border of the stone, and reads as
follows:

    "Here lieth buried the body of MR. BARNABAS HORTON, who was
    born at Mousely, Leicestershire, Old England, and died at
    Southold, on the 13th day of July, 1680, aged 80 years."

In the centre of the stone we find the Epitaph, as follows:

      "Here lies my body tombed in dust
      'Till Christ shall come to raise it with the just;
      My soul ascended to the throne of God,
      Where with sweet Jesus now I make abode:
      Then hasten after me, my dearest wife,
      To be partaker of this blessed life;
      And you, dear children, all follow the Lord,
      Hear and obey His public sacred word;
      And in your houses call upon His name,
      For oft I have advised you to the same:
      Then God will bless you with your children all,
      And to this blessed place He will you call."

    Heb. xi: 4.--"He being dead, yet speaketh."

It is said that this epitaph was written by himself, and that it,
together with the inscription, date of his death excepted, was
all put upon the stone before he died. He was the only one of the
original thirteen who brought his tombstone with him, and this fact
seems to indicate a commendable desire to see that his name and
memory should not perish from the earth.


    NOTE.--We have followed _Griffin's Journal_ in relation to the
    thirteen old Puritans who first settled in Southold. But C.
    B. Moore, Esq., of New York City, who has been more thorough
    and faithful than any other person, in studying the history
    and genealogy of the early settlers of Southold--examining all
    the _deeds_ and _wills_, and other authentic documents to be
    found, and also copying the inscriptions from every headstone,
    not only in Southold, but over nearly the whole Island--makes
    it very evident that some of those named were not there at so
    early a date, and he also says that _Peter_ Hallock, who is
    named as one of the thirteen, was the grandson of the Puritan
    Hallock who settled at Southold, and whose Christian name
    was William. Mr. Moore is one of the best genealogists of
    the country, and in relation to Long Island, he is the best
    authority extant.


MORE ABOUT THE OLD HOUSE.

It will be seen by the engraving that the old house is double. The
western part is that which was built by Barnabas in 1659-60. The east
or two-story part was built by Jonathan I., about 1682. The upper
room of this part was used for a court-house for nearly twenty years,
as we learn from Thompson's History of Long Island, and some of the
old benches used when it was a court-house are still preserved. The
old "castle," as Jonathan G. Horton, its last Horton occupant, used
to call it, is in all probability the oldest wood house in America. I
know of no dwelling-house of any kind, stone or brick, now standing,
that can date back as far as this venerable old mansion. There were
a few huts on the east of Long Island previous to 1640--two or three
it is said on Shelter Island. But these, as well as those built by
the Puritans, immediately on their settlement in Southold, soon all
passed away. Not a vestige of any of the first generation buildings
can be found except this one. It remained for the house that Barnabas
built to survive the wreck of ages, and to stand to-day as a noble
representative of the dwellings of two hundred and fifteen years ago.
But the old house stands to-day not only as peering above all others
by its age, but also by its occupancy. It is not very often that
we find two generations of the same name, living and dying in the
same house--rarely find three. But here we have six generations in
succession, all bearing the Horton name, living and dying in the same
house, and all born in it except Barnabas I., and his son Jonathan.
We may go to the castles and palaces of the old world, and search
long and diligently, and fail to find a parallel case.

With a few repairs, the old castle may yet stand for generations far
in the future.

It requires some thought and reflection to realize the lapse of time
since the old house was built. See the old Puritan himself there
twenty years; then his son Jonathan, twenty-eight years; and then
Jonathan, Jr., about sixty years; and next Lawrence and _his_ son
Jonathan over a half a century; and lastly Jonathan G. Horton, about
a half a century; making in all two hundred and thirteen years at the
death of Jonathan G. Horton, 3 July, 1873. These six generations all
living and dying in the old mansion! Could those old walls re-echo
all the words ever spoken there, and exhibit anew all the scenes
ever witnessed there--the book containing such a record would vastly
exceed in volume the size of the old castle. It would bring to light
much that is now in darkness, and must forever remain hidden from the
generations of the living.

At the death of Jonathan G. Horton, the old homestead became, by
will, the property of the Rev. Mrs. Williams, of Brooklyn, N. Y., who
was the adopted daughter of Jonathan G. Horton, he never having had
issue, so that on the 3d of July, 1873, the old homestead went out of
the Horton name.

Mrs. Williams proposes to sell it, and if some of the Hortons do
not buy it, it will indicate a lack of decent respect for the old
castle, if not for the Horton name. It should be bought back into
the Horton name, suitably repaired and preserved for the wonder and
admiration of generations of Hortons yet unborn. Jonathan G. Horton,
the short, thick man, and Stuart T. Terry, are the two men seen in
the engraving, in front of the old house.

Mr. Stuart T. Terry, of Southold, L. I., has kindly copied and
forwarded to me, many interesting facts from the New Haven Colonial
Records, some of which are here inserted:

    "Concerning some farmers neere Southold, at a place called
    Hashamamock, aboute whom BARNABAS HORTON, one of ye Constables
    last yeare, which was 1656, also, Constable in 1659. 29
    May, 1661, Barnabas Horton was a Deputy to the New Haven
    Court--also, 31 May, 1654, the Deputies from Southold,
    presented to ye court a wrighting from their towne, wherein
    it is desired that BARNABAS HORTON and JOHN PEAKEN, the two
    present Deputies of Southold, may be chosen Constables for
    that plantation; which was done. Barnabas Horton was a Deputy
    to the Court in New Haven, in 1654-'56-'58-'59 and 1661. In
    1655 there was no election, but he wrote a letter to the
    Court on public affairs. In 1662 he was admitted a Freeman of
    Connecticut Colony, at Harford, and in 1663 and 1664 he was a
    Deputy to the General Court, at Harford. He was a Magistrate in
    1664, and until his death. He is one of the Patentees of the
    Town of Southold in 1676." Made his will May 10, 1680. Died 13
    July, 1680. Will proved. Lib. 2, N. Y., p. 54.--_Vide "Moore's
    Indexes of Southold."_


THE OLD BIBLE.

Perhaps the most interesting relic left by our good old ancestor,
Barnabas, is the OLD BIBLE, which he brought with him from England.
It is now in the possession of the Hon. Silas Horton, of Southold. It
was taken to the Bible House, New York, some years ago, and carefully
repaired, and every torn leaf mended, so that it is now entire, and
in a good condition.

We find in it the following record:

  "Imprinted at London, by the Deputies of Christian Barker."

  _Printer to the Queen's Most Excellent Majestie, 1597._

  CUM PRIVILEGIO.

Then follows in manuscript:

    "Barnabas Horton, to his son Jonathan Horton, this BIBLE he did
    bequeath, in the year of our Lord, 1680."

Then follows:

    "Capt. Jonathan Horton, his _Book_. _God give him grace._
    Jonathan Horton, 1683."

In another place, and probably in the handwriting of Jonathan Horton,
Jr., we find:

    "_The Word of the Lord God of Jonathan Horton, 1748-'49._"

Again we find:

    "Lydia Tuthill, her _Book_, given her by her mother, as it is
    said."

And then follows:

    "Feb. 8, in the year 1742, then Jonathan Tuthill departed this
    life--the son of Henry Tuthill and Bethia (Horton) Tuthill.
    Susanna Tuthill, wife of Jonathan Tuthill, departed this life
    May 16, in the year 1743, in the 50th year of her age. Henry
    Tuthill, departed this life the 4th day of January, in the year
    1750, aged 84. Bethia Tuthill, wife of Henry Tuthill, departed
    this life March 16th, 1744, in the 73d year of her age."


OLD MUSKET, CASK, AND WALKING STAFF.

_The old wood hooks_ are still attached to the big beam of the old
house, upon which Barnabas used to hang his OLD MUSKET, which was
called "uncle Barney's _quart pot_." He brought it with him from
England. It is now in the possession of Barnabas B. Horton, of
Southold. It is still a long old gun, though not as long as it was
once, as it was bursted by overloading on one Thanksgiving Day, and
about eight or ten inches of the muzzle cut off.

The CASK, in which he packed a portion of his household goods, and
brought over with him, is still in existence, and is owned by Gilbert
W. Horton, of Bay View, Southold. It is doubly historic from the fact
that when the British invaded Long Island it was filled with wheat
and buried, thus securing the wheat from the foraging parties of the
British army. It is made of solid oak--hoops and all--the hoops are
square and about an inch and a quarter thick--only one hoop missing.
It is used for a grain cask, and will hold about fifteen bushels. It
was formerly called "uncle Barney's money barrel," as romance had it,
that he brought it over full of gold and silver.

His WALKING STAFF is still preserved. It is made of the Yew tree
wood, has a fine ivory head with the letters "J. H." and the figures
"1617" in apparently golden specks indented into it, from which
it would seem that it once belonged to his father, and that J. H.
(Joseph Horton) were his initials. It is now owned by Silas R.
Horton, of Goshen, N. Y.

Many other mementos of the old Puritan are in existence, some of them
in the Long Island Historical Rooms, Brooklyn, N. Y.


THE HORTON NAME--FIRST SETTLERS IN THIS COUNTRY.

The word Horton in the Anglo-Saxon language means an enclosure, or
garden of vegetables. It is said to be derived from _ort_ and _tun_,
_ort_, meaning plant, and _tun_, enclosed. The name is evidently of
Latin origin, and has been known in England ever since the conquest
of Cæsar.

The Hortons in England, and their descendants in America, have
generally been cultivators of the soil. They have been found almost
universally in the middle class of society, and it is not known that
any royal blood has ever coursed in their veins. They are, and always
have been, _producers_ rather than _consumers_, and for industry,
integrity, and piety, they will lose nothing in a comparison with the
renowned families of either the new or the old world.

The first of the family who emigrated to this country, of whom we
have any authentic record, came over from England 1633 to 1638.
Thomas, Jeremiah, and Barnabas, were among the early emigrants, and
old tradition says they were brothers. Thomas came over in the "_Mary
and John_," in 1633, settled permanently in Springfield, Mass.
Jeremiah also settled in Massachusetts. There was a John Horton in
New York, in 1645, but no one has been found claiming descent from
him. He probably returned to England.

It is not known from what place in England either Thomas or Jeremiah
came, nor is there any certain evidence that they were brothers of
Barnabas, but the three coming over about the same time would favor
the tradition that they were brothers.

The Head Quarters of Cæsar's army was near the present _Leicester_,
the principal town of that county, and the Horton name has been
known there to the remotest period of any authentic records. This
fact, together with the name itself, favors the idea that the family
was of Roman origin. The name in olden time was frequently written
Orton, and it is highly probable, that the Ortons and Hortons were
originally from the same family, and perhaps also the Nortons.


ANTIQUITY OF THE HORTON FAMILY.

The antiquity of the Horton Family is established by the fact, that
one Robert De Horton, manumitted a bondman to his manor of Horton,
long before the time of Henry Larey, Earl of Lincoln, who died in
1310. It is also ascertained that the Hortons had a manor-house
in Great Horton, with a mill and certain demesne lands therewith
belonging, at a very remote period.

William Horton, Esq., of Frith House, in Barksland, Halifax,
descended from the above-mentioned Robert, married Elizabeth,
daughter of Thomas Hanson, Esq., of Toothill, had issue and died
about 1640, viz.:

    1. William, of Barkisland, or Bark Island Hall, who purchased
    in the 15th of Charles I., the estate of Howroyde, was born
    about 1576.

    2. Joseph, born about 1578.--_Burke's Landed Gentry, vol. 1, p.
    345._

It is held that this Joseph settled in Mousely, Leicester Co.,
and was the father of Barnabas Horton. It is highly probable that
Barnabas was not the oldest son, and not inheriting real estate, may
have been one reason for his emigrating to America.

It is known that Capt. Jeremy Horton, 18 Aug., 1626, was the master
and owner of the ship "_Swallow_," of Barnstable, and that he made
voyages to New England, in 1633 and 1638, and in a subsequent voyage
he was shipwrecked and several lives lost--the crew and master came
to Boston, but the vessel was lost.

Capt. Roger Horton, about this time, had a prisoner delivered to
him, from the White Line Prison, to be transported into parts beyond
the seas, to serve in the wars of his majesty's plantations.

Tradition says that Barnabas Horton and family came over in the
"_Swallow_," in 1638, or perhaps earlier, but I have not found his
name on any of the lists of emigrants.


ORIGINAL NAME OF SOUTHOLD.

"The Indians called Southold,[1] 'Yennycock.' Mr. John Youngs,
who had been a minister at Hingham, England, came over with a
considerable part of his church, and here fixed his residence. He
gathered his church anew on the 21 Oct., 1640, and the planters
united themselves with New Haven. However, they soon departed from
the rule of appointing none to office, or of admitting none to be
freemen, but members of the church. New Haven insisted on this as a
fundamental article of the constitution. They were, therefore, for
a number of years, obliged to conform to the law of jurisdiction.
Some of the principal men were: Rev. Mr. Youngs, Mr. William Wells,
Mr. Barnabas Horton, Thomas Mapes, John Tuthill, and Matthias
Corwin."--_Trumbull's History of Connecticut._


CHAPTER VII.

Documentary History of New York, vol. ii., p. 439. "Rate-Lists of
Long Island, 1675, 1676, and 1683," page 447, Southold's Estimate, 16
Sept., 1675, p. 451:

    _Barnabas Horton_, 2 heads (men? voters?), rated at £18 each;
    37 acors land £37; 9 oxen, £54; 8 cows, at £40; 4 three
    year-olds, £16; 4 two year-olds, £10; 4 yerlings, £6; 69 shepe,
    £23; 6 horses, £72; 1 yerling (colt), £3; 8 swine, £8. Total,
    £305.

    _Jonathan Horton_, 1 heade, 36 acors land, 2 oxen, 6 cows,
    3 three-year olds, 5 two-year olds, 2 yerlings, 3 horses, 1
    yerling, 9 shepe, 6 swine. Total, £171, 10s.

    Page 452. _Joshua Horton_, 1 heade, 20 acors land, 8 oxen, 4
    cows, 7 three-year olds, 3 yerlings, 3 horses, 1 two-year old,
    10 swine. Total, £197.

    Page 454. _Caleb Horton_, 1 heade, 80 acors of land, 6 oxen, 12
    cows, 5 three-year olds, 7 two-year olds, 7 yerlings, 2 horses,
    1 three-year old horse, 1 two-year old, 1 yerling horse, 2
    swine. Total, £282.

    Page 456. _Benjamin Horton_, 1 heade, 70 acors land, 4 oxen, 8
    cows, 4 three-year olds, 5 two-year olds, 4 horses, 4 swine.
    Total, £232.

    Page 535. Southold Estemation for ye year 1683. _Jonathan
    Horton_, £440, 13s. _Joshua Horton_, £173. _Caleb Horton_,
    £350. _Benjamin Horton_, £267.

Documentary History, vol. i, page 669. A list of names of old and
young, Christians and heathens, freemen and servants, white and
black, inhabittinge within the township of Southold, 1698:

    Jonathan Horton, Bethia Horton, Jonathan Horton, Jr., William
    Horton, James Horton, Mehetabel Horton, Mary Horton, Abigail
    Horton, Patience Horton, Joshua Horton, Mary Horton, Ephraim
    Horton, Mary Horton, Jr., Bathia Horton, Elizabeth Horton,
    Zeruiah Horton, Caleb Horton, Sarah Horton, widow, Penelope
    Horton, Mary Horton, widow, Caleb Horton, Jonathan Horton,
    David, Barnabas, and Phebe Horton, Joshua Horton, Jr., Eliza
    Horton, Eliza Horton, Jr., Patience Horton, Deborah Horton,
    Martha Horton, Bethia Horton, Barnabas Horton.

Documentary History, vol. iii., p. 855.--Capt. James Horton, 1775,
takes a census of slaves in Westchester County, New York, in which he
sets down to himself 1 male and 1 female negro.

Same vol., p. 863.--Rev. Simon Horton, 1755, has 1 female and 2 male
slaves.

Documentary History, vol. iv., p. 200.--List of freeholders 27
February, 1737.

    Jonathan and Joseph Horton, Joshua, Jr., and Jonathan, Jr.,
    David and Caleb Horton.


NOTE.

The reader will see at a glance the plan of this book. We commence
with the Christian name. Then follows the parentage, genealogical
data, &c., and then the Christian names of the children and order
of births. In many of the early families the exact order of births
cannot be ascertained; but it has been approximated as nearly as
possible. The lineage is given in connection with the first member of
the family. The Roman numerals indicate the order of births. The sons
and daughters of the old Puritan, Barnabas, constitute the second
generation, but they are spoken by way of eminence as Joseph I.,
Hannah I., &c. The book contains much repetition, but none too much
to make it plain and easy to study.

This little book contains the chronicles of only about one-half of
the Horton families looked up. Those whose genealogical data are
given only in a small part, and those whose correct lineage has not
been satisfactorily ascertained, are not included in this book.

This book is mainly what those who have kindly furnished records
and sketches have made it. The whole has been carefully compiled.
But genealogical works, almost of necessity, contain many errors.
Doubtless this small work has its full share. But when errors are
discovered, notice thereof should be given, so that a second edition
may be made entirely truthful. Thankful to all who have generously
given their assistance, this work is sent out as a small contribution
to the genealogical literature of the day, and in the hope that a
more full and extensive book of Horton chronicles may be issued at no
very distant day.

_Terrytown, 10 Jan., 1876._




_First Generation.--Barnabas I._


I. BARNABAS HORTON, son of Joseph Horton, born in Mousely,
Leicestershire, England, 13 July (old style), 1600. Emigrated to
America in the ship "Swallow," Captain Jeremy Horton, master and
owner, in 1635 to '38, landed at Hampton, Massachusetts, came to New
Haven in 1640; his wife, MARY, and two children, Joseph and Benjamin,
with him. He settled permanently on the east end of Long Island, now
Southold, Suffolk County, New York, in October, 1640.

Children, all born in Southold, except Joseph and Benjamin, who were
born in England:

    1. Joseph, born about 1632; married Jane Budd, daughter of John
    Budd I.

    2. Benjamin, born about 1634; married Anna Budd, sister of Jane.

    3. Caleb, born about 1640; married Abigail Hallock.

    4. Joshua, born about 1643; married Mary Tuthill.

    5. Jonathan, born about 1648; married Bethia Wells.

    6. Hannah, married Barnabas Terrill.

    7. Sarah, married Joseph Conklin.

    8. Mary, married Joseph Budd, son of John Budd.

    9. Mercy, married Christopher Youngs.

    10. Abigail, married Charles Booth.




_Second Generation.--Joseph I._


I. JOSEPH, the first son of Barnabas I., was born in Mousely,
England; exact date of his birth has not been found. Probably 1635.
He came to this country with his father. He married, about 1655, JANE
BUDD, daughter of John Budd, one of the original thirteen Puritans,
who settled in Southold in 1640. He resided near his father in
Southold for several years after his marriage; but about the year
1664, he moved to Rye, Westchester County, New York, to which place
his father-in-law, John Budd, had previously gone.

He was admitted a freeman of Connecticut Colony in 1662. In 1663 he
witnessed a deed of Tucker and Brush to Mapes. He sold his house, and
lot of four acres of land, to his father, Barnabas Horton, and also
deeded land to John Youngs, in 1665. In 1671 he was chosen one of
the Selectmen of Rye, and about this time he is one of a Committee
of three to procure a minister. In 1678 he was a Justice of the
Peace, and about this time he was a Lieutenant, and then a Captain
of a Militia Company, and also authorized by the General Court to
issue warrants, and to unite persons in holy matrimony. In 1690-'91
he was devisee of his brother Benjamin, and his brother Joshua was
executor. In 1695 he was chosen one of the vestrymen of the church,
and in 1699 he was licensed to keep a public house of entertainment.
In addition to all these dignities, he also filled the office of
miller, and in this useful calling he was succeeded by several of
his descendants. He had five sons and several daughters, only one of
whom is mentioned. (_Vide "Moore's Indexes of Southold," and "Baird's
History of Rye," New York._)

Children, all born at Southold, except Jeremiah, who was probably
born at Rye:

    1. Joseph, born about 1654; married, perhaps, Mary Hallock.

    2. John, born about 1656; married, perhaps, Sarah Vail.

    3. Samuel, born about 1658.

    4. David, born about 1661.

    5. Abigail, born about 1663; married Roger Park.

    6. Jeremiah, born about 1666.


II. BENJAMIN, son of Barnabas I., born in Mousely, England, 1637.
came to this country with his father; married about 1661 ANNA
BUDD, daughter of John Budd I., and settled near his father, in
Southold. He was a freeman of Connecticut Colony in 1664, deeds land
to Christopher Youngs in 1670, and to Samuel King and others at
various times. Anna, his wife, witnesses deeds in 1673, 1683-85. On
19 February, 1686, he makes his will, appointing his brother Joseph
devisee and his brother Joshua executor. He moved to Rye about 1665,
where he died, 3 November, 1690, without issue. (_Vide "Moore's
Indexes of Southold,"_ pp. 22 and 23.)




_Second Generation.--Caleb I._


III. CALEB, son of Barnabas Horton I., born at Southold, in the
autumn of 1640; married in Southold, 23 December, 1665 to Abigail
Hallock, daughter of Peter Hallock, the Pilgrim. They settled at
Cutchogue, Southold Township, L. I. He was accepted as a freeman of
Connecticut, 1664. Land deeded to him by S. King the same year. In
1676 he is rated for 30 acres of land, 37 cattle, 5 horses, £282:
and in 1683 his valuation was £350. In 1686 he has four males and six
females in his family. He died 3d. October, 1702. His wife died in
1697. (See "_Moore's Indexes of Southold_.")

Children, all born at Cutchogue:

    1. Barnabas, born 23 September, 1666; married Sarah Hines.

    2. Jonathan, born in 1668; married Bethia _Conklin_.

    3. Nathan, born in 1670; died without offspring.

    4. David, born, 1672; married Mary Horton, daughter of Jonathan
    Horton I.

    5. Mary, born 1675; married Nathaniel Terry.

    6. Hannah, married ensign John Booth, son of John Booth I.

    7. Abigail, married David Booth, son of Charles Booth and
    Abigail Horton.

    8. Esther. 9. Rachel, died unmarried. 10. Ruth.




_Second Generation.--Joshua I._


IV. JOSHUA, son of Barnabas Horton I., born at Southold, L. I., in
1643; married, about 1667, MARY TUTHILL. In 1673, '76, '78 and '95 he
deeds land to various persons. In 1676 he is one of the patentees of
Southold, and has six males and five females in his family. He is a
Lieutenant in 1693. (See "_Moore's Indexes of Southold_" p. 88.) He
died in Southold, 1729. His wife died 2 January, 1718.

Children, all born in Southold:

    1. Joshua, ensign, born 1669.

    2. Joseph, born 1671; married.

    3. Sarah, born 1673; married Richard Terry, son of Richard I.

    4. Mary, born; married 2 January, 1708, Zaccheus Goldsmith.

    5. Bethia, born; married in Jan., 1716, Ichabod Hallock. She
    died 1753.

    6. Keziah or Zeruiah, married Israel Case.

    7. Ephraim, born 1786; married, in 1707, Martha Vail.

"In the old Colonial Records of Connecticut, Joshua speaks of 'his
brother Caleb, 15 September, in the 28th year of the reign of Charles
II.'"--_S. T. Terry._




_Second Generation.--Jonathan I._


V. JONATHAN, youngest son of Barnabas I., born in Southold, L. I.,
23d February, 1648; married about 1672 to BETHIA WELLS, daughter of
William Wells, Esq., one of the original 13 settlers of Southold,
about 1750. Jonathan resided with his father, and inherited the
homestead. He was the first Captain of the first Company of Cavalry
ever organized in Suffolk County, New York, and his brother Joshua
was first Lieutenant of the same Company. He and his wife were
worthy members of the Southold Church, and highly esteemed in all
the relations which they sustained. For further particulars, see
"_Moore's Indexes of the town of Southold_," No. 348, page 90.

They had eleven children, viz.:

    1. Caleb, born 1673, died young.

    2. Bethia, born 1774.

    3. Barnabas, born 1775, married Elizabeth Burnette.

    4. William, born 1777, married Christiana Youngs.

    5. Mehetabel, born 1679, married, 1. Peter Bradley, 2. Dea.
    Daniel Tuthill.

    6. Abigail, born 1681; married, 1. Lyons, 2. David Brewster;
    settled in Orange County, New York.

    7. Jonathan, born 23d December, 1683, married Mary Tuthill.

    8. Mary, born 1687, married David Horton.

    9. Caleb, born 1690, married 1. ----, 2. Widow Mary Goldsmith.

    10. Patience, born 1692, died unmarried.

    11. James, born 1694, married Anna Goldsmith.

Captain Jonathan made his will 21 February, 1707, and died on the
23d, two days afterwards. His wife, remaining his widow, died 14
April, 1733.

       *       *       *       *       *

An inventory of the goods and chattels of Capt. Jonathan Horton, late
of Southold, who deceased February 23, Anno Domini 1706-7:

                                         £   s.  d.
  Neat Cattle,                           82  00  00
  Horses,                                 9  00  00
  Sheep and Swine,                       30  00  00
  Implements of Husbandry,               12  00  00
  Beds and Bedding,                      45  00  00
  Linen,                                 18  00  00
  Money and Plate,                       10  01  03
  Wearing Clothing and Arms,             22  00  00
  Iron, Brass and Pewter Ware,           17  10  00
  Chairs, Chest, and Wooden Ware,        14  14  00
  Grain and Provision,                   35  16  00
                                        ---  --  --
                                        304   5  03

We, the subscribers, have prized the above written particulars
according to the best of our judgments.

  THOMAS MAPES.
  JOSHUA WELLS.


_Hannah I._

HANNAH, daughter of Barnabas Horton I., born in Southold, about 1651;
married, about 1670, BARNABAS TERRILL, son of Thomas Terrill.

Children, all born at Southold:

    1. Barnabas.

    2. Richard.

    3. Abigail.

    4. Nicholas.

    5. Catherine.

    6. Mary.


_Sarah I._

SARAH, daughter of Barnabas Horton I., born at Southold, about
1653; married, about 1670, JOSEPH CONKLIN, son of John Conklin, the
Pilgrim, and born in Southold, about 1650.

Children, all born at Southold:

    1. Sarah.

    2. Rachel.

    3. Mary.

    4. Joseph.

    5. John.

    6. Henry.

    7. Thomas.

    8. Elizabeth.


_Mary I._

MARY, daughter of BARNABAS HORTON I., born at Southold, about 1655;
married, about 1674, JOHN BUDD, son of John Budd, the Pilgrim. They
moved from Southold to Rye, New York, about 1680.

Children:

    John and Joseph, born in Southold; Jonathan and others, born in
    Rye.


MERCY, daughter of BARNABAS HORTON I., born at Southold, about 1660;
married, about 1678, CHRISTOPHER YOUNGS, son of Col. John Youngs,
grandson of Rev. John Youngs, the first pastor of the first church at
Southold.

Children, all born at Southold:

    1. John, born 21 Oct., 1679.

    2. Abram, born 1681.

    3. Nathaniel, born 1683.


ABIGAIL, adopted daughter of BARNABAS HORTON I., born at Southold,
about 1665; married, about 1690, CHARLES BOOTH, son of John Booth.
She was probably the daughter of the second wife of Barnabas, by her
first husband. Her father's name is not known.

Children, born in Southold:

    1. Charles, born 1691; married Mary ----, who died 13 April,
    1774.

    2. Abigail, born 1693; married Thomas Goldsmith.

    3. David, born 1695; married, in 1717, Abigail Horton, daughter
    of Caleb I.




_Third Generation.--Joseph I._


I. JOSEPH, son of Joseph Horton and Jane Budd (_Barnabas I._), born
in Southold, about 1654. Moved with his father's family to Rye,
Westchester County, N. Y., in 1664; married, perhaps, MARY HALLICK,
about 1678. Children all born in Rye:

    1. Joseph, born in 1679.

    2. John, born in 1631.

    3. Benjamin,

    4. Janetz, baptized in New York in 1696.

    (_Moore's Indexes._)


II. JOHN, son of Joseph Horton and Jane Budd (_Barnabas I._), born in
Southold, about 1656. Married about 1680, perhaps, SARAH VAIL. Moved
with his father to Rye, N. Y. Was captain of a militia company in
Rye, in 1700. Children all born in Rye:

    1. John; married, perhaps, Mary Vail.

    2. Joseph.

    3. Jonathan.

    4. Benjamin; married and had Joseph, Benjamin and others.

    5. Hannah.


IV. DAVID, son of Joseph Horton and Jane Budd, born in Rye, 1664;
married about 1688, perhaps, ESTHER KING. Settled at White Plains, N.
Y. Children probably all born at White Plains:

    1. Joseph, born 1687; married Anna Howell.

    2. Thomas, born 1690; married, perhaps, Mary Knapp, and had
    Thomas and others.

    3. Daniel, born 23 April, 1692; married Esther Lane.

    4. Samuel.

    5. John.

    6. Jeremiah.

    7. Abigail.

    8. Ambrose.




_Fourth Generation--Joseph I._


I. JOSEPH, son of Joseph Horton and Mary Hallock (_Joseph I._), born
at Rye, in 1697; married about 1703, perhaps, ANNA HOWELL. He was
living in Rye, in 1722 and '23, and he probably died there. He had
Joseph, born about 1705, and probably others of whom no record has
been given.


II. JOHN, son of Joseph Horton and Mary Hallock, born at Rye, in
1681. He married and had family--John, born in Rye about 1707, is the
only one found.


I. JOSEPH, son of David Horton and Esther King (_Joseph I._), born at
Rye about 1689; married ANNA KNAPP. Moved to White Plains about 1725.
Died in 1763.

Children, probably, all born in Rye:

    1. Joseph, born 1713.

    2. Azariah.

    3. Phebe.

    4. Patience.

    5. Hannah.


II. THOMAS, son of David Horton and Esther King, born at Rye, about
1691; married, perhaps, _Mary Knapp_, and probably moved to Rehoboth,
Mass.

Children all born in Rehoboth:

    1. Thomas, born 1758, married Mary Hix.

    2. Mary.

    3. David.


III. DANIEL, son of David Horton and Esther King, born at White
Plains, N. Y., 23 April, 1602; married about 1724, ESTHER
LANE, born at Rye, 24 May, 1704. They settled at Yorktown, N. Y.,
about 1724. She died 18 April, 1769. He died 10 December, 1777.

Children all born at Yorktown:

    1. Daniel, born 1725.

    2. Elizabeth; married ---- Wright.

    3. Rachel; married Daniel Wright.

    4. Stephen, born 30 April, 1731; married 1. Sarah Owens. 2.
    Elizabeth Frost.

    5. Esther; married ---- Wright.

    6. Phebe; married ---- Knapp.

    7. Milicent; married 1. Owens. 2. Lee.

    8. William born 10 January, 1743; married Elizabeth Covert.

V. JOHN, son of David Horton and Esther King, born at White Plains,
N. Y., about 1696; married, perhaps, ELIZABETH LEE, and settled in
Rye. He owned the mills at Horton's mill pond in Rye, from 1747 to
1769.--(See "_Baird's History of Rye_.")

Children.

    1. Richard, born 1721; married Jemima Wright.

    2. John, born 1722; married Mary Frost.

    3. David.

    4. Daniel.




_Fifth Generation.--Joseph I._


I. DANIEL, son of Daniel Horton and Esther Lane (_David_, _Joseph
I._), born at Yorktown, West Chester Co., N. Y., about 1725; married
about 1748, perhaps, MARY COREY, and moved to White Plains, N. Y.

Children probably all born at White Plains:

    1. Stephen, born about 1749; married Mary Wright.

    3. Samuel.

    4. George W., settled at City Island.

    5. Anna; married Samuel Crawford, of White Plains.

    6. David, born 4 August, 1860; married Sabra Wheeler.

    7. Margaret, born 1763.


III. RACHEL, daughter of Daniel Horton and Esther Lane, born at
Yorktown, N. Y., about 1730; married DANIEL WRIGHT.

Children all born at Yorktown:

    1. Daniel, born 1751.

    2. Sarah; married Frost.

    3. Hannah.

    4. Esther, born 1761; married Enoch Knapp.

    5. Micajah.

    6. Frances; married Field.

    7. James.

    8. Milicent; married Beadle.

    9. Rachel; married Field.

    10. Phebe; married Howland.


IV. STEPHEN, son of Daniel Horton and Esther Lane, born at Yorktown,
30 April, 1731; married 24 December, 1758, SARAH OWENS, born 19
November, 1737. Died 27 October, 1772. He married second, 29
December, 1773, ELIZABETH FROST, born 24 February, 1741. Died 20 May,
1825. He died 7 December, 1814. Children all born at Yorktown:

    1. Joseph, born 24 August, 1759; married Mary Beedle; he died
    in June, 1813.

    2. Hannah, born 12 January, 1761; married 23 December, 1782;
    died 30 October, 1827.

    4. Elizabeth, born 23 October, 1764; married 25 November, 1787,
    William Beedle.

    5. Caleb, born 3 November, 1766; died 11 February, 1771.

    6. Sarah, born 18 November, 1769; died 20 September, 1771.

By second wife:

    7. Caleb, born 25 September, 1774; married 22 January, 1800,
    Sarah Field; died 26 May, 1849.

    8. Wright, born 22 May, 1776; married, 28 November, 1798, Anna
    Quereau.

    9. Jacob, born 19 February 1779; married 17 June 1802; died 15
    July, 1808.

    10. Sarah, born 11 March, 1781; married 10 July, 1824, Joseph
    Lee; died 20 October, 1858.


VIII. HON. WILLIAM, son of Daniel Horton and Esther Lane, born at
Yorktown, 10 January, 1743. In 1768, he married LIZZIE (ELIZABETH)
COVERT, an accomplished and amiable lady of French descent, who was
born 9 January, 1743. He removed from the town of Sommers, formerly
Stephentown, to Colchester, Delaware Co., N. Y., in 1789. He was a
tanner and currier by trade, and he tanned the first leather that was
ever manufactured in Delaware Co. He purchased large tracts of lands,
built saw-mills and grist-mills, and carried on a large business in
the manufacture and sale of lumber and provisions, as well as of
leather. He was a healthy, muscular man. His father died when he was
sixteen, and he then for a while lived with his brother Stephen. He
was a man of sound judgment, and capable of enduring much hardship.
Colchester was an unbroken wilderness when he settled there, but by
his influence and great business capacity, it was soon settled by
an enterprising and industrious people, and the wilderness was soon
turned into well cultivated and productive fields. He was a very
prominent citizen among them. He was a Justice of the Peace for many
years, and in 1794, he was sent to the Legislature, and about this
time he was President Judge of Ulster Co., Ulster and Delaware being
then one county.

He and his wife were both worthy and active members of the Baptist
Church, and they trained up their children to fear the Lord and
keep his commandments. He died suddenly in 1831, at the age of
eighty-eight years, respected and lamented, not only by his numerous
friends and relatives, but by the whole community. His wife survived
him but two weeks. Children all born in Sommers:

    1. John, born in 1769; married Sallie Hagan.

    2. Henry, born 7 November, 1771; married Abigail Cook.

    3. James, born 23 January, 1773; married Martha White.

    4. Sarah, born in 1775; married Jacob Radaker.

    5. Micajah, born in 1777; married Hannah Williams.

    6. Isaac, born 13 April, 1780; married Prudence Knapp.

    7. Hattie, born in 1783; married John Radaker.


I. THOMAS, son of Thomas Horton and Mary Knapp (_David, Joseph I._),
born, probably, at Rehoboth, Mass., 1784; married MARY HIX. Moved to
New Lebanon, N. Y., and afterwards to Duchess Co., N. Y.

Children:

    1. John Hix, born in New Lebanon, 1792; married Sarah Bannister.

    2. Thomas, born in 1774; married Mary Wright.

    3. Joseph.

    4. Phebe.

    5. Elizabeth.

    6. Patience.

    7. Stephen, born in Marnacaton, Duchess Co., N. Y., 10 May,
    1791; married Susan Hyatt.


I. RICHARD, son of John Horton and Elizabeth Lee (_David, Joseph
I._), born at White Plains; married, perhaps JEMIMA WRIGHT, and moved
to Peekskill.

Children, probably, all born at Peekskill:

    1. Elijah, born 7 August, 1839; married Jemima Currie.

    2. George.

    3. William.

    4. Richard.


II. JOHN, son of John Horton and Elizabeth Lee, born at White Plains,
about 1718; married, about 1742, perhaps, MARY FROST, and moved to
Philipstown, now Putnam Valley, Putnam Co., N. Y., about 1760.

Children, probably, all born at White Plains:

    1. John, born 17 November, 1746; married perhaps, Sarah Lane.

    2. Richard.

    3. Jesse.

    4. David.

    5. Joseph.

    6. Sarah.

    7. Phebe.




_Sixth Generation.--Joseph I._


I. ELIJAH, son of Richard Horton and Jemima Wright (_John, David,
Joseph I._), born in Peekskill, N. Y., 7 August, 1739; married about
1762, JEMIMA CURRIE, born 6 July, 1744, probably in Peekskill. They
moved from Peekskill to Stroudsburg, Pa., about 1780, and purchased
a farm of Jacob Stroud, for which he was to pay in continental money,
of which he had enough to pay down for the farm, but Stroud kept
putting off making the deed until his money had so much depreciated
that he could not pay for it, and Stroud kept the land. He then
settled, for a time, in Middlesmithfield, Pa., but about 1789, he
came to Sheshequin, Bradford Co., Pa., and took up land where Edward
Brigham now resides, and here he spent the balance of his days. He
and his wife were members of the Baptist Church. He died 14 August,
1821. She died 11 March, 1825. They were both buried in Horn Brook
Cemetery.

Children all born in Peekskill:

    1. Richard, born about 1766; married Tabitha Jayne.

    2. Elijah M., born 9 June, 1768; married 1. Pamela Ogden. 2.
    Abigail Bullard.

    3. Joshua, born 7 October, 1774; married 1. Lucy Thompson. 2.
    Lucinda Ellis. 3. Phebe Goodsell.

    4. Isaac, born about 1778; married 1. Sally Smith. 2. Laura
    Stevens.

    5. Gilbert, born about 1782; married ---- Beardsley.

    6 Stephen, born about 1786; married Susan Mayhew.

    7. William, born 14 May, 1789; married Esther Cowell.

There were probably some daughters in this family, but we have no
knowledge of any. If there were any, they never came to Bradford
County.


II. GEORGE, son of Richard Horton and _Jemima Wright_, born in
Peekskill, N. Y., about 1741; married ELSIE SHOEMAKER.

Children, probably, all born in Peekskill,--all are now (1875) dead:

    1. Anna; married Dunham.

    2. Elizabeth; married Taylor.

    3. Daniel; unmarried.

    4. Esther; married Moses Cortwright.

    5. Eleanor; married Cornelius De Witt.

    6. Jane Depuy; married Evans.

    7. George Cummins; married Hannah Cortwright.

    8. Benjamin; married Jane Savage.


III. WILLIAM, son of Richard Horton and Jemima Wright, born in
Peekskill. No record of marriage or family has been given.

Tradition says that he was a man of uncommon physical powers. In
wrestling and prize-fighting he was never known to be beaten. At one
time, it is said, a prize-fighter known as the "Boston Bully," came
all the way from Boston to Peekskill to whip Billy Horton. It was
in cold weather, and Horton at first declined to fight. But he was
called a coward, and this he would not stand, and then the seconds
were chosen, and the fight began, Horton came off victorious, the
Boston man being so severely handled that it was several weeks before
he was able to return home. He was kindly cared for by Horton until
he was able to return.

JOHN HORTON, of Philipstown, now Putnam Valley, N. Y., son of John
Horton and Mary Frost (_John_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born at White
Plains, N. Y., 17 November, 1746. Went to Philipstown with his father
about 1760; married 2 April, 1768, to SARAH LANE, in Philipstown. She
died 16 September, 1773, probably without issue, April 4, 1775. He
married SARAH LEE, born 30 November, 1751. They settled permanently
at Philipstown, and lived to a good old age, he dying in 1830, and
she soon after him.

Children, all born at Philipstown:

    1. John, born 31 December, 1775; died 30 September, 1776.

    2. Jesse, born 29 January, 1777; married.

    3. Sarah P., born 4 August, 1778; died 6 August, 1785.

    4. Hannah, born 9 November, 1780; married 3 January, 1799, to
    John Bryant.

    5. David, born 18 July, 1782.

    6. Tamar, born 5 February, 1784; married Joshua Smith.

    7. Lee, born 11 July, 1785.

    8. Israel, born 15 December, 1786; married Nancy Hills.

    9. Samuel, born 3 May, 1788.

    10. John, born 23 March, 1790.

    11. Isaiah, born 15 August, 1791.

    12. Phebe, born 25 December, 1792.


I. STEPHEN, son of Daniel Horton and Mary _Corey_ (_Daniel_, _David_,
_Joseph II._), born, probably at Yorktown, New York, in 1750;
married, about 1771, to Mary _Wright_; moved to White Plains.

Children, probably born at White Plains:

    1. David, lived at Yonkers, New York.

    2. Benjamin, "        "         "

    3. Joseph, settled in Claverack, Columbia County, New York.


II. DANIEL, son of Daniel Horton and Mary Corey, born at Yorktown,
about 1753; married.

Children, probably born at White Plains:

    1. Daniel, born 22 February, 1776; married Anne Strong.


VI. DAVID, son of Daniel Horton and Mary Corey, born, probably, at
Yorktown, 4 August, 1760; married, in 1784, SABRA WHEELER, born 11
May, 1766. They both died at Yorktown: he, 14 July, 1829, she, 20
July, 1831.

Children, born at Yorktown:

    1. Platt, born 10 September, 1785; died 31 January, 1865.

    2. Rhoda, born 1 April, 1787; died 14 January, 1859.

    3. Amos, born 6 February, 1789; died 12 June, 1858.

    4. David, born 29 October, 1790; died 21 January, 1758.

    5. George, born 20 September, 1792; died 14 April, 1872.

    6. Pearce, born 5 December, 1794; married Hannah Peak.

    7. Peleg, born 23 February, 1797; died 2 April, 1834.

    8. Leonard, born 2 November, 1798; died 17 February, 1858.

    9. Alvor, born 2 November, 1800; died 24 December, 1871.

    10. Mazor L., born 27 July, 1802.

    11. Treuman, born 3 April, 1804; died 3 October, 1871.

    12. Henry, born 15 April, 1808; died 12 December, 1872.


I. JOHN, son of Hon. William Horton and Elizabeth Covert (_Daniel_,
_David_, _Joseph I._), born at Somers, New York, in 1770; married, in
1792, SARAH HAGAR, born in Scoharrie County, New York, June, 1774.
He died 28 October, 1828. She died 31 July, 1849, at Colchester, New
York.

Children, probably all born at Colchester:

    1. Daniel, born 17 February, 1793; died 29 January, 1861.

    2. Peter, born 28 August, 1795; died 28 August, 1796.

    3. David, born 23 August, 1797.

    4. Peter, born 3 July, 1800.

    5. Mary, born 7 February, 1803.

    6. Samuel McCrea, born 28 June, 1805; died 28 April, 1829.

    7. Elizabeth, born 16 June, 1807.

    8. Col. Enoch, born 7 March, 1811.

    9. Cornelia, born 5 July, 1813.

    10. Geo. W. P., born 6 February, 1816; married Julia E.
    Carpenter.

    11. Benjamin, born 24 July, 1818.

Sarah Hagar was the daughter of Capt. Peter Hagar, who commanded the
upper Fort in Scoharrie County, in the Revolutionary War. He and his
family were in the Fort three months. He was a man of firmness, and
highly respected.

John Horton was a worthy man, a good citizen, taken away in the midst
of his usefulness. He and his family were always much respected.


II. HENRY, son of the Hon. William Horton and Lizzie Covert, born
at Sommers, New York, 7 November, 1771; married at Colchester, New
York, by Elder Woolsey, 10 March, 1792, to ABIGAIL COOK, born in
Duchess County, New York, 4 July, 1774. They were both worthy members
of the Baptist Church.

Children, all born at Colchester, except Susan Cook and Henry, who
were born at Point Salubrious, Jefferson County, New York:

    1. Phebe, born 27 December, 1794; married Daniel Robbins.

    2. William Cook, born 2 December, 1796.

    3. Eliza, born December, 1799; married Ralph W. Rogers.

    4. Stephen, born 1 October, 1801.

    5. John Todd, born 29 September, 1803; married Emeline Smith.

    6. Le Roy De, born 10 November, 1805; married Jane Reynolds.

    7. Samuel McCrea, born 14 October, 1807.

    8. Jacob R., born 22 October, 1809.

    9. Susan Olive, born 29 December, 1811; married Noah Dunham.

    10. Henry, born 12 April, 1814; married Sarah P. Dunham.

Henry Horton and family moved to Point Salubrious in the Autumn of
1809 and settled there. He died 4 February, 1855. Date of his wife's
death is unknown. Both buried at Point Salubrious.


III. JAMES, son of Hon. William Horton and Lizzie Covert, born at
Sommers, New York, 23 January, 1773; was married 15 May, 1800, to
MARTHA WHITE, born at White Plains, 17 March, 1775. She died 16 July,
1862, aged 87.

He was about sixteen years of age when his father moved to
Colchester, Delaware County, New York, where he endured the hardships
and privations incident to a frontier settlement. In 1806 he moved
from Colchester to Chaumont, Jefferson Co., New York, then a dense
forest. He settled permanently on Point Salubrious, being the first
family of white people who ever settled there. Here he was again
exposed to hardships, causing continued ill health, until his death,
which occurred on 5th November, 1833. He and his wife were members
of the Baptist Church. He was a warm supporter of religion and a
lover of good order in society, which he always labored zealously
and successfully to promote. He was temperate in his habits and
exemplary in his character. He never disgraced the name he bore, and
his virtues are worthy of imitation by all his posterity. He and his
elder brother Henry settled near each other on Point Salubrious,
which is a neck of land running out about four miles into Chamount
Bay. Here they took up farms, had fine fishing grounds, and raised
large families.--_Letter of Van Rantz Horton._

Children:

    1. John White, born 12 October, 1802; married Candace L. Fox.

    2. George, born 31 March, 1804; married Sabra Mills.

    3. Ann Caroline, born 13 June, 1806; married Benjamin Ryder.

    4. Valiant McCrea, born 14 May, 1808; married Delia M. Cook.

    5. James I., born 18 March, 1810; married Lucy Hubbard.

    6. Cornelius W. Van Rantz, born 31 January, 1812; married
    Emeline E. Dickerson.

    7. William Henry, born 24 June, 1814; married Hattie Wright.

    8. Sarah Maria, born 10 August, 1817; unmarried.


IV. SARAH, daughter of Hon. William Horton and Lizzie Covert, born in
Westchester County, New York, in 1775; married JACOB RADAKER.

Children:

    1. Betsy, married ---- Bliss.

    2. Elbridge.

    3. Armina, married David Horton.

    4. John.

    5. Barney.

    6. Sylvia, married Charles Knapp.

    7. William Horton.

    8. Hannah, married ---- Campbell.

    9. Henry J.

    10. Perry.

    11. Esther, married ---- Boggatt.

    12 and 13. Elmeda and Elmira, twins; 12. married Peter Radaker,
    13. married ---- Wilson.

They probably settled in Colchester and died there.


V. MAJ. MICAJAH, son of Hon. William Horton and Lizzie Covert, born
at Sommers, New York, 22 May, 1777; married in Colchester in 1800, to
HANNAH WILLIAMS, born in Norwich, Massachusetts, 15 September, 1773;
died at Mason, Ingham County, Michigan, 1 September, 1868. He died
at Colchester, 5 February, 1829. He was a volunteer in the war of
1812-15, and bore the commission of a Major.

Children, all born at Colchester:

    1. Amanda, born 15 December, 1801; married Moore; died about
    1850.

    2. Wright, born 24 April, 1803; resides in Howard County,
    Kansas.

    3. Isaac Williams, born 10 October, 1805; married Adah Washburn.

    4. Martha, born 29 April, 1807; died at Mason, Michigan, 10
    August, 1857.

    5. James, born 4 April, 1809; died 12 May, 1809.

    6. and 7. William and Elizabeth, twins, born 17 February, 1811.

    8. Debora Ann, born 5 March, 1813; resides at Mason, Michigan.

    9. Esther, born 27 December, 1814; married John Radaker;
    resides at Mason, Michigan, and has Sophia, who married Isaac
    Miller.

    10. Peter Williams, born 9 September, 1816; died at Colchester,
    April, 1843.


VI. ISAAC, son of the Hon. William Horton and Lizzie Covert, born at
Sommers, 13 April, 1780; married at Colchester, 1 January, 1807, by
Elder Woolsey, to PRUDENCE KNAPP, daughter of Enoch Knapp and Esther
Wright, and born in June, 1787.

Children, all born at Colchester, except Emily, born at Liberty,
Sullivan County, New York.

    1. Homer, born 28 June, 1809; married Jane Davidge.

    2. Ray, born 8 April, 1811; married Martha A. Radaker, and has
    Agnes.

    3. James, born 5 June, 1813; married 1. Elizabeth Krimer, 2.
    Eliza Ann Clements.

    4. Charles, born 25 February, 1815; married Betsey Grant.

    5. Esther, born 4 August, 1817; married Nathaniel Gildersleeve.

    6. Clarissa, born 11 May, 1819; married John C. Smith.

    7. Ovid, born 7 May, 1821; married Catharine Holliday.

    8. Annis, born 16 January, 1824; unmarried.

    9. Webb, born 24 February, 1826; married Elizabeth Ann Radaker.

    10. Emily, born 11 Dec., 1829; married Nicholas M. Young; died
    5 Jan., 1875.

    "Isaac Horton moved from Colchester to Liberty, Sullivan Co.,
    N. Y., 4 and 5 of April, 1826. The snow fell in April, after
    they moved, about two feet deep. He had a large stock of cows,
    sheep and hogs. In his flock of sheep were twenty-two ewes,
    the finest that could be found in Colchester, nearly all of
    them only two years old. He drove them to Liberty. Wolves
    were seen on the way near Parkesville. He arrived at Liberty
    Falls--salted his sheep in the evening. The next morning the
    sheep were gone, and Isaac and his son Roy, went up the hill
    at Liberty Falls to look for them. Before they got beyond the
    clearing they found dead sheep scattered along the log fence,
    and others dying. Nearly all the flock were killed. They even
    killed a lamb in the pen adjoining the house.

    "In 1837, Isaac Horton had thirty-seven grandchildren, all
    living but two. His children all lived to maturity."--(_Letter
    G. B. Horton, 1871._)

Isaac Horton was a member of the Baptist Church, of Colchester; but
after he moved to Liberty, Sullivan Co., N. Y., he usually attended
the Episcopal Church. He built a grist-mill at Liberty Falls, in 1827
or 1828, another in 1841-42. He was quite extensively engaged in the
manufacture of bed-posts and other turned work, including wooden
bowls; also in shipping curled and birds-eye maple. Politically he
was a whig, and an ardent supporter of Clay and Webster. He died 10
May, 1855. She is still living.

Under date of 8 February, 1874, Webb Horton writes, "My mother is
living and in good health. She resides at Liberty, Sullivan Co.,
N. Y. She is in the eighty-seventh year of her age. Her father
died aged eighty-eight, and her grandmother, Prudence Schofield,
aged ninety-four. She has now living ten children, thirty-seven
grandchildren, and nineteen great-grandchildren."

This is a very remarkable family--so large and yet so few deaths.
It is a rare occurrence to find a family of children, ten in number,
the youngest forty-six years old, _all living_. And then so many
grandchildren and great-grandchildren living. I have no record of any
family equal to it, and doubtless, the number is now (1875), somewhat
augmented.


IV. ESTHER, daughter of Rachel Horton and Daniel Wright (_Daniel_,
_David_, _Joseph I._), born at Yorktown, N. Y., in September, 1761;
married ENOCH KNAPP, about 1786. Children all born at Yorktown.

    1. Prudence, born 20 January, 1787; married Isaac Horton.

    2. Esther; married Charles Bliven.

    3. Allen.

    4. James.

    5. Charles; married Sylvia Radaker.


I. JOSEPH, son of Stephen Horton and Sarah Owens (_Daniel_, _David_,
_Joseph I._), born at Sommers, formerly Stephentown, N. Y., 24
August, 1759; married, in 1784, MARY BEEDLE, born about 1760. He died
in June, 1813.

Children all born at Sommers, N. Y.:

    1. Benjamin, born 19 February, 1785; married Hannah Strang.

    2. Jesse.

    3. Philena.

    4. Joel.

    5. Phebe.


VIII. WRIGHT, son of Stephen Horton and Elizabeth Frost, second wife,
born at Yorktown, N. Y., 22 May, 1776; married 28 November, 1798,
ANNA QUEREAU, daughter of Dr. Quereau, and born 10 March, 1780. Died
4 January, 1852. He died 27 June, 1861. Children, probably, all born
at Yorktown:

    1. Elias Quereau, born 22 December, 1800; married Mary Lyons.
    He died 23 September, 1831.

    2. Betsey Ann, born 4 November, 1802; married 10 January, 1827.

    3. George W., born 10 September, 1804; married Charlotte
    Griffin.

    4. Frost, born 15 September, 1806; married Phebe Tompkins.

    5. Stephen D., born 3 October, 1808; married Delia Clapp. He
    died 5 March, 1842.

    6. William C., born 9 January, 1811; married Phebe McKeel; he
    died 26 January, 1846.

    7. Jane, born 17 July, 1813; married 19 May, 1839, Thomas C.
    Van Heusen.

    8. Sarah, born 10 May, 1815; married 18 March, 1838, Joseph T.
    Hollow. She died 11 January, 1850.

    9. Peter Quereau, born 26 December, 1817; resides at Sing Sing.
    Unmarried.

    10. Wright Frost, born 22 February, 1820; died 23 March 1844.
    Unmarried.




_Seventh Generation.--Joseph I._


I. RICHARD, son of Elijah Horton and Jemima Currie (_Richard_,
_John_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born in Peekskill, N. Y., about 1766.
Moved with his father's family from Peekskill to Stroudsburg, Pa.
about 1782; married, in 1787, TABITHA JAYNE, daughter of Isaac Jayne
and Anna Lattemore, and probably born in New Jersey, about 1768. They
settled first at Middlesmithfield, Pa., but about 1790, he moved to
Bradford Co., Pa., and settled permanently in Sheshequin, on land
now, 1875, occupied by Joseph Towner, son of Enoch Towner. They have
both been dead many years--dates have not been given. Both buried in
Horn Brook Cemetery.

Children all born in Sheshequin except David, who was born in
Middlesmithfield, Pa.

    1. David, born 22 October, 1788; married Hannah Newell.

    2. Isaac Jayne, born 1790; married Ruth N. Ferguson. Both dead.

    3. Infant, died before naming.

    4. Anna, born 1792; married Caleb Shores.

    5. Tabitha, died young.

    6. Jemima, married John Lyons.

    7. Tabitha, married Nathaniel Shores.

    8. Betsey, married George Vibbert.

    9. Diana, married Stephen Shores.

    10. Richard, born 3 June, 1807; married Eliza Shores.

    11. Josephine, born 6 April, 1809; married Daniel Culver. He
    died 25 August, 1856. She died 27 September, 1856.

    12. Jane, married Aaron Shores, live in the West.

    13. Lorinda, married Orrin Smith.


II. ELIJAH M., son of Elijah Horton, and Jemima Currie, born in
Peekskill, N. Y., 9 June, 1768; married in 1791, PAMELA OGDEN, born
in Northumberland, now Columbia Co., Pa., at the mouth of Fishing
Creek. Soon after the birth of their first child, they moved up the
Susquehanna River, and settled in Sheshequin. Pamela Ogden died 11
February, 1804, aged forty years. He married, 2. ABIGAIL BULLARD,
born 11 April, 1780; died 3 March, 1845. He died August, 1835. All
buried in Horn Brook Cemetery.

Children all born in Sheshequin except Isaac S., who was born at
Fishing Creek:

    1. Isaac Snyder, born 20 June, 1792; married Hannah Elliott.

    2. Charles, born 5 September, 1793; married Sally Brink; died
    24 February, 1873.

    3. John, married ----

    4. Lydia, married Rev. David Blackman.

    5. Mary, married, 1. Smith Horton, 2. Rufus Cooley.

    6. Betsey, married King Shores.

    7. Elijah, married Elizabeth Ferguson Drake. She was born 1
    August, 1799; died 23 October, 1863.

    8. Jane Jemima, married Joseph Elliott.

By second wife:

    9. William Bullard, born 27 September, 1807; married Melinda
    Blackman.

    10. Charles, married Sally Brink.

    11. Lucinda, married John B. Smith.

    12. John, married Sally Stevens, went West.


III. ISAAC, son of Elijah Horton and Jemima Currie, born Peekskill,
19 April, 1772. Came to Sheshequin with his father married, 1. SALLY
SMITH, 2. LAURA STEVENS, sister of Ira H. Stevens Esq., former
Sheriff of Bradford Co., and born in Athens, Pa., 19 June, 1797.
She died 19 June, 1851. Sally Smith died 18 August, 1814. He died 6
September. 1861,--without issue. All buried in Horn Brook Cemetery.


IV. JOSHUA, son of Elijah Horton and Jemima Currie, born in
Peekskill, N. Y., 7 October, 1774; married, about 1800, LUCY
THOMPSON, daughter of William Thompson and Elsie Welsh, and born 14
December, 1780. He came to Sheshequin about 1790.

Children all born in Sheshequin:

    1. Elsie, born in 1801; married Abraham Durham.

    2. Richard, born 1803; died aged 10 years, 1 month, and 10 days.

    3. Lucy, born 1805; married Lemuel Landrus. She died.

    4. Sally, born 1807; married Francis Forbes.

    5. Joshua, born 1809; married Betsey Brink.

    6. William, born 1811; married Sally Shores.

    7. Richard T., born 20 May, 1813; married Rhoda Horton,
    daughter of David Horton.

Lucy Thompson Horton died 19 May, 1814, and he married LUCINDA ELLIS,
born 2 January, 1788, and had--

    8. Ithiel, born 1815; married Polly Brink, moved West.

    9. Lucinda married Ethan Tuthill, both dead.

    10. Esther married Jackson Blackman, no issue, they live in the
    West.

    11. Ulysses married Sally Elliott.

    12. Fanny married Elijah H. Blackman, lives in Illinois.

    13. Eleazer married Harriet Chaffee, both dead.

    14. Lewis born 6 February, 1822; married Sallie Maria Chaffee.

    15. Luman P. married Phebe Horton, daughter of Richard N.
    Horton.

    16. Nelson, married Lucy Bullis, moved to Rochelle, Ill.

Lucinda Ellis Horton died 20 April, 1864, and he married PHEBE
GOODSELL. He died 19 February, 1863, she is still living. He and
his two deceased wives were buried in Horn Brook Cemetery.


V. GILBERT, son of Elijah Horton and Jemima Currie, born in
Stroudsburg, Pennsylvania, in 1784; came to Bradford County with his
father; married MARY BEARDSLEY and settled in Sheshequin. He moved to
the West about 1850.

Children, all born in Sheshequin:

    1. Freeman, died at 18.

    2. Clarissa, married Leonard Shaw.

    3. Reuben, married Polly Pierce.

    4. David, went West.


VI. STEPHEN, son of Elijah Horton and Jemima Currie, born in
Stroudsburg, Pennsylvania, about 1786; died 23 November, 1868;
married SUSAN MAYHEW in 1807, she born on Long Island, New York, in
1788; died at North Towanda, Pennsylvania, 28 February, 1873. They
lived in Sheshequin, Pennsylvania.

Children:

    1. Elijah Harrison, born 12 November, 1808; married Mary
    Forster.

    2. Hiram, married Hannah Hovey; they live at Lawrenceville, Pa.

    3. Shepherd, married Harriet Accla; live at Painted Post, N. Y.

    4. Mayhew, married Elizabeth Lyons; live at Blossburg, Pa.

    5. Elizabeth, married Geo. Williams; he is dead.

    6. Mary, married Benjamin Lyons.

    7. Catharine, married Hiram Goff; live in Monroe, Pa.

    8. Ann, married Rosin Fox; live on Hollon Hill, Pa.


VII. WILLIAM, son of Elijah Horton and Jemima Currie, born in
Stroudsburg, Pa., 14 May, 1789; married at the old Judge Gore place,
in Sheshequin, 15 January, 1809, by Samuel Gore, Esq., to ESTHER
COWELL, daughter of Christopher Cowell and Rachel Coolbough, and
born in Kingswood, N. J., 19 January, 1789. He settled in 1811, in
Sheshequin, about two miles from the river, where his widow now
resides. She is now (1875) 87 years old, retains her mental faculties
without any apparent failure, and, excepting dimness of sight,
her bodily powers are remarkably well preserved. Her husband died
23d ----, 1858. Her son, Isaac Jackson, with whom she lives very
comfortably, occupies the old homestead.

Children, all born in Sheshequin:

    1. _Eliza_, born 29 April, 1811; married _Joseph Tuthill_;
    she is dead. They had Lucinda, Arletta, Murray, Josiah, dead,
    Jerusha, dead.

    2. _Delight_, born 4 February, 1813; married _Albert Tuthill_.
    Children: William, who was shot by an Indian and instantly
    killed at Elm Grove, Minnesota, Esther, Lucinda, George, dead,
    Ursula, Franklin, Florence.

    3. _Richard Currie_, born 29 May, 1816; married _Elizabeth
    Smith_.

    4. _Lucinda_, born 17 October, 1819; married _Guy Smith_.
    Children: Ulysses, dead, Ethline, dead, Ward.

    5. _William_, born 29 June, 1822; married _Polly Margaret
    Rundell_. Children: Relsamon, Mahlon, Alice, Mary, Jane,
    Franklin. Mahlon and Alice are dead. The rest live in Iowa.

    6. _Esther Jemima_, born 27 March, 1824; married _John Vought_,
    son of David Vought and Nelly Huyck. Children: Amanda, Eliza,
    Helen, Thomas, John, dead, Eugene, Esther.

    7. _Rachel Amanda_, born 5 April, 1826; married _George
    Chaffee_. Children: William Dallas, dead, Francis, Mahlon and
    Sevelon, twins, Ethline, Jackson, Julia.

    8. _Isaac Jackson_, born 3 Dec., 1828; married 3 March, 1852,
    in Sheshequin, by Rev. Mr. Gibson, of the Universalist Church
    of Sheshequin, to _Elizabeth Rogers_, daughter of John Rogers
    and Elizabeth Petit, and born in Litchfield, Penn'a, 26
    December, 1834; they reside at the old homestead of William
    Horton. No children.

    9. _Lucy Ann_, born 12 September, 1830; married, in Sheshequin,
    31 December, 1850, by Rev. S. J. Gibson, to _Joseph Franklin
    Blackman_, son of Col. Franklin Blackman and Sybil Beardsley,
    and born 9 June, 1825; they reside in Sheshequin, near Col.
    Blackman's. Children: William Wallace, born 7 October, 1851;
    Mary, born 28 July, 1854; Florence E., born 17 October, 1858,
    died 26 July, 1861; George, born 17 February, 1863; Grace, born
    1 September, 1870.


I. PHEBE, daughter of Henry Horton and Abigail Cook (_Hon. William,
Daniel, David, Joseph I._), born at Colchester, New York, 27
December, 1794; married 15 January, 1817, by Esq. Robinson, to DANIEL
ROBBINS. He was born 29 July, 1792; he died 9 September. 1850. She
died.

Children, born at Chaumont:

    1. Caroline Horton, born 19 April, 1818; married, 9 Feb'y,
    1837, Noah Dunham.

    2. Marietta, born 3 April, 1820; married, 27 January, 1842, to
    James Stebbins.

    3. Abigail Horton, born 18 Jan., 1823; married, 28 Feb., 1848,
    to Geo. W. Phelps.

    4. James, born 26 November, 1824.

    5. John D. A., born 2 January, 1827; married 30 June, 1850, to
    Elizabeth Lance.

    6. Daniel C., born 29 May, 1829; married, 16 February, to
    Magdaline Zimmerman.

    7. Eliza E., born 22 May, 1832; married Chauncy Canfield, 20
    April, 1851.

    8. Lucy Jane, born 20 August, 1834.


III. ELIZA, daughter of Henry Horton and Abigail Cook, born 7
December, 1799; married RALPH W. ROGERS, by Elder Farmer, 4 February,
1819. He born 27 September, 1792; died 29 Sept., 1866.

Children, born at Point Salubrious, the residence of their parents:

    1. Perley, born 18 Aug., 1802; married, by Rev. J.
    Canfield, to Susanna Dunham.

    2. Henry Horton, born 19 February, 1822; died 31 May, 1830.

    3. Charles, born 24 September, 1823; married, 22 February,
    184-, by Esq. Hoyt, to Angeline Bloget.

    4. Byron, born 19 June, 1825; married Julia A. Warner.

    5. Anna J., born 29 June, 1827; married Edwin Warner, by Esq.
    Hoyt.

    6. Minot J., 23 July, 1829; married, 1. Adeline Dewey, 2.
    Jerusha Hagens.

    7. Mercy Ann, born 3 Dec., 1832; married, by Rev. J. Canfield,
    to Daniel Owens.

    8. James L., born 23 March, 1835; married, 1. Elizabeth
    Denison, 2. Louisa Warner, 3. Almyra Warner.

    9. Gaylord, born 22 April, 1837.

    10. Rebecca, born 24 December, 1838; married Ambrose Warner.

    11. Cyrus, born 4 June, 1841; married Mary Moren.


V. JOHN TODD, son of Henry Horton and Abigail Cook, born at
Colchester, N. Y., 29 September, 1803; married at Point Salubrious,
14 January, 1827, by Esq. Lockwood, to EMELINE SMITH, born 15 June,
1806. He is a blacksmith by trade, resides at Mason City, Iowa. They
are members of the Methodist Episcopal Church.

Children all born at Point Salubrious, except William D., born at
Mason, Iowa.

    1. Albert F., born 26 December, 1827; married Lucinda Hunter.

    2. Emily, born 9 March, 1830; died 18 August, 1836.

    3. Martha M., born 11 March, 1832; married 27 February, 1851,
    by Rev. I. Canfield, to George Hunter.

    4. Isabella D., born 9 November, 1834; married, 20 September,
    1864, William Knapp. She died 29 December, 1873.

    5. Emma F., born 2 June, 1838; died 20 December, 1838.

    6. John S., born 29 November, 1840; married Olive Verder.


VI. LE ROY, son of Henry Horton and Abigail Cook, born in Colchester,
N. Y., 10 November, 1805; married, 26 February, 1828, by Esq. Stone,
to JANE REYNOLDS, born 22 November, 1807.

Children all born at Lyme, N. Y.

    1. Henry, born 20 July, 1831; married Sally Bush.

    2. Angelina Cook, born 31 August, 1833; married Isaac Adams.

    3. William Dare, born 17 September, 1835; married Louisa Border.

    4. Margaret, born 7 July, 1837; died 3 July, 1868.

    5. Isaac Cook, born 27 April, 1839; married Helen F. Blodgett.

    6. Dorr, born 12 September, 1841; married Eveline O. Fish.

    7. James Le Roy, born 2 February, 1844; married Martha J.
    Williamson.


VII. SAMUEL MCCREA, son of Henry Horton and Abigail Cook, born at
Colchester, N. Y., 14 October, 1807; married 2 November, 1831, to
LEAH TRUMPER; she was born 2 April, 1810. He died at Chaumont, 1870.
Moved to Chaumont with his father's family where he settled.

Children all born at Chaumont:

    1. John McCrea, born 2 August, 1832; married 11 March, 1857, to
    Mary Jane Shelley, no children.

    2. Henry Trumper, born 25 January, 1835; married 1 January,
    1860, to Rachel Doty.

    3. Abigail C., born 4 January, 1838; married James Lauer.

Henry T. Horton and Rachel Doty have two children:

    1. Levi D., born 6 August, 1861, and 2. Estella, born 2
    September, 1865.


X. HENRY, son of Henry Horton and Abigail Cook, born at Point
Salubrious, N. Y., 12 April, 1814; married 6 January, 1836, by Esq.
Bouse, to SARAH P. DUNHAM; she was born 6 July, 1818; she died 28
July, 1858. He married, 2. on the 6 January, 1860, by George Smith,
Esq., to FIDELIA HORTON; she died 26 January, 1870. He married, 3. by
Esq. Ennons, 12 April, 1872, to HELONIA PLUCHE.

Children by first wife, born at Point Salubrious.

    1. Caroline, born 12 July, 1838; married Warren Horton. He died
    4 July, 1870, leaving one son Willie, born 16 August, 1869.

    2. Edward Baker, born 21 October, 1840; married Ellen Delma.

    3. George Bertrand, born 27 April, 1844; married Henrietta
    Meeks.

By second wife:

    4. Sarah Estella, born 12 December, 1861.

    5. Harry, born 6 March, 1866.

    6. Jason, born 2 May, 1867.

    7. Frank A., born 16 January, 1870.

GEORGE PHILIP, son of Joseph Horton, (_Stephen, Daniel, David, Joseph
I._), born in Claverack, N. Y., in 1798; married MAGDALENA MILLER,
daughter of Cornelius Miller, and born in Claverack, N. Y., in 1800.

Children:

    1. Rev. F. A., born in Philmont, N. Y., 15 September, 1841.

    2. Cornelius Miller, born in Philmont, N. Y., 26 November, 1844.

"The original ancestor on the father's side was Michael, and on the
mother's side it was Cornelius Stephanse Muldor, friend and companion
of the old Patroon, the Hon. Stephen Van Rensalaer, and originally
from Rykerk, Holland."--_Letter of Rev. F. A. Horton, of Catskill,
now (1874), of Cleveland._


VI. THOMAS, son of Thomas Horton and Mary Wright (_Thomas, Thomas,
David, Joseph I._), born in Hector, Schuyler Co., N. Y., 26 June,
1800; married, 27 February, 1823, to RACHEL LEE daughter of David
Lee, of Duchess Co., N. Y.

Children, probably, all born in Pultney, Steuben Co., N. Y.:

    1. David Lee, born 1824; married Susan Swarthout.

    2. William Edward, born 14 March, 1826; married Nancy Bancroft.

    3. Mary, born 26 July, 1828; married 5 June 1849, to Rev. J. C.
    Mallory.

    4. Martha Cordelia, born 4 Oct., 1830; married 11 Oct., 1852,
    Rev. A. B. Chase.

    5. Ann Eliza, born 15 March, 1833; married 4 July, 1852, Minor
    Swarthout.

    6. Daniel Taylor, born 16 Nov., 1835; married, 1. Mary Ann
    Swarthout, 2. Mary Jane Knapp.

    7. Sarah Maria, born 10 October, 1838; died 28 June, 1855.

    8. Joseph Robert, born 25 April, 1841; married, 25 Feb., 1868,
    to Abbey Gaspar

    9. Theodore Marcena, born 11 August, 1845; married Mary E.
    Jordan.


I. ELIAS QUEREAU, son of Wright Horton and Anna Quereau (_Stephen_,
_Daniel_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born at Yorktown, 22 December, 1800;
was married in Bedford, N. Y., 25 January, 1826, by Ezra Fountain, to
MARY LYONS, daughter of Ezra Lyons, and born in Bedford, about 1802.
He died 23 September, 1831, at Yorktown; was buried at Amawalk.

Children born at Yorktown:

    1. Martha Ann, born 26 December, 1829.

    2. Elizabeth M., born 27 May, 1831.


GEORGE WASHINGTON, son of Wright Horton and Anna Quereau, born at
Yorktown, West Chester Co., N. Y., 10 September, 1804; married, 1. at
Bedford, N. Y., by Daton Webus, Esq., 3 November, 1824, to CHARLOTTE
GRIFFIN, daughter of Jacob and Rosanna Griffin; she died at Richfield
Springs, 5 June, 1843; married, 2. to JULIA A. CANEY, 10 March, 1844,
daughter of Edward and Mary Caney.

Children:

    1. Charles W., born 2 November, 1825; died 13 December, 1826.

By second wife:

    2. Anna, born 6 April, 1845; married Menzo Clapsadale.

    3. Jane Elizabeth, born 25 November, 1848; died 20 February,
    1864.

    4. Mary Louisa, born 19 November, 1850; died 28 January, 1867.

    5. William Van Hocson, born 22 June, 1864; died 28 March, 1870.

George W. Horton is now living at Richfield Springs, Otsego Co., N.
Y. He is a liberal, kind-hearted man, much esteemed in the community.


IV. HON. FROST, son of Wright Horton and Ann Quereau, born in
Yorktown, N. Y., 15 September, 1806; married at Yorktown, 17 October,
1827, by Thomas Tompkins, Esq., to PHEBE TOMPKINS, daughter of
William Tompkins and Lydia Lane, and born at Yorktown, 25 November,
1803. William Tompkins was a cousin of Ex-Governor Daniel D.
Tompkins, of New York.

Children, all born at Peekskill:

    1. William James, born 10 December, 1828; married Leah B.
    Carpenter.

    2. Sarah Jane, born 10 June, 1832; died 10 March, 1835.

    3. Cornelia, born 17 February, 1837; died 18 February, 1852.

    4. Stephen D., born 17 February, 1837; married Emily Horton.

Hon. Frost Horton is a retired manufacturer, and resides at
Peekskill. He has always been a prominent man in the community,
enjoying in a high degree the confidence and respect of his fellow
citizens. He possesses fine social qualities, and, since retiring
from business, he occasionally amuses himself in hunting and fishing.
His integrity, industry and great business capacities, during the
active part of his life, rendered him a most valuable acquisition to
the community in which he carried on his business, and the articles
he manufactured were of sterling value to the farming interests of
the country.

Mr. Horton, on sending me his photograph for an engraving,
accompanied it with the following very modest and unassuming sketch
of his life:

    "I was born in Yorktown, Westchester County, New York,
    15 September, 1806. My parents were farmers, in moderate
    circumstances. I remained with them until I was seventeen,
    working on the farm in the summer, and going to school in the
    winter, thus acquiring merely a common-school education. When
    I was seventeen years old, at the suggestion of my parents,
    I decided to learn the blacksmith trade, and commenced the
    business at once, and served an apprenticeship for several
    years. On the 17th of October, 1827, I married Phebe Tompkins,
    and on the 9th of March, 1820, we moved to Peekskill village,
    where we have resided ever since. I bought some property,
    and set up the blacksmithing business. I succeeded well
    in the business. In the spring of 1835 I entered into a
    co-partnership business with Mr. Truman Minor, under the firm
    name of 'Minor & Horton,' and went into the foundry business,
    manufacturing agricultural implements, principally ploughs and
    plough-castings. Our business increased rapidly, and paid us
    well. We continued partners for twenty years. In 1855 Mr. Minor
    retired from business, and I took in Mr. Geo. W. Depeu as a
    partner, and about two years afterwards, we admitted each of us
    a son, and the firm then became, 'Horton, Depeu & Sons.' Our
    manufactured articles were sold in nearly every State in the
    Union, and also in many foreign countries.

    "In 1862 we all sold out to a stock company, formed for that
    purpose. Having been in active business for thirty years, I now
    retired. In the spring of 1855 I was elected Supervisor of the
    town of Cortlandt, and I represented that town in the Board of
    Supervisors for five years in succession.

    "In the winter of 1858, I was a member of the Legislature from
    this Assembly District. For many years I held the various
    offices of our village, but of late have declined official
    stations, preferring the enjoyments of private life."

Mr. Horton is not a public professor of Christianity, but is a
gentleman of correct moral deportment, and very temperate in his
habits. Mrs. Horton is an amiable lady, and a valued member of the
Presbyterian Church.

[Illustration: Frost Horton]


V. STEPHEN D., son of Wright Horton and Ann Quereau, born at
Yorktown, 3 October, 1808; moved to Peekskill in 1832; married in
Peekskill, 13 January, 1841, by Rev. Mr. Westbrook, to DELIA CLAPP,
daughter of Philip Clapp and ---- Ferris. They had one child, Emma,
born at Peekskill in 1842, died in 1856. He was a lawyer, very
industrious and ambitious, and died 5 March, 1842, probably from
applying himself too closely to his profession and overtasking his
mental powers.


VI. WILLIAM CLEMENTS, son of Wright Horton and Ann Quereau, born at
Yorktown, 9 January, 1811; married 29 August, 1832, at Yorktown, by
Thomas Tompkins, Esq., to PHEBE MCKEEL, daughter of Moses McKeel. She
died at Yorktown, in 1845, leaving one child, which died young. He
died 26 January, 1846. All buried in Yorktown Cemetery.


II. WRIGHT, son of Maj. Micajah Horton and Hannah Williams (_Hon.
William_, _Daniel_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born at Colchester, N. Y.,
24 April, 1803; married--resides in Howard County, Kansas.


III. ISAAC WILLIAMS, son of Maj. Micajah Horton and Hannah Williams,
born in Colchester, N. Y., 10 October, 1805; married 10 October,
1832, in Colchester, to ADAH WASHBURN.

Children, all born in Colchester:

    1. Mary Antoinette, born 7 January, 1834; married John R.
    Miller.

    2. Elbridge Micajah, born 20 March, 1836; married Jane Pixley.

    3. Ansell Phinney, born 27 December, 1837; married Mary T. Root.

    4. Helen Delia, born 30 September, 1842; unmarried.

    5. James Perry, born 28 February, 1845; married Lydia Dallsom.

    6. Harriet Huntly, born 9 April, 1847; unmarried.

Isaac W. Horton moved from Colchester 2 June, 1847, to Vevay, Ingham
County, Michigan; settled and remained there until September, 1853,
when he removed to Mason, in the same county, and kept the "Mason
Hotel" until about 1861; he still resides in Mason.


X. GEORGE WASHINGTON PAGE, son of John Horton and Sarah Hagar (_Hon.
William_, _Daniel_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born in Colchester,
New York, 6 February, 1816; married in Dryden, Tompkins County,
New York, 16 September, 1852, by the Rev. S. Minier, to JULIA E.
CARPENTER, daughter of John Y. Carpenter and Sarah Jane Delany, and
born in 1818.

Children, both born in Colchester:

    1. Edward Delany, born 15 August, 1854.

    2. Eva Jane, born 6 September, 1857.


I. JOHN WHITE, son of James Horton and Martha White (_Hon. William_,
_Daniel_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born at Colchester, New York, 12
October, 1802; married at Brownville, Jefferson County, New York, 17
September, 1826, by the Rev. Lyman Ackerman, to Candis Louisa Fox,
daughter of Gabriel Ely Fox and Betsey, and born in Chestertown,
Warren County, New York, 12 October, 1805. She died at Adams Centre,
Jefferson County, New York, 13 December, 1872. He is a Deacon in the
Baptist Church, embraced religion in early life, has always been a
prominent man, and commanded the respect and esteem of all who knew
him. He went to Jefferson County, New York, in his infancy, and in
1826 he purchased land at Adams Centre, and became a well-to-do
farmer, exerting a salutary influence in the community, being active
in the moral and religious enterprises of the day; he resided there
until after the death of his wife, when he went to Troy, New York,
where he now (1874) resides.

Children, all born at Adams Centre:

    1. Louisa Maria, born 9 August, 1827; married Moses Pierson.

    2. Lucinda Elizabeth, born 17 October, 1829; married James
    Taylor Main.

    3. Lavanda Candis, born 15 November, 1832; married William D.
    Armo.

    4. Licetta Augusta, born November, 1842; married Willard Reese
    Hammond.

[Illustration: Dea. J. W. Horton]

The following auto-biographical sketch of Dea. John W. Horton,
contained in one of his letters, is interesting and well worth
preserving:

    "I was born in the town of Colchester, Delaware County, New
    York, on the 12th of October, 1802. When a little over three
    years old, my father moved to Lyme, Jefferson County, New York,
    which was then known as the Black River Country, and settled on
    the shore of Chaumont Bay, at the east end of Lake Ontario. It
    was here I spent my childhood and my boyhood days, learning, as
    I grew up, how to endure the privations of a pioneer life in a
    northern wilderness. At the age of nine years I began to know
    what manual labor meant, working on the farm in the summer, and
    going to school in the winter. In those days our school-houses
    were frequently some old log house, which some settler had
    built and then vacated, and perhaps left the country, or moved
    into better quarters. Such school-houses were splendid for
    hot weather, being so well ventilated; but in the winter they
    required piles of wood and great physical endurance to keep
    warm. My facilities for acquiring an education were exceedingly
    limited. Being the eldest of eight children, perhaps I had to
    take a little more of the rough end of life than some of the
    others.

    "At the commencement of my seventeenth year, my father
    commenced preparing for building a new house, and I then gave
    up going to school, and worked through the winter at quarrying
    stone and getting lumber for the new house. The house was
    commenced in the spring and completed before fall, myself and
    younger brother carrying the stone and mixing the mortar.

    "I remained with my father until I was twenty-four years old. I
    then went for myself. I purchased land, and settled permanently
    at Adams Centre, after my marriage. In December, 1829, myself
    and wife connected ourselves with the Baptist Church, at the
    State Road, Jefferson County, New York.

    "We were blessed with four daughters--all grew up to womanhood,
    married, made a public profession of religion, and became
    members of the Baptist Church. We occupied our old home until
    the 13th of December, 1872, when death removed my dear wife
    from this world of care, pain and suffering to the mansions of
    everlasting rest, as I humbly trust.

    "The next April I sold my farm, and I am now spending the few
    remaining days of my life with my three surviving daughters,
    by whose affectionate care and tenderness I am made quite
    contented and happy."


II. GEORGE, son of James Horton and Martha White, born at Colchester,
N. Y., 31 March, 1804; married, 29 January, 1829, to SABRA MILLS,
born at Deering, N. H., 29 May, 1804. They reside at Point
Salubrious, Jefferson Co., N. Y., and they are worthy members of the
Baptist Church.

Children:

    1. George Dinsmore, born at Chaumont, N. Y., 3 November, 1829.

    2. Ann Elizabeth, born at Adams Centre, N. Y., 30 December,
    1831.

    3. James White, born at Brownsville, N. Y., 6 March, 1834.

    4. Robert Mills, born at Brownsville, N. Y., 3 July, 1836.

    5. Francis Newell, born at Brownsville, N. Y., 29 June, 1838.

    6. Andrew Marcus, born at Brownsville, N. Y., 31 December, 1840.

    7. Martha Maria, born at Brownsville, N. Y., 10 April, 1842.

    8. John Williams, born at Brownsville, N. Y., 12 September,
    1845.

    9. Emily Agnes, born at Brownsville, N. Y., 12 March, 1847.


III. ANN CAROLINE, daughter of James Horton and Martha White, born
at Chaumont, N. Y., 13 June, 1806; married, at Point Salubrious, 30
January, 1833, by the Rev. Asher Stanton, to BENJAMIN RYDER; 2. a
farmer, and born at Dumerstown, Vt., 31 December, 1806; he died at
his residence in Brownsville, N. Y., 12 November, 1871.

Children all born at Brownsville, except Watkins L., born at Chaumont:

    1. Watkins L., born 6 March, 1834; married Mary E. Spaulding,
    resides at Montella, Ill. He was a faithful soldier in
    the Union army, served during the war, and was honorably
    discharged. He is a lawyer.

    2. Cornelia W., born 7 January, 1836; married Charles J.
    Gillingham, lives at Watertown, N. Y.

    3. William Wallace, born 22 August, 1838; married Frances M.
    Easterbrooks.

    4. Walter Van Rantz, born 9 January, 1841; died in the service
    of his country, November, 1864.

    "He was a good soldier; his kind and obliging disposition, and
    his soldierly bearing won for him the respect and good-will
    of all who knew him. His love for his country overrode all
    personal considerations, and he was often heard to say, that
    the life of a civilian had no attractions for him while armed
    traitors refused to acknowledge the laws and its institutions
    typified by the Stars and Stripes. He loved his friends and
    home, but he loved his country more, and he was willing to bid
    adieu to father and mother, brothers and sisters, and go into
    the foremost rank of those who were battling for the right, and
    he battled nobly, and fell at last a martyr for his country's
    freedom. He died in Millon Prison, Ga., aged 23 years and 10
    months."--_Extract of Letter of Andrew Horton._

    5. Willie Gaylord, born 15 May, 1843; died 30 January, 1849.

    6. Mary L., born 26 ---- 1847.

    7. Willis Bruce, born 19 September, 1850.


IV. VALIANT MCREA, son of James Horton and Martha White, born at
Lyme, N. Y., 14 May, 1808; married at Adams, N. Y., 30 August, 1837,
Delia M. Cook. They moved to Ridgefield, O., in 1837, where they both
died, he 14 August, 1857; she 7 August, 1863.

Children all born at Grafton, O., except

    1. Charles, born at Ridgefield, O., 18 June, 1838; died 20 May,
    1840.

    2. William Benton, born 13 ---- 1840; married Lavina Edgar,
    9 September, 1862. He enlisted, 22 January, 1863, in the 8
    Regiment N. Y. Sharpshooters, was taken prisoner at the Weldon
    Railroad, 19 August, 1864, was confined in Salisbury Prison, N.
    C., and died for his country, 2 January, 1865.

    3. Cornelius C., born 8 January, 1843; died 1 August, 1865.

    4. Edward W., born 30 December, 1844; enlisted in the 3d
    Regiment Ohio Cavalry, 28 March, 1864, was mustered out at
    Edgefield, Tenn., 4 August, 1865.

    5. Eugene W., born 29 May, 1847; died 30 July, 1848.

    6. Martha Louisa, born 15 January, 1852; a modest, unassuming,
    pious young lady, living with her cousin, Mrs. Hammond, in Troy.


V. JAMES INGERSOL, son of James Horton and Martha White, born on
Point Salubrious, N. Y., 19 March, 1810; married 1st of January,
1839, to LUCY B. HUBBARD.

Children:

    1. Ella Isadore, born in Lyme, N. Y., 6 July, 1844.

    2. Theron Kimble, born in Lyme, N. Y., 2 November, 1847.


VI. CORNELIUS W. VAN RANTZ, son of James Horton and Martha White,
born in Lyme, N. Y., 31 January, 1812; married 13 September, 1843, to
EMELINE E. DICKERSON.

Children all born in Lyme, except Judson A., who was born in
Somerville, St. Lawrence Co., N. Y.

    1. Emma A., born 23 June, 1845.

    2. Georgia Ann, born 25 Sept., 1846; resides in Troy, is
    employed in preparing for the press, the Transactions of the
    Homœopathic Society of the State of New York. In 1865, she
    was a clerk in one of the Census Bureaus at Albany, occupying
    the same place her father had held in 1855. She is educated,
    intelligent, and pious, and possesses fine social qualities.

    3. Annie, born 17 April, 1848; married, 1 June, 1866, to Alfred
    E. Field, a clerk in the New York Post-Office, have one child,
    Harriet Van Rantz Field, born at Glen Cove, L. I., 17 October,
    1867.

    4. Judson A., born 13 March, 1850.

    5. Willet S., born 11 June, 1853.

    6. Eva A., born 25 May, 1855.

    7. Theodore, born 20 November, 1860; died 24 March, 1861.

C. Van Rantz Horton died at Lyme, 3 September, 1862. He was mostly
self-educated, possessed a good literary taste, was a good writer,
and left an interesting diary.


VII. WILLIAM HENRY, son of James Horton and Martha White, born on
Point Salubrious, N. Y., 24 January, 1814; married 20 November, 1851,
to HARRIET WRIGHT, born 16 August, 1824.

Children all born on Point Salubrious:

    1. William Wirt, born 26 October, 1852.

    2. Lucy Lavina, born 3 December, 1853.

    3. Darwin D., born 22 August, 1855; died 8 September, 1865.

    4. Beulah A. G., born 2 November, 1856; died 4 February, 1858.

    5. Jessie M., born 2 March, 1859; died 11 August, 1865.

    6. Winfield Scott, born 15 September, 1861; died 21 January, 1862.

    7. Abraham Lincoln, born 9 September, 1863; died 31 August, 1865.

William Henry occupies the old homestead of his father on Point
Salubrious, Jefferson Co., N. Y.


VII. SARAH MARIA, daughter of James Horton and Martha White, born
on Point Salubrious, N. Y., 10 August, 1817; she is an interesting
and intelligent lady, engaged heartily in the work of the Horton
Genealogy, and has done more than any other one in looking up the
descendants of the first Joseph. She resides at Chaumont, and is a
worthy member of the Baptist Church, is much esteemed and highly
respected in the community. Her health is somewhat impaired,
nevertheless she is active in every benevolent work, and she has been
unwearied in her efforts to ferret out the genealogical data of her
branch of the family. She possesses genuine piety, a mild and affable
disposition, and never forgets her friends, and even if she has
enemies she remembers them only to do good to them, by teaching them
by her words and deeds to have a better mind.


I. HOMER, son of Isaac Horton and Prudence Knapp (_Hon. William_,
_Stephen_, _Daniel_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born at Colchester,
N. Y., 29 June, 1809; married, at Liberty Corners, N. Y., to JANE
DAVIDGE.

Children all born in Sullivan Co., N. Y.:

    1. Walter married, lives at Sheffield, Pa., has one child.

    2. Lucien, born 14 December, 1836; married Hattie Burr.

    3. Elizabeth married ---- McNair, has three children.

    4. Rachel married ---- McNair, has two children.

    5. James, born 1 August, 1849; married Willimina Garrit.

    6. Isaac.

    7. Sarah.


III. JAMES, son of Isaac Horton and Prudence Knapp, born at
Colchester, 5 June, 1813; married, 1. ELIZABETH KREMER, 2. ELIZA ANN
CLEMENTS.

Children, by first wife:

    1. Archer.

    2. Mary married Mansfield.

    Names of children by second wife, not given.


IV. CHARLES, son of Isaac Horton and Prudence Knapp, born at
Colchester, 25 February, 1815; married BETSY GRANT.

Children, all born at Liberty Falls, New York:

    1. Lucinda, born 14 Dec., 1843; married 16 Jan., 1867, to S. H.
    Yocum.

    2. Gurdon B., born 8 July, 1845; married ----; dealer in hides,
    New York.

    3. Melvin, born 25 May, 1847; unmarried.

    4. Francis E., born 29 Nov., 1848.

    5. Louisa, born 25 Jan., 1851.

    6. Florence, born 19 Sept., 1854.

Charles Horton is a merchant and leather manufacturer, in Middletown,
New York, and also interested in large tanneries, in western
Pennsylvania. He is wealthy, is doing a large business, and has a
beautiful lot and dwelling house in Middletown, New York.


V. ESTHER, daughter of Isaac Horton and Prudence Knapp, born at
Colchester, 11 August, 1817; married NATHANIEL GILDERSLEEVE.

Children:

    1. William.

    2. Isaac.

    3. Henry.

    4. Annis.

    5. Lizzie.

    6. Elsie.


VI. CLARISSA, daughter of Isaac Horton and Prudence Knapp, born 11
May, 1819; married JOHN C. SMITH.

Children:

    1. Perry.

    2. Charles.

    3. Flavius.


VII. OVID, son of Isaac Horton and Prudence Knapp, born at
Colchester, New York, 7 May, 1821; married in Bethel, New York, 3
June, 1847, by Rev. William Reeves, to CATHERINE GRAHAM HOLIDAY,
daughter of Rev. Thomas Holiday and Elizabeth McCoy, and born at New
Scotland, Albany County, New York, 28 February, 1825.

Children, all born at Liberty Falls, New York:

    1. George, born 27 March, 1848; he is superintendent of the
    Sheffield Tannery, Warren County, Pa.

    2. Byron, born 24 Dec., 1851; he graduated at Union College,
    New York, in the class of 1872; he is now and has been for two
    years past, a teacher in an Academy, near New York City; he
    possesses a good moral character, is "apt to teach," and is
    much esteemed and respected.

    3. Celia, born Jan., 1855.

    4. Catherine, born 24 April, 1857.

    5. James Holiday, born 11 Dec., 1859.

Ovid Horton is a merchant, and is the proprietor of the Liberty Falls
Mills, and manufactures flour and lumber. He enjoys the confidence,
respect and esteem of the community. He has taken a lively interest
in the history of the Horton family, and has cheerfully answered the
circulars and letters sent him.

The Rev. Thomas Holiday was a Presbyterian minister, and labored
faithfully in the ministry in New Scotland, N. Y., for more than
thirty years.


IX. WEBB, son of Isaac Horton and Prudence Knapp, born at Colchester,
N. Y., 24 February, 1826; married at Montgomery, Orange Co., N. Y.,
28 August, 1855, by Rev. E. F. Fowler, of Monticello, N. Y., to
ELIZABETH ANN RADAKER, daughter of Henry Radaker and Rachel Taylor,
and born in Montgomery, N. Y., in 1833.

Children, all born in Damascus, Wayne Co., Pa.:

    1. Eugene, born 22 May, 1856.

    2. Junius Ray, born 2 March, 1860.

    3. Carrie Josephine, born 18 Sept., 1861.

Webb Horton is largely engaged in the manufacture of leather and
lumber, and also in general mercantile business at Sheffield, Warren
Co., Pa. In a letter of 9th February, 1874, he says:

    "My mother is living and in good health; she is in the 87th
    year of her age and resides at Liberty, Sullivan Co., N. Y.;
    her father died aged 88, and her grandmother aged 94; she
    has now living ten children, thirty-seven grandchildren and
    nineteen great grandchildren."


X. EMILY, daughter of Isaac Horton and Prudence Knapp, born at
Liberty, Sullivan Co., N. Y., 11 December, 1829; married NICHOLAS M.
YOUNG.

Children, born at Liberty Falls:

    1. Amelia.

    2. Reuben.


I. THOMAS HYATT, M. D., son of Stephen Horton and Susanna Hyatt,
(_Thomas_, _Thomas_, _Thomas_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born in
Pultney, Steuben Co., N. Y., 9 June, 1819; married in Jerusalem,
Yates Co., N. Y., 24 Sept., 1840, by Rev. A. B. Winchel, to LAURA ANN
TORRANCE, daughter of William H. Torrance and Salome, and born in
Jerusalem, 1 November, 1818.

Children:

    1. William Nelson, born in Jerusalem, New York, 5 September,
    1841.

    2. Stephen, born in Jerusalem, 18 March, 1842; married at Lock
    Haven, Pa., 2 Sept., 1872, to Alice Ferris, of Bath, N. Y.

    3. Levi Eugene, born in Pultney, 29 Aug., 1845; married in
    Bath, 6 April, 1867, by the Rev. Stephen Merritt, to Matilda M.
    Hickok.

    4. Thomas Carson, born in Jerusalem, 23 August, 1849.

    5. Ida Caroline, born in Cameron, N. Y., 11 October, 1861.

Thomas H. Horton is a physician, resides in Bath, Steuben County,
New York, and is a successful practitioner, standing fair in the
community.




_Eighth Generation.--Joseph I._


I. DAVID, son of Richard Horton and Tabitha Jayne (_Elijah_,
_Richard_, _John_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born in Middle Smithfield,
Pa., 22 Oct., 1788, came with his father to Bradford County, in
1792; married in Sheshequin, 31 May, 1812, by George Scott, Esq., to
HANNAH NEWELL, daughter of Abel Newell and Amy Wilcox, and born in
Sheshequin, 5 Feb., 1794. She died 28 Jan., 1875; he died 23 June,
1875.

Children, all born in Sheshequin:

    1. Richard Newell, born 28 Jan., 1813; married by Rev. N.
    Rouse, to Celinda Landrus.

    2. Nancy Strickland, born 11 Oct., 1814; married by H. Morgan,
    Esq., 9 April, 1833, to James De Money.

    3. Rhoda B., born 16 Aug., 1816; married Richard T. Horton.

    4. Daniel Jayne, born 18 July, 1818; married Rhoda Chaffee. He
    died 21 March, 1867.

    5. Tabitha, born 17 June, 1820; married Moses Canfield.

    6. Eliza Ann, born 25 Feb., 1822; died 15 June, 1838.

    7. Adaline, born 20 March, 1824; married Charles Chaffee.

    8. David, born 25 Jan., 1826; married Arilla Newell.

    9. Benjamin, born 25 Sept., 1827; married Lucinda D. Canfield.

    10. William Franklin, born 2 Sept., 1829; died 11 Aug., 1830.

    11. William Pesse, born 5 Sept., 1831; married Susan Lyon Young.

    12. Hannah, born 10 June, 1834; married Dr. C. D. H. Cole.

    13. Joseph Elliott, born 28 Oct., 1836; died unmarried.

    14. George Landon, born 5 Aug., 1838; married Lucinda M.
    Horton, daughter of Ulysses, son of Joshua Horton.


IV. ANNA, daughter of Richard Horton and Tabitha Jayne, born in
Sheshequin, in 1782; married at the residence of her father, in
Sheshequin, 25 March, 1812, by William Myer, Esq., to CALEB SHORES,
son of Samuel Shores and Polly Stephens, and born at Canoe Brook,
Sussex Co., N. J., 15 Sept., 1789.

Children, all born on Shores' Hill, Wysox Township, Pa.:

    1. Tabitha Dorcas, born 20 Sept., 1812; married James D. Lent.

    2. Ethlinda, born 30 May, 1814; Curtis D. Ferguson.

    3. Jemima, born 23 Sept., 1815; married Lewis B. Gillett.

    4. David, born 12 April, 1817; married Miranda Rippett; she is
    dead.

    5. Abraham J., born 2 Sept., 1818; married Jane Shores.

    6. Richard, born 18 Jan., 1820; married Maria Shores; he is
    dead.

    7. Anna Lorinda, born 31 July, 1821; married Jos. R. Horton,
    son of Wm. B. Horton.

    8. Infant, born 7 Oct., 1825; died before naming.

    9. Josephine, born 13 Sept., 1826; married William Post.

    10. Irvine Caleb, born 28 Oct., 1828; married Elmira Shores.

    11. Mary Amanda, born 19 May, 1834; married Merriman Shores.

Children all live in Sheshequin except Irvine, Richard and David, who
live in Wysox, Pa.

Caleb Shores and his wife both died in March, 1875--only four days
between their deaths.


X. RICHARD, son of Richard Horton and Tabitha Jayne, born in
Sheshequin, 3 June, 1807; married in Sheshequin, 4 July, 1827, by
Esq. Holcomb, to ELIZA SHORES, daughter of James Shores and Elizabeth
Hamilton, and born in Sheshequin, 31 Dec., 1807; he died 20 Feb.,
1835; she is still living.

Children, all born in Sheshequin:

    1. James, born 5 May, 1828; died in 1850; unmarried.

    2. Elizabeth, born 31 Dec., 1829; married Abel Barnes.

    3. Lawrence Clinton, born 16 Feb., 1832; died at 11 months old.

    4. Tabitha Amanda, born 22 Feb., 1834; married Philip Sebic.


I. ISAAC SNYDER, son of Elijah M. Horton and Pamela Ogden (_Elijah_,
_Richard_, _John_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born at the mouth of
Fishing Creek, Columbia County, Pa., 20 June, 1792; came to Bradford
County with his father when he was but three weeks old; "was pushed
up the Susquehanna River," as he says, "in a canoe." He was married
in Sheshequin, Pa., 13 June, 1813, by Samuel Gore, Esq., to HANNAH
ELLIOTT, daughter of John Elliott and Elizabeth Snyder, and born
near the City of Hudson, N. Y., 2d of August, 1792. Elizabeth Snyder
was a daughter of William Snyder, of Claverack, Columbia, New York.
Isaac S. Horton died 9 January, 1874; his widow, now (1875) 83 years
old, retains her mental faculties remarkably well; she is a fine old
Christian lady and much esteemed.

Children all born in Sheshequin:

    1. Sylvester, born 28 April, 1814; married Abigail Cooley.

    2. Emily, born 16 Oct., 1815; married Reuben Young.

    3. John Elliott, born April, 1817; married Zippora Bidlack.

    4. Joseph, born 2 Dec., 1818; married Anasthasia Stephenson.

    5. Lydia, born 9 April, 1820; married Joseph Vought.

    6. Elijah, born 25 Dec., 1821; married Eliza Hines.

    7. George, born 22 Dec., 1823; married Emily Billings.

    8. Elizabeth, born 11 Oct., 1825; married Dr. W. C. Ransom.

    9. James, born 11 Dec., 1827; married, 1. Theresa Towner, 2.
    Mary Collins, 3. Mary Purcell.

    10. Snyder, born 22 Dec., 1830; married Helen Hayden.

    11. Hannah, born 11 Oct., 1832; married Barnabas Horton White.

    12. Pamela, born 6 June, 1836; died 14 Jan., 1837.

    13. Isaac Rufus, born 30 Nov., 1837; married Tabitha Maria De
    Money.

Isaac S. Horton was a farmer, and occasionally a hunter, "frequently
taking his rifle," as he says, and going into the woods not far
from his house, he would knock down a deer or two and return home
by breakfast time. One morning in June, some forty years ago, he
took his gun and went out into the woods, about half a mile from his
house, when a fine buck appeared before him and down he went. While
reloading his gun he heard a wolf howl, and going a little further he
brought him down also. On returning to the place where he shot the
buck, behold, a huge panther had taken possession of the buck, and
was regaling himself by licking up the blood and preparing to feast
upon the carcass. He stood still for some minutes, looking at the
panther, thinking it rather cruel to kill him before he had a chance
to take his fill of his much coveted food. But at length the panther
saw him and showed signs of fight, and he then put a ball through his
brain. On going home for his team, he found he had been gone only a
little over an hour.

Mr. Horton took up land in a dense wilderness, several miles from any
inhabitant, cleared it up, and then bought several other farms and
assisted in clearing them up. He was a man of strong constitution,
and lived to a good old age, dying at his old homestead, about two
miles from Ghent meeting house, in Sheshequin, Pa.


II. LYDIA, daughter of Elijah M. Horton and Pamela Ogden, born in
Sheshequin; married REV. DAVID BLACKMAN, of the Methodist Episcopal
Church.

Children, all born in Sheshequin:

    1. Milton.

    2. Sterling.

    3. Elisha Billings.

    4. Franklin.

    5. Charles Ichabod.

    6. Elijah B.

    7. David S.


III. CHARLES, son of Elijah M. Horton and Pamela Ogden, born in
Sheshequin; married SALLY BRINK.

Children:

    1. Perley.

    2. Myron.

    3. Orrin.

    4. Charles.

    All born in Sheshequin.


IV. JOHN, son of Elijah M. Horton and Pamela Ogden, born in
Sheshequin.

Children:

    1. John, married Sally Stevens.

    2. Ellen, married John Brink.


VII. ELIJAH, son of Elijah M. Horton and Pamela Ogden, born in
Sheshequin; married BETSEY FERGUSON; both dead.

Children, all born in Sheshequin:

    1. Rockwell, married Forbes.

    2. Stephen, married Forbes.

    3. Ogden.

    4. Curtis.

    5. Jemima, married Fisher.


VIII. JANE JEMIMA, daughter of Elijah M. Horton and Pamela Ogden,
born in Sheshequin; married JOSEPH ELLIOTT.

Children:

    1. Isaac.

    2. Irvine.

    3. William Milton.

    4. Jemima.


IX. WILLIAM BULLARD, son of Elijah M. Horton and Abigail Bullard, his
2d wife (_Elijah_, _Richard_, _John_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born
in Sheshequin, 21 Sept., 1807; married 22 Sept., 1831, to MELINDA
BLACKMAN, daughter of Col. Franklin Blackman and Sybil Beardsley, and
born in Sheshequin, 28 Sept., 1810. She died 7 June, 1850. He married
2. on 19 Feb., 1851, to SALOMA J. KILMER, daughter of Jeremiah Kilmer
and ---- Barner, and born in Sheshequin, 27 April, 1827. He died 20
Aug., 1867. She is still living.

Children, all born in Sheshequin. By 1st wife:

    1. Harry Lawrence, born 17 July, 1832; married 1. Helen E.
    Breed, 2. Clara Patten.

    2. Horace, born 25 Sept., 1834; married Mary Smith.

    3. Elizabeth, born 25 Aug., 1836; married Perley Hutchins
    Kinney.

    4. Amazilla, born 18 Aug., 1840; married Henry Clay Kinney.

    5. Mary Ellen, born 25 Oct., 1844; married William Miles Shores.

By 2d wife:

    6. Miles Emmett, born in 1851; married Mary Arinda Webb.

    7. Rowena Hortense, born 23 Oct., 1855; married Theodore
    Gardner Smith.

William B. Horton was a man of good character and much esteemed as a
neighbor and citizen.


XI. LUCINDA, daughter of Elijah M. Horton and Abigail Bullard, his
2d wife, born in Sheshequin; married JOHN B. SMITH, son of John B.
Smith.

Children, all born in Sheshequin:

    1. Ulysses M., born 10 Jan., 1843; died 17 July, 1859.

    2. Ethline, born 19 Jan., 1850; died 19 June, 1850.

    3. Clark.

    4. Rachel.

    5. William.

    6. Cecelia.


VII. RICHARD THOMPSON, son of Joshua Horton and Lucy Thompson
(_Elijah_, _Richard_, _John_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born in
Sheshequin, Pa., 20 May, 1813; married in Sheshequin, 23 Oct., 1834,
by Chester Park, Esq., to RHODA HORTON, daughter of David Horton and
Hannah Newell, and born 16 August, 1816.

Children all born in North Towanda, except Percilla Adaline, born in
Sheshequin:

    1. Joel, born 8 June, 1835; died 28 of the same month.

    2. Horace Le Roy, born 22 June, 1836; died young.

    3. Sarah,[2] born 7 Nov., 1837; married John Alloways.

    4. Hannah Lucinda, born 15 Sept., 1840; married Munson Howe;
    died in May, 1871.

    5. Joel Stephen, born 10 April, 1845; resides at Terrytown;
    school-teacher; unmarried.

    6. Percilla Adaline,[3] born 14 March, 1847; married William L.
    Fanning.

    7. Andrew, born 26 Nov., 1848; died 12 Dec., 1849.

    8. Richard Joshua, born 7 Dec., 1851; unmarried.

Mr. R. T. Horton resides at Terrytown, Pa., owns the Terrytown
grist-mill, a dealer in flour, produce, etc. He and his wife are
worthy members of the M. E. Church.


XIII. LEWIS, son of Joshua Horton and Lucinda Ellis, born 6 Feb.,
1822; married in Sheshequin, by Elder Joseph Towner, of the M. E.
Church, 17 Sept., 1851, to SALLIE MARIA CHAFFEE, daughter of Sullivan
Chaffee and Catherine Deo. Reside at Horn Brook, Pa.

Children all born at Horn Brook, Sheshequin Township:

    1. Sidney Chaffee, born 17 Sept., 1852.

    2. Edith Lucinda, born 12 Nov., 1855; married Cevellon Horton.

    3. Theodore Parker, born 29 April, 1859.

    4. Adela, died at 11 months old.


I. ELIJAH HARRISON, son of Stephen Horton and Susan Mayhew (_Elijah_,
_Richard_, _John_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born in Sheshequin, 12
Nov., 1808; married by David F. Barstow, Esq., in North Towanda,
12 Oct., 1830, to MARY FORSTER, daughter of Abial Forster and Mary
Means, and born in North Towanda.

Children, all born on Hollon Hill:

    1. Philander.

    2. Infant son, died before naming.

    3. Orville Carlton, born 19 June, 1835; married Mary Olive
    White.

    4. Infant daughter, died before naming.

    5. Bishop, born 12 August, 1839; married Martha Passage.

    6. Fluta Ellen, born 18 Jan., 1832; married Benjamin
    Kerrick; no children.

    7. Lydia, born 26 Nov., 1845; unmarried.

    8. Mary, born 31 July, 1848; unmarried.

Mr. E. H. Horton now lives at North Towanda. He resided for many
years on Hollon Hill, now Liberty Corners, Bradford Co., Pa. He and
his wife are esteemed members of the M. E. Church, active in the work
of the church and Sabbath-school.


III. RICHARD CURRIE, son of William Horton and Esther Cowell, born
29 May, 1816; married in Sheshequin, 26 May, 1843, by George Kinney,
Esq., to ELIZABETH SMITH, daughter of John M. Smith and Rachel Brink,
and born in Sheshequin, 26 Dec., 1820. He died about 1858.

Children:

    1. Died unnamed in 1846.

    2. Samuel Huston, born 30 July, 1847.

    3. Welles, born 19 July, 1854.

Mrs. Horton and her sons live very comfortably near the old homestead
of William Horton in Sheshequin.


I. REV. GEORGE DINSMORE, son of George Horton and Sabra Mills
(_James_, _Hon. William_, _Daniel_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born at
Chaumont, N. Y.; graduated at Hamilton College, N. Y., in the Class
of 1857; graduated at Auburn Theological Seminary in 1860. He is
now (1875), pastor of the Presbyterian Church at Coventryville,
N. Y. Commenced his ministry at Dexter, Jefferson Co., N. Y., and
was ordained there. He was married (1.) at Constantia, by Rev. Mr.
Williams, to CARRIE INGERSOLL, on the 1 August, 1860; she was the
daughter of Deacon Daniel W. Ingersoll, and was born at Constantia,
Oswego Co., N. Y., 23 September, 1837; she died 24 July, 1868,
leaving four children:

    1. Carrie Elizabeth, born in Dexter, N. Y., 24 May, 1861.

    2. George Ingersoll, born in Dexter, N. Y., 24 Sept., 1862.

    3. James Mills, born in Dexter, N. Y., 16 June, 1864.

    4. Mary Louisa, born in Dexter, N. Y., 28 Jan., 1867.

He was married (2.) at Coventryville, N. Y., 23 June, 1869, by Rev.
A. Crocker, to WEALTHY ARCENCE BLAKE; she is the daughter of Deacon
Othniel Blake, and was born at Coventry on the 28 Feb., 1830; has
no children by 2 wife. He is a faithful minister, well-drilled in
theological lore, and an able and earnest expounder of the Scriptures.


II. ANN ELIZABETH, daughter of George Horton and Sabra Mills, born in
Adams Centre, N. Y., 30 Dec., 1831; married at Chaumont, N. Y., 20
April, 1856, to ABRAM VAN DOREN, a farmer, and born 13 August, 1827.
She died at Chaumont, 19 Feb., 1859.

Children:

    1. James Israel, born 17 March, 1857.

    2. George Hanford, born 8 July, 1858.


III. JAMES WHITE, a sea captain, son of George Horton and Sabra
Mills, born at Brownsville, Jefferson Co., N. Y., 6 March, 1834;
married at Cape Vincent, N. Y., 11 January, 1858, to MARY JANE MARKS,
born 8 August, 1838.

Children, all born at Dexter, N. Y.:

    1. Nelia Maria, born 21 Oct., 1858.

    2. George Clinton, born 26 April, 1860; died 10 May, 1862.

    3. Reuben E., born 24 July, 1865; died 10 August, 1865.


IV. ROBERT MILLS, son of George Horton and Sabra Mills, born at
Brownsville, N. Y., 3 July, 1836; married at Chaumont, 14 June, 1857,
to LAURA JANE CROSS, born 9 July, 1836.

Children:

    1. Eva Estelle, born at Hillsboro, Ill., 18 June, 1858.

    2. Helen Agnes, born at Hillsboro, Ill., 14 August, 1860.

    3. Gertrude Elizabeth, born at Chaumont, 23 April, 1863.

Robert Mills Horton enlisted in the Union Service at Hillsboro, Ill.,
1 August, 1861, and died for his country at Memphis, Tenn., 8 Sept.,
1862.


V. FRANCIS NEWELL, son of George Horton and Sabra Mills, was born at
Brownsville, N. Y., 29 June, 1838. Enlisted in the Union Service at
Hillsboro, Ill., 1 August, 1861, Co. D, 126 Ill. Volunteers; died
a martyr to freedom at Duvall's Bluff, Arkansas, 12 Dec., 1862;
unmarried.


VI. ANDREW MARCUS, son of George Horton and Sabra Mills, born at
Brownsville, N. Y., 31 Dec., 1840; enlisted in the Union Service, Co.
E, 6. Reg. N. Y. Vol. Cavalry, 10 Sept., 1861; was orderly-sergeant;
re-enlisted in Dec., 1863; served through the war, and was honorably
discharged at Elmira, N. Y., 22 August, 1865, and is now (1873),
editor of the "Algona Republican," Algona, Iowa; unmarried.


VII. MARTHA MARIA, daughter of George Horton and Sabra Mills, born
at Brownsville, N. Y., 10 April, 1842; married at Chaumont, N. Y.,
18 June, 1867, to PETER VAN DOREN, a farmer, and born 21 June, 1839.
Children:

    1. Leah Elizabeth, born at Chaumont in 1873.


III. JOSEPH STRANG, son of Benjamin Horton and Hannah Strang
(_Joseph_, _Stephen_, _Daniel_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born at
Sommers, 24 Feb., 1812; married 23 Jan., 1839, in Putnam Valley,
N. Y., to ANN ELIZA DUSENBURY, daughter of Charles Dusenbury and
Elizabeth Hadden, and born in 1814.

Children:

    1. Benjamin, born at Yorktown, N. Y., 13 Oct., 1839.

    2. Charles, born at Yorktown, 29 August, 1841; married Mercy
    Williams of Roundout.

    3. Theodore F., born at Yorktown, 23 Nov., 1843; married Isabel
    Smith, Kingston, N. Y.

    4. Hannah E., born at N. Y. City, 13 Jan., 1846.

    5. Mary Louisa, born at Putnam Valley, 16 June, 1849; married
    Johannes Sleight of Esopus, N. Y.

    6. Phebe Jane, born at Putnam Valley, 23 March, 1852.

    7. Joseph, born at Roundout, N. Y., 23 August, 1854.

    8. Claude, born at Roundout, N. Y., 23 Jan., 1857.

    9. Wilfeid, born at Roundout, N. Y., 6 June, 1859.

    10. Elmer E., born at Roundout, 9 Oct., 1861.

    11. Anna, born 27 August, 1864.

Mr. J. S. Horton resides near Roundout, N. Y., and for twenty-one
years past he has been Foreman and Director of Labor for the Newark
Lime and Cement Manufacturing Company. That he possesses good
business capacity and tact, and the confidence and esteem of his
employers, is evident from the length of time he has been in their
employ.


IV. STEPHEN, son of Benjamin Horton and Hannah Strang, born in
Carmel, Putnam Co., N. Y., 8 Nov., 1813; married at Sommerstown, N.
Y., 10 Jan., 1844, to MARTHA LINES, daughter of Stephen Lines and
Hannah Peirsoll, and born in Sommers about 1815.

Children:

    1. Orlando, born in Yorktown, Westchester Co., N. Y., 27 Feb.,
    1854.

    2. Stephen Lines, born in Yorktown, Westchester Co., N. Y., 12
    April, 1856.

    3. Hannah, born in Yorktown, Westchester Co., N. Y., 12 May,
    1858.

    4. Alvira, born in Richford, Tioga Co., N. Y., 26 July, 1860.

Stephen Horton now resides in Richford, N. Y.


I. SARAH, daughter of Israel Horton and Nancy Hills (_John_, _John_,
_John_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born in Philipstown, 9 Feb., 1815;
married in 1833, to JOSHUA NELSON of Philipstown.

Children, all born at Philipstown, except Joshua George:

    1. Horton Washington, born 20 February, 1834.

    2. Cyrus Elisha, born 25 March, 1836.

    3. Cornelius James, born 20 November, 1838.

    4. Adelia Ann, born 22 February, 1840.}
                                          } Twins.
    5. Amelia, born 22 February, 1840.    }

    6. Mary Jane, born 6 March, 1842.

    7. Joshua George, born at Cold Spring, N. Y., 20 November, 1850.


II. JESSE, son of Israel Horton and Nancy Hills, born at Philipstown,
5 Feb., 1816; married in Putnam Valley, N. Y., 3 March, 1842, by Rev.
Samuel Weeks, to CAROLINE JAYCOX, daughter of Thomas Jaycox and Sarah
---- and born 8 May, 1819.

Children, all born at Philipstown:

    1. Thomas Israel, born 5 July, 1844; died 16 August, 1849.

    2. Sarah Ann, born 23 Sept., 1847; died 10 August, 1849.

    3. Mary Jane, born 4 July, 1850.

    4. James Edward, born 20 Sept., 1852.


III. MARY ANN, daughter of Israel Horton and Nancy Hills, born at
Philipstown, 16 July, 1817; married in January, 1842, to SYLVESTER
HAIGHT, of Philipstown, and born in 1817. She died January, 1850;
buried in South Highland Cemetery, but afterwards removed to Fishkill
Cemetery. Children, all born in Philipstown:

    1. Israel James, born 5 Nov., 1842.

    2. Sarah Ann, born 5 May, 1844.

    3. William C., born 1845; died in 1852; removed to Fishkill
    Cemetery.

    4. Randolph, born 1847; died in 1852; removed to Fishkill
    Cemetery.


IV. WILLIAM JOHN, son of Israel Horton and Nancy Hills, born at
Philipstown, 1 July, 1819; married 20 Dec., 1843, by Rev. Richard
Hopper, to SARAH JANE ENTROTT, daughter of Henry Entrott and Hanna
----, of Putnam Valley, and born 16 Sept., 1825.

Children:

    1. Israel Washington, born 26 Nov., 1844; died 11 Aug., 1848.

    2. William Henry, born 14 July, 1848.

    3. Mina, born 29 June, 1853.

    4. Emily, born 25 Feb., 1861; died 18 March, 1861.

    5. Maritta, born 24 May, 1862; died 24 Jan., 1864.


V. PHEBE JANE, daughter of Israel Horton and Nancy Hill, born in
Philipstown, 14 April, 1821; married CORNELIUS J. HAIGHT, 12 Nov.,
1840, of Philipstown, by Rev. Richard Hopper, and born 28 Aug., 1814.

Children, all born at Philipstown:

    1. Cyrus J., 26 Aug., 1841.

    2. Isaac S., born 9 Feb., 1844.

    3. Nancy Maria, born 22 June, 1846.

    4. Israel, born 3 May, 1850; died 11 Jan., 1851; buried at
    South Highland.

    5. Margaret J., born 18 Dec., 1851.

    6. Sarah E., born 17 March, 1854.

    7. Mary A., born 5 Aug., 1858; died 12 March, 1866; buried at
    South Highland Cemetery.


VI. CYRUS, son of Israel Horton and Nancy Hills, born 8 Dec., 1822,
at Philipstown, married in Philipstown, 27 Jan., 1849, to CATHERINE
WARREN, daughter of John Warren and Matilda ----, and born 25 May,
1829, in Philipstown.

Children, all born at Philipstown:

    1. Washington, born 27 March, 1850; died in 1856; buried in
    South Highland Cemetery.

    2. William C., born 16 Feb., 1852; died in 1856; buried in
    South Highland.

    3. Matilda Ann, born 1 July, 1855.

    4. Charles, born 26 Sept., 1857.

    5. Cyrus J., born 12 Dec., 1867.


VII. JOSHUA J., son of Israel Horton and Nancy Hills, born in
Philipstown, 4 June, 1826; married in Philipstown, 4 June, 1855,
by Rev. D. L. Meeks, of Fishkill, N. Y., to ELECTA ANN TOWNSEND,
daughter of Talmadge Townsend and Julia Ann Bush, of Massachusetts,
and born 21 May, 1838.

Children all born in Philipstown:

    1. Mary Ann, born 28 June, 1857.

    2. Geo. I., born 13 Feb., 1859.

    3. Ezra J., born 28 May, 1861.

    4. John C., born 31 July, 1866.

    5. Allen D., born 18 Feb., 1871.


HENRY BEACH, son of Stephen Horton and Hettie Vandyke (_Stephen_,
_Stephen_, _Daniel_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born in Marcellus, N.
Y., about 1826; married 1. in Winsted, Connecticut, 5 May, 1851, to
ADALINE HOLABIRD, daughter of William S. Holabird; married 2. in
Elgin, Ill., 16 Dec., 1861, to AMANDA J. WEBSTER, daughter of Hazen
Webster.

Children, born at Elgin, Ill. By 1st wife:

    1. John Holabird, born 31 July, 1853.


By 2d wife:

    2. Alexander Webster, born 10 July, 1863.

    3. Laura Beach, born 18 Feb., 1866; died Oct., 1868.

    4. Ben Porter, born 21 Feb., 1870.

They reside in Chicago, Ill. He is Secretary of the Sherwood School
Furniture Co. In his letter giving the above record he remarks,
"I know nothing of your purpose in gathering up this information;
but, as I seldom see the name of Horton in our reports of criminal
prosecutions, I trust that in tracing the genealogy of the family,
you will find little to reflect dishonor upon the name. I have never
met a _scalawag_ who called himself Horton."


I. DAVID LEE, son of Thomas Horton and Rachel Lee (_Thomas_,
_Thomas_, _Thomas_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born in Pultney, N. Y.,
6 Jan., 1827; married 12 Sept., 1847, to SUSAN SWARTHOUT. He was a
hotel keeper; died 11 May, 1872, in Pultney, N. Y.


VI. CAPT. DANIEL TAYLOR, son of Thomas Horton and Rachel Lee, born in
Pultney, N. Y., 16 Nov. 1835; married in Barrington, N. Y., 1 Jan.,
1861, by the Rev. A. B. Chace, to MARY ANN SWARTHOUT, daughter of
Asahel Swarthout. She died without issue, and on the 16th Nov., 1866,
he married MARY JANE KNAPP, and moved to Auburn, N. Y. He was Captain
of Company A., 161st New York Volunteer Infantry, served during the
war, and came out unharmed. He is now (1873) one of the Keepers in
Auburn State Prison, and has charge of the Shoe Department. The
Captain is intelligent, possesses a good character and fine social
qualities.


IX. THEODORE MARCENA, son of Thomas Horton and Rachel Lee, born in
Pultney, N. Y., 11 Aug., 1845; married in Tyrone, N. Y., 3 Oct.,
1868, by Rev. Philetus Olney, to MARY E. JORDAN. He is a merchant,
doing a fair business in Weston, Schuyler Co., N. Y., where he
resides. His wife is a daughter of William Jordan and Charity
Lobdell, and born in Tyrone, Schuyler Co., N. Y., 15 May, 1850. They
have one son, Milton Vern, born in Weston, N. Y., 25 Aug., 1871.


CORNELIUS MILLER, son of George Philip Horton and Magdalena Miller,
born in Claverack, Columbia, Co., N. Y., 25 June, 1822; married at
Livingston, Columbia Co., N. Y., 26 Nov., 1844, by Rev. Mr. Fonda,
to CAROLINE DENISPAUGH, daughter of Henry Denispaugh and Christiana
Potts, and born in Livingston, Columbia Co., N. Y., 8 July, 1820.

Children:

    1. Cleveland Kemble, born in Livingston, 16 Jan., 1846.

    2. Helen Mather, born in Hudson, N. Y., 26 Sept., 1849.

    3. Abbertina Miller, born in Livingston, N. Y., 8 March, 1852.

    4. Margaretta, born in Philmount, N. Y., 12 Jan., 1854.

    5. Cornelius Mandeville, born in Buffalo, N. Y., 4 June, 1860.

    6. Caroline Denispaugh, born in Buffalo, N. Y., 11 Dec., 1864;
    died 16 Dec., 1864.


I. LOUISA MARIA, daughter of Dea. John White Horton and Candis Louisa
Fox (_James_, _Hon. William_, _Daniel_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born
at Adams Centre, Jefferson County, New York, 9 Aug., 1827; married
at Adams Centre, 4 April, 1850, by the Rev. Thomas Bright, to MOSES
PIERSON, M. D., son of Henry Pierson and Polly Butler, and born
at Charleston, Montgomery Co., N. Y., about 1824. They settled at
Metuchen, N. J., where he died 13 July, 1874. He was, and so also is
his wife, a worthy member of the Presbyterian Church.

Children:

    1. Henry Bowman, born at Fishkill Landing, N. Y., 29 June, 1852.

    2. William Horton, born at Smithville, Jefferson Co., N. Y., 12
    Feb., 1857.

    3. Ely Fox, born at Smithville,             "     "      "   13
    Nov., 1859.


II. LUCINDA ELIZABETH, daughter of Dea. John W. Horton and Candis L.
White, born at Adams Centre, N. Y., 17 Oct., 1829; married at Adams
Centre, 2 May, 1863, by the Rev. Edward Mills, to JAMES TAYLOR MAIN,
son of James Main and Susan Shelden, and born at Adams Centre, 8
June, 1816.

They are members of the Baptist Church. Have one son, Walter Taylor
Main, born at Troy, N. Y., 13 Oct., 1870.

Mr. Main has a farm near the city of Troy, where he resides, and is
a dealer in grain, cattle, &c., and he also has a store in Troy. He
possesses good business capacities, and he and his amiable lady enjoy
the confidence and respect of the community.


III. LAVANDA CANDIS, daughter of Dea. John W. Horton and Candis L.
Fox, born at Adams Centre, 15 Nov., 1832; married at Adams Centre,
early in the morning, 4 April, 1855, by the Rev. E. G. Blount, to
WILLIAM D. ARMS, son of Luman Arms and Caroline Arms, and born at
Adams Centre, 14 Jan., 1829. She died 10 Aug., 1872, at Metuchen,
N. J., leaving two children. She was a worthy member of the Baptist
Church.

Children:

    1. Minnie Louisa, born at Adams Centre, 23 May, 1859.

    2. Carrie Emeline, born at Belleville, Jefferson Co., N. Y., 20
    May, 1862.

Mr. Arms is a merchant, in Troy; member of the Baptist Church.


IV. LICETTA AUGUSTA, daughter of Dea. John W. Horton and Candis L.
Fox, born at Adams Centre, 16 Nov., 1842; married at Adams Centre,
29 Nov., 1866, to WILLARD REESE HAMMOND, son of William Hammond and
Elizabeth James, of Watertown, N. Y., and born at Waterloo, N. Y.,
20 March, 1842. Mr. Hammond is an active business man, engaged in
grocery and provision merchandise, in the city of Troy, and both he
and his wife are intelligent members of the Baptist Church.


I. HENRY, son of Le Roy Horton and Jane Reynolds (_Henry_, _Hon.
William_, _Daniel_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born in Lyme, N. Y., 20
July, 1831; married by G. P. Ainsworth, Esq., 4 July, 1855, to SALLY
BUSH, born 22 April, 1839; they settled in Lyme, N. Y. He died 3
July, 1864.

Children all born in Lyme:

    1. Hannen A., born 8 June, 1856.

    2. Jacob L., born 12 May, 1858.

    3. Elmore E., born 9 Feb., 1860.

    4. Henry E., born 3 Sept., 1862.

Most of this family now reside in Michigan.


II. ANGELINE COOK, daughter of Le Roy Horton and Jane Reynolds, born
in Lyme, 31 August, 1833; married by Rev. Mr. Stanton to ISAAC ADAMS,
12 Feb., 1856; he was born 4 Oct., 1835.

Children born in Lyme:

    1. Frederick B., born 26 February, 1859.

    2. Frank Reynolds, born 29 October, 1861.

    3. Jennie I., born 28 September, 1864.


III. WILLIAM DRAKE, son of Le Roy Horton and Jane Reynolds, born
27 Sept., 1835, at Lyme; married 29 July, 1869, by Rev. William
Merrifield, to LOUISA BORDER, born 5 June, 1843; no children.


IV. MARGARET, daughter of Le Roy Horton and Jane Reynolds, born 7
July, 1837; married 14 Sept., 1861, by Rev. Mr. Green, to CHARLES
DOTY, born 18 May, 1840. She died 3 July, 1868.

Children, probably, all born in Lyme:

    1. Burtie, born July 7, 1862.

    2. Minnie, 12 August, 1866.

    3. Annis, born 12 March, 1868.


V. ISAAC COOK, son of Le Roy Horton and Jane Reynolds, born 27 April,
1839; married 25 Dec., 1865, by Rev. George C. Greenleaf, to HELEN F.
BLODGETT, born 27 July, 1843.

Children, born in Lyme:

    1. Herbert Doty; born 15 Dec., 1866.

    2. Alice M., born 7 March, 1872.


VI. DORR, son of Le Roy Horton and Jane Reynolds, born 12 Sept.,
1841; married 22 January, 1867, by Rev. W. B. Joice, to EVELINE O.
FISH, born 4 July, 1848.

Children, all born in Lyme:

    1. Allen H., born 20 Nov., 1867.

    2. Julia J., born 24 Oct., 1869.

    3. Elizabeth M., born 12 Jan., 1872.

    4. Ida M., born 23 August, 1873.


VII. JAMES L., son of Le Roy Horton and Jane Reynolds, born 22 Feb.,
1844; married 4 July, 1867, MARTHA J. WILLIAMSON, born 29 July, 1850.
One child, viz.:

    Henry A., born 22 May, 1868.


REV. FRANCIS A., son of George Philip Horton and Magdalena Miller,
born in Philmont, N. Y., 15 September, 1841; married in New
Brunswick, N. J., 9 Nov., 1865, by Rev. J. Y. Beatty, to EMILY
VAN DYKE ADAMS, daughter of John Adams. He is a clergyman of the
"Reformed (Dutch) Church in America," entered the ministry in 1865,
was ordained 30 Oct., of that year, at Glenham, Dutchess Co., N. Y.,
and removed in 1867 to Catskill, Greene Co., N. Y., where he now
(1873), resides; moved to Cleveland, O., in 1874.

Children:

    1. James Muldor, born 11 Dec., 1867, at Catskill, N. Y.

The Rev. F. A. Horton, in his letter of April, 1871, says:

    "Our relatives are mainly in Southold, along the Hudson, in
    central and western New York, and in Michigan. I recollect
    father always said that one of the original brothers went into
    New Jersey, and that he had lost all trace of him. May be _you_
    are a scion from that root. At any rate, the Hortons are a
    great people. I see an account now and then of some of them
    in the reports of criminal prosecutions, but these are offset
    by now and then one in good and honorable places. The last
    Governor of Michigan married a full-blooded Horton of our line.
    Trace us back to the throne if you can, see that you make no
    less of our great top root, when you find him than an Earl."
    Another Horton says: "If you find any of the name claiming to
    have royal blood in his veins, perform phlebotomy upon him at
    once, and take every drop out of him or disown him. Trace us
    back to the noble old Roman CINCINNATUS, if you can."--_Dr.
    Horton, of Orange Co., N. Y._


I. WILLIAM JAMES, son of the Hon. Frost Horton and Phebe Tompkins
(_Wright_, _Stephen_, _Daniel_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born at
Yorktown, 10 Dec., 1828; married at Peekskill, by Rev. Mr. Underhill,
8 Jan., 1851, to LEAH B. CARPENTER, daughter of William Carpenter and
Winneford Carpenter, of Sommers, and born in 1830. He is a farmer,
and resides at Yorktown.

Children, all born at Yorktown:

    1. Wright, born 7 March, 1852; married 22 Oct., 1873, by Rev.
    Mr. Page, to Phebe E. Weeks, daughter of Jonah Weeks and Sarah
    his wife, and born in Peekskill in 1854. They have one son
    William Thomas, born 14 Feb., 1875.

    2. Thomas Vanheusen, born 13 Oct., 1853.

    3. Georgiana, born 9 Sept., 1860.


II. STEPHEN D., son of Hon. Frost Horton and Phebe Tompkins, born
at Peekskill, 17 June, 1837; married at Cortland, N. Y., 28 Dec.,
1857, by Rev. Mr. Bates, to EMILY CLARA HORTON, daughter of Joshua
Horton[4] and Sally Purdy, and born at Yorktown, 19 Dec., 1840.

Children, all born at Peekskill:

    1. Cornelia, born 30 August, 1859; died 31 August, 1866.

    2. Frost Joshua, born 20 Sept., 1862; died 7 November, 1862.

    3. Stephen Frost D., born 18 Feb., 1865.

Stephen D. Horton is a manufacturer and doing a large business. His
residence is in the village of Peekskill, and he has one of the most
splendid dwellings in the village.


I. ALBERT F., son of John T. Horton and Emeline Smith (_Henry_,
_Hon. William_, _Daniel_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born 26 Dec., 1827;
married 27 Feb., 1851, by Rev. J. Canfield, to LUCINDA HUNTER.

Children:

    Isadore M., born 20 Jan., 1852.


VI. JOHN SMITH, son of John T. Horton and Emeline Smith, born 29
Nov., 1840; married 1 Jan., 1861, by Rev. M. Wheeler, to OLIVE VERDEE.

Children:

    1. Perley Ainsworth, born 10 Oct., 1861.

    2. Delia Adelaide, born 20 March, 1863.

    3. Fluta Bell, born 12 Feb., 1865.

    4. Martha Maria, born 1 Feb., 1867.

    5. William Drake, born 31 March, 1870.


II. ELBRIDGE MICAJAH, son of Isaac W. Horton and Adah Washburn (_Maj.
Micajah_, _Hon. William_, _Daniel_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born at
Colchester, Delaware Co., N. Y., 20 March, 1836; moved with his
father's family to Mason, Mich., in 1847. He left Mason, and went
to Chicago, 8 July, 1862, and connected himself with the Illinois
Central Railroad Co., as bookkeeper. He was married in Buffalo, N.
Y., 17 Oct., 1867, to JANE PIXLEY, daughter of Philander Pixley and
Adaline Hovey, and born in Warsaw, Wyoming Co., N. Y., 15 Oct., 1812.

Mr. E. M. Horton is a man of good business capacities, and has
rendered valuable assistance in furnishing a correct statement of the
names and genealogical data of his branch of the family from the Hon.
William Horton to the present time. He has no children. He possesses
more than ordinary mental ability, and gives good satisfaction to his
employers, and commands their confidence and respect, and the esteem
of all who know him.


II. LUCIEN, son of Homer Horton and Jane Davidge (_Isaac_, _Hon.
William_, _Stephen_, _Daniel_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born at Bethel,
Sullivan Co., N. Y., 14 December, 1836; married 12 Nov., 1861, at
Liberty, Sullivan Co., N. Y., by the Rev. Mr. Mack, to HATTIE BURR,
daughter of Bradley Burr and Polly Sherwood, and born at Liberty, N.
Y., 21 August, 1836.

Children:

    1. Charles L., born in Lake Corner, Pa., 3 January, 1863.

    2. Jessie Burr, born in Lake Corner, Pa., 11 May, 1864.

    3. Cora Burr, born in Berkshire, N. Y., 26 November, 1865.

    4. Lillie May, born in Berkshire, N. Y., 24 August, 1870.

    5. Le Roy, born in Berkshire, N. Y., 28 April, 1873.

Lucien Horton is a man of commanding form, and possesses good social
qualities. Resides at Berkshire, Tioga Co., N. Y., and is one of the
principals of the firm of "Davidge, Horton and Co., Sole Leather
Tanners," Berkshire, N. Y.


VI. JAMES, son of Homer Horton and Jane Davidge, born at Liberty
Falls, Sullivan Co., N. Y., 1 August, 1849; married at Hancock,
Delaware Co., N. Y., 4 March, 1872, by Rev. J. D. Cornell, to
WILLIMINA GAVITT, daughter of Cyrenius Gavitt and Dorothy Burr, and
born at Liberty, N. Y., 3 March, 1851.

Children, both born at Hancock, N. Y.:

    1. Ruth, born 18 Nov., 1872.

    2. Warren Gavitt, born 4 May, 1874.

James Horton is an accomplished clerk and bookkeeper. He resided
several years at Hancock, respected and esteemed by all who knew him.
He now (1875), resides in Sheffield, Warren Co., Pa., interested in a
large tanning establishment.


I. WILLIAM NELSON, son of Thomas Hyatt Horton, M. D., and Laura
Ann Torance (_Stephen_, _Thomas_, _Thomas_, _David_, _Joseph I._),
born in Jerusalem, Yates Co., N. Y., 5 Sept., 1841. He was a Union
soldier, faithful and true, and died for his country in Georgia, 23
May, 1865, being shot by the rebels through the head and instantly
killed. He left no issue.


II. GURDON BROMLEY, son of Charles Horton and Betsey Grant (_Isaac_,
_Hon. William_, _Stephen_, _Daniel_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born
at Liberty Falls, N. Y., 8 July, 1845; married in New York City,
27 Dec., 1871, by Rev. Alexander Capron, Rector of Grace Church,
Middletown, N. Y., to MARY AMANDA BUCKLEY, daughter of William
Buckley and Jane ----, his wife, and born in New York City.

They have Bessie Grant, born 18 Nov., 1872, and Jennie, born 27 Oct.,
1874, both born in Brooklyn, N. Y., where Mr. Horton resides. He is
in the leather business, and is the principal of the firm of "G. B.
Horton & Co., 98 Gold Street, New York." We are indebted to him for
valuable records of the family.


III. MELVIN, son of Charles Horton and Betsey Grant, born at Liberty
Falls, N. Y., 25 May, 1847; unmarried. He deals in hides and leather,
and is one of the firm of G. B. Horton & Co., Gold Street, New York.
He traveled extensively in Europe, in 1873, possesses fair business
capacities, is unassuming in his manners, and is wholly disinclined
to "trumpet his own fame and name," as he expressed it, when he
declined to get his portrait for the "Chronicles."


III. EDWARD AUGUSTUS, son of Jacob Horton and Charlotte Eugenia
Knapp (_Caleb_, _Stephen_, _Daniel_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born at
Yorktown, N. Y., 1 May, 1847; married at Middlebury, Scoharrie Co.,
N. Y., 15 June, 1872, by Rev. Mr. Savage, to ANNIE MARIA DISBROW,
daughter of Benjamin N. Disbrow and Sarah Haviland, and born in
Croton, Westchester Co., N. Y., about 1848.

Children.

Mr. E. A. Horton is principal of the firm of Horton & Goodrich,
66 Dey Street, New York, who keep a wholesale seed store. He was
formerly in business in Rochester, N. Y., and more recently in the
employ of the General Government of the United States, in the Custom
House, Brooklyn, N. Y.




_Ninth Generation.--Joseph I._


I. RICHARD NEWELL, son of David Horton and Hannah Newell (_Richard_,
_Elijah_, _Richard_, _John_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born at Horn
Brook, Pa., 28 Jan., 1813; married in Sheshequin Pa., by the Rev. N.
Rouse, to CELINDA LANDRUS.

Children, all born in Sheshequin:

    1. Calista, married ---- Shores.

    2. Phebe, married Luman Horton.

    3. Lemuel.

    4. Jackson.

    5. Hannah, married Frank Shores.


II. NANCY STRICKLAND, daughter of David Horton and Hannah Newell,
born 11 Oct., 1814; married at Horn Brook, 9 April, 1833, by Harry
Morgan, Esq., to JAMES DE MONEY.

Children, all born in Sheshequin:

    1. David, born in 1834; died in the army, unmarried.

    2. Tabitha Maria, born in 1836; married Isaac Rufus Horton, son
    of Isaac S. Horton, and they had David Snyder, born 10 March,
    1860.

    3. Burton, born 1838.

    4. Richard, died young.

    5. Mary, died young.

    6. William.


III. RHODA, daughter of David Horton and Hannah Newell, born 16
August, 1816; married RICHARD THOMPSON HORTON. (_Vide_ his record.)


IV. DANIEL JAYNE, son of David Horton and Hannah Newell, born 18
July, 1818; married 3 March, 1841, by Elder Joseph Towner, to RHODA
REBECCA CHAFFEE, daughter of Sullivan Chaffee and Catherine Deo, and
born 19 April, 1823, in Lexington, N. Y.

Children, all born in Sheshequin:

    1. George Washington, born 8 Feb., 1843; married 30 Aug., 1866,
    by Rev. Mr. Eckert, to Melissa Smith, daughter of John B. Smith
    and Lucinda Horton; live at Ghent.

    2. Catherine Elizabeth, born 7 Feb., 1845; married 12 Sept.,
    1866, Joseph Vought, son of Edward Vought and Lydia Horton;
    live at Ghent.

    3. James Franklin, born 8 July, 1847; married 31 Dec., 1873, by
    Elder Maryatt, to Emma Maynard, daughter of William Maynard, of
    Rome.

    4. Daniel Sullivan, born 20 March, 1853; died 7 Nov., 1857.

    5. Matilda Adelaide, born 28 May, 1855; married 11 March, 1874,
    by Rev. George L. Williams, to Charles Edward Brigham, son of
    Edward Brigham and Clarissa Swain, and born in Waverly, N. Y.,
    25 Dec., 1841.

    6. Eliza Estella, born 14 Aug., 1857.

    7. Charles Jayne, born 20 Aug., 1863.


V. TABITHA, daughter of David Horton and Hannah Newell, born 17 June,
1820; married MOSES CANFIELD.

Children, born in Sheshequin:

    1. David, volunteered in the service of his country; died in
    the army.

    2. Hannah, married Jefferson Horton, son of Charles, son of
    Elijah Horton.


VII. ADALINE, daughter of David Horton and Hannah Newell, born at
Horn Brook, 20 March, 1824; married 19 Oct., 1842, by Rev. Joseph
Towner, to CHARLES CHAFFEE, son of Sullivan Chaffee and Catherine
Deo, and born in Lexington, Greene Co., N. Y., 28 Nov. 1813. He came
to Bradford County in Oct., 1840.

Children, all born at Horn Brook, Sheshequin, Pa.:

    1. John, born 13 July, 1843; married Marian Bull.

    2. Festus Pratt, born 8 Aug., 1846; died 4 Aug., 1858.

    3. Lodicy Emaline, born 11 March, 1850; died 4 Sept., 1850.

    4. David Wilmot, born 13 July, 1851; married Delphine Brainard.

    5. Richard Mahlon, born 23 Oct., 1853.

    6. Charles La Fayette, born 2 Aug., 1864.

Mr. Chaffee is a farmer, of good social qualities and business
capacity, and is said to be very wealthy.


VIII. DAVID, son of David Horton and Hannah Newell, born at Horn
Brook, Pa., 25 Jan., 1826; married in Union, Tioga Co., Pa., 10 Oct.,
1849, by Charles O. Spencer, Esq., to ARILLE NEWELL, daughter of
Josiah Newell and Phebe, his wife, and born 28 June, 1827.

Children, both born at Horn Brook, Pa.:

    1. Cevellon, born 22 Nov., 1850; married 1 April, 1872, Edith
    Lucinda Horton, daughter of Lewis Horton and Sarah Maria
    Chaffee, and born 14 April, 1859.

    2. Josiah Spaulding, born 27 Feb., 1854.


IX. BENJAMIN, son of David Horton and Hannah Newell, born at Horn
Brook, 25 Sept., 1827; married at Athens, Pa., 15 Oct., 1863, by Rev.
H. R. Clark, to LUCINDA D. CANFIELD, daughter of William B. Canfield
and Matilda, his wife, and born 14 Dec., 1842.

Children, both born at Horn Brook:

    1. Myrtie Stella, born 13 Feb., 1864.

    2. Ida May, born 12 Nov., 1866.


XI. WILLIAM PESSE, son of David Horton and Hannah Newell, born at
Horn Brook, in Sheshequin, Pa., 5 Sept., 1831; married in Sheshequin
10 Nov., 1859, by Rev. J. W. Hewitt, to Susan Lyon Young, daughter of
Reuben Young and Emily Horton, and born in Sheshequin, 28 Sept., 1839.

Children, all born Sheshequin:

    1. Emily Eveline, born 29 August, 1862; died 24 Jan., 1868.

    2. Reuben Emmerson, born 11 April, 1865; died 19 Oct., 1868.

    3. Charles Mahlon, born 24 May, 1869.

    4. Ruth Naomi, born 9 May, 1875.

William P. Horton and his wife are members of the M. E. Church,
active in the work of the church and Sabbath-school. He follows the
occupation of teaching in the public-schools of the county, and is a
skillful educator.


XII. HANNAH, daughter of David Horton and Hannah Newell, born in
Sheshequin, 10 June, 1834; married in Wysox, Pa., 15 June, 1859,
by Rev. Andrew Barr, to CORNELIUS DUBOIS HASBROUCK COLE, son of
John Cole and Catharine Letts, and born in Kingston, Ulster Co., N.
Y., 4 April, 1818. Read Medicine and Surgery with Drs. Eastman and
Arnold, of Owego, N. Y. Graduated at Geneva Medical College in the
Class of 1849; was Assistant Surgeon 172d Pennsylvania Volunteers 15
Dec., 1862; promoted 31 same month to Surgeon, with rank of Major,
served to the close of the war; was Surgeon-in-Charge of Nelson
General Hospital, Yorktown, Va., for over six months. The Doctor now
practices medicine and resides in Sheshequin. They have one son--

    John Franklin Cole, born in Sheshequin, 4 April, 1860.


XIV. GEORGE LANDON, son of David Horton and Hannah Newell, born 5
August, 1838; married 23 Dec., 1864, LUCINDA MARIA HORTON, daughter
of Ulysses Horton and Sallie Elliot, and born 8 May, 1844. Children,
all born at Horn Brook:

    1. Jessie Lorena, born 23 Sept., 1865.

    2. Emma A., born 24 August, 1867.

    3. Ulysses David, born 22 May, 1870.

They reside at the old homestead.


I. SYLVESTER, son of Isaac S. Horton and Hannah Elliott (_Elijah_,
_Elijah M._, _Richard_, _John_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born in
Sheshequin, Pa., 28 April, 1814; married in Sheshequin, by Esq.
Kinney, to ABIGAIL COOLY, daughter of Rufus Cooly and Mary Horton,
and born about 1817.

Children:

He was a Union soldier and died in Kentucky, 16 May, 1862.


II. EMILY, daughter of Isaac S. Horton and Hannah Elliott, born 16
Oct., 1815; married 8 Oct., 1835, by Rev. N. Rouse, to REUBEN YOUNG,
son of Ephraim Young and Hannah Shaw, and born in Rhode Island, 19
Feb., 1815.

Children:

    1. Isaac Lewis, born 4 July, 1836.

    2. Susan Lyon, born 28 Sept., 1839; married William P. Horton.


III. JOHN ELLIOTT, son of Isaac S. Horton and Hannah Elliott, born 9
April, 1817; married by Esq. Holcomb, to ZIPPORA BIDLACK, daughter of
James Bidlack and Esther Moore.

Children:

    1. Martin Van Buren, married Louisa Ferguson, daughter of
    Curtis Ferguson, and Ethlinda Shores; had one son, viz.:
    Clayton.

    2. Isaac, married Lovilla Ferguson, sister of Louisa,--have one
    daughter, Lovilla.

    3. Alfred, married Sarah Hackette; no children.


IV. JOSEPH HARRISON, son of Isaac S. Horton and Hannah Elliott,
born 2 Dec., 1818; married, by Esq. Holcomb, ANASTHASIA STEPHENSON,
daughter of Benjamin Stephenson.

Children:

    1. Benjamin F. married 1. Sarah Elizabeth Shores, daughter of
    Silas Shores; married 2. Ruth Sackett; had by 1st wife, Orrin,
    Nancy, and Mary; she died 23 August, 1871; by 2d wife has one
    son.

    2. Hannah married Milton Horton, son of William Horton; they
    have one son and two daughters.

    3. Joseph, unmarried.

    4. Emily married William Bidlack, son of Stephen Bidlack; one
    son.

    5. Reuben.

    6. William.

    7. Asa.

    8. Edward.

    9. Anasthasia.


V. LYDIA, daughter of Isaac S. Horton and Hannah Elliott, born 9
April, 1820; married by Rev. Mr. Smith, to EDWARD VOUGHT, son of
Joseph Vought and Hannah Dietrick.

Children:

    1. Joseph M., married Catharine Elizabeth Horton, daughter of
    Daniel Horton and Rhoda Chaffee, and born 7 Feb., 1845.

    2. Lewis, married Elizabeth King.

    3. Hannah, married George Spencer.

    4. Frank, married Maretta Gillet, daughter of Lewis Gillet and
    Jemima Shores.

    5. Edward.

    6. Charlotte.

    7. Sumner.

    8. Emmerson.


VI. ELIJAH, son of Isaac S. Horton and Hannah Elliott, born 25 Dec.,
1821; married ELIZA HINEY, daughter of Timothy Hiney and Sally Wright.

Children:

    1. Alvin.

    2. Levi.

    3. Omar.

    4. Orrin.

    5. George.

    6. Guy.


VII. GEORGE, son of Isaac S. Horton and Hannah Elliott, born 22 Dec.,
1823; married by Rev. Joseph Towner, to EMILY BILLINGS, daughter of
George Billings and Elizabeth Towner.

Children, all born in Sheshequin:

    1. Elizabeth.

    2. Joseph.

    3. and 4. Sylvester and Eunice are both mutes.

    5. Susan.

    6. Olive E.

    7. William Mervin.

    8. George Lewis.

    9. Emma.

    10. Snyder.

    11. Chauncy.

    12. Hannah.


VIII. ELIZABETH, daughter of Isaac S. Horton and Hannah Elliott, born
11 Oct., 1825; married 8 August, 1846, by Franklin Blackman, Esq., to
Dr. WILLIAM CHAUNCY RANSON, born in Orwell, Pa., 15 Nov., 1824, son
of Henry Ranson and Hannah Spencer, who was a grand-daughter of Gen.
Spencer.

Children:

    1. Reuben, born 19 Oct., 1848; died 11 Sept., 1851.

    2. Hannah, born 27 March, 1852; died 18 Nov., 1866.

    3. Reuben Wilmot, born 1 June, 1855.

They reside at the old homestead of Isaac S. Horton with the old
lady. She is now (1875), eighty-three years old, but retains her
mental faculties remarkably well, is a fine Christian old lady.


IX. JAMES, son of Isaac S. Horton and Hannah Elliott, born 11 Dec.,
1847; married 1. THERESA TOWNER, 2. MARY COLLINS, 3. MARY PURCELL. He
had three sons and four daughters by his first wife. Franklin, his
oldest son, died in the army. By 2. wife he had Isaac, who lives in
Tioga Co., Pa.


X. SNYDER, son of Isaac S. Horton and Hannah Elliott, born 25 Dec.,
1830; married HELEN HAYDEN; they reside in Jones Co., Iowa; and have
four sons.


XI. HANNAH, daughter of Isaac S. Horton and Hannah Elliott, born 11
Oct., 1832; married BARNABAS HORTON WHITE; have Herson, Lydia, and
Herman.


XIII. ISAAC RUFUS, son of Isaac S. Horton and Hannah Elliott, born 30
Nov., 1837; married by Rev. Mr. Dutcher, 10 March, 1859, to TABITHA
MARIA DE MONEY, daughter of James De Money and Nancy S. Horton.
Children:

    1. David Snyder, born 10 March, 1860.

    2. Mary Emeline, born 20 Dec., 1861; died 13 Jan., 1874.

Isaac Rufus Horton was a Union soldier, and died for his country in
the hospital at Alexandria, Va.


IV. FRANKLIN, son of Lydia Horton and Rev. David Blackman (_Elijah
M._, _Elijah_, _Richard_, _John_, _David_, _Joseph I._), born in
Sheshequin, Pa., 11 April, 1832; married in Sheshequin, 26 May, 1869,
by Rev. W. H. Gavitt, to ETHLEEN GILLETT, daughter of Ensley W.
Gillett and Sarah E. Townsend, and born in Sheshequin, 27 Sept., 1844.

Children, all born in Ogle Co., Ill.:

    1. Sarah Maud, born 6 June, 1870.

    2. Otto E., born 7 Jan., 1872.

    3. Blanch, born 14 Feb., 1874.

Franklin Blackman is a very intellectual man, possesses superior
social qualities, a high sense of honor, and extraordinary business
capacities. He resides at Rochelle, Ill. He is self-educated,
possesses a large store of general information and practical
knowledge, a mind disciplined to study, and a generous spirit. He
has made two European tours, the first in 1866-67, and the second in
1868-69. During his travels and after his return home he published,
in the "Ogle County Reporter," _fifty letters_, under the title
of "Rambles in the Orient," ably written, and full of interesting
information. Under date of 17 June, 1875, he says, "In relation to
my two voyages across the Atlantic and my travels in Europe, I must
say, in all candor, that I revert to them as the most palmy days
of my earthly pilgrimage. Should opportunity occur, I would again
cheerfully place myself upon the perilous waves, that I might once
more enjoy the rich feast spread out before me in the classic lands
of the Orient."


I. HARRY LAWRENCE, son of William B. Horton and Melinda Blackman
(_Elijah M._, _Elijah_, _Richard_, _John_, _David_, _Joseph I._),
born in Sheshequin, Pa., 17 July, 1832; married at Milwaukee, Wis.,
26 Oct., 1858, by Rev. I. P. G. Ingraham, of the Episcopal Church, to
HELEN ELIZABETH BREED, daughter of A. O. T. Breed, Esq., and Margaret
Shields, both of Milwaukee, Wis., and born in Milwaukee, 20 Jan.,
1842. She died in Milwaukee, 25 Oct., 1864, and was buried in Forest
Home Cemetery, Milwaukee.

Children, both born in Milwaukee:

    1. Eugene Henry J., born 20 July, 1859.

    2. Olive Grant, born 10 June, 1864.

Mrs. Horton was a lady of education and refinement. She possessed an
excellent moral and religious character; was a worthy member of the
St. James Episcopal Church, of Milwaukee, in which she took a lively
interest, and was distinguished for her generosity--especially for
her many deeds of benevolence to the suffering and the poor. She
was a kind and dutiful wife, a most tender and affectionate mother,
and her early departure was deeply lamented, not only by her bosom
companion and near relatives, but also by the community in general.

[Illustration: Yours Truly

H. L. Horton]

Harry L. Horton's father was a well-to-do farmer, and Harry remained
with his parents and worked on the farm until he was seventeen years
old. He received but a moderate common-school education, and, during
his school-boy days, he was noted for his activity and sagacity, and
early exhibited more than ordinary business capacity. At the age of
seventeen he engaged as a clerk in the store of D. Brink & Son, at
Horn Brook, Pa., and remained with them until they sold out to H. W.
Langford & Co., and with them he continued his clerkship until they
closed business. Shortly after this, he was engaged for one year
by O. D. Bartlett, Esq., of Towanda, Pa., as clerk in his store,
and at the expiration of that time, he entered the store of Joseph
Powell & Co., of Towanda, with whom he served as clerk until 1854.
He always gave good satisfaction to his employers. Having by his
industry and economy laid up a small sum of money, he decided to go
West, and leaving Bradford County in 1854, he traveled extensively
in Michigan, Illinois and Wisconsin, until he neared the bottom
of his purse, without locating or engaging in business anywhere. But
at length, in 1856, he went to Milwaukee, and engaged in the produce
commission business, in which he was very successful. Here he seemed
to be permanently settled. But after the death of his wife, his
business, which had been very remunerative, seemed to lose much of
its interest, and in March, 1865, having closed up his business in
Milwaukee, with about $15,000 in pocket, he went to New York City,
and immediately engaged in the banking and broker business, in which
he has continued until the present time, conducting a large business,
which, under the supervision of his keen eye and his assiduous
personal attention, he has made very lucrative. He now owns a fine
property on Staten Island, and, though he lost largely by the panic
of 1873, he is still doing a fair business, and, to use his own
language, he "has always managed to pay a hundred cents on the dollar
and never _failed_."

He possesses excellent social qualities, is kind-hearted, generous
and noble, and at his banking house, 56 Broadway, New York, or at
his island home, those who visit him will meet with such a frank
and cordial reception as to make them feel that they are not only
at home, but at the home of one whose words and deeds define the
character of a true gentleman.

Mr. Horton was married 2. in Trinity Chapel, N. Y., 12 October,
1875, by the Rev. Dr. Weston, to Sara Patten, a lady of culture and
refinement of the city of New York, and an esteemed member of the
Episcopal Church.


II. HORACE, son of Wm. B. Horton and Melinda Blackman, born in
Sheshequin, Pa., 25 Sept., 1834; married at the Valley House, in
Sheshequin, 15 Oct., 1856, by C. H. Ames, Esq., to MARY SMITH,
daughter of Henry C. Smith and Sarah Webb, and born in Genoa, Cayuga
Co., N. Y., 22 Feb., 1835. No children.

Horace is a well-to-do farmer, owns a large farm about two miles from
the river, has a very pretty dwelling-house with slate roof, a good
barn and out-buildings. He is a prominent man in the township, rents
his farm and lives at ease. He inherited a part of the old homestead
farm.


III. ELIZABETH, daughter of William B. Horton and Melinda Blackman,
born in Sheshequin, 25 Aug., 1836; married in Sheshequin, 23 Jan.,
1855, by Rev. J. M. Peebles, to PERLEY HUTCHINS KINNEY, son of Perley
Kinney, Esq., and Sarah Hutchins, and born in Sheshequin, 20 April,
1826. They have two children, viz.:

    1. Sarah, born 18 Oct., 1856.

    2. Flora, born 8 Oct., 1858.

They were both born in Sheshequin, are well educated, amiable and
highly accomplished young ladies.


IV. AMAZILLA, daughter of William B. Horton and Melinda Blackman,
born in Sheshequin, 18 Aug., 1840; married in Sheshequin, 18 Nov.,
1863, by Rev. Schuyler B. Gibson, to HENRY CLAY KINNEY, son of Guy
Kinney and Matilda Gore, and born in Sheshequin, 6 Aug., 1839. He
died 11 March, 1871.

Children, all born in Sheshequin:

    1. H. Gordon, born 8 Sept., 1864.

    2. Horace Horton, born 6 June, 1868.

    3. Hilene S., born 7 April, 1870.

Mr. Kinney was an intelligent farmer. The Kinney family is one of the
oldest, most respectable and most intellectual families of Bradford
County. Among them we find editors, legislators, lawyers, and last,
but not least, educated farmers.


V. MARY ELLEN, daughter of William B. Horton and Melinda Blackman,
born in Sheshequin, 25 Oct., 1844; married in Sheshequin, 25 Oct.,
1866, by Rev. J. F. Brownell, to WILLIAM MILES SHORES, a farmer, son
of David Shores and Marinda Rippeth, and born in Wysox, Pa., 11 Jan.,
1843; have Henry Clay Shores, born in Wysox, 19 June, 1868. They
reside in Towanda, Pa.


VI. MILES EMMETT, son of William B. Horton and Saloma J. Kilmer
his second wife, born in Sheshequin, 18 Nov., 1851; married in
Sheshequin, 4 July, 1872, by Rev. George L. Williams, to MARY ARINDA
WEBB, daughter of Andrew Webb and Mary Bull, and born in Sheshequin,
15 Dec., 1851. They have one son, viz.:

    William Bullard, born in Sheshequin, 13 Oct., 1873.

Miles E. Horton owns a part of the old homestead, has made many
improvements, is a good liver, and possesses fine social qualities.
The widow of W. B. Horton, a plain, intelligent, unassuming woman,
lives very happily with her son Miles and his amiable lady.


VII. ROWENA HORTENSE, daughter of William B. Horton and Saloma J.
Kilmer, born in Sheshequin, 23 Oct., 1855; married Jan., 1871, to
THEODORE GARDNER SMITH. They reside at Horn Brook, Pa.


JOSEPH ROSE, son of William B. Horton and Mary Rose, born in
Sheshequin, _when his father was but sixteen years old_; married ANNA
LORINDA SHORES, daughter of Caleb Shores and Anna Horton, and born on
Shores' Hill, 31 July, 1821. They live in Waverly, N. Y., and have
two children, Sophia and Melinda; Sophia married Smith Barnum--reside
in Litchfield; Melinda remains unmarried.

Joseph R. Horton possesses more than ordinary intellectual capacity,
and is highly respected and esteemed. He was a faithful Union soldier
in the war of the Rebellion, and lost a leg in the service.




_Third Generation.--Caleb I._


I. BARNABAS, son of Caleb Horton I. and Abigail Hallock, born at
Cutchogue, L. I., Sept., 1666; married about 1686, SARAH HINES.

Children, all born at Cutchogue:

    1. Caleb, born 1687; married Phebe Terry.

    2. Barnabas.

    3. Penelope.

    4. Bethia.


II. JONATHAN, son of Caleb I. and Abigail Hallock, born at Cutchogue,
about 1668; married about 1693, perhaps, BETHIA CONKLIN.

Children, born at Cutchogue:

    1. Jonathan, born 1694; married Elizabeth Goldsmith.

    2. Barnabas.


IV. DAVID, son of Caleb Horton I. and Abigail Hallock, born at
Cutchogue, about 1672; married MARY HORTON, daughter of Capt.
Jonathan Horton I.

Children, all born at Cutchogue:

    1. David, born in 1697; married Eliza Sweazy.

    2. Silas, born in 1700.

    3. John.

    4. Adam.

    5. Patience.

    6. Mary.

    7. Abigail.

    8. Lydia.

    9. Phebe, born 1715; married Constant King, son of Capt. John
    King, a mariner, of Southold.


V. MARY, daughter of Caleb Horton I. and Abigail Hallock, born at
Cutchogue; married 31 Nov., 1682, NATHANIEL TERRY, son of Richard
Terry I.

Children, all born at Cutchogue:

    1. Phebe.

    2. Uriah,

    and others, names not known.




_Fourth Generation.--Caleb I._


I. CALEB, son of Barnabas Horton and Sarah Hines (_Caleb I._), born
in Southold 22 Dec., 1687; married 10 Dec., 1714, PHEBE TERRY,
daughter of Nathaniel, son of Richard Terry I., and born in Southold,
in 1689. They moved to Roxbury, now Chester, N. J., in 1748, and
settled there. They were both members of the Southold Church, and
liberal supporters of the Gospel. On their tombstone in Chester
Cemetery we find "Caleb Horton, of Southold, L. I., N. Y., died
6 Aug., 1772, having lived almost 85 years with an unblemished
character. Phebe, wife of Caleb Horton, died 24 Dec., 1767, having
finished a life of 78 years, 58 of which she was the wife of Caleb
Horton.

      "'Martha's care she had at heart,
      And also chosen Mary's better part.'"

Children all born in Southold:

    1. Caleb, born 1715; married Sarah Benjamin.

    2. Hannah, born 1717; married Samuel Sweazy, son of Joseph
    Sweazy.

    3. Nathaniel, born 13 Oct., 1719; married Mehetabel Wells.

    4. Nathan, born about 1720; married Mehetabel Case.

    5. Phebe, born about 1722; married Henry Tuthill.

    6. Elijah, born 19 June, 1724; married Lydia Sweazy.

    7. Richard, born about 1726; married Elizabeth Harrison.

    8. Sarah, born about 1735; married Stephen Sweazy.

    9. Mary, born about 1831; married Richard Terry.

    10. Rachel, born about 1733; married 23 Aug., 1753, Jonathan
    Racket.

    11. Rhoda, born about 1728; married Robert Robinson;
    died in Chester, 30 June, 1771, aged 43 years and 5 days.


II. BARNABAS, son of Barnabas Horton and Sarah Hines, born in
Southold, about 1690; married MARY SWEAZY and moved to Goshen, Orange
Co., N. Y., about 1732.

Children, probably all born in Southold:

    1. Barnabas, born in 1772; married Abigail Parshall.

    2. David, born 1724; married Mary Warner.

    3. Matthias, born 1726; married.

    4. Elihu, born 1720; died young.

    5. Silas, born 1730; married Experience Vail.

    6. Mary, married Charles Seely.


I. JONATHAN, son of Jonathan Horton and Bethia Conklin (_Caleb I._),
born at Cutchogue, L. I., about 1694; married in 1720, to ELIZABETH
GOLDSMITH, daughter John Goldsmith, and born at Southold, 3 Nov.,
1701. They were both members of the Southold Church.

Children, all born at Cutchogue:

    1. Israel, born in 1728; married Sarah Lee.

    2. Jonathan, born in 1730; married Bethia Horton.

    3. Barnabas, born in 1732; married, perhaps, Mary Tuthill.

    4. Zaccheus, born in 1734; married widow Elizabeth Case.

    5. Bethia, born in 1736.

    6. Elizabeth, born in 1739; married David Tuthill, probably a
    son of Henry Tuthill and Phebe Youngs, and born in Southold
    about 1735.


II. BARNABAS, son of Jonathan Horton and Bethia Conklin, born at
Cutchogue, in 1695; married about 1721, to SALLY CLARK.

Children, all born at Cutchogue:

    1. Jonathan, born 1722.

    2. Bethia.

    3. Calvin.


I. DAVID, son of David Horton and Mary Horton (_Caleb I._), born at
Cutchogue, in 1697; married about 1720, perhaps, to ELIZA SWEAZY,
daughter of Richard Sweazy.

Children, all born at Cutchogue:

    1. Richard, born in 1720; married, probably, Mehitabel Jayne.

    2. Mary, born in 1724.

    3. Abigail.

    4. John.




_Fifth Generation.--Caleb I._


I. CALEB, son of Caleb Horton and Phebe Terry (_Barnabas_, _Caleb
I._), born in Southold in 1715; married in April, 1737, to SARAH
BENJAMIN, born in 1717. They moved to Chester, N. J., about 1748.

Children, all born in Southold, except Sally and Mary, who were born
in Chester:

    1. Caleb, born in 1738.

    2. Richard.

    3. Stephen.

    4. Justin.

    5. Patty.

    6. Sally.

    7. Mary, married Richard Terry.


III. NATHANIEL, son of Caleb Horton and Phebe Terry, born in
Southold, 13 Oct., 1819; married MEHETABEL WELLS about 1740. They
moved to Chester, N. J., in 1748. "She died 10 Dec., 1801. He died
24 Jan., 1804, having lived about 85 years, with an unblemished
character."--_From tombstone, Chester Cemetery._

Children, 1. and 2. born in Southold, the rest in Chester:

    1. Dea. Nathaniel, born in 1741; married Rebecca Robinson.

    2. Benjamin, born 1743.

    3. David, born 2 Sept., 1750; married Olive Skellinger.

    4. Daniel, married Martha Terry.

    5. Polly, married Caleb Terry.

    6. Mehetabel, married Edward Lewis.


IV. NATHAN, son of Caleb Horton and Phebe Terry, born in Southold
about 1725; married about 1749, to MEHETABEL CASE, of Southold. They
moved to Chester, N. J., soon after marriage. He was a soldier and a
captain in the Revolutionary war.

Children, all born in Chester, or Black River, Morris Co., N. J.:

    1. Israel, born 1750; died young.

    2. Jemima, married Houston, or Hughson; lived at Mount Highest,
    N. J.

    3. David, no record.

    4. Nathan, born 25 Feb., 1757; married Elizabeth Eagles.

    5. Bethia, married Caleb Terry, of Black River.

    6. Sarah, married Daniel Sweazy.

    7. Zephaniah, born 13 Nov., 1760; married Jane McCurry.

    8. Phineas, born 17 Feb., 1774; married 1. Bethia Luce; 2.
    Esther Horton.


VI. ELIJAH, son of Caleb Horton and Phebe Terry, born in Southold, 19
June, 1724; married LYDIA SWEAZY, daughter of Joseph Sweazy, and born
in Southold about 1731. They moved to Roxbury, now Chester, N. J., in
1748. He died 7 Oct., 1799. She died 18 March, 1723. He was
a Justice of the Peace, of fair reputation, and much respected.

Children, all born in Chester:

    1. Barnabas, born 27 Sept., 1749; married Elizabeth Coleman, or
    Corwin.

    2. Elijah, born 19 Dec., 1756; married Lydia Sweazy.

    3. Silas, born 17 July, 1746: married 1. Susan Corwin; 2. Mary
    Kelsey; 3. Esther Horton.


VII. RICHARD, son of Caleb Horton and Phebe Terry, born in Southold
about 1727; married ELIZABETH HARRISON, and moved to Chester, N.
J., about 1750; and thence to Radnor, Delaware Co., Pa. They were
Quakers, and attended the Radnor Meeting, but the early records
of Radnor Meeting cannot be found. The dates are mostly given by
estimate. He remained in Chester only a short time.

Children, all born in Radnor:

    1. Samuel, born about 1752; settled in Huntington Co., Pa.

    2. Nathan, born 1754; settled in Huntington Co., Pa.

    3. Josiah, born 1756.

    4. Jesse.

    5. John, married Elizabeth Thomas.

    6. Thomas.

    7. Septimus, died in Baltimore, about 1850.


I. BARNABAS, son of Barnabas Horton and Mary Sweazy (_Barnabas_,
_Caleb I._), born in 1720; married in 1740, to ABIGAIL PARSHALL, born
in Goshen about 1721.

Children, born in Goshen:

    1. Barnabas, born about 1743; married 8 Nov., 1767, to Abigail
    Dickerson.

    2. Abigail, born about 1748; married Henry Youngs.

    3. Sarah, born about 1752; married 23 July, 1775, Henry Conklin.

    4. Anna, born about 1754; married 12 Oct., 1774, Ichabod
    Cleveland.

    5. Lydia, born about 1756; married 5 Feb., 1775, Thomas Webb.


II. DAVID, son of Barnabas Horton and Mary Sweazy, born about 1724;
married 31 May, 1744, MARY WARNER. They settled in the town of Goshen
about 1760. He was a warm Whig, was one of the signers of the Pledge
of Independence for the Colonies in 1775.

Children:

    1. David, born about 1745; married 29 Oct., 1773, Theodosia
    Allen.

    6. Dorothy, born 3 April, 1756; married Eli Corwin.


III. MATHIAS, son of Barnabas Horton and Mary Sweazy, born about
1726; married about 1750, and had Mathias, born in Goshen in 1751,
and others, names not known.


IV. ELIHU, son of Barnabas Horton and Mary Sweazy, born about 1728;
married Colman, and had one child, which died young. He was a true
patriot, and signed the Pledge of Independence in 1775.


V. SILAS, son of Barnabas Horton and Mary Sweazy, born in Southold,
about 1730; married about 1755, EXPERIENCE VAIL, daughter of Jeremiah
Vail, Esq., and Mary, and born in Goshen, N. Y., about 1732.

Children, probably, all born in Goshen:

    1. Silas, born 24 August, 1756; married Mary Danes.

    2. Benjamin, married 24 Sept., 1786, Anna Goldsmith.

    3. Gamaliel, or Samuel, married Mehetabel Hulse.

    4. Mathias, married Sarah Rumsey.

    5. Elihu.

    6. Barnabas, married Milicent Howell.

    7. Nellie, married ---- Stringham.

    8. Mary, married John L. Hommedinn.

    9. Lucretia, married Henry Youngs.

    10. Hannah, married Isaiah Vail, Jr.

    11. Abigail, born 3 Sept., 1773; married Capt. Daniel Stringham.


I. LIEUT. ISRAEL, son of Jonathan Horton and Elizabeth Goldsmith
(_Jonathan_, _Caleb I._), born at Cutchogue, about 1728; married in
1755, to SARAH LEE, daughter of Rev. John Lee, of Lyme, Conn., born
about 1730. The Rev. John Lee had two sons who were preachers.

Israel and his family moved from Cutchogue to Goshen Township in
1762. He was a farmer. In the Autumn of 1771, he went to Newburgh
with a load of grain. On the way home, he was taken sick, succeeded
in getting home, but died in a day or two after. About 1782, his
widow married Parshall Terry, formerly of Southold. He was a widower,
was living with his family in Wyoming Valley in 1778. He and his
family were in the famed Forty Fort the night after the Indian battle
and massacre. The next morning they fled to the mountains and after
suffering great hardships, crossing the "big swamp," afterwards
known as "Swamp Dismal," or the "Shades of Death," they reached
Stroudsburg, Pa., in safety. Leaving his family here, he hastened
to Orange Co., N. Y., for assistance. During his absence his wife
was taken sick with "camp distemper" (malignant dysentery), and died
leaving a large family of children, the youngest but three years old.

He took his family to Little Britain, Orange Co., N. Y., and as
above-stated, married the widow Horton. The two families, all told,
numbering twenty-two persons. The house in which they lived being an
old-fashioned double log-house, they hired a school-master and made
one part of it a school-house, thus evincing a laudable determination
to have the education of their household properly cared for. The
writer obtained these facts in 1828, from Benjamin Horton, son of
Israel, who was one of the pupils. But this arrangement was not of
long continuance, for in 1786, Sarah, the mother and step-mother
died, and was buried by her first husband in Warwick Cemetery.

Israel Horton had children as follows, the first four born in
Southold, the rest in Goshen, Orange Co.:

    1. Israel, born 23 Sept., 1756; married Anna Van Devort.

    2. Jason, born 18 Dec., 1758; married Mary Terry.

    3. Jeremiah, born 12 Nov., 1760; married Mary Goldsmith.

    4. Eunice, born Dec., 1761; married George Howell.

    5. John, born 30 July, 1763; married Deborah Terry.

    6. Joseph Lee, born 27 April, 1765; married Hannah Todd.

    7. Sarah, born in 1767; died young.

    8. Mary, born 6 Dec., 1768; married John Clark.

    9. Samuel, born in 1770; died of small-pox; unmarried.

    10. Benjamin, born 7 Feb., 1772; married Hannah Vance.

Israel Horton and his wife were pious people, active members of the
Southold Church, and after removing to Orange County they became
members of the Presbyterian Church of Warwick. Their children were
trained up to love and fear the Lord and keep his commandments.
He was a soldier in the old French war, and, in 1758, bearing the
commission of Lieutenant, he had charge of Fort Stanwix, N. Y., and
remained there until the close of the war.


II. JONATHAN, son of Jonathan Horton and Elizabeth Goldsmith, born at
Cutchogue, L. I., about 1730; married BETHIA HORTON about 1752, and
moved to Orange Co., N. Y. He was a zealous Whig, and early espoused
the cause of the colonies against the mother country. He was one of
the signers for the Pledge for Independence, in 1775.--_Vide "History
of Orange County," page 499._

Children, probably born in Orange County:

    1. John, born 1753, went to Wyoming Valley; married Mary De La
    Montayne.

    2. Caleb, went to New Jersey; married a Jayne.

    3. Benjamin.


III. ZACCHEUS, son of Jonathan Horton and Elizabeth Goldsmith,
born at Cutchogue, 1734; married widow ELIZABETH CASE; moved to
Orange County; lived at Cornwall, where he signed the Pledge for
Independence. He was probably married twice. He had a son, Zaccheus,
who also signed the Pledge, and after the war was over he probably
settled at Penfield, Monroe Co., N. Y., and was appointed Postmaster,
at the first town meeting of that town, in 1811. Some of his
posterity are living in that part of the country yet, and some are
buried in East Palmyra Cemetery, Wayne Co., N. Y.




_Sixth Generation.--Caleb I._


I. DEA. NATHANIEL, son of Nathaniel Horton and Mehitabel Wells
(_Caleb_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born in Southold, about 1741;
married in 1761, to REBECCA ROBINSON, born 21 June, 1742; died, 14
Dec., 1819. He died 13 Aug., 1824; moved to Chester, N. J., with his
father's family, in 1748.

Children, all born at Chester:

    1. Huldah, born 14 Jan., 1762; married Joel Coe; died 13 Dec.,
    1803.

    2. Rebecca, born 31 Dec., 1763; married Benj. Fordyce; died in
    1840.

    3. Jonah, born in 1765; married Jane Dalrymple; died in
    Lockport, N. Y.

    4. Susan, born in 1767; married 30 March, 1798, to Robert
    McCollam; died in Calais, N. Y.

    5. Polly, born in 1769; married David Lewis.

    6. Nathaniel.

    7. Hiram.

    8. Mehitabel, all three died in childhood.

    9. Elisha, born about 1777; married Mary Horton; died in
    Scipio, N. Y.

    10. Nathaniel, born 1778; married Eunice Horton, daughter of
    Daniel Horton and Martha Terry.

    11. Esther, born about 1782.

Dea. Nathaniel Horton was one of the excellent of the earth, loved by
all.


II. BENJAMIN, son of Nathaniel Horton and Mehitabel Wells, born in
Southold, in 1743; married 1767; moved to Brutus, N. Y., and settled
there; died in Brutus.

Children:

    1. Benjamin, born 1778, had William, Wines and Omar.

    2. David, born 1780, had Spencer, who lives in Lansing, Mich.,
    and others.

    3. Rhoda, born 1782.


III. DAVID, son of Nathaniel Horton and Mehitabel Wells, born in
Chester, 2 Sept., 1750; married OLIVE SKELLINGER, born 28 March,
1761.

Children, all born in Chester:

    1. Edward, born 17 March, 1777; married Charlotte Seward.

    2. Mehitabel.

    3. Daniel.

David Horton was a soldier in the Revolution--served to the close of
the war--drew a pension to the close of his life. He was a man of
integrity and sound Christian character.


IV. DANIEL, son of Nathaniel Horton and Mehitabel Wells, born in
Chester, in 1751; married MARTHA TERRY, daughter of Richard Terry and
Mary Horton, and born in Chester, in 1757; died 9 Feb., 1842. He died
27 Nov., 1835.

Children, born in Chester:

    1. Stephen, died young.

    2. Eunice, born 1782; married Col. Nathaniel Horton.

    3. Daniel, married Esther Terry.

    4. Lydia, married William Skellinger.

    5. Esther, married Phineas Horton, being his 3d wife.

Daniel Horton was a Justice of the Peace for many years, of fair
reputation and much respected.


II. JEMIMA, daughter of Capt. Nathan Horton and Mehitabel Case
(_Caleb_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born in Chester, about 1752;
married about 1770, ROBERT HUGHSON. They lived at a place called
Mount Highest, N. J.

Children, probably all born at Mount Highest:

    1. John.

    2. Elizabeth.

    3. Nathan.

    4. Jacob.

    5. Sarah.

    6. Samuel.

    7. Phineas.

    8. Robert.

    9. Daniel.

    10. Julia.

    11. Lydia.

Jemima Hughson died 3 Oct., 1842. Her husband survived her six years.
The children nearly all had families. Phineas had Elizabeth, Emeline,
Theodore, Sarah, Mary, John and Lura; Julia married a Leek; Lydia
married a Messler.


IV. COL. NATHAN, son of Capt. Nathan Horton and Mehitabel Case, born
in Chester, N. J., 25 Feb., 1757; married in New York City, 10 July,
1783, to _Elizabeth Eagles_, daughter of John Eagles and Hannah ----,
and born in the city of New York, 1 Dec., 1766. They moved to North
Carolina about 1785, and settled on New River, then Wilkes, now
Watauga Co., N. C.

Children, probably, all born at New River, except--

    1. Hannah, born at Chester, 15 Dec., 1784; and died at
    Hagerstown, Md., while on the way to North Carolina.

    2. William, born 15 August, 1786; married Milley Dula.

    3. James, born 28 Feb., 1789; married Sydnia Webb.

    4. David Eagles, born 4 May, 1792; married Sarah Dula.

    5. Phineas, born 9 Jan., 1795; married Sarah Councill.

    6. Sarah, born 19 Sept., 1797; died of croup when young.

    7. John, born 11 June, 1800; died of croup when young.

    8. Elizabeth, born 15 Sept., 1803; married Zephaniah Horton,
    Jr., of Yancey Co.

    9. Jonathan, born 26 Feb., 1806; married Malinda Hartzag.

Col. Nathan Horton was a soldier in the Revolutionary War, and was on
guard at the hanging of Major Andre. The gun which he then carried
has been carefully preserved, and is now in the possession of his
grandsons, who live near Elkville, Wilkes Co., N. C.

The Colonel was a farmer, a prominent man and for many years a
Colonel of a regiment of militia of his county. He represented the
county of Ashe in the Legislature in 1800-1-2. He was one of the
first settlers in the county, and became wealthy in lands and other
property. He died at his residence on New River, 22 July, 1824, and
there his wife also died, 19 May, 1854.


V. BETHIA, daughter of Capt. Nathan Horton and Mehitabel Case, born
in Chester, N. J., about 1759; married CALEB TERRY, of Chester.

Children, probably, all born in Chester:

    1. Nathaniel, married Coleman.

    2. Nathan, married Van Doren.

    3. Richard, married Smith.

    4. Julia, married Caleb Horton.

    5. Deborah, married Thomas Stoute.

    6. Jemima, died young.

    7. Esther, married 1. Daniel Horton, son of David Horton;
    married 2. Nathan Hughson, son of Robert Hughson.


VI. SARAH, daughter of Capt. Nathan Horton and Mehitabel Case, born
in Chester, N. J., about 1761; married DANIEL SWEAZY.

Children, probably, all born in Chester:

    1. Benjamin, married Margaret Wiley.

    2. James, married Effie Swackhammer.

    3. Isaac, married an English lady, name not given.

    4. Sarah, married Low Sliker.

    5. Mehitabel, married John Sliker.

    6. Mary, never married.


VII. ZEPHANIAH, son of Capt. Nathan Horton and Mehitabel Case, born
in Chester, N. J., 13 Nov., 1760; went to North Carolina when a young
man, soon returned to Chester, and 25 March, 1788, married JANE
MCCURRY, daughter of Malcolm McCurry, Esq., of Chester, and soon
afterwards moved to Wilkes Co., N. C., and thence in 1793, to Burke
Co., and thence to Tennessee, where he remained only a short time,
and then returned to North Carolina, and settled in Buncomb, now
Yancey Co., where he lived, and where, 5 April, 1844, he died. He
was a magistrate for many years, and also represented Buncomb Co. in
the Legislature, in 1810-1812, and 1815.

On the day he was seventy years old he had his funeral sermon
preached by Rev. Goodson McDaniel, of the Holston Conference. His
wife died at her residence, 13 August, 1857. Her father was born on
the Island of Ila, Highlands, Scotland. He was kidnapped when a small
boy and brought to New Jersey, where he obtained a good education,
became a lawyer, and practiced law at Morristown, N. J.

Children, 1. and 2. were born in Wilkes Co.; 3. born in Burke Co.,
and the rest in Buncomb Co., N. C.:

    1. Nathan, born 24 Jan., 1789.

    2. Rachel, born 31 May, 1791; died 29 Oct., 1800.

    3. Sarah, born 30 June, 1794.

    4. Malcolm, born 8 April, 1797.

    5. Elizabeth, born 15 Nov., 1799.

    6. Zephaniah, born 26 Nov., 1802.

    7. Jane M., born 18 March, 1806.

    8. Phebe D., born 30 Oct., 1810.


VIII. PHINEAS, son of Capt. Nathan Horton and Mehitabel Case, born in
Chester, N. J., 17 Feb., 1774; married 1. 19 Oct., 1797, to BETHIA
LUCE (Lewis), she died 20 August, 1809. He married 2. the widow
ESTHER HORTON, daughter of Daniel Horton, and widow of Silas Horton.

Children, all born in Chester, 1, 2, 3, 4, by first wife; 5 and 6 by
2d wife:

    1. Sarah, born 27 March, 1799; married Jeremiah Wilcox.

    2. Nathan, born 27 Dec., 1801; married Julia Horton.

    3. Elias, born 6 Feb., 1803; married Melinda Lewis.

    4. Mary, born 6 Feb., 1806; married Daniel Skellinger.

    5. Martha Esther, born 7 June, 1819.

    6. Daniel, born 3 August, 1820; married Lydia C. Horton.

Phineas Horton died 8 Feb., 1857. Esther is still (1874) living,
resides at the homestead with her son Daniel.


I. BARNABAS, son of Barnabas Horton and Abigail Parshall (_Barnabas,
Barnabas, Caleb I._), born in Goshen, N. Y., about 1747; married 1. 8
Nov., 1767, to ABIGAIL DICKERSON, she died about 1777, he married 2.
RACHEL BOSTWICK.

Children, all born in Goshen, exact order of births not known:

    1. David.

    2. Isaac.

    3. Selah.

    4. Richard.

    5. Barnabas, married Mehitabel Youngs.

    6. Mary.

    7. Betsey.

    8. Henry.

    9. Benjamin, born 12 April, 1788.

    10. Abigail, married William Brewster.


I. SAMUEL, son of Richard Horton and Elizabeth Harrison (_Caleb,
Barnabas, Caleb I._), born in Radnor, Delaware Co., Pa., about 1752.
He moved to Huntingdon Co., Pa., married and raised a large family,
but no family record has been found. He was a blacksmith, and had the
reputation of being a first-class workman.


II. NATHAN, son of Richard Horton and Elizabeth Harrison, born in
Radnor about 1754. He settled in Huntingdon Co., Pa., and was a
blacksmith by occupation, a very skillful workman, and a man of good
character and standing. He married REBECCA PRIEST, and lived in West
Chester for a short time before he went to Huntingdon.

Children:

    1. William, born in West Chester, Pa., about 1789.

    2. Henry, born in West Chester, 25 Jan., 1791; married
    Elizabeth White.

    3. Mary, born in West Chester, 25 Jan., 1791; (twins).

    The rest viz.:

    4. Catherine.

    5. Rebecca.

    6. Deborah.

    7. John.

    8. Elizabeth.

    9. Nathan Priest,

    were all born in Huntingdon.


V. JOHN, son of Richard Horton and Elizabeth Harrison, born in Radnor
in 1762; married ELIZABETH THOMAS.

Children, all born in Newtown, Chester Co., Pa.:

    1. Jesse, born in 1786; married about 1819, Mary Steel.

    2. Jacob, born in 1791; married about 1813, Sarah Winans.

    3. John, born 1798; married about 1828, Jane Lindsley.

    4. Elizabeth, born 27 Nov., 1800; married Samuel Black.


I. LIEUT. JOHN, son of Jonathan Horton and Bethia Horton (_Jonathan,
Jonathan, Caleb I._), born in Southold, L. I., 1753; went in early
life to Chester, N. J., and thence to Wyoming Valley, where about
1782, he married MARY DE LA MONTAGNYE, daughter of John De La
Montagnye. He was a soldier in the Revolutionary War, and was a
Lieutenant at the battle of Wyoming, July, 1778. He and his wife both
died in Wyoming.

Children, all born in Wyoming:

    1. Sarah, born about 1784; married John Hannas; settled in
    Hanover, Pa.

    2. Mary, born about 1786; married John Shalls; settled in
    Kingston, Pa.

    3. Ann, born about 1788; died unmarried.

    4. John, born about 1790; married ---- Wickizer.

    5. Miller, born 2 Feb., 1792; married Elizabeth Waller.

    6. Josiah, born 1795; went south; died in Georgia.

    7. Jesse, born 1797; married 1. ---- Headly; 2. Widow Cook.

    8. Lewis Mulison, born 1799; married Priscilla Crisman.

    9. Abigail, born 1803; died in Kingston, in 1808.


I. SILAS, son of Silas Horton and Experience Vail (_Barnabas_,
_Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born in Goshen, 24 Aug., 1756; married about
1777, MARY DANES. Settled in Wallkill, Orange Co., N. Y. He died 25
Dec., 1816.

Silas, though young, like his father, was truly patriotic, and signed
the Pledge of Independence for the Colonies in 1775.

Children, probably all born in Wallkill:

    1. Silas Danes, born in July, 1778.

    2. Barnabas, born 1780; died in 1867.

    3. Hiram, born 1782; died in 1840.

    4. Nelly, married Timothy Wheat.

    5. Molly, married Israel Moore; had Alfred and William; she
    married 2. Daniel Slawson, and had six children.

    6. Mehala, married William Wheat.

This family were all dead in 1873, except Mehala.


IV. MATTHIAS, son of Silas Horton and Experience Vail, born in
Goshen, in 1765; married about 1800, SARAH RUMSEY, born in Goshen,
about 1765.

Children, probably all born in Goshen:

    1. John, born in 1801.

    2. James, born 1803.

    3. Hector, born 26 Jan., 1805.

    4. Gabriel, born 9 Aug., 1806; married Eliza Corwin; dead.

    5. Dolly (Dorothy), born 1809; married John Coleman.

    6. Matthias, born 26 Jan., 1812; married Eveline Williams.

    7. Julia, born 1814; married Hector Tuthill.

Matthias Horton died 1815; his wife in 1842.


V. ELIHU, son of Silas Horton and Experience Vail, born 1758;
married, about 1779, HANNAH COLEMAN. He was a zealous Whig in
Revolutionary times, and signed the Pledge of Independence for the
Colonies in 1775.

Children, probably born in Goshen:

    1. Ira, born 1780; married Sarah Vanduzen.

    2. Gabriel H., married Margaret Faulkner.


VI. BARNABAS, son of Silas Horton and Experience Vail, born in
Goshen, 30 June, 1770 (Mrs. Lee says 3 Jan.); married in 1794,
MILICENT HOWELL, of Southampton, L. I., born 18 Sept., 1770; died 13
Jan., 1849. He died 24 Oct., 1823, both in Minnisink.

Children:

    1. Parmenas Howell, born in Wallkill, 13 Dec., 1795; married
    Fanny Cash.

    2. Anna, born in Wallkill, N. Y., 21 Jan., 1798; married Simon
    W. Stoddard; died 30 Sept., 1843.

    3. Harvey, born in Goshen, 1 Feb., 1800; married Mary Bennet.

    4. Horace, born in Minnisink, 6 Oct., 1803; left at 18; never
    heard of afterwards.

    5. Gabriel, born 9 Aug., 1806, in Minnisink; died 18 Dec., 1847.

    6. Milicent Ellen, born 10 July, 1809; married Charles Lee.

    7. Hampton Howell, born in Minnisink, 16 May, 1811; died 6
    Jan., 1825.


XI. ABIGAIL, daughter of Silas Horton and Experience Vail, born in
Goshen, in 1773; married in Goshen, in 1794, CAPT. DANIEL STRINGHAM,
born in Wallkill, N. Y., in 1765. They moved to the State of Indiana
in 1816. He died in 1841. She died in 1842.

Children, all born in Middletown, N. Y.:

    1. John D. Stringham, born in 1795; died in 1814.

    2. Silas Horton Stringham, born 7 Nov., 1797.

    3. Charles S., born 1799; died 1818.

    4. Lewis, born 1801; died 1816.

    5. William M., born 1803; died 1805.

    6. Margaret, born 1805; married Z. C. Hovey in 1837; died 1874.

    7. Jane, born 1808; married Randolph Widding; is now a widow in
    Terre Haute, Ind.

    8. William M., born 1808; died 1816.

    9. Hannah, born 1811; married John Gilkey; now a widow,
    Crawfordsville, Ind.

    10. Mary, born 1814; died 1816.


X. HANNAH, daughter of Silas Horton and Experience Vail, born in
Goshen, about 1770; married in 1790, ISAIAH VAIL, JR. Settled in
Goshen.

Children, probably all born in Goshen:

    1. Lebbeus Lathrop, born 27 Oct., 1791; married Sally Moore;
    had 10 children.

    2. Julia, married Whitehead Halstead; had 5 children.

    3. Dolly, died in infancy.

    4. Oliver Horton, married Eunice Moore; had 5 children.

    5. Nathaniel, died unmarried.

    6. William Morris, married Harriet Edwards; had 10 children.

    7. James Williamson, married 1. Lindamira Jackson, had 2
    children; married 2. Rebecca Sherman, grand-daughter of
    the HON. ROGER SHERMAN, of Connecticut, of the CONTINENTAL
    CONGRESS; had 5 children.


I. ISRAEL, JR., first son of Lieut. Israel Horton and Sarah Lee
(_Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Caleb I._), born in Cutchogue, Southold,
23 Sept., 1756. He died at Phelps, Ontario Co., N. Y., 22 July,
1813. She died Jan., 1842. He moved with his father from Southold to
Goshen, N. Y., in 1762. At the death of his father he was about 15
years old, and he being the oldest of the family, remained with his
mother, and assisted in taking care of the family. On the 23 Feb.,
1780, he married ANNA VAN DEVORT; she was the daughter of Thomas
Van Devort, and was born in Orange Co., N. Y., 29 Nov., 1763. He
removed from Orange County to Owego, N. Y., about 1801 or 1802, and
in 1816 from Owego to Phelps, Ontario Co., N. Y., where he settled
permanently, and spent the remainder of his days. They were pious
people and members of the Methodist Episcopal Church.

Children:

    1. Jason, born in Orange Co., N. Y., 23 Feb., 1781; married
    Sally Miller, of Geneva.

    2. William Lee, born in Orange County, New York, 21 October,
    1781.

    3. Sarah, born in Orange County, New York, 9 April, 1784;
    married in Phelps, 1813, Samuel Minnis.

    4. Phebe, born in Orange Co., N. Y., 6 March, 1786; married
    Frederick Schenick, of Spencer, N. Y.

    5. John, born in Orange Co., N. Y., 26 Feb., 1788; married
    Rachel Hiler.

    6. Thomas Van Devort, born in Orange Co., N. Y., 6 April, 1790;
    died 21 July, 1811.

    7. Benjamin, born in Orange Co., N. Y., 9 Sept., 1792; died 22
    Sept., 1834.

    8. Arietta, born in Orange Co., N. Y., 28 Nov., 1794; married
    Isaac Butler.

    9. Peter Davis, born in Orange Co., N. Y., 11 Dec., 1796;
    married Hannah Couch.

    10. Isaac T., born in Orange Co., N. Y., 28 Feb., 1799; married
    Esther Clark.

    11. Eleanor, born in Owego, N. Y., 27 Dec., 1802; married
    Thomas Van Devort.

    12. Cornelius, born in Owego, N. Y., 13 Aug., 1804; died
    unmarried.

    13. Joseph Lee, born in Owego, N. Y., 9 July, 1807; married
    widow Elizabeth Hatfield.


II. JASON, son of Lieut. Israel Horton and Sarah Lee, born at
Cutchogue, Southold, L. I., 18 Dec., 1758; married in 1783, to MARY
TERRY, daughter of Uriah Terry and Abigail Cleveland, and born in
Southold, L. I., in 1760. He was a clothier by trade, served his
apprenticeship in Chester, and then settled for a short time at
Boskenridge,--it is now Basking Ridge,--New Jersey, and then moved
to Somerville, New Jersey, where he settled permanently and where he
died. He was one of the most pious and exemplary men that ever lived,
a zealous, active, intelligent Presbyterian. He was a very strict
observer of the Sabbath, and violation of it by his neighbors always
gave him great displeasure. Observing one of his neighbors frequently
chopping firewood on the Sabbath, he went one Saturday afternoon
and took his neighbor a load of wood prepared for the fire, telling
him it was to save him the trouble of chopping his firewood on the
Sabbath. His neighbor took it kindly, and was careful afterwards to
see that his fuel was all ready beforehand for the Sabbath. It was a
common remark of one of the most reckless men of Somerville, that "If
all professors of religion would live like Old Jason Horton, he would
believe there was some reality in religion."

Jason Horton never failed to exert a strong influence for the
Christian religion as long as he lived. And his wife also was a
true help-meet for him in this regard, possessing genuine piety and
Christian activity. She died at Somerville, on Sabbath morning at 5
o'clock, 22 Aug., 1841.

Children:

    1. Uriah, born in Sugar Loaf, Orange Co., N. Y., in 1784;
    married Elizabeth Fairchild.

    2. Sarah, born 20 Jan., 1788; married William Guest.

    3. Elizabeth, married 1. John Denniston; 2. Adam Huyler.

    4. Mary, born in 1793.

    5. Abigail, born in Somerville, 6 March, 1795.

    6. Eunice, born in 1797.

    7. Fanny, born in 1799.

    8. Israel, born in 1801; died young.

These children were all members of the Presbyterian Church, except
Elizabeth, who is a member of the M. E. Church.


III. JEREMIAH, son of Lieut. Israel Horton and Sarah Lee, born at
Cutchogue, L. I., 24 Oct., 1759. He lived with his grandfather Lee
on Long Island, until he was sixteen years old, and then came to
Orange Co. On the 16th of Jan., 1783, he married MARY GOLDSMITH. One
of his hips was injured by sciatic rheumatism in early life, causing
him to be a cripple all his days. He was a stone-mason and farmer,
and notwithstanding he was lame, he still performed a great amount
of manual labor. He was a man of good judgment, and a Justice of the
Peace for many years, and was a man greatly beloved and respected in
the community. He and his wife were both members of the Presbyterian
Church. They settled in Blooming Grove, about a mile and a quarter
south of the present village of Washingtonville, and he built, mostly
with his own hands, the venerable old stone mansion now occupied by
the widow and family of his only son Benjamin G. Horton. Jeremiah
Horton died 17 Sept., 1841. His wife died 10 June, 1833.

Children, all born in Blooming Grove:

    1. Julia, died young.

    2. Fanny, died young.

    3. Eunice, born 2 March, 1791.

    4. Susan, born 17 Oct., 1793.

    5. Mary, born 23 Oct., 1795.

    6. Sarah, born 15 March, 1797.

    7. Lydia, 24 April, 1799.

    8. Eliza, died young.

    9. Amy, born 17 Nov., 1803.

    10. Benjamin G., born 28 August, 1807.


IV. EUNICE, daughter of Lieut. Israel Horton and Sarah Lee, born at
Southold in 1761; married GEORGE HOWELL. They moved from Orange Co.,
in early life, and settled at Peach Orchard, Seneca Co., N. Y.

Children:

    1. Benjamin.

    2. William.

    3. Jeremiah.

    4. George.

    5. Samuel.

    6. Lucinda.

    7. Anna.

    8. Jemima.

    9. Mehitabel.

    10. Sally.

    11. Hannah.

    12. Eliza.


V. MAJ. JOHN, son of Lieut. Israel Horton and Sarah Lee, born in
Goshen, 30 July, 1763. He married in Little Britain, Orange Co., N.
Y., 9 April, 1785, DEBORAH TERRY, daughter of Parshall Terry and
Deborah Clark, born in Little Britain, Orange Co., N. Y., on the 25
day of May, 1766. She was one of the inmates of the famed Forty Fort
the night after the Indian battle and massacre of Wyoming. She was
the tender and affectionate mother of eleven children, and raised
them all to maturity. They moved to Wyoming Valley in 1787, and
in 1792 moved to Terrytown, Pa., where he bought land and settled
permanently, and where he died on the 28th day of April, 1848, aged
almost 85 years, and where she died on the 25th day of May, 1844,
aged 78 years.

Major Horton built the first framed dwelling-house on the west side
of the river in the township of then Wyalusing, now Terry. He was
the owner of the first two-horse wagon ever brought into Terrytown,
and that wagon not only cheerfully bore the burdens he put upon it,
but also those of several of the neighbors. He also owned the first
fanning mill ever brought into the place. He built the first frame
barn that was ever built in the township. It was built in 1805, and
is still in a good state of preservation, and is owned by Edmund
Horton.

The framed house mentioned above, built by Major Horton in 1806,
accidentally took fire on the 23 Sept., 1861, and was burned up.
Major Horton was a wagoner in the Revolutionary War, towards the
close of the war, and was stationed in Mamakating Hollow, and
afterwards on the Neversink Creek, not far from the present Port
Jervis. He was Major of a battalion of militia in Wyalusing,
frequently held township offices, and was one of the leading men
of the place. He was not a public professor of Christianity, but
his life in the main was in harmony with its teachings, and he
loved, and was successful, in promoting good order in society. He
was universally esteemed, and at his funeral a larger concourse of
people were gathered than had ever before been witnessed in this
part of the country on a funeral occasion. Deborah, his wife, was a
woman distinguished for her eminent piety, unwearied industry, and
good economy; she knew well how to guide the house. Their children
were all born at Terrytown, except Ebenezer, who was born in Little
Britain, N. Y., and Anna and Lydia, who were born in Wyoming Valley.

Children:

    1. Ebenezer, born 9 Jan., 1786; married Mary Terry.

    2. Anna, born 21 Oct., 1788; died August, 1813; unmarried.

    3. Lydia, born 14 March, 1791; married John P. Stalford.

    4. John, born 23 March, 1793; married 1. Nancy Miller; 2. Lydia
    Molther; 3. Amanda Cross.

    5. Eunice, born 14 Jan., 1796; married Thomas Ingham.

    6. Sallie, born 29 May, 1798; married John Morrow.

    7. Betsey, born 27 Dec., 1800; married Francis Baillet.

    8. Francis, born 7 June, 1803; died unmarried.

    9. George F., born 2 Jan., 1806; married Abigail Terry.

    10. Edmund, born 9 August, 1808; married Martha A. Robinson.

    11. Harry Morgan, born 24 Sept., 1811; unmarried.


VI. JOSEPH LEE, son of Lieut. Israel Horton and Sarah Lee, born in
Goshen, N. Y., 27 April, 1765; married in Sugar Loaf, N. Y., 27 Feb.,
1791, to HANNAH TODD, daughter of Joseph Todd, of Sugar Loaf, and
born there on the 31 Aug., 1771. He died in Palmyra, 10 July, 1831.
She died at the same place on 9 Aug., 1827.

He moved from Goshen, N. Y., soon after he was married, to Owego, N.
Y., where he remained until 1803, and he then removed to Palmyra,
N. Y., and took up land and settled about four miles north of the
village, where Mrs. Sarah Durfee, one of his daughters, now resides.

Joseph L. Horton and his wife were very pious people, both worthy
members of the Baptist Church, beloved and respected in the
community. He was a farmer and shoemaker. He had feeble health
for several years before his death, wasting away gradually by
consumption. He was a very patient and industrious man, and towards
the close of his life, suffering from the ravages of disease, and
much enfeebled, he would still work at his occupation, making
sometimes one shoe in a day, and at others only half a one, according
as he had strength and breath. His end was peace.

Children:

    1. Samuel Todd, born at Owego, N. Y., 27 July, 1792.

    2. Catharine, born at Owego, N. Y., 21 May, 1794; married Geo.
    Spinner; he died without issue.

    3. Henry Wisner, born at Owego, N. Y., 31 May, 1797.

    4. Sarah Parshall, born at Owego, N. Y., 28 May, 1799.

    5. James Parshall, born at Owego, N. Y., 5 April, 1801.

    6. Millie Ann, born at Palmyra, N. Y., 20 July, 1803; died 7
    Oct., 1818.

    7. Lewis Beers, born at Palmyra, N. Y., 24 May, 1806.

    8. Anna, born at Palmyra, N. Y., 5 July, 1808.

    9. Durfee Delano, born at Palmyra, N. Y., 25 July, 1813.

    10. Wilson Osborn, born at Palmyra, N. Y., 26 April, 1815.


VII. MARY, daughter of Lieut. Israel Horton and Sarah Lee, born near
Goshen, N. Y., about 1767; married JOHN CLARK. Settled in Spencer, N.
Y.

Children:

    John,

    Benjamin,

    Ann,

    Sally,

    and others.


VIII. SAMUEL, son of Lieut. Israel Horton and Sarah Lee, born in
the township of Goshen, N. Y., in the year 1770. He was a master
builder in the city of New York, when quite a young man. He was said
to possess a mind peculiarly adapted to mechanical pursuits, and he
engaged in them before his majority. When about 23 years of age, he
took the small-pox, in New York, went home to his father's, in Orange
County, where he died in a few days.


IX. BENJAMIN, youngest child of Lieut. Israel Horton and Sarah Lee,
was born at Sugar Loaf, N. Y., 7 Feb., 1772. He was married in
Belvale, Orange Co., N. Y., 29 Jan., 1795, by the Rev. Mr. Stevens,
to HANNAH VANCE. She was born in Belvale, N. Y., 28 March, 1777. He
bought a farm and settled there, but by indorsing for a friend, he
lost his farm and all that he had. He then, about 1822, removed to
New York, and entered largely into the business of a master builder.
In 1834 he moved to Milan, Ohio, where, on the 18th Feb., 1856, he
died, of congestion of the lungs. His wife died at the same place, 25
June, 1860. He and his wife were both members of the M. E. Church.

Children:

    1. Margaret Vance, born 9 Dec., 1796.

    2. Milton, born 7 April, 1799.

    3. Julia Ann E., born 12 May, 1800; died of consumption, in
    Ohio, 27 Nov., 1839; unmarried.

    4. Samuel, born 28 July, 1802; died 21 Nov., 1841, of epilepsy
    and consumption; unmarried.

    5. Nicholas Townsend, born in Belvale, 20 Jan., 1805; married
    Sarah Van Orden.

    6. Sarah Jane, born in Belvale, 2 May, 1807; married Matthew
    Mead, and settled in Philadelphia, Pa.

    7. Eliza, born in Belvale, 19 March, 1809; died of lock-jaw, 18
    July, 1815.

    8. Hannah Maria, born in Belvale, 7 May, 1811; married James
    Galloway Horton.

    9. Catharine D., born in Belvale, 13 Aug., 1813; married Enoch
    Nichols.

    10. Elizabeth R., born in Belvale, 3 Oct., 1815; married Smith
    Conley.

    11. Eunice, born in Belvale, 6 Oct., 1817; died 8 Oct., 1826,
    of dysentery.

    12. Eloise, born in Belvale, 19 May, 1822; died 2 Oct., 1843,
    of consumption; unmarried.


I. ELIJAH, son of Elijah Horton and Lydia Sweazy (_Caleb_,
_Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born in Chester, N. J., 19 Dec., 1756;
married 19 Dec., 1780, MARY ----, born in Roxbury, N. J., April,
1752; died 17 Dec., 1790, leaving two children, Anna and Betsy, who
married and settled in Canada. He married 2. about 1793, MEHITABEL
RUTH COLEMAN, of Goshen, N. Y., and had:

    1. Elijah, born 15 Dec., 1794; married Sarah Oberton.

    2. Ephraim Coleman, born 1796; died young.

Elijah Horton was a man of correct moral deportment, and a valuable
citizen. He died 29 August, 1799; buried in Chester Cemetery.


II. BARNABAS, son of Elijah Horton and Elizabeth Sweazy, born in
Chester, 27 Sept., 1759; married 1783, ELIZABETH COLEMAN. He died 6
Dec., 1800. She died 26 Jan., 1831. Both buried in Chester Cemetery.

Children, born at Chester:

    1. Elizabeth, born 1784; married Nathan Corwin; died 5 May,
    1806.

    2. Ruth, married Lodwick Horton, of Goshen, N. Y.

    3. Patty Coleman, born 23 Sept., 1802; married John W. Thorp.


III. SILAS, son of Elijah Horton and Lydia Sweazy, born in Chester,
17 July, 1764; married 1. SUSAN CORWIN, who died 9 July, 1790,
leaving Lydia Corwin Horton, who married Isaac H. Corwin, and died
in 1816, childless. He married 2. MARY KELSEY, born in Goshen, 26
Jan., 1770; died 21 Dec., 1803, without issue. He married 3. ESTHER
HORTON, daughter of Dea. Nathaniel Horton, and had

    Mary, born 8 Sept., 1811; died 8 Oct., 1811.

On the tombstone of Silas, we find: "Filled the measure of his days
with usefulness, and departed this life 10 Dec., 1842. He was a
consistent member of the Congregational Church for 55 years, and the
loss caused by his death can only be estimated by those who knew him.
One of his last bequests was $3,200, secured by bond and mortgage,
and the interest to be appropriated annually to the support of the
elected Congregational minister of the first Congregational Church of
Chester."

Esther, his 3d wife, died 5 Feb., 1852, aged 70.


JONATHAN BANI, son of Barnabas Horton and Mary Tuthill (_Jonathan_,
_Jonathan_, _Caleb I._), born at Southold, 14 March, 1794; married
1. 20 May, 1815, by Rev. L. Thompson, to DEBORAH OSBORN. She died in
1833, leaving children, as follows, all born in Southold:

    1. Emily, born 11 March, 1816; married Gilbert Miller; she died
    in 1857.

    2. Edwin, born 1 Sept., 1817; died 6 July, 1818.

    3. Joseph Osborn, born 24 Aug., 1819; died in New York, in 1858.

    4. Edmund Bani, born 5 October, 1821.

    5. Jerusha Conklin, born 14 June, 1824; married Orrin Case;
    died in 1874.

    6. Deborah, born 7 Sept., 1828; married Charles Van Devort.

    7. Catherine Conover, born 25 Dec., 1830; married Jonas Gulick.

Jonathan Bani married 2. in 1838, JERUSHA EDWARDS, she died, and
he married 3. JERUSHA PEORNEY, she died, and he married 4. HANNAH
BLONVETTE, she died in 1870; he died in New York, 19 Feb., 1871, and
was buried at Cutchogue, L. I. Mr. Horton was emphatically a servant
of God. We here re-produce a portion of his obituary, which appeared
in the Presbyterian, of Philadelphia, shortly after his decease:

    "Mr. Horton has been for forty years the indefatigable and
    successful Tract Missionary of the Seventh Ward, New York
    City. When he first assumed the important task of laboring
    for the spiritual interests of this portion of the city, it
    was known as one of the most wicked and wretched wards. The
    'Sailor Boarding-houses' of olden times, with their numerous
    'land-sharks,' and temptations to sinful indulgence, swarmed
    here.... In process of time, the greater part of this territory
    was occupied by dwellings of opulent merchants. Then after
    another period of years, a new generation found the older
    inhabitants of the Seventh Ward crowded out, and their former
    homes became filled with a population of the dregs of old
    country emigrants, or gave place to shops and manufactories.
    Mr. Horton adapted himself and modified his work to meet
    these successive changes, and calling to his help a faithful
    band of distributors, teachers and visitors, made a Christian
    influence to be felt, increasing its power by every available
    means. A great multitude of conversions from year to year were
    the result of his faithful labors. Admonished by the approach
    of old age, he resigned his position as missionary, made all
    arrangements as to his worldly affairs, wrote farewell letters,
    and quietly looked forward to the close of his earthly career."




_Seventh Generation.--Caleb I._


I. HULDAH, daughter of Dea. Nathaniel Horton and Rebecca Robinson
(_Nathaniel_, _Caleb_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born in Chester, N.
J., 14 Jan., 1762; married in 1781, to JOEL COE, of Middletown, Conn.
Moved to Scipio, Cayuga Co., N. Y., where they settled. He died 23
Sept., 1846, aged 88 years, 4 months. She died 13 Dec., 1803. After
her death he married Widow HEPZIBAH SMITH.

Children, probably, all born in Scipio:

    1. Mary C., born 8 Sept., 1782; married David Bennet; had Joel
    Coe, Mary Jane, Charles David, Emily, Nathaniel Curtis, and
    Rachel.

    2. Joseph, born 12 Nov., 1784; married 1st 12 Jan., 1816,
    Pallas Wales, she died 4 Feb., 1822; he married 2d Sophia
    Harwood; he died in Ohio, 17 Oct., 1854.

    3. Rachel, born 9 July, 1786; married 22 April, 1813, Benjamin
    Olney; he died 1st Sunday in April, 1850; she died 1st Sunday
    in April, 1874.

    4. Nathaniel, born 6 Sept., 1788; married Mary Taylor White; he
    died in Oregon, 10 Oct., 1868.

    5. Joel, born 8 March, 1791; died 21 May, 1791.

    6. Huldah Horton, born 5 July, 1793; married Walter Bennet, of
    Portage, N. Y.

    7. Joel, born 7 June, 1795; married Sophronia Roberts; he died
    in Louisiana, in June, 1834.

    8. Curtis, born 25 August, 1797; married Hannah Clark; died 10
    April, 1871, at Spring Post, N. Y.

    9. Alma, born 25 Sept., 1802; married William Harwood; had
    Joel, William, and Alma; she died in Michigan, Jan., 1836.

A genealogy of the Coe family was published about twenty years ago.
Many eminent men belong to that family.


II. REBECCA, daughter of Dea. Nathaniel Horton and Rebecca Robinson,
born in Chester, 19 Dec., 1763; married BENJAMIN FORDYCE. He died 13
March, 1819. She died 17 Nov., 1840, in Scipio, N. Y.

Children:

    1. John, born 2 March, 1791; died 21 Jan., 1868.

    2. Eunice, born 4 July, 1792; died 20 Nov., 1861.

    3. Benjamin, born 11 June, 1797; died 10 Dec., 1870.

    4. Nathaniel Horton, born 4 Jan., 1799.

    5. Rebecca, born 27 July, 1805; died 7 July, 1829.

Mrs. Fordyce was a very pious woman, a member of the Presbyterian
Church, and highly esteemed.


III. JONAH, son of Dea. Nathaniel Horton and Rebecca Robinson, born
in Chester, 1765; married 1. about 1789, to JANE DALRYMPLE. She died
about 1795; married 2. in 1796, HANNAH BRYANT.

Children, probably all born in Chester:

    1. Phebe, born 1790.

    2. Huldah, born about 1792; married John King.

    3. Nathaniel, born about 1794.

By 2d wife:

    4. Elisha, born about 1798; died without issue.

    5. Barnabas, born about 1800; married Ruth Cramer.

    6. Archibald, born about 1802; married Matilda Smith.

    7. Joanna, born about 1804; married David Horton Lewis.

    8. Celestia, born about 1807; married John Cooper Horton.

    9. Lydia, born about 1809; married Daniel Horton; no issue.

Jonah Horton died in Lockport, N. Y.


IV. SUSAN, daughter of Dea. Nathaniel Horton and Rebecca Robinson,
born in Chester, about 1767; married ROBERT MCCOLLUM, 30 March, 1788.
Died in Calais, N. Y.

Children:

    1. Joel.

    2. Rebecca.

    3. Isaiah.

    4. Susan.

    5. Robert L.

    6. Hiram.

    7. Esther.

    8. Nathaniel.

    9. Anna.

    10. Mehitabel.

    11. Polly.

    All now (1872), dead, excepting Hiram, Anna, and Esther.


IX. ELISHA, son of Dea. Nathaniel Horton and Rebecca Robinson, born
in Chester, in 1777; married about 1800, to POLLY, daughter of Caleb
Horton and Sarah Benjamin. She was his second cousin, and born in
Chester, about 1779. They moved to Scipio, N. Y., in 1797, and
settled there, and there they died.

Children, probably, all born in Chester:

    1. Isaiah, born 27 July, 1796; married Charlotte Chatfield.

    2. Aaron, unmarried.

    3. Phebe, married Stephen Robinson.

    4. Esther, married Warren R. Atwood.


X. COL. NATHANIEL, son of Dea. Nathaniel Horton and Rebecca Robinson,
born in Chester, 15 Sept., 1778; married about 1801, to EUNICE
HORTON, daughter of Daniel Horton and Martha Terry. He died in
Chester, 17 Dec., 1856. She died 7 June, 1857; both buried in Chester
Cemetery. He was an honorable and popular man, a Colonel in the
militia, and much esteemed as an officer and citizen.

Children, all born in Chester:

    1. Julia, born 1802; married Nathan Horton.

    2. Ann Eliza, born 1804; married Levi Vanosdell.

    3. Martha, born 1806; married Isaac Oakford.

    4. Lydia, born 1809; married Charles Dobbins.


XI. HIRAM, son of Dea. Nathaniel Horton and Rebecca Robinson, born
in Chester, 16 Feb., 1780; married in 1808, MARY ROSE, born 29 Feb.,
1778. He died 22 May, 1852. She died 8 March, 1855; both buried in
Chester Cemetery.

Children, all born in Chester:

    1. Rebecca, born 29 Dec., 1809; married David Schuyler De Camp.

    2. Stephen Overton, born 21 July, 1811; married Dency Cooper.

    3. Elizabeth Celina, born 1813; married 1. Silas Olney; 2.
    Capt. Lemon.

    4. Mary Rose, born 8 April, 1818; married Alfred Horton.

Hiram Horton possessed fine social qualities, was well skilled in
music, and always led the singing in the Congregational Church until
prevented by the infirmities incident to old age.

    "With the most limited opportunities for early education, he
    became a great and profound thinker. He was an upright and
    conscientious man, and largely shared the esteem of all who
    knew him. He was a most sincere and ardent Universalist, living
    the life of the Christian, and dying in the full and perfect
    triumph of Gospel faith and hope. He and his wife were, for
    many years, members of the Congregational Church of Chester;
    but about thirty years before his death, he and his wife
    embraced Universalism, and avowed it openly ever afterwards.
    Nevertheless, they continued to support the church and worship
    within its walls, and we hazard nothing in saying that there
    was no man in Chester, nor in all the region round about it,
    who was more generally and highly respected for manly and
    Christian character than Hiram Horton. Some time before his
    death he had requested that a minister of the Universalist
    denomination should attend his funeral services; but the pastor
    of the church, the Rev. Luke I. Stoutenberg, and others,
    refused to let them into the church, notwithstanding that the
    salary of that preacher was paid in part by the 'Horton Fund,'
    and the church itself had been built mainly by the Hortons.
    His funeral had to be attended in the Presbyterian Church,
    the Presbyterians generously offering them the use of their
    church."--_Obituary of Hiram Horton._


XIII. AARON, son of Dea. Nathaniel Horton and Rebecca Robinson, born
in Chester, about 1788; married NANCY CRAMER, and had children, viz.:

    1. Silas, born about 1812.

    2. Lydia.

    3. Aaron Decatur.

    4. Huldah.

    5. Nathaniel Charles.

Nancy Cramer Horton died, and he married the widow MARIA CRAIG, and
she died without children by him. He married next the widow, PAMELA
SMITH; she died leaving no children by him. He married, for his
fourth wife, JANE HAWK, and by her he had one son, viz.: William.


I. EDWARD, son of David Horton and Olive Skellinger (_Nathaniel_,
_Caleb_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born in Chester, N. J., 17 March,
1777, married in Jan., 1798, CHARLOTTE SEWARD, cousin of the late
Gov. William H. Seward, of New York, and born in Chester, 19 August,
1775. They moved to Cayuga Co., N. Y., in 1804, and settled in the
town of Brutus.

Children, all born in Randolph, Morris Co., N. J.:

    1. James, born 24 Dec., 1798; married Jane Putnam.

    2. John, born 29 Oct., 1801; married Paulina Carrier.

    3. David, born 4 July, 1804.

    4. Daniel, born 17 March, 1808.

    5. Horace, born 2 July, 1810.

Edward Horton died 6 Feb., 1835. His wife died 10 Sept., 1872, at the
remarkable age of 97 years and 21 days. In her funeral procession
were four generations of her descendants. They were both buried in
Brutus, N. Y.


II. MEHITABEL, daughter of David Horton and Olive Skellinger; born in
Chester, N. J., 15 Jan., 1780; married DANIEL HORTON MILLER; moved to
Michigan; died in Calhoun Co.

Children, probably, all born in Chester:

    1. Olive, born 31 Dec., 1797; died 1st Sept., 1819.

    2. David, born 30 Dec. 1799.

    3. Phebe Ann, born 27 Jan., 1803; married Root.

    4. Charles, born 13 Sept., 1809; died 23 Sept., 1828.

    5. Esther, born 10 March, 1803; married Hackett.

    6. Mary C., born 8 Sept., 1823; married Hicks; died 27 April,
    1863.


I. SILAS DANES, son of Silas Horton and Mary Danes (_Silas_,
_Barnabas, arnabas_, _Caleb I._), born in Goshen, Orange Co., N.
Y., in July, 1778. Moved to Wallkill, with his father, when young;
married MARY MCCLEAN, 1796:

Children, probably, born in Wallkill:

    1. Fanny, born 1797.

    2. Abbey, born 1799.

    3. Warren, died 3 Oct., 1862.

    4. Betsey.

    5. Caroline.

    6. Nelson, married Sarah Shons.

    7. James M., died in 1816.

    8. Jane, died in 1838.

    9. William Harrison.

    10. Lewis, died young.

    11. Judson, died in 1859.

    12. Alfred, died 27 July, 1873.

    13. Emiline, died May 1861.

    14. Mary Ann.

    15. Smith.

    16. Verdine, resides in Jersey City.

Of the above children, the first to ninth, inclusive, were by his 1st
wife, she died 30 Jan., 1814. In 1815, he married 2. MARY CALENDER,
and she had the 10, 11, 12, and 13 of the above children, and died in
Sept., 1826, and in August, 1827, he married 3. ANN PURDY, by whom he
had the three last children.

Silas Danes Horton was a farmer, upright, honest, and a man of more
than ordinary mental capacity. He was a deacon of the Old School
Baptist Church at the time of his death, and for many years before.
He wrote frequently on religious subjects, and many of his articles
appeared in the "_Signs of the Times_" a religious paper edited and
published by the Rev. G. Beebee, of Middletown, N. Y.

Dea. Horton was one of the pillars of the church, greatly esteemed by
his fellow-citizens, and his death, which occurred 21 Sept., 1850,
was deeply lamented.


II. BARNABAS, son of Silas Horton and Mary Danes, born in Wallkill,
in 1780; married about 1804, JERUSHA WHEAT; she died and he married 2.

Children, born in Wallkill, and all by his first wife:

    1. Loton, married Adeline Horton.

    2. Harrison, married Prudence Warner.

    3. Anna, married Alanson Beeks.

    4. Milicent, married Chauncey Horton, son of Gilbert, son of
    Frederick.

    5. Alfred M., married Adaline Wheat, they were double cousins;
    had Silas Danes, and others.

    6. Gabriel C., married 1. Mary Ann Slawon; 2. Elizabeth
    Thompson; he had Loton, by his 1st wife, and Horace and
    Gilbert, by 2d wife.

Barnabas Horton died in 1867.


I. JASON, son of Israel Horton and Anna Van Devort (_Israel_,
_Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Caleb I._), born in Goshen, Orange Co., N.
Y., 23 Feb., 1781; married in Lansing, Tompkins Co., N. Y., 9 Oct.,
1805, SALLY MILLER; she was born in Lansing, in 1787.

Children:

    1. Ursula, born in Lansing, N. Y., 15 July, 1806; died in
    Williamston, Mich., Feb., 1868; unmarried.

    2. Ann, born in Lansing, N. Y., 11 Aug., 1808; married Daniel
    Sutton.

    3. Phebe, born in Phelps, N. Y., 11 May, 1811; married David
    Beeman.

    4. Joseph, born in Phelps, N. Y., 25 Sept., 1812; died at
    Constantine, St. Joseph Co., Mich., 16 Sept., 1866.

    5. Israel, born in Lansing, N. Y., 29 Jan., 1815.

    6. Mary Ann, born in Lansing, N. Y., 20 Feb., 1817, married
    ---- Smith.

    7. Minor Thomas, born in Phelps, 2 June, 1816.

    8. Eleanor, born in Lansing, N. Y., 22 Nov., 1821; married
    Samuel Barker, in Phelps, where she now lives.

He died in Lansing, N. Y., 16 Sept., 1821. After his death his widow
married a Taylor; she died in Watkins, N. Y., 19 Dec., 1861.


II. WILLIAM LEE, son of Israel Horton and Anna Van Devort, born in
Orange Co., N. Y., 21 Oct., 1782; married EUNICE TRACEY, of Spencer,
N. Y.

Children:

    1. James Parshall.

    2. Lydia Ann, married Shepherd.

    3. Caroline, married Harmer.

    4. Charlotte, J., married Raymond.

    5. Sarah R., married Nichols.

    6. Clark, married, had sons, Henry N. and Elliott.

He moved with his father to Phelps, N. Y., in early life.


III. SARAH, daughter of Israel Horton and Anna Van Devort, born in
Orange Co., N. Y., 9 April, 1784; married in Phelps, in 1813, to
SAMUEL MINNIS. She died 8 May, 1864, in Wyalusing, Bradford Co.,
Pa.; she was a quiet Christian woman, much esteemed by all who knew
her. Her husband died in comparatively early life, leaving her with
a family of children, and not much of this world's goods to help
herself with. But by industry and care she managed to raise and
educate her children. She was living with one of them, viz., Maria
Homet, of Wyalusing, Pa., at the time of her death. In her early life
she was very active--often rode on horseback--and at one time she
made a trip on horseback and alone, from Phelps to Wyalusing, about
three hundred miles circular.

Children, born at Phelps:

    1. William.

    2. and 3. (twins) Maria, married Edward Homet; Rachael, married
    Stephen Spoor.

    4. Ellen, married Jacob Hicks.

    5. Willard, born in 1823; died young.


IV. PHEBE, daughter of Israel Horton and Anna Van Devort, born in
Orange Co., N. Y., 6 March, 1786; married about 1806, to FREDERICK
SCHENICK, of Owego, N. Y., and went to Canada; nothing further is
known of her.


V. JOHN, son of Israel Horton and Anna Van Devort, born in Orange
Co., N. Y., 26 Feb., 1788; married in Phelps, about 1810, to RACHAEL
HILER. He died at Phelps, 9 Sept., 1859. She is still living.

Children, born in Phelps:

    1. John M., born 30 Dec., 1819; married Mary Martin Boardman.

    2. Samuel Minnis, born 29 Oct., 1836; married Sylvia Ann Cole.

    3. S. Van Rensalaer, born 11 Aug., 1829; married Rowena S.
    Rafter.

    4. Peter Davis, born 17 April, 1826; married Mary S. Aiken.

    5. William P., born 26 Dec., 1821; married Phebe Ann Brink.

    6. Eunice, married Edgar P. Lake.

    7. Ella S., married Gross.

    8. Sarah, unmarried.


VIII. ARIETTA, daughter of Israel Horton and Anna Van Devort, born
in Orange Co., N. Y., 28 Nov., 1794; married about 1818, to ISAAC
BUTLER, of Phelps. She died 2 June, 1842.

Children:

    1. Maria, married Eggleston.

    2. Nancy, married Parshall.

    3. Elizabeth, married Parshall.

    4. Sarah Ann, married Service.

    5. Mahala, married Van Scoy.

    6. Amanda, married Larkin.

    7. Elihu.

    8. Samuel.


IX. PETER DAVIS, son of Israel Horton and Anna Van Devort, born in
Orange Co., N. Y., 11 Dec., 1796; married at Nelson, O., 5 May, 1830,
by Rev. Ezra Booth, to HANNAH COUCH, daughter of Samuel Couch and
Hannah Ferris, and born in Lee, Berkshire Co., Mass., 23 July, 1802.
He was a minister of the M. E. Church, a pious man, and an acceptable
preacher, standing fair among his brethren, and in the community.
Hannah Couch Horton died at Hubbard, Trumble Co., O., 22 Feb., 1845,
leaving three children, viz.:

    1. Joseph Dempster.

    2. Thirza Ann.

    3. Marcus C.

He married 2. in 1846, ANN CHAMBERS, daughter of Ezekiel Chambers, of
Erie Co., Pa., and had one son, George W., born 2 Dec., 1849. Peter
D. Horton died at Nelson, O., 21 Dec., 1867.


X. ISAAC TENEYCK, son of Israel Horton and Anna Van Devort, born in
Orange Co., N. Y., 28 Feb., 1799; married about 1822, ESTHER CLARK.
He died 7 Sept., 1869.

Children, 1. born in Phelps, N. Y., 7 born in Washtenaw, Mich., the
rest in Orleans, N. Y.:

    1. Myron, born 14 Oct., 1823; died 14 May, 1848.

    2. Charlotte, born 26 Sept., 1825.

    3. Tunis D., born 28 March, 1828.

    4. Anne J., born 5 March, 1830.

    5. Caroline, born 3 May, 1832.

    6. Abbie, born 6 August, 1835.

    7. Ellen V., born 28 Dec., 1843.


XI. ELEANOR, daughter of Israel Horton and Anna Van Devort, born in
Owego, N. Y., 27 Dec., 1802; moved with her father to Phelps, N. Y.,
in 1816; married at Phelps, by the Rev. Mr. Strong (Presbyterian),
on 1 Jan., 1828, to THOMAS VAN DEVORT, born in Warwick, N. Y., 27
August, 1802. He moved to Phelps, in 1823. He was a son of Cornelius
Teneyck Van Devort and Maria Probosco, and was born in Warwick, N.
Y., 12 Oct., 1773. Maria Probosco was born in Brunswick, N. J., 8
Oct., 1778. He died 7 April, 1855. She died 17 March, 1864.

Dr. Thomas Van Devort, of Somerset Co., N. J., the father of
Cornelius, died 17 Oct., 1773, aged 32 years, 7 months, and 10 days.
His wife's name was Arietta Teneyck. After his death she married ----
Wood. He died and she subsequently married ---- Clark. She died 31
Oct., 1826, aged 80 years.

Children of Eleanor, all born at Phelps, N. Y.:

    1. Cornelius Teneyck, born 14 Oct., 1828; died 20 August, 1829.

    2. Phebe Ann, born 24 Dec., 1829; died 20 Dec., 1862; unmarried.

    3. Henry Christy, born 16 March, 1831; died 20 Nov., 1848.

    4. Andrew Probosco, born 10 Sept., 1832; died 1 March, 1869.

    5. Gilbert Mead, born 9 Dec., 1834.

    6. Maria, born 21 Sept., 1836.

    7. Sarah Ella, born 12 May, 1838.

    8. Cornelius, born 16 Oct., 1842.

    9. Thomas Spencer, born 26 Nov., 1844.


XII. CORNELIUS, son of Israel Horton and Anna Van Devort, born in
Owego, N. Y., 13 August, 1804; moved with his parents to Phelps, in
1816. He was a teacher for several years in his early life.

Quite early in life he engaged in mercantile business, selling
dry-goods, groceries, hardware, etc., and also various agricultural
implements, and generally carried on a successful business.

He was Supervisor of the township of Phelps for eight years in
succession, and was one of the most prominent and influential
citizens of the town, enjoying the fullest confidence of the people.
He was a kind-hearted and upright man, a close figurer, but always
just and honorable in his dealings. He was never married, never
made a public profession of religion, although he was a man of very
correct moral deportment and habits, and practically a Christian
gentleman. On the 29 Oct., 1871, as he was riding with a friend
in a buggy, the horse became frightened, and ran away, upsetting
the wagon, and throwing Mr. Horton upon the ground with great
violence, causing his death in a few hours afterwards. He was wholly
unconscious, and never spoke after the fall. He was a tall man, over
six feet high, of commanding appearance, and urbane and dignified in
his manners. He left an estate of about $50,000, with one sister, and
a large number of nephews and nieces to inherit it.


XIII. JOSEPH LEE, youngest son of Israel Horton and Anna Van Devort,
born in Owego, N. Y., 9 July, 1807. He married the widow ELIZABETH
HATFIELD, of Newark, N. J. He was a very quiet, unassuming man, never
had any children. He died in Phelps, in Jan., 1871. His wife died in
Nov., 1870.


I. URIAH TERRY, son of Jason Horton and Mary Terry (_Israel_,
_Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Caleb I._), born in Orange Co., N. Y., in
1784; moved with his father to Basking Ridge, N. J., about 1790,
and next to Mendham, N. J., where in 1806, he married ELIZABETH
FAIRCHILD, daughter of Peter Fairchild, and born 13 June, 1782. They
moved from Mendham to White House, Hunterdon Co., N. J., in 1808, and
lived there until 1820, when they moved to Lambertville, N. J., and
settled there. He was a hatter by trade. He died in the Fall of 1858.
She died at Lambertville, 22 Oct., 1864. For her goodness of heart
and fidelity to duty in all the relations of life, she had the esteem
and respect of all who knew her. She united with the Presbyterian
Church in Lambertville, in 1825, and she adorned and illustrated
the profession of Christianity, she then made, in the whole of her
after life. She was one of the excellent of the earth, and though far
advanced in years, still her departure was greatly lamented by the
church and congregation.

Children:

    1. Mary Jane, born in Mendham, 24 Jan., 1809; married Charles
    Naylor.

    2. Harriet Lacy, born in Mendham, 6 April, 1811; married James
    Gordon.

    3. Andrew Jackson, born in Mendham, 13 May, 1813; left home at
    17, never heard of afterwards.

    4. Anna Maria, born at White House, 14 April, 1815; unmarried.

    5. Brackey, born at White House, 27 Feb., 1819; married Asa
    Price.

    6. Alexander Horace, born at Lambertville, 16 Oct., 1821.

    7. Abbey Wilson, born at Lambertville, in 1825; died unmarried.


II. SARAH, daughter of Jason Horton and Mary Terry, born in Basking
Ridge, 20 Jan., 1788; married about 1808, to WILLIAM GUEST; he died
at White House, N. J., 6 March, 1857.

Children:

    1. George, dead.

    2. Mary.

    3. Elizabeth.

    4. Fanny.

    5. Phebe.

    6. Martha, dead.

    7. Sarah Ann.

    8. William.

    9. Amy.


III. ELIZABETH, daughter of Jason Horton and Mary Terry, born at
Basking Ridge, N. J., 6 January, 1790; married 1. in the spring of
1807, to JOHN DENISTON, son of William Deniston and Elizabeth Black,
and born about 1780; died in 1815. She married 2. ADAM HUYLER.

Children:

    1. George, born near Morristown, N. J., 1808; married Dorothy
    Smith.

    2. Charles, born near Morristown, N. J., 4 April, 1809; married
    Mary Workman.

    3. Anna, born in Trenton, N. J., 12 March, 1812; married Sebra
    Hough.

    4. John Horton, born in Trenton, N. J., 15 Jan., 1815; married
    1. Eliza Ricket, 2. Alice Palmer.

By second husband:

    5. Elizabeth, born at Bound Brook, N. J., 6 Jan., 1818; married
    Hiram Allen.

    6. Adam, born at Lambertville, N. J., 27 Dec., 1820; married 1.
    Elizabeth Roberts, 2. Hannah Snyder.

    7. Jason Horton, born at New Brunswick, 23 Feb., 1823.

    8. Edward Perrine, born at New Brunswick, 22 Aug., 1829.

Adam Huyler died in March, 1846; he was the son of William Huyler and
Gertrude Smock; family originally from Holland.

Mrs. Huyler resides at Newark, N. Y., is wonderfully preserved,
is active in body and mind, sight and hearing only very slightly
impaired, and her memory quite good, and now, at nearly 86, she is
getting a new set of natural teeth.


IV. MARY, daughter of Jason Horton and Mary Terry, married GEO.
BEEMER, of Beemersville, N. J.

Children:

    Sarah,

    Horton,

    Elton and Halsey (twins),

    Abbey,

    Harriet and

    Jane.


V. ABIGAIL, daughter of Jason Horton and Mary Terry, born in
Sommerville, N. J., 6 March, 1795; died 19 August, 1875; she was
never married. She made teaching her profession for many years. She
was a skillful educator and a great favorite of children. She early
professed Christianity, and became a member of the Presbyterian
Church. She was a lady of marked piety and intelligence; occasionally
wrote articles for the newspapers. In 1872 she writes:

    "This is my hand-writing, so, through the mercy of the Lord, my
    life is yet prolonged, but I am aged (77) and infirm, going the
    down hill of life, living on borrowed time. Oh, how important
    to be prepared for the final change!

    "Of my sisters, the oldest is gone, taken in her 84th year,
    departed suddenly, gone, we trust, to 'Heaven above, where all
    is love,' and where sorrowing and sighing can never enter."

In another letter, she says: "Our home is pleasant, we live in a
beautiful village of New Jersey. Yes, little New Jersey,

      "'With all thy faults, I love thee still;
      I see beauties on every hill;
      Thy rocks in grandeur rise;
      Thy rills are charming in my eyes.'"

She wrote and published a very pretty obituary of her sister, who
died recently.


VI. EUNICE, daughter of Jason Horton and Mary Terry, born at
Basking Ridge, N. J., 20 Feb., 1796; married at North Branch, N.
J., 15 Sept., 1813, by Rev. Enoch Burt, to GEORGE BOCKOVER, born at
Beemersville, Sussex Co., N. J., 3 Jan., 1790; died 30 July, 1870.

Children, all born at Beemersville:

    1. Jason Horton, born 18 Oct., 1814; married Mary Insley; had 4
    sons and 4 daughters; nearly all his life a wholesale merchant
    in the city of New York; died 22d April, 1875; he was truly one
    of the excellent of the earth.

    2. John Jackson, born 20 Oct., 1816; married Ruth Coykendull.

    3. Maria, born 19 May, 1819; married Jacob H. Todd, merchant.

    4. Julia Ann, born 13 Oct., 1821; married John B. Adams.

    5. Benjamin Terry, born 8 Aug., 1824; married Sarah E. Hathaway.

    6. Miranda, born 20 Aug., 1827; married Charles Good; both dead.

    7. and 8. (twins) Harriet, born 8 July, 1830; married Alvah
    Crone; he died. Jane, born 8 July, 1830; married Henry A. De
    Poe; he died.

    9. Elizabeth, born 5 July, 1833; married Thomas C. Whider.

    10. Emma, born 25 Feb., 1838; married Sanford E. Fitch, 15
    Sept., 1863, during the very interesting celebration of the
    "Golden Wedding" of her honored parents.


VII. FANNY, daughter of Jason Horton and Mary Terry, born at Basking
Ridge, N. J., 15 Sept., 1799; married, at North Branch, N. J.,
14 Feb., 1817, by Rev. Dr. Vadenburg, to JOHN WILLIAMS, born at
Redington, N. J., 27 Aug., 1791; a farmer; died 11 Dec., 1867.

Children:

    1. George, born 15 Nov., 1818; a merchant in New York City.

    2. Jason, born 6 March, 1824, also a merchant in New York.

    3. John William Kline, born 15 Sept., 1831; merchant in New
    York.

    4. Samuel, born 29 May, 1833; died 9 March, 1845.

[Illustration: Nathaniel Thompson]

[Illustration: Sarah Thompson.]


III. EUNICE, daughter of Jeremiah Horton, Esq., and Mary Goldsmith
(_Israel_, _Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Caleb I._), born in Blooming
Grove, Orange Co., N. Y., 2 March, 1791; married EDWARD STRONG, of
Blooming Grove.

Children, all born in Blooming Grove:

    1. Nancy, married James Madison Smith.

    2. Nathan, married Mary Morbin.

    3. Edward.

    4. Sarah Jane.

    5. Benjamin Horton.


IV. SUSAN, daughter of Jeremiah Horton, Esq., and Mary Goldsmith,
born in Blooming Grove, 17 Oct., 1793; married HARRY CLARK.

Children, all born in Blooming Grove:

    1. Nathan.

    2. Walton.

    3. Mary.

    4. Sarah.

    5. Eunice.


V. MARY, daughter of Jeremiah Horton, Esq., and Mary Goldsmith, born
in Blooming Grove, 23 Oct., 1795; married 1. SOLOMON GRAY, and had
two children, viz.:

    Thomas and Leander.

Solomon Gray died about 1845. She married 2. RICHARD GIBSTON, and had:

    1. Ann Maria.

    2. Edward.

    3. Julia.

    4. Mary.


VI. SARAH, daughter of Jeremiah Horton, Esq., and Mary Goldsmith,
born in Blooming Grove, 15 March, 1797; married 22 Jan., 1818, in
Blooming Grove, by Rev. Luther Halsey, to NATHANIEL THOMPSON, son of
George Thompson and Elizabeth Gregory, and born in Blooming Grove, 22
Dec., 1792. She died 11 March, 1875, very suddenly.

Children, both born in Monroe, Orange Co., N. Y.:

    1. Jeremiah Horton, born 13 Jan., 1821; married 10 Dec., 1845,
    Mary Webb.

    2. George Washington, born 2 March, 1824; married 5 Jan., 1848,
    Charity Conklin; she died 15 March, 1875.

Sarah H. Thompson was one of the excellent of the earth--faithful,
kind, energetic and industrious--exemplifying Christianity in her
daily walk and conversation; open, frank and cheerful, she was ever
sunshine for the family. She was a member of the Presbyterian Church.

Mr. Thompson is well preserved; has lived a long life of usefulness;
an able and efficient farmer; an upright Christian man; began the
world with little; is now wealthy. He is a member of the Presbyterian
Church.


VII. LYDIA, daughter of Jeremiah Horton, Esq., and Mary Goldsmith,
born in Blooming Grove, 24 April, 1799; married 1. by Rev. Mr.
Arbuckle, in Blooming Grove, to ALBERT GALLATIN HILDRETH, son of John
Hildreth, of Southampton, L. I.; had one son, died in infancy. Mr.
Hildreth died. She married 2. EDWARD STRONG, of Blooming Grove, and
had Mary Bethia, born 20 May, 1840, who married, 20 May, 1863, Dr.
George Hudson Thompson, a dentist, of Newburgh, and they have Edward
Brewster Thompson, born in Newburgh, 9 March, 1844. Edward Strong
died, and Lydia, his wife, moved to Newburgh, where she owns property
and is very pleasantly situated. She has long been a professor of
Christianity, and lived in harmony with its teachings.


IX. AMY, daughter of Jeremiah Horton, Esq., and Mary Goldsmith, born
in Blooming Grove, 17 November, 1803; married PALMER WILLIAMSON.

Children:

    1. Mary.

    2. Susan.

    3. Horton.

    4. Jennie.

    5. Marietta, dead.

    6. Oscar.

    7. Julia.

    8. Harrison.


X. BENJAMIN GOLDSMITH, son of Jeremiah Horton, Esq., and Mary
Goldsmith, born in Blooming Grove, 28 Aug., 1807; married 14 Feb.,
1832, to SARAH JANE STUART, born in Blooming Grove, about 1809. She
died 13 May, 1847.

Children:

    1. Sarah Maria, born 23 Jan., 1833.

    2. Anna F., born 1 Sept., 1835.

    3. John W., born 27 May, 1837; dead.

    4. Carrie S., born 30 Nov., 1840.

    5. Phebe N., born 30 Aug., 1842; dead.

    6. Jeremiah Henry, born 20 Dec., 1844.

    Anna F. remains unmarried. John W. and Phebe N. died unmarried.

Benjamin G. Horton married 2. in the Presbyterian Church, Merry All,
Pa., 23 January, 1853, by Rev. Dr. S. F. Colt, to ANNA PAMELA INGHAM,
daughter of Thomas Ingham, Esq., and Eunice Horton, and born at Sugar
Run, Bradford Co., Pa., 4 May, 1818.

Children:

    7. Eunice Louisa, born 10 May, 1854.

    8. Thomas Ingham, born 18 Sept., 1856.

    9. Charles Herbert, born 5 June, 1860.

His children were all born in the old stone mansion, built by his
father, in 1802. It is one of the oldest dwellings in Blooming Grove,
and it is still a very comfortable and venerable house. It, together
with a good farm, was inherited by Benjamin, he being the only son;
and here he lived until his death, which occurred on the 9th of
Nov., 1874. He was a kind, unassuming man--always possessing a good
moral character, and a few months before his death he made a public
profession of Christianity, and became a member of the Blooming Grove
Church. His wife early embraced Christianity, and was a member of the
Presbyterian Church, of Wyalusing, Pa. She is now a member of the
Blooming Grove Church, faithful and active in the work of the Church
and Sabbath-school.

[Illustration: Lydia H. Stalford.]


I. EBENEZER, son of Maj. John Horton and Deborah Terry (_Israel_,
_Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Caleb I._), born in Little Britain, Orange
Co., N. Y., 9 Jan., 1786; married, at Terrytown, Pa., by Guy Wells,
Esq., in Oct., 1805, to MARY TERRY, daughter of Jonathan Terry, Esq.,
and Abigail Terry, born in Wyalusing, Pa., 5 Dec., 1787. He died 1
May, 1826, of tuberculosis. She died 30 March, 1873, at the advanced
age of nearly 86 years. He was one of the constituent members of
the first Baptist Church of Asylum, now Terry Township. She was not
a public professor of Christianity, but was Old School Baptist in
sentiment for many years before she died.

Children, all born at the old homestead, in Wilmot, now occupied by
N. T. Horton, except Jason and Nathaniel, who were born at Terrytown:

    1. Jason, born 13 July, 1807; married (1) Olivia Ladd, (2)
    Roxana Cooey.

    2. Nathaniel Terry, born 5 Jan., 1808; married Mehala Hancock.

    3. Julia, born 6 Oct., 1810; married Samuel E. Miller.

    4. Eunice, born 7 Sept., 1812; married James H. Turrell.

    5. Hiram, born 7 June, 1815; unmarried.

    6. Ebenezer, born 4 April, 1817; married Ellen M. Crandall.

    7. Adela, born 13 April, 1819; married C. Schoonover.

    8. Jane, born 22 July, 1821; married Lehman Turrell.

    9. Lydia Ann, born 4 Feb., 1824; married Moses T. Slotery.


II. ANNA, daughter of Maj. John Horton and Deborah Terry, born in
Wyoming Valley, on the farm afterwards owned by Oliver Pettibone,
21 Oct., 1788; died at Terrytown, 27 Aug., 1813, of consumption;
unmarried. She was intelligent, truly pious, and of a most amiable
disposition.


III. LYDIA, daughter of Maj. John Horton and Deborah Terry, born in
Wyoming Valley, 14 March, 1791; married at Terrytown, 12 Nov., 1815,
by Rev. M. M. York, to JOHN PAULING STALFORD, son of Joseph Stalford
and Catherine Pauling, and born in Perkiomen, Montgomery Co., Pa., 20
Dec., 1788; died in Wyalusing, 27 Jan., 1863. Mrs. Stalford is still
living; she is well preserved, resides at the old homestead, also
occupied by her son, John B. Stalford. She was a very beautiful girl,
always possessed an amiable disposition and fine social qualities,
and now, at the age of 84 and upwards, she is active, cheerful and
remarkably good looking for one of her age; devotedly attached to her
grandchildren, who live with her, and for whom she is untiring in
her care. She is a member of the Presbyterian Church, and has lived
a long life of industry, economy and practical piety, beloved by all
who know her.

Children, all born in Wyalusing:

    1. Samuel, died in infancy.

    2. Ellen, born 18 Dec., 1817; married Dr. D. C. Scoville.

    3. Elizabeth, born 20 Aug., 1819; married Cornelius Cronin;
    died at Dushore, Pa., 5 Oct., 1856; left John and Julia.

    4. Joseph Horton, born 14 July, 1821; married 1. Mary Deihl;
    married 2. widow Mary Sturdevant.

    5. Benjamin, born 25 July, 1823; unmarried.

    6. Jesse Tuxbury, born 8 Dec., 1825; married 1. Catherine
    Wilcox; married 2. Jane Manly.

    7. Deborah Ann, born 15 Oct., 1828; married Hollenback; died in
    Illinois.

    8. John Bradford, born 6 April, 1830; married Emma Martin.

    9. George Horton, born 23 May, 1833; married Minerva Jane
    Hollenback; lives in Iowa.


IV. MAJ. JOHN, JR., son of Maj. John Horton and Deborah Terry, born
at Terrytown, 23 March, 1793. He was three times married, 1. 16 July,
1816, to NANCY G. MILLER, daughter of John Miller and Lydia Gilbert.
She was born in Connecticut; she died 27 Oct., 1839. He married 2.
3 Aug., 1841, to widow LYDIA MOLTHER, of Nazareth, Pa.; she died
4 June, 1850. Married 3. 9 Aug., 1852, to widow AMANDA CROSS, of
Towanda, Pa., daughter of ---- Spaulding and Huldah Kellogg. He died
21 Feb., 1867.

Children, by his first wife:

    1. Elmore, born 6 May, 1817; married Mary Stone.

    2. Mary, born 19 Nov., 1818; married Dr. Nathan Wells.

    3. Orice, born 16 June, 1821; married Austin Stalford.

    4. John Miller, born 7 Feb., 1823; married Susan L. Bacon.

    5. Anna, born 19 Nov., 1825; married Dr. James De Wolf.

    6. Lydia Miller, born 31 Dec., 1828; married Rev. Dr. S. F.
    Colt.

    7. Rowena Nancy, born 4 Dec., 1832; married Capt. Familton.

    8. Harry M., born 25 May, 1835; unmarried.

    9. Infant, female, stillborn, 1838.

By his second wife:

    10. Col. Joseph Homet, born 2 June, 1842; married Abbie Newcomb.

By his third wife:

    11. Belle Amanda, born 8 May, 1860. All born at Terrytown, Pa.

[Illustration: JOHN HORTON.]

Maj. Horton possessed more than an ordinary fund of cheerfulness
and joviality; and his humorous and genial nature was an
unfailing source of interest and life in the family and in the
social circle. He was a careful business man. Though long engaged
in mercantile pursuits, he never had occasion to fear financial
crises or revulsions, living always prepared at any moment to honor
his pecuniary obligations. Punctuality and promptness were marked
characteristics of the man. To perform was more pleasing to him than
to promise; in enterprises for the public good he was always among
the first. He was constable for many years, Justice of the Peace
for five years, and declined a re-election; was Treasurer of the
County for two years, and was one of the electors on the Democratic
electoral ticket in 1848. He was Captain and then Major in the
militia, and from 1828 to 1835 Brigade Inspector.

Though not a public professor of Christianity, he was its friend and
supporter, and conscientiously and habitually practised its virtues.
He was uniformly in attendance upon public worship, and paid more
money for the Terrytown Tabernacle (Union meeting-house) than any
other person.

He was popular and pleasing in his manners, and politically a man of
mark, but never a _politician_--holding office only when the office
sought him. His end was quiet and peaceful.

      "The 'Angel's Whisper' stole in song upon his closing ear;
      From his own daughter's lips it came, so musical and clear,
      That scarcely knew the dying man what melody was there:
      The last of earth's or first of heaven's pervading all the air."


V. EUNICE, daughter of Maj. John Horton and Deborah Terry, born at
Terrytown, 14 Jan., 1796; married in the old log meeting-house at
Merry All, Pa., 20 July, 1817, by Rev. Minor Manasseh York, to THOMAS
INGHAM, ESQ., son of Joseph Ingham and Pamelia Ellicott, and born in
Bucks Co., Pa., 1 April, 1794. The ancestors of Thomas Ingham came
from England. Jonas Ingham, the first known ancestor, came to this
country about A. D. 1700. By trade he was a clothier. He married a
Cheshire woman, who often told her grandson that she landed on the
ground where the city of Philadelphia now stands before there was a
house on it. They settled in Trenton, N. J., where their son Jonathan
was born, in 1709 or 1710. They also had three daughters. Jonathan
Ingham resided in Bucks County, at a place known as Ingham's Springs,
where he owned a farm and woolen factory. He was a rigid Quaker. A
cotemporary, who was well acquainted with him said, "He did not
belong to the old aristocracy who governed Bucks County before the
Revolution, but his position in life and high intelligence put him
in their society." They made him a Justice of the Peace, a Judge of
the Court, and a member of the Assembly. He died in 1798 or 1799,
aged 89. He had 3 sons and 2 daughters. Jonas, his youngest son,
was born in 1746. He learned the business of a clothier. January 3,
1771, he was married to Elizabeth Beaumont, and soon after leased his
father's fulling mill, and was running it when the Revolutionary war
commenced. When the contesting armies came near, he enlisted, and
served first as a Lieutenant and then as a Captain in the militia.
He was in service in 1777, and in the battle at Gulf Mills. In the
early part of the year 1778 he was taken with a fever and sent
home. He afterward purchased land and built a fulling mill near the
Delaware River; he there lived some years and educated his children
himself. In 1789 he commenced a settlement on the Wyalusing Creek,
being the first settler above Lewis', on that stream. He was an
ingenious mechanic, and invented the machine for shearing cloth,
which afterwards came into general use. He was a good writer and
public speaker. In 1804 he was elected a member of the Legislature
from Luzerne County. He died October 28, 1820. He had three sons and
three daughters.

[Illustration: Thos. J. Ingham.]

Joseph, his eldest son, was born January 21, 1773, and his father
taught him the common branches of education, including surveying
and algebra. While his father was making his first improvements on
the Wyalusing, Joseph remained at home in Bucks County, in charge
of the business. He learned the trade of a millwright. About the
year 1793 he married Pamelia Ellicott, and soon after bought three
hundred acres of land on the Susquehanna River, at the mouth of the
Sugar Run. He moved his family to this place in 1795, and commenced
building a saw mill in the fall of 1801, and finished it in the
spring following. Soon afterwards he built a grist mill. His wife,
Pamelia Ellicott, died 17 November, 1824. He afterwards married Laura
(Whitcomb) Vose, a widow, by whom he had two sons. He had six sons
by his first wife--no daughters. He died 11 June, 1829. Thomas, his
eldest son, was educated partly by his father at home and partly in
the common-school at Wyalusing. He learned his father's business of
millwright, running mills and farming. He bought a farm and settled
first at Browntown, Pa. But he remained there but a short time, when
he sold out and came back to Sugar Run, and lived near his father.
After the death of his father, he bought the homestead, and there
lived until his death. He re-built the mills, and also erected a
store-house, and engaged in the mercantile business. While quite a
young man he was appointed a Justice of the Peace, and held that
office during the most of his life. His mind was well informed on
all general topics; his judgment was excellent, and he was noted for
his morality, honesty and truthfulness. He was mild and quiet in his
manners, but decided and firm in his purposes. Eunice, his wife, was
handsome in her appearance and pleasing in her manners, possessed a
lively and cheerful disposition, and was exceedingly energetic. She
managed all the affairs of her household with economy and skill, and
often assisted her husband in his business. When he was absent she
could as readily manage the business out-doors as in the house. She
was remarkably generous, and always had a bountiful hand for the
poor, and was active in assisting her neighbors who were in sickness
or trouble. Without making a public profession, both she and her
husband exhibited the virtues of Christianity in her daily walk and
character. She died 2 March, 1844. He died 14 August, 1855. They were
both buried in the Terrytown Cemetery.

Children, all born in Asylum, now Wilmot, Pa.:

    1. Anna Pamelia, born 4 May, 1818; married Benjamin Goldsmith
    Horton, of Blooming Grove, Orange Co., N. Y., where she now
    resides.

    2. Joseph Washington Ingham, born 21 Oct., 1823; married
    in Wyalusing, 5 June, 1849, by Rev. Dr. S. F. Colt, to
    Mary Elizabeth Taylor, daughter of Rev. George Taylor, of
    Moravia, N. Y., and Abigail Baldwin, of Bloomfield, N. J., and
    grand-daughter of Maj. John Taylor, of Wyalusing, and born at
    Moravia, N. Y., 16 Jan., 1830; they have one son, George Taylor
    Ingham, an only child, born at Sugar Run, 13 Aug., 1851; he is
    a merchant.

J. W. Ingham owns and occupies the old homestead of his father, and
is a manufacturer of lumber and flour. He is a good writer, and some
of the soundest and best political articles published in the journals
of the county are from his pen. Mrs. Ingham is a worthy and active
member of the Presbyterian Church.

    3. Thomas Jefferson, born 25 Nov., 1828; married at Laporte,
    Pa., 5 June, 1853, by William A. Mason, Esq., to Caroline
    Araminta Cheney, daughter of Abel Cheney and Priscilla
    Washburn, and born at Cortlandville, N. Y., 15 Feb., 1831. He
    removed to Sullivan County after the death of his father, and
    studied law, soon attained to eminence as a lawyer, and stood
    at the head of the bar in his county; he has held the offices
    of Register, Recorder, Prothonotary, member of the Legislature,
    and Additional Law Judge, and in the fall of 1874, he, although
    always a strong Republican and editor of a Republican paper,
    was elected president Judge of the 44th Judicial District--a
    district largely Democratic. He resides in Laporte, Sullivan
    County, has three children, Ernest V., Ellery P., and Frank
    Horton.

    4. Debbie Lelia, born 3 June, 1831; married Andrew Jackson
    Stone, son of Raphael Stone and Mary Ingham. They live in
    Aurora, Ill., and have three children, Hugh, Lillie and Eliza,
    all born in Wilmot, Pa.

    5. Emma Adelaide, born 25 Nov., 1840; married Dr. Volney
    Hornet. They reside at Camptown, Pa., and have Jessie, born at
    Sugar Run.

No child or grand-child of Eunice Horton Ingham has yet died.


VI. SALLY, daughter of Maj. John Horton and Deborah Terry, born 29
May, 1798; married by Thomas Ingham, Esq., to JOHN MORROW, son of
John Morrow and Nancy Gamble, and born in Dunlevey, in the Parish of
Aughobog, County of Monohan, Ireland, 20 June, 1801. He sailed from
Ireland 14 March, 1811, and landed at Amboy, on 15 April, 1811. He
was an excellent farmer, owned a good farm in "The Bend" Asylum, now
Wilmot Township, Bradford County, Pa. He was engaged in early life
in merchandising, and later in life in raising and selling stock and
grain. He possessed good business capacities, and was a man of much
influence and activity, of good, sound, moral character, and well
read in the sacred Scriptures, and in sentiment a thorough Old School
Presbyterian or Covenanter, but never made a public profession. He
was fond of company, and always took pains to make pleasant visits
for his friends when they called on him.

Sally was a good housekeeper--industrious, economizing and a
skillful worker, often taking the premium at the County Fair
for domestic articles of her own manufacture. She possessed a
wonderfully retentive memory--readily stating, not only incidents
that occurred at any time during her life, but also dates--dates of
births, marriages and deaths of all her acquaintances, even from her
early childhood. She had a peculiar faculty of stating a fact or
circumstance so connected with others as to leave no doubt of its
truthfulness. She died in Wyalusing, 27 April, 1874, leaving to her
family and friends the consoling belief that she exchanged the cares
and sorrows of this mortal life for the full fruition of that world

      "Where fragrant flowers eternal bloom,
          And joys supreme are given;
      Where rays divine disperse the gloom,
      Beyond the confines of the tomb,
          The endless bliss of Heaven."

Mr. Morrow died in Wyalusing, at the residence of his son-in-law,
Andrew Fee, 10 August, 1873, where he had lain sick about four
months.

[Illustration: M^{RS}. SALLY H. MORROW.]

Children, all born in Wilmot, except George, who was born at
Terrytown, Pa.:

    1. George Horton, born 16 May, 1823; died 30 Dec., 1873;
    unmarried.

    2. John Wallace, born 4 Oct., 1824; died 20 March, 1857;
    unmarried.

    3. James Harvey, born 2 March, 1826; married Sabra Smith; died
    at Terrytown, 22 June, 1857; he was a merchant.

    4. Hon. Paul Dudley, born 17 Feb., 1828; entered Freshman
    class, at Hamilton College, N. Y., Sept., 1848; graduated July,
    1852, in first grade of scholarship; read Law Extra, under
    Prof. T. W. Dwight, during his senior year in College. After
    his graduation, he studied law with the Hon. Ulysses Mercur, of
    Towanda. Admitted to practice, Sept., 1853. Elected District
    Attorney in 1856. Married 2 June, 1857, at Warren, Pa., by Rev.
    Dr. S. F. Colt, to Harriet King Pitcher, daughter of Lorin
    Pitcher and Henrietta Coburn, and born in Byron, Genesee Co.,
    N. Y., 19 Oct., 1836. Mr. Morrow was appointed additional Law
    Judge of the 13th Judicial District, 1 March, 1870; was elected
    in the fall of the same year, and commissioned for ten years.
    The district was divided in 1874, and he was then commissioned
    President Judge of the 13th District (composed of Bradford
    County) for the balance of his term of office. He was a first
    class lawyer, and, as a judicial officer, he ranks high,
    possessing good executive talent and a sound judgment--none
    of his decisions have been reversed by the Supreme Court. He
    resides at Towanda, Pa.

    5. Debbie Ann, born 7 Oct., 1830; married Andrew Fee. She is a
    highly respected member of the Presbyterian Church. They live
    in Wyalusing.

    6. Nancy, born 23 July, 1834; married Capt. John G. Brown; she
    died 1 April, 1874.

    7. Francis Gailey, born 28 Dec., 1839; married Sarah Webb; owns
    the old Homestead.

    8. William Gibson, born 7 May, 1842; married Eliza Miller;
    lives in Wyalusing.


VII. ELIZABETH (Betsy), daughter of Maj. John Horton and Deborah
Terry, was born at Terrytown, Pa., 27 Dec., 1800; was married at
Terrytown, by Thomas Ingham, Esq., to FRANCIS E. BAILLET, son of
Francis Baillet and Lydia Terry, and born in Philadelphia, 9 June,
1797. He moved with his mother to Baltimore, where he served as an
apprentice with a tobacconist.

He came to Terrytown when a young man, moved to Farmersville,
Cataraugus Co., N. Y., soon after their marriage. Resided in
Farmersville till 1837, when they removed to Ellicottville in the
same county. He was clerk of Cataraugus Co. for twelve years in
succession, was always, and is yet, a staunch Democrat. Cataraugus
was largely a Whig county, yet his great popularity always drew Whig
votes enough to elect him. He left Cataraugus Co. a few years ago,
and went to Black River Falls, Wisconsin, where he now resides. He is
a genial, whole-souled, sportive man, and his penmanship, now at the
age of seventy-six years, is remarkably beautiful, round and fair,
and almost as easily read as print. He is now clerk in the office of
Carl C. Pope, Esq., of Black River Falls. He and his wife are both
members of the Baptist Church, and if they live until the 30 of Nov.
next (1874), they may celebrate their golden wedding.[5]

Children:

    1. Harry, born at Farmersville, N. Y., 29 Sept., 1825; died 5
    Oct., 1825.

    2. John Horton, born at Farmersville, N. Y., 28 Jan., 1827; was
    a Union soldier; lives in Wisconsin.

    3. George Washington, born at Farmersville, N. Y., 1 April,
    1829; was Postmaster at Ellicottville, New York, for several
    years; now lives in Wisconsin.

    4. Lydia Jane, born in Farmersville, New York, 24 July, 1831;
    married A. E. Sawyer; lives at Black River Falls, Wisconsin.

    5. Frank, born at Farmersville, 3 Sept., 1833; lives at Black
    River Falls.

    6. Henry, born at Farmersville, 30 April, 1836; died 3 April,
    1857.

    7. Anna E., born in Ellicottville, New York, 4 March, 1838;
    died 4 October, 1838.

    8. Pamela, born in Ellicottville, 15 Sept., 1839; married
    Austin; lives at La Crosse, Wisconsin.


VIII. FRANCIS, son of Maj. John Horton and Deborah Terry, born at
Terrytown, Pa., 7 June, 1803. He purchased a farm in Farmersville, N.
Y., went there and made the last payment for it. He was taken with
inflammation of the stomach and bowels when on his way home, and died
at his Uncle Joseph Horton's, at Palmyra, 30 June, 1829, was buried
in the East Palmyra Cemetery.


IX. GEORGE FIRMAN, son of Maj. John Horton and Deborah Terry, born
at Terrytown, 2 Jan., 1806; married at Terrytown, 4 June, 1832, by
Thomas Ingham, Esq., to ABIGAIL TERRY, daughter of William Terry and
Nancy Sherman, and born at East Palmyra, N. Y., 8 Oct., 1807. He is
a physician, was a member of the late Constitutional Convention of
Pennsylvania.

They have children as follows, all born at Terrytown:

    1. Francis William, born 15 March, 1833; died 22 Dec., 1833.

    2. Julia, born 24 Oct., 1834; married C. S. Homet.

    3. Jane Elizabeth, born 6 June, 1837; married Rev. D. Craft.

    4. William Terry, born 9 April, 1839; married Prudence
    Beardsley.

    5. John Burleigh, born 8 Jan., 1842; married Eva Tupper.

    6. Debbie Emily, born 7 Nov. 1843; married 30 June, 1868, Dr.
    W. J. Hillis; died 26 March, 1869, of consumption.

    7. Nancy Terry, born 15 July, 1846; died of consumption, 7
    Jan., 1872; unmarried.

    8. Mary Eliza, born 24 April, 1850; married 1 Oct., 1873, to
    William R. Sutton, of Lyons, N. Y.


X. EDMUND, son of Maj. John Horton and Deborah Terry, born 9 August,
1808; married at Lewistown, Mifflin Co., Pa., 10 Nov., 1834, by
Rev. Mr. Wyles, to MARTHA ANN ROBINSON, daughter of Robert Robinson
and Elizabeth Stalford, and born near Waynesburg, 3 Sept., 1811.
Robert Robinson was the son of William Robinson and Martha Houston.
He emigrated to this country from Ireland in 1752, and landed at
Wilmington, Del., being then nineteen years old. He resided there
until 1771, when he moved to Waynesburg, Mifflin Co., Pa., where he
remained till the 12 June, 1817, when he died.

Robert Robinson was born 31 July, 1773, on the old farm in
Waynesburg, now McVeytown. He was married in Philadelphia 23
Oct., 1810, by an Episcopal clergyman, to Elizabeth Stalford,
only daughter of Joseph Stalford and Catharine Pauling. Joseph
Stalford was the son of Samuel Stalford and Elizabeth Richardson, of
Philadelphia. Catharine Pauling was the daughter of Henry Pauling,
who was originally from Germany. Henry Pauling had six sons and two
daughters, viz.: John, Henry, Benjamin, Jesse, Nathan, William,
Catharine, and Rachael. Robert Robinson died in Lewistown, 18 April,
1832.

Edmund Horton and Martha Robinson have children as follows, all born
at Terrytown, Pa.:

    1. James Robert, born 15 Feb., 1836; died 10 Sept., 1838.

    2. Elizabeth Robinson, born 15 May, 1838; unmarried; resides at
    Terrytown, Pa.

    3. Mary Lucretia, born 17 July, 1840; unmarried; resides at
    Terrytown, Pa.

    4. Parshall Terry, born 15 Feb., 1843; unmarried; resides at
    Terrytown, Pa.

    5. Emily Robinson, born 14 Nov., 1847; married at Terrytown,
    1 June, 1869, by Rev. Hallock Armstrong of the Presbyterian
    Church, to Calvin D. Albert. He was a mechanic, and whilst at
    work in a planing-mill in Wyalusing, Pa., he was struck in the
    region of the stomach by a piece of board thrown by a circular
    saw, causing his death on the 17 May, 1870, leaving Anna Horton
    Albert, a posthumous child, born in Terrytown, 16 Oct., 1870.


XI. HARRY MORGAN, son of Maj. John Horton and Deborah Terry, born
24 Sept., 1811. He studied medicine with Dr. George F. Horton, and
was also an office student of Prof. Samuel McClellan of Jefferson
Medical College, Philadelphia, in 1833 and 1834. He graduated at
Jefferson Medical College in March, 1835. During the last year of his
residence in the city, he frequently visited patients in the city and
its environs, and in Feb., 1835, he was attacked with disease of the
lungs. He was examined for his degree by a part of the Professors
while confined to his bed, and he bore a very successful examination,
_all_ the Professors voting in his favor. He came home to Terrytown,
and lived but seven weeks after he reached home, dying on the 6 May,
1835. He was a member of the First Presbyterian Church, Philadelphia,
and had a complimentary letter from the Rev. Dr. Ely, introducing him
to some of the leading men of Columbia, South Carolina, and there he
would have gone if he had lived, as Dr. Ely had influential friends
there. The idea of going South to locate himself in the practice of
medicine was so deeply impressed upon his mind, that he could not
get rid of it, and he would not be satisfied until he started on his
journey, and he did start, rode four miles in a buggy, and died the
next morning at Thomas Ingham's.


I. SAMUEL TODD, son of Joseph Lee Horton and Hannah Todd, was born
at Owego, N. Y., 27 July, 1792; was married at Palmyra, 27 March,
1812, to MARY GALLOWAY, daughter of Captain James Galloway, and born
at Palmyra in May, 1794. He was a farmer and merchant, a spirited
business man, of commanding personal appearance, and greatly
respected. He was a First Lieutenant of a volunteer company of
militia in 1825. He died at Palmyra, 5 Sept., 1851.

His wife after his death moved to Genesee Co., Mich., where she died
13 May, 1867. They were both members of the Baptist Church of Palmyra.

Children:

    1. James Galloway, born at Palmyra, April, 1815.

    2. Cynthia, born at Palmyra.

    3. Ira Joseph, born at Palmyra, 1 April, 1818; married Ruth
    Howard.

    4. Maria P., born in Palmyra; died 28 May, 1843.

    5. William M., born in Palmyra; died 25 June, 1854. 6. Carlton
    S., born in Palmyra.


III. HENRY WISNER HORTON, son of Joseph Lee Horton and Hannah Todd,
born at Owego, N. Y., 31 May, 1797. Moved with his parents to
Palmyra, N. Y.; married at Penfield, N. Y., 31 Jan., 1819, to ADAH
JENNINGS, daughter of Joseph Jennings and Nancy Sherman. She was born
at Broadalbin, Saratoga Co., N. Y., 8 Oct., 1800. She died 20 Jan.,
1856. They moved from Palmyra to Royaltown, Niagara Co., N. Y., in
1819. Remained there until 1830, when they removed to Groveland,
Oakland Co., Mich., and settled on the farm upon which they now live
(1873). He purchased his farm of the Government, and it was the first
Government land sold and occupied in that township. He was an Acting
Justice of the Peace for twenty-two years. He was town-clerk for nine
years, and supervisor for three years. He embraced Christianity in
early life, became connected with the M. E. Church, and has been one
of the Stewards in that church in Groveland, from 1839 to the present
time. He has frequently been the class leader of the church, and his
house has always been known as "The Methodist Tavern and Preacher's
Home." Through his efforts mainly, a comfortable church building was
erected on the corner of his farm, and it has always been known as
the "Horton Methodist Church." He was Captain of the first volunteer
militia company ever organized in that section of the country. He was
always a true republican, and frequently received the nomination of
the Whig party for a seat in the Legislature, but in consequence of
the large Democratic majority in the district, he was never elected.
With a character unblemished he has lived to an honorable old age,
and by his many virtues he commands the respect and high esteem of
the church and community in which he resides.

Children:

    1. Permelia, born 25 June, 1820.

    2. Emerson Jennings, born 25 Dec., 1821; both died at Royalton,
    10 Sept., 1824, where they were born; they were both placed in
    one coffin and buried in Royalton Cemetery.

    3. Elstin Jennings, born 25 Jan., 1824.

    4. Henry Lee, born 24 March, 1826.

    5. Adah A., born 12 March, 1828; all at Royalton.

The rest, born at Groveland, Michigan:

    6. Julia A., born 24 Aug., 1830.

    7. Joseph Lee, born 27 Nov., 1832.

    8. Dexter, born 24 June, 1836.

    9. Emerson C., born 24 Oct., 1838.

    10. Oscar, born 2 Nov., 1840.

    11. Nancy H., born 5 July, 1847.

He married 2. on 16 Sept., 1856, MARY LASER, widow of Isaac J. Laser,
Esq., of Springfield, Mich.


IV. SARAH PARSHALL, daughter of Joseph Lee Horton and Hannah Todd,
born at Owego, N. Y., 28 May, 1799; married at Palmyra, N. Y., 27
Aug., 1818, by Elder Roe, to NATHAN DURFEE, son of Gideon Durfee and
Hannah Wood, and born at Palmyra, 21 Aug., 1796. He died 28 May,
1868, at the homestead of his father-in-law, which he had bought, and
upon which he had made great improvements. He was a member of the
Baptist Church.

Children:

    1. Susan, born 18 Nov., 1819.

    2. Sarah A., born 17 April, 1822.

    3. James S., born at Royalton, Niagara Co., N. Y., 16 Dec.,
    1827. He is married, has a family, resides at the old homestead
    with his mother. He is an active member of the Baptist Church.
    His mother is also a member of the Church, of marked piety and
    highly esteemed.


V. JAMES PARSHALL, son of Joseph Lee Horton and Hannah Todd, born at
Owego, N. Y., 5 April, 1801. He married in Palmyra, 17 Feb., 1829,
to CAROLINE M. GOLDSMITH; she died at Palmyra, 16 Jan., 1864; he died
13 July, 1871.

They had but one child, viz.:

    Adriana, born in Palmyra; married David Bostwick, and had one
    daughter. David Bostwick died 13 March, 1864; his wife died 23
    June, 1869.

Their daughter is living, and has a good property left her by her
grandfather.


VII. LEWIS BEERS, son of Joseph Lee Horton and Hannah Todd, born at
Palmyra, N. Y., 24 May, 1806; married 1. at Royalton, N. Y., 22 Feb.,
1827, to LUCY A. BEDELL; she died 9 Aug., 1864. He was married 2. in
the spring of 1866, to widow ELIZABETH SPENCER, of Michigan. By his
first wife he had Caroline, born at Royalton. He is a farmer, and a
deacon of the Baptist Church, of Royalton.


VIII. ANNA, daughter of Joseph Lee Horton and Hannah Todd, was born
5 July, 1808, died at Palmyra, N. Y., 29 July, 1854. She was never
married, was a very pious girl; a member of the Baptist Church, lived
a very exemplary life, had many friends; she was greatly afflicted
with ill health all her life.


IX. DURFEE DELANO, son of Joseph Lee Horton and Hannah Todd, born
25 July, 1813; married 25 Feb., 1836, to SARAH BOYCE, daughter of
William Boyce, of Marion, N. Y. Settled at Groveland, Oakland Co.,
Mich. His wife died at Groveland, 5 June, 1837; was married 2. to
SARAH ----. They are members of the Methodist Episcopal Church.

Children:

    1. Lewis Beers.

    2. George.

    3. James L.

    4. Ella.


X. WILSON OSBORN, son of Joseph Lee Horton and Hannah Todd, born 26
April, 1815. In his childhood he was subject to "fits," which clouded
and dwarfed his mind; but to the extent of his ability he was a
consistent Christian, and a member of the Methodist Episcopal Church.
He died by drowning, while bathing in the Erie Canal, at Palmyra, 20
July, 1866.


I. MARGARET VANCE, daughter of Benjamin Horton and Hannah Vance
(_Israel_, _Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Caleb I._), born at Sugar Loaf,
Orange Co., N. Y., 9 Dec., 1796; married 13 Oct., 1821, to PETER
BENNET, of Goshen. She died of consumption, 22 March, 1846. She was a
member of the M. E. Church.


II. MILTON, son of Benjamin Horton and Hannah Vance, born at Sugar
Loaf, Orange Co., N. Y., 7 April, 1799; married at Monroe, Orange
Co., N. Y., 10 Nov., 1821, by the Rev. Zalmon Lyon of the M. E.
Church, to LYDIA BENNET, daughter of Benjamin Bennet and Mary
Belcher, and born in Monroe. She died in West Salem, Wis., 12 Sept.,
1871.

    "Mother left us last fall for a brighter, happier clime. Her
    work was done, and well done. Many deeds of kindness were
    performed by her, known only to the recipients and to Him who
    seeth in secret."--_Letter of Josephine D. Horton_, 1872.

Children:

    1. Mary Elizabeth, born at Belvale, N. Y., 10 August, 1822;
    married Nelson Brown.

    2. Benjamin, born at Belvale, N. Y., 19 Dec., 1823; married
    Carrie Hart.

    3. Townsend Nicholas, born at Belvale, N. Y., 8 March, 1826.

    4. Eunice Lucada, born at Belvale, N. Y., 21 Dec., 1827;
    married Caleb Evans.

    5. Hannah Jane, born in Belvale, N. Y., 19 August, 1829;
    married Caleb Oakes.

    6. Sarah Delia, born in Belvale, N. Y., 3 June, 1831; married
    A. G. Smith.

    7. Josephine Deborah, born in Belvale, N. Y., 17 July, 1834;
    unmarried.

    8. Emma Alma, born in Milan, Ohio, 4 Sept., 1836; married
    William Upton.

    9. Catharine Julia, born in Milan, Ohio, 5 March, 1841.

Milton Horton is now (1873) living at West Salem, Wis. He has been
a farmer all his days, an occupation as honorable, certainly as
useful, as any other known to the family of man. The intelligent,
conscientious, upright farmer is, and of right should be, one of the
lords of our happy country. He cannot be surpassed by any profession
or class of persons.

Milton Horton moved from Orange Co., N. Y., to Milan, Ohio, in 1835,
and thence to West Salem, Wis., in 1865. He is a worthy follower,
and so also was his wife, of the Good Shepherd, and he has always
commanded the respect and esteem of all who have known him.


V. NICHOLAS TOWNSEND, son of Benjamin Horton and Hannah Vance, born
in Belvale, N. Y., 20 Jan., 1805; married 1. in New York City,
19 August, 1827, SARAH VAN ORDEN, of Jersey City. She died in
Cincinnati. He was married 2. in Cincinnati, Ohio, to ELIZA A. SMITH.

He commenced in New York City about 1826, the business of setting
iron railings around door-steps and iron fences in front of
dwelling-houses and other buildings. In 1832 he moved to Cincinnati,
Ohio, and carried on his business on a large scale, manufacturing
as well as setting iron-railings, mantels, grates, and fencings,
giving employment to quite a number of workmen. He was doing a
large business in and about Cincinnati, and was reputed to be worth
$200,000.

In July, 1857, he was killed by one of his employees. The murderer
was arrested, tried, convicted, and executed.

By his sudden death his business matters were so deranged that his
wife and family realized only a small part of his large estate.

Children, by 1st wife:

    1. David Claudius, born in New York City, 1828; dead.

    2. Benjamin J., born in New York City, 13 Feb., 1831.

By 2d wife:

    3. Carrie Ella, born in Cincinnati; married Cunningham.

    4. George Clifford, born in Cincinnati; unmarried; lives with
    his mother.

    5. Nicholas Townsend, born in Cincinnati; unmarried; lives with
    his mother.


VI. SARAH JANE, daughter of Benjamin Horton and Hannah Vance, was
born at Belvale, 2 May, 1807; was married in New York, 26 Dec.,
1827, to MATTHEW MEAD, and moved to Philadelphia, where she died of
consumption, 28 April, 1843.


VIII. HANNAH MARIA, daughter of Benjamin Horton and Hannah Vance,
was born at Belvale, 7 May, 1811; was married about 1830, to JAMES
GALLOWAY HORTON, son of Lieut. Samuel T. Horton, of Palmyra, N. Y.
They moved to Michigan. She died 19 April, 1847, of consumption.

(For her family, see James Galloway Horton.)


IX. CATHARINE D., daughter of Benjamin Horton and Hannah Vance, was
born at Belvale, 13 August, 1813; was married 12 Jan., 1837, at
Norwalk, Ohio, by Rev. J. H. Powers, to ENOCH NICHOLS. He died 22
March, 1861, of consumption. He was a son of Nathaniel Nichols, who
emigrated from England, settled 1. in Connecticut: 2. in Oneida Co.,
N. Y.; 3. in Genesee Valley, N. Y., where he died.

Children:

    1. Martha J., born in Ridgefield, Ohio, 11 August, 1838;
    married by E. A. Pray, Esq., 23 Feb., 1857, to Caleb Root, of
    Norwalk, Ohio.

    2. Hannah Etta, born in Ridgefield, Ohio, 12 Oct., 1839;
    married by Rev. Edwin Dewitt, 16 Sept., 1862, to Eben Baldwin,
    of Oxford, Ohio.

    3. Benjamin Townsend, born in Oxford, Erie Co., Ohio, 29 July,
    1845; married by Rev. Dr. Hatfield, 28 Oct., 1868, to Alice F.
    Hughes, of Milan, Ohio.

    4. Albion Nathaniel, born in Oxford, Ohio, 19 March, 1850;
    unmarried.

    5. Horton Samuel, born in Oxford, Ohio, 12 April, 1852; died 8
    Feb., 1872, of consumption.

To Mrs. Catharine D. Nichols we are indebted for the above record,
and for other information in regard to the family of Benjamin Horton.


X. ELIZABETH R., daughter of Benjamin Horton and Hannah Vance, born
at Belvale, 3 Oct., 1815; married 7 Feb., 1833, to SMITH CONLEY.
She died 26 May, 1853, of inflammation of the bowels. No record of
children.


IV. JOHN, son of Lieut. John Horton and Mary De La Montanye
(_Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Caleb I._), born in Wyoming,
in 1790. He married WICKIZER, and settled on Wysox Creek, now Rome,
Bradford Co., Pa., about 1814.

Children:

    1. Mary, born in Wyoming, 23 Nov., 1810; married William Trout.

    2. Rosina, born in Wyoming, 25 Nov., 1813; unmarried; resides
    at Myersburg, Pa.

    3. Sarah Ann, born in Wysox, now Rome, 8 Oct., 1816; married
    Jarvis.

    4. John, born in Rome, 11 March, 1819; married Sarah Wickizer.

    5. Josiah, born in Rome, 16 Feb., 1823; married Mary Ann Lung.
    He is a good farmer and a very worthy man. He and his wife are
    members of the M. E. Church of Rome.


V. MILLER, son of Lieut. John Horton and Mary De La Montanye, born
in Wyoming Valley, 12 Feb., 1792; married in Wilkesbarre, Pa., 19
Dec., 1813, by Esq. Campbell, to ELIZABETH WALLER, daughter of Nathan
Waller, and born in Wilkesbarre, 24 May, 1786. She died in South
Wilkesbarre, 30 June, 1833. He died 20 Oct., 1847. He was a stage
proprietor, contractor on public works and a farmer.

Children, all born in South Wilkesbarre, Pa.:

    1. John Waller, born 22 Nov., 1814; married Sarah Gates.

    2. Elizabeth, born 14 Oct., 1816; married P. M. C. Gilchrist.

    3. Mary, born 23 Oct., 1818; married W. L. Cook.

    4. Nathan Miller, born 5 Jan., 1821; married Susan Richards.

    5. Emily, born 25 March, 1824.

    6. Thomas Miner, born 23 March, 1826; died without issue.

    7. William Drinker, born 6 Aug., 1828; died 16 Nov., 1829.


HON. JESSE, son of Lieut. John Horton and Mary De La Montanye, born
in Wyoming Valley, near Forty Fort, 1797; married in Berwick, Pa.,
in Jan., 1820, by Rev. Mr. Penne, to HARRIET HEADLEY, daughter of Dr.
Samuel Headley and Anna Fairchild, and born in Cherry Valley, N. Y.,
in 1800; died at Berwick, 17 Jan., 1823, leaving two children, viz.:

    1. Anna Maria, born 2 April, 1822; married Allen M. Gangwer,
    now (1873) chief clerk 3d Auditor's Office, Washington, D. C.

    2. Harriet, born 17 Jan., 1823; married Nathan G. Wesley.

He married 2. the widow MARTHA COOK, daughter of James Lemon and
Rachel Fishing, and born in Point Township, Northumberland Co., Pa.,
25 Feb., 1796.

Children, all born in Northumberland:

    3. Carrie.

    4. Amelia.

    5. Isabella.

    6. Martha Cora.

By her first husband Mrs. Horton had Elizabeth and Edward, both died
in infancy, and William Lemon Cook, who married ---- Horton, and is
now a clerk in the Pension Office, Washington, D. C.

Jesse Horton was a soldier in the war of 1812; came out unharmed. He
was a member of the Assembly in 1841, and a member of the Senate in
1843-4-5. In early life he was engaged in the staging business, and
afterwards was Captain of a packet-boat on the Penn'a Canal. But for
many years past he has been a farmer and dealer in cattle, grain and
flour. He died quite suddenly in Feb., 1874.


VIII. LEWIS MULLISON, son of Lieut. John Horton and Mary De La
Montanye, born in Wyoming Valley, near Forty Fort, in May, 1799;
married in Wyoming, 1827, to PRISCILLA CRISMAN, and removed to
Rushville, in 1836. In 1842, he moved to the Littleton Prairie, Ill.,
and settled on the northeast of Section 21, and here he remained
until the day of his death, which occurred on the 10 Sept., 1874. In
early life he was interested in several stage lines, and in boating
on the Penn'a Canal. After he went West he followed farming.


I. JESSE, son of John Horton and Elizabeth Thomas (_Richard_,
_Caleb_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born in Newtown, Chester Co., Pa.,
in 1786; was married about 1819, to MARY STEEL, daughter of Andrew
Steel and Susanna ----. He died in Newtown in 1825. The date of his
wife's death is not given. Children, all born in Newtown:

    1. Susanna, was born in 1820; died unmarried.

    2. Jesse Davis, was born in 1822; died unmarried in Beverly, N.
    J., in 1850.

    3. Mary Elizabeth, was born 30 Oct., 1824; a maiden lady of
    intelligence and refinement, and resides in Newtown.


II. JACOB, son of John Horton and Elizabeth Thomas, born in Newtown,
in 1791; was married in 1813, to SARAH WINANS, daughter of Jacob
Winans and Mary ----.

Children, all born in Newtown:

    1. John Elliott, was born in 1814; died in Ohio; unmarried.

    2. David Thomas, was born in 1815; was married in 1839, to
    Mary Davis, daughter of William Davis; lives in Conshohocken,
    Montgomery Co., Pa.

    3. James Elliott, was born in 1817; married Mary Roberts.

    4. Mary, born in 1819.

    5. Eliza Ann, was born about 1821; died unmarried.

    6. Richard, born in 1823; resides in Jones Co., Iowa.

    7. Caroline, born about 1825; married Abram Paschal.

    8. Jacob, born about 1828; was a Union soldier, died in the
    service.


III. JOHN, son of John Horton and Elizabeth Thomas, born in Newtown,
in 1798; married in 1828, to JANE LINDSLEY, daughter of Andrew
Lindsley and Christiana Vanleer; reside in Newtown.

Children, all born in Newtown:

    1. Christiana, born in 1829; unmarried; lives in Newtown.

    2. John Andrews, born in 1831; lives in Newtown.

    3. Jane, born in 1833.

    4. Harry Thomas, born in 1835; married Mary Dwalf; resides in
    Philadelphia.

    5. Bernard N., born in 1838; married Hannah Green, daughter of
    Lewis Green; has two children; lives in Radnor.

    6. Elizabeth, was born 17 Feb., 1840; married George Davis,
    son of Samuel Davis; had three children; lives in Haverford,
    Delaware Co., Pa.

    7. Mary Ann, was born about 1842; married Walter Thompson; has
    two children; resides in Haverford, Delaware Co., Pa.

    8. Samuel Black, was born in 1844; married Mary ----; lives in
    Marple, Delaware Co., Pa.


IV. ELIZABETH, daughter of John Horton and Elizabeth Thomas, born in
Newtown, 27 Nov., 1800; married in Radnor, 20 March, 1828, by the
Rev. Samuel C. Brinkley, an Episcopal clergyman, to SAMUEL BLACK, son
of Samuel Black and Catharine Vanleer, and born in Marple, Delaware
Co., Pa., in 1799, and died there in 1851.

Mrs. Black now resides there, and to her the compiler is indebted
for nearly all the information he has in relation to the Hortons of
Radnor. She is intelligent and retains her memory remarkably well.

Children, all born in Marple:

    1. John Horton, born 17 Feb., 1829.

    2. Catharine Ann, born 8 May, 1831; was married in
    Philadelphia, 25 Dec., 1854, by the Rev. Mr. Channy, to Lewis
    Morris Lewis, son of James Lewis and Mary Fawkes, and born in
    Marple, in 1831. He is an Elder in the Presbyterian Church at
    Marple, is Superintendent of the Sabbath School, and both he
    and his wife are intelligent, active, and faithful members of
    the church. They have Harry M. Lewis, and James B. Lewis.

    3. William Vanleer, born in Marple, 29 June, 1833.

    4. Samuel Vanleer, born in Marple, 10 May, 1836; unmarried.

    5. Harry Harrison, born in Marple, 23 Dec., 1837; married
    Helen Lawrence.

    6. George Fell, born 20 July, 1839.

    7. Elizabeth Jane, was born in Marple, 17 Feb., 1842; married
    by the Rev. Dr. Hodgkin, to Charles Johnson Essey.

    8. Bernard Vanleer, born 22 May, 1844. He lives in
    Philadelphia, Pa.


BENJAMIN, son of Barnabas Horton and Rachael Bostwick (_Barnabas_,
_Barnabas_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born at Grey Court, Orange
Co., N. Y., 12 April, 1788; was married 1. 31 Dec., 1810, by Rev.
Dr. Lansing, to SARAH ROSE, born 6 Jan., 1790; 2. 23 Dec., 1816, to
ALMIRA OSBORN, born 4 July, 1798; 3. in Marseilles, N. Y., by Rev.
Mr. Williams, 17 Dec., 1845, to POLLY BROOKS; 4. in Liverpool, N. Y.,
by the Rev. Silas Ball, 24. Jan., 1865, to ELIZA GRIFFIS, daughter of
John Griffis, of Syracuse.

Children:

    1. Benjamin, Jr., born 6 August, 1811.

    2. Benjamin Rose, born 20 Feb., 1814.

By second wife:

    3. Harry, born 30 July, 1818.

    4. Israel, born 27 June, 1820.

    5. Mirandi, born 8 Jan., 1823; married Jacob Brodhead.

    6. Albert, born 3 March, 1825; died young.

    7. Alauson, born 28 May, 1829.

By his fourth wife:

    8. Hiram Haskins, born 17 May, 1866.

Mr. Horton is still in good health. He moved to Syracuse in early
life, where he has now a fine property. He is able to get up his
horse and carriage himself, and drive wherever his business calls him.


II. HENRY, son of Nathan Horton and Rebecca Priest (_Richard_,
_Caleb_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born in Radnor, Delaware Co., Pa.,
25 Jan., 1791; married in Broadtop, Pa., 22 Sept., 1812, to ELIZABETH
WHITE, daughter of Thomas White and Elizabeth Jones.

Children, all born in Broadtop, Pa.:

    1. Thomas, born 12 June, 1813; married 1. Barbara Barrett; 2.
    Widow Elizabeth Garrett.

    2. Nathan, born 3 May, 1815; married 1. Rosanna Miller; 2.
    Widow Susanna Reddy.

    3. William, born 4 July, 1817; married Ann Cerathers.

    4. Hannah, born 21 March, 1819; married Amos Figart; resides at
    Broadtop, Pa.

    5. Jesse, born 12 June, 1822; married Catherine Wightman;
    resides at Bellville, Pa.

    6. George, born 31 August, 1824; died 16 June, 1868; married
    Catherine Hamilton.

    7. Alexander, born 5 Jan., 1828; died, from disease contracted
    in the war, in 1868; married Naomi Duval.

    8. Mary, born 21 August, 1832; married Eli Alloway; she is a
    widow, and resides at Broadtop, Pa.


HON. ELIJAH, son of Elijah Horton and Mehitabel R. Coleman
(_Elijah_, _Caleb_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born at Chester, N. J.,
15 Dec., 1794; married at Chester, 16 Dec., 1812, by the Rev. Stephen
Overton, to SARAH OVERTON, daughter of Rev. Stephen Overton and Phebe
Rose, and born at Fire Place, L. I., 4 Jan., 1797.

Children:

    1. Alfred, born at Chester, N. J., 25 Nov., 1813; married Mary
    Horton.

    2. Charles, born at Chester, N. J., 25 Jan., 1816.

    3. Harriet, born at Chester, N. J., 13 July, 1817; died at
    Nunda, N. Y., 25 Jan., 1843.

    4. George Washington, born at Chester, N. J., 29 July, 1819.

    5. Phebe Ann, born at Chester, N. J., 16 Sept., 1821.

    6. Theodore, born at Chester, N. J., 28 Oct., 1823.

    7. Elizabeth, born at Pleasant Grove, N. J., 28 Sept., 1827.

    8. Stephen Edwin, born at Chester, N. J., 25 Sept., 1829; died
    at Goshen, N. Y., 9 Feb., 1849.

    9. Sarah Ann, born at Morristown, N. J., 10 June, 1832; died at
    Oswego, Ia., 28 Jan., 1856.

    10. Elijah Augustus, born at West Almond, Alleghany Co., N. Y.,
    15 Dec., 1833.

    11. Henrietta, born at West Almond, Alleghany Co., N. Y., 13
    June, 1835.

Hon. Elijah Horton's present residence is Oswego, Kosciusko Co., Ia.
In a letter bearing date 23d Sept., 1874, he says:

    "You ask for a short biographical sketch. This I rather
    decline, further than to say that my life has been devoted
    to the judicial profession. I studied law in Morristown, N.
    J., and practiced there until I removed to Alleghany Co., N.
    Y., in 1832. I served as first Judge of the Court of Common
    Pleas of that county for about ten years. Soon after moving
    into the State of Indiana in 1844, I was appointed District
    Judge, and I have served in that office, and also as a Justice
    of the Peace ever since, until within a few weeks past when I
    resigned. In looking over my past life, I see many things that
    I would not do over again, with my past experience, especially
    would I say long and loud, NO, instead of YES, as I often did.
    Your letter brings to my mind views and opinions which I have
    been learning and experiencing for many years of my past life.
    Habits have grown upon me imperceptibly from my childhood. I
    have old diaries written in my younger days, in which I find
    recorded rules for my own conduct, the strict observance of
    which, has caused me many miles of travel and hours of labor.
    For illustration, I recall one or two: 'Have a place for
    everything, and keep everything in its place' and 'Never put
    off till to morrow what you can as well do to-day.' I began
    life under such rules, and I have always been tyrannically
    _ruled_ by them. If I forgot to do anything that I intended to
    do through the day, and happened to think of it after I had
    gone to bed, I could not sleep until I would get up and do it,
    if possible, and if not possible there would be no sleep for me
    that night. I have written this letter at one sitting and feel
    pretty tired."

The letter contained about four pages foolscap, and it is no wonder
that he, now just entering his eightieth year, should feel tired.
The greater wonder is that he could write at all. It is written in a
bold, plain hand, giving no indications of age.


I. PARMENAS HOWELL, son of Barnabas Horton and Milicent Howell
(_Silas_, _Barnabas_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born in Goshen, N.
Y., 13 Dec., 1795; married in Minnisink, N. Y., 16 Nov., 1819, by
Rev. Henry Ball, to FANNY CASH, daughter of Reuben Cash and Milicent
Howell, and born in Minnisink, 11 June, 1799; died 31 March, 1838. He
died 21 June, 1868.

Children, all born in Goshen:

    1. Mary Emeline, born 12 August, 1820; married William Reeve;
    died 1 Jan., 1849.

    2. Barnabas, born 19 Feb., 1822; died 19 June, 1852; unmarried.

    3. Harriet Milicent, born 12 July, 1826; died 15 Nov., 1855;
    unmarried.

    4. Anna Eliza, born 15 Jan., 1830; married John Wheeler Gardner.

    5. Sarah Frances, born 23 Feb., 1836; died 17 August, 1856;
    unmarried.


III. DR. HARVEY ADDISON, son of Barnabas Horton and Milicent Howell,
born in Middletown, N. Y., 1 Feb., 1800; married MARY BENNET, born in
Goshen, 15 July, 1798; died 27 Sept., 1855. He died.

He was an educated and skillful physician and practiced with good
success in Minnisink and adjoining towns, and enjoyed the confidence
and respect of all who knew him.

Children, born in Minnisink:

    1. Harvey Addison, M. D., born 12 March, 1832; married Fanny C.
    Beebe.

    2. Milicent Ellen, born 3 Sept., 1833; died 24 March, 1841.

    3. Albert Howell, born 13 March, 1837; married Anna Amelia
    Robertson.


VI. MILICENT, daughter of Barnabas Horton and Milicent Howell, born
in Minnisink, N. Y., 10 July, 1809; married in Minnisink, 10 March,
1827, by Rev. William Timlow, of Amity, N. Y., to CHARLES SMITH LEE,
of Minnisink, and born 12 Feb., 1804.

Children, all born in Minnisink, N. Y.:

    1. Mary Milicent Lee, born 12 Sept., 1828; died 8 April, 1844.

    2. Harriet Elizabeth Lee, born 19 Feb., 1832.

    3. Alexander Lee, born 19 April, 1834.

    4. Angeline Lee, born 19 April, 1834.

    5. Egbert Lee, born 2 Sept., 1837; died 1 Feb., 1839.

    6. Albert Lee, born 21 Jan., 1840; died 30 Dec., 1845.

    7. Ellen Amanda Lee, born 19 March, 1842; died 8 Feb., 1844.

    8. Simeon Morgan Lee, born 26 July, 1846; died 27 Feb., 1852.

    9. Horace Horton Lee, born 15 Dec., 1848; died 28 Dec., 1851.

    10. Howell Haynes Lee, born 15 Dec., 1848; died 18 Sept., 1873,
    in Shreveport, Louisiana, greatly lamented by all who knew
    him. He was a merchant. He and his wife Fannie Moore, to whom
    he was married 2 May, 1872; went South early in the Summer of
    1873. She came North by the advice of physicians, and at her
    husband's request, as it was not considered safe for her to
    remain there during the hot season. His mother writes: "We
    have passed through a great bereavement. Howell died the 18
    Sept. last. He was taken sick on Sabbath with yellow fever,
    and died the next Thursday, at eleven o'clock. Our hopes as to
    this world are all blasted, but we trust that he is with his
    Saviour, to whom he gave himself in his seventeenth year, and
    from that time until his death, he lived a Christian. So we may
    mourn not without hope."


  +------------------------------------------------------------------+
  | TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE:                                              |
  | The following two entries for 'II. John Seward' and 'III. David' |
  | are misplaced and should be ignored. They are repeated, with     |
  | some changes and additions, in the correct location in the       |
  | _Eighth Generation_ section on p. 130.                           |
  +------------------------------------------------------------------+


II. JOHN SEWARD, son of Edward Horton and Charlotte Seward (_Edward_,
_Nathaniel_, _Caleb_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born in Randolph,
Morris Co., N. J., 24 Oct., 1801. He was married at Brutus, Cayuga
Co., N. Y., 13 March, 1823, by Elder Hough, of Port Byron, N. Y., to
PAULINA CARRIER, daughter of Amaziah Carrier and Wealthy Hatch, and
born in Brutus, 29 Sept., 1804.

Children, all born in Conquest, N. Y., except Jane A., who was born
in Clarence, Calhoun Co., Mich.:

    1. Charlotte, born 8 Jan., 1826; married William Wright; died
    at Conquest, N. Y., 14 August, 1858.

    2. Mary Ann, born 1 March, 1828; married 1. Oliver M. Reed; 2.
    Samuel Farrand; 3. Theodore P. Halliday.

    3. Hetty M., born 9 June, 1830; died 2 Sept., 1830.

    4. Edward Livingston, born 28 August, 1834; died 28 March, 1839.

    5. Pauline Emily, born 11 Feb., 1842; married 1. David Keck; 2.
    James Lewis.

    6. Jane Adelaide, born 7 Nov., 1847; married Reuben C. Sibley.


III. DAVID, son of Edward Horton and Charlotte Seward, born in
Randolph, Morris Co., N. J.


I. JOHN, son of Matthias Horton and Sarah Rumsey (_Silas_,
_Barnabas_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born about 1785, in Goshen, N. Y.

Children, born in Goshen:

    1. Clarissa Jane, born 1810.

    2. Matthias, died in Goshen; had 2 children.

    3. John, lives in Albany, N. Y., has 6 children.

    4. Mortimer, no children, lives in Bethel, Michigan.

    5. Sarah Elizabeth, married Richard Drake, has 7 children,
    lives in Coldwater, Mich.

    6. Mary, married Thomas Stansbrough, has 11 children, lives in
    Newburgh.


IV. GABRIEL, son of Matthias Horton and Sarah Rumsey, born in Goshen,
9 Aug., 1806; married ELIZA CORWIN, daughter of Joseph Corwin and
Hannah Finch, and born in Goshen about 1808.

Children, probably all born in Goshen:

    1. Julia, married William Garlock.

    2. Henry, married, had Adah and Sarah.

    3. Abigail.

    4. Sarah.

    5. Caroline, married George Huff.

    6. Mary, married Hunsike, had Mary and Millard.

    7. Adelia, married Wm. Porter, had Horton.

    8. Charles.

    9. Harriet, married Jackson.


VI. MATTHIAS, son of Matthias Horton and Sarah Rumsey (_Silas_,
_Barnabas_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born in Orange Co., N. Y., 26
Jan., 1812; married 1 April, 1836, to EVELINE WILLIAMS, born in
Orange Co., N. Y., 19 Oct., 1807.

Children, probably all born in Goshen Township:

    1. Mary Catherine, born 3 Dec., 1836; married 7 May, 1854, to
    Henry Stedman.

    2. Sarah Ann, born 19 Oct., 1838; married 3 Sept., 1857, to
    Charles Moore.

    3. George Washington, born 11 Jan., 1841; died 6 Oct., 1862.

    4. Andrew Jackson, born 26 June, 1843; married 21 June, 1868,
    to Hannah Fowler.

    5. Martin Van Buren, born 13 March, 1846.

    6. William Henry, born 24 Feb., 1848; died 25 July, 1848.

    7. Eveline, born 15 Nov., 1849; married William Hutchings.

Matthias Horton died 6 March, 1863; his wife died 11 March, 1872.


IV. EDMUND BANI, son of Jonathan Bani Horton and Deborah Osborn
(_Barnabas_, _Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Caleb I._), born in Southold,
5 Oct., 1821; married in New York City, 5 June, 1844, by the Rev.
Dr. E. F. Hatfield, to MATILDA G. DEVOY, daughter of John M. Devoy
and Margaret G. Coddington. He is a mechanic, but is now a salesman,
warehousing and forwarding merchant, in New York City. He has a
beautiful residence at White Stone, L. I. He is an active and
intelligent member of the Presbyterian Church, and he, with a few
other liberal Presbyterians, have erected a very pretty little church.

Children, all born in New York City:

    1. Edmund B., born 14 April, 1845.

    2. William Henry, born 23 April, 1847; died 22 July, 1867.

    3. Charles Pierson Baldwin, born 7 Feb., 1852.

    4. Jonathan Bani, born 7 March, 1857.

    5. Mortimer Slittwell, born 1 April, 1863.


II. GEN. WILLIAM, son of Col. Nathan Horton and Elizabeth Eagles
(_Nathan_, _Caleb_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born at New River,
Wilkes, now Watauga Co., N. C., 15 Aug., 1786; married in 1814, at
Yadkin River, Ashe Co., N. C., to MILLY DULA, daughter of William and
Theodoria, his wife.

Children, probably all born at Yadkin River:

    1. James C., born 9 March, 1817.

    2. William Leander, born 1818; married Francis Corpening.

    3. Eliza, born 1820; married Jackson Corpening.

    4. Theodoria Elvira, born 22 August, 1825; married Geo. Hays
    Hamilton.

    5. Rebecca, born about 1827; married David E. Bower.

    6. Nathan, born about 1829; unmarried.

    7. Phineas, born about 1832; unmarried.

    8. Sarah, born about 1834; unmarried.

    9. Lamira Louisa, born about 1837; married Wiley P. Thomas.

    10. Alexander Hamilton, born 1840; married Mary Jane Vogler.

After his marriage the General moved to Yadkin River, and
settled near the mouth of Elk Creek, where he acquired a large
amount of valuable land and other property, farming being his
principal vocation. He represented Ashe County in the Legislature
in 1814-'15-'16, and from Wilkes County he was elected in
1822-'23-'29-'30-'33-'34-'35 and '36. He was also for many years
Brigadier General of the 9th Brigade, North Carolina Militia. He died
at his residence on Yadkin River.


III. JAMES, son of Col. Nathan Horton and Elizabeth Eagles, born at
New River, 28 Feb., 1789; married SIDNEA WEBB, daughter of Benjamin
Webb and Jane ---- ----, of Beaver Dam, Ashe Co., N. C. He was
elected to the State Legislature in 1830, and held other public
positions for many years. He was a volunteer in the service of his
country in the war of 1812-'15, and served until honorably discharged.


IV. DAVID EAGLES, son of Colonel Nathan Horton and Elizabeth Eagles,
born at New River, 4 May, 1792; married SARAH DULA, a sister of the
General's wife. They settled at Yadkin River, where they became quite
wealthy in lands and negroes, owning, at the time they were made
free, 150. He was a planter, and died at his residence, 3 July, 1870.
He was also a volunteer in the war of 1812. His wife is still living.

Children:

    James Theodore, born 16 Oct., 1829; married Sarah Rosa Lynch.


V. PHINEAS, son of Colonel Nathan Horton and Elizabeth Eagles, born
at New River, Watauga Co., N. C., 9 Jan., 1795; married about 1827,
REBECCA COUNCILL, daughter of Jordan Councill and Sarah Howard, of
Ashe Co., N. C, and born 20 Feb., 1802.

Children, all born at New River:

    1. William, born 8 March, 1828.

    2. Nathan, born 22 March, 1829.

    3. Jonathan Fillmore, born 3 March, 1836.

    4. James Harrison, born 27 May, 1841.

Phineas Horton was a volunteer in the war of 1812. He served as
a magistrate over 30 years. He was County Treasurer for several
years. He is yet living, and remains upon the same place where he
first settled at New River, five miles east of Boone. He has a
considerable quantity of land, and at the time Emancipation was
proclaimed, he owned six negroes. He has no inclination for anything
but farming, and although in his 81st year, he is well preserved, and
does a good deal of farm work.

Rebecca Councill, his wife, died of cancer of the breast, 12 August,
1863.


IX. COL. JONATHAN, son of Col. Nathan Horton and Elizabeth Eagles,
born on New River, 26 Feb., 1806; married 11 Jan., 1841, at Richland,
Ashe Co., N. C., to MELINDA HARTZAG, daughter of Jacob Hartzag and
Rebecca Coloway, and born at Richland, 10 May, 1824. She is a distant
relative of the celebrated DANIEL BOONE, the bold old pioneer of the
West, of former days.

The Colonel resides at the old homestead of his father, Col. Nathan,
owns good lands, and is an excellent farmer. He lost heavily by
Emancipation. He has been a very prominent man all his life--firm,
intelligent and generous. He was elected to the State Legislature
in 1832-'33-'34 and '35. He was a member of the Electoral College
of North Carolina, on the Henry Clay ticket, in 1844. He was again
elected to the State Legislature from Watauga County, in 1854. He was
a volunteer in the service of the Confederate States, in 1861, and
was elected Captain of Co. B., 37th Regiment North Carolina troops,
infantry, and he was in the seven days' fight near Richmond, Va.,
towards the close of which the command of the regiment devolved on
him. Soon after this, health failing, he resigned and came home, and
in 1864 he was elected to the State Senate. He says, and no doubt
truly, that his house was robbed, in the spring of 1865, eighteen
times in fourteen days, by men professing to be, and wearing the garb
of, Union soldiers.

The Colonel has never had any children.


I. NATHAN, son of Zephaniah Horton, Esq., and Jane McCurry (_Capt.
Nathan_, _Caleb_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born in Wilkes Co., N.
C., 24 Jan., 1789; married 29 May, 1817, MARY YOUNG, born in Burke
Co., N. C., about 1794; died 19 May, 1875. He was Col. Commander in
the 15th Brigade, 9th Division, North Carolina Militia, for about 20
years--was offered the position of Brigadier General, but declined.

Children, all born in Buncombe County, except Mary I., born in Yancey
Co., N. C.:

    1. Zephaniah, born 20 Feb., 1818.

    2. Martha E., born 16 Sept., 1819.

    3. Malcolm, born 9 Feb., 1822.

    4. Lucky, born 27 Dec., 1823.

    5. Joshua, born 21 Oct., 1825.

    6. Jesse, born 11 Nov., 1828.

    7. Nathan Youngs, born 21 March, 1831.

    8. Naomi A., born 10 Dec., 1832.

    9. Mary I., born 14 April, 1835.


III. SARAH, daughter of Zephaniah Horton, Esq., and Jane McCurry,
born 30 June, 1794; married in 1815, THOMAS YOUNG, of Buncombe
County, and born 16 Jan., 1792.

Children (the 1 to 7, inclusive, born in Buncombe; 8, 9, and 10 born
in Yancey County):

    1. Elizabeth E., born 9 March, 1816.

    2. Martha E., born 25 May, 1818.

    3. Nathan, born 23 April, 1820.

    4. Strawbridge, born 25 Jan., 1822; died 10 Nov., 1843.

    5. Zephaniah, born 19 Oct., 1823.

    6. Thomas, born 29 Sept., 1830.

    7. Josiah, born 11 March, 1833.

    8. Sarah I., born 12 Sept., 1835.

    9. Mary A., born 12 Aug., 1837.

    10. Tilman H., born 4 Oct., 1839.


IV. MALCOLM, son of Zephaniah Horton, Esq., and Jane McCurry, born 15
Nov., 1799; married 29 Feb., 1832, MARGARET A. DENHAM, of Virginia.
He was for several years Col. Commander in the 15th Brigade, 9th
Division, North Carolina Militia. He settled in Maryland and died
there, 10 Aug., 1870.

Children:

    1. Jane E., born 20 July, 1833.

    2. Amos O., born 18 Aug., 1835.

    3. David D., born 18 Dec., 1837.

    4. Phebe E., born 25 June, 1840.

    5. Amy I., born 5 Oct., 1842.

    6. Charles A., born 3 Jan., 1846.

    Amos I. and Charles A. are dead; the rest are all living, and
    have families.


V. ELIZABETH, daughter of Zephaniah Horton, Esq., and Jane McCurry,
born 15 Nov., 1799; married JOSEPH SHEPHERD, ESQ., of North Carolina,
28 March, 1821. She died 2 Aug., 1838.

Children, all born in Buncombe Co., N. C.:

    1. Jane A., born 6 Dec., 1826.

    2. Julia, born 5 Sept., 1828.

    3. Cordelia P., born 8 June, 1831.

    4. Theressa E., born 3 Aug., 1833.


VI. ZEPHANIAH, son of Zephaniah Horton, Esq., and Jane McCurry, born
26 Nov., 1802; married 3 April, 1825, ELIZABETH HORTON, of Ashe Co.,
N. C., daughter of Nathan Horton, of Ashe County. She born 15 Sept.,
1803. He died at his residence, in Yancey, 17 July, 1865.

Children, 1. and 2. born in Ashe, 3. born in Buncombe, all the rest
born in Yancey:

    1. Nathan, born 26 Jan., 1826.

    2. McWilliam, born 14 Feb., 1828.

    3. Jonathan, born 17 March, 1830; died 18 Aug., 1862.

    4. Phineas, born 20 Dec., 1833; died 2 Oct., 1862.

    5. Lorenzo D., born 30 July, 1836; died 25 Aug., 1862.

    6. James P., born 13 Dec., 1839.

    7. Elbert S., born 3 Sept., 1842.

    8. Sarah I. E., born 8 Feb., 1845; died 20 Oct., 1845.

    9. Harriet E., born 28 June, 1847; died 8 Nov., 1847.

    10. Zephaniah I., born 12 May, 1849; died 4 Aug. 1849.

    11. David E., born 5 Nov. 1851.


VII. JANE M., daughter of Zephaniah Horton, Esq., and Jane McCurry,
born 18 March, 1806; married 25 Aug., 1823, JAMES H. POTEET, of
Buncombe County, and born 23 Oct., 1796; moved in 1834 to Missouri,
Gasconade County, where he died, 5 July, 1835, leaving two children,
born in Buncombe County, viz.:

    1.[6]Lorenzo D., born 5 June, 1824.

    2. Sophronia, born 8 May, 1826.

Mrs. Poteet, soon after the death of her husband, returned to her
native State, and, 23 Feb., 1840, married JOHN W. GARLAND, of Yancey
County, born in Tennessee, 5 Sept., 1807. He was County Clerk of
Yancey County for 12 years, and also represented that county in the
Legislature in 1854-'55 and in 1865-'66, and was the Union Delegate
in the State Convention of 1861.


VIII. PHEBE D., daughter of Zephaniah Horton, Esq., and Jane McCurry,
born 3 Oct., 1810; married ADAM A. BROYLES, of Washington Co., Tenn.,
15 July, 1835, born 11 May, 1813.

Children, all born in Washington Co., Tenn.:

    1. Edmonia L., born 15 April, 1837.

    2. Edwin A., born 2 Sept., 184-.

    3. James W. McB., born 12 Jan., 1844.

    4. Adam C., born 23 Jan., 1846.

    5. Sarah E. I., born 7 Dec., 1848.

    6. Lodelius H., born 8 May, 1855.


SILAS HORTON, son of Abigail Horton and Daniel Stringham (_Silas_,
_Barnabas_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born in Middletown, Orange Co.,
N. Y., 7 Nov., 1797; married in 1821, HENRIETTA HICKS, daughter of
Jacob M. Hicks and Elizabeth ----, of Brooklyn, N. Y., and born in
1804. (Jacob M. Hicks died in 1843, aged 94. His wife died in 1854,
aged 85.)

Children, probably all born in Brooklyn:

    1. Maria Hicks Stringham, married William M. Richards.

    2. Jane Horton Stringham, married Benjamin W. How; died in
    1874.

    3. Edwinna Hurlbut Stringham, married Johnston Blakeley
    Creighton; died in 1862.

    4. Elizabeth Wynkoop Stringham, married Com. J. B. Creighton,
    being his 2d wife.

Silas H. Stringham entered the navy in June, 1810, as midshipman
on the frigate _President_, Commodore John Rogers. In 1812 he was
assigned to the _Guererre_, under Decatur. In 1813 he was on the
_Spark_, one of the Algerine squadron. In 1817, having been promoted
to a Lieutenancy, he was transferred to the sloop-of-war _Erie_, and
in 1818, to the _Peacock_. He was next ordered to the sloop-of-war
_Cyane_, in 1819. In 1821 he was upon the _Hornet_, 1st Lieutenant,
at the West India station. In 1822 he was again on the _Cyane_, under
Com. Creighton. From 1825 to 1829 he held a position at the Brooklyn
Navy Yard, and in 1829 he was again assigned to the _Peacock_, and
sent in search of the _Hornet_, sloop-of-war, which was lost. We
next find him on the _Falmouth_, and ordered to Carthagena. From
1830 to 1834 he was in shore service. In 1835 he has command of the
_John Adams_, in the Mediterranean squadron. In 1837 he is second
in command at the Brooklyn Navy Yard, and from 1843 to 1846 he had
the full command of this yard. During the Mexican war we find him in
active service, and in command of the _Ohio_, ship-of-the-line. In
1851 he was commander of the Norfolk Navy Yard; and in 1852 assigned
to the command of the Mediterranean squadron, which he held till
1855. He is next in command of the Charleston Navy Yard, which he
held till May, 1859. In March, 1861, he was a member of a naval
Court-martial, and while there was appointed flag officer of the
Atlantic Blockade squadron. In 1861 Com. Stringham was honored with
the preparation of the first of those combined naval and military
expeditions which have crowned the American navy with such glory;
and in his case, as in many others, the success has been almost
exclusively due to the action of the navy. The result of this
expedition being the capture of the rebel forts Clark and Hatteras,
and the surrender of the garrison to Flag-officer Stringham and
General Butler, consisting of 715 men, 1000 stand of arms, 75 kegs of
powder, 5 stand of colors, 31 cannon (1 of them a 10-inch Columbiad),
a brig loaded with cotton, a sloop with provisions and stores, 2
light-boats, 150 bags of coffee, &c. Not a man belonging to the fleet
was killed. For this brilliant affair Flag-officer Stringham received
the thanks of the Government.

On the 23d of September, 1861, at his own request, he was relieved
from his command, and in August, 1862, he was made a Rear-Admiral,
on the retired list, and soon after this he was President of the
Naval Commission to locate a new Navy Yard. In 1863 he had command
of the Navy Yard and station at Charleston, S. C., remained there
till 1866. In 1869 he was Port Admiral at New York, and served three
years. March 3d, 1873, by Act of Congress, retired officers are
prohibited from being employed by Government, except in time of war.
Since that time the Admiral is permitted to enjoy a retired life, at
his residence, in Brooklyn, N. Y.

For a more full account of the noble and daring deeds and brilliant
exploits of Admiral Stringham, see _The American Crisis of 1861-'62_,
by Frank Moore.


I. LEBBEUS LATHROP, son of Hannah Horton and Isaiah Vail, Jr.
(_Silas_, _Barnabas_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born in Goshen, N. Y.,
27 Oct., 1791; married SALLY MOORE, a lineal descendant of Thomas
Moore, of Southold, L. I.

Children, probably all born in Newburgh, N. Y., where they settled
soon after marriage:

    1. Charles.

    2. Hector.

    3. Azuba.

    4. Nathaniel.

    5. Hannah.

    6. Wilmot.

    7. Richard.

    8. Sally.

    9. Egbert.

    10. Anna.

    "He early engaged in the business of transporting Orange County
    products to New York, and soon found himself in command of a
    first-class sloop, of extra heavy tonnage, and his carrying
    trade of merchandise, passengers, &c., became very extensive.
    The immense traffic at White Hall Street, East River, prompted
    Captain Vail to seek some other quarters, more commodious than
    that he occupied--the city at that time having a population of
    only about 100,000. He soon found an old acquaintance, formerly
    a Miss Horton, of West Chester Co., N. Y., who had married
    Mr. James Van Nostrand, a wholesale grocer. An arrangement
    was soon consummated, by which Van Nostrand was to move his
    stock to West Street, and Vail to leave East River and land
    at the Albany Basin, adjacent to Van Nostrand's store, which
    arrangement was at once announced to the Hudson River boatmen
    at White Hall, when, in derision, they laughed at the young
    Captain's presumption; but Vail and Van Nostrand soon had the
    laugh on the White Hall advocates, for the entire craft from
    Orange County soon followed Capt. Vail, discharging regularly
    his heavy loads of produce from the _Bayard_,[7] the first
    to establish a regular wharf for Orange County produce and
    passengers on the North River side of New York, and Van
    Nostrand's grocery was the first ever located in West Street.
    The following summer Capt. Vail's eyesight became impaired,
    and he moved to Goshen, New York, where he and Mrs. Vail were
    popular hotel keepers until the year 1834, when he was elected
    Clerk of Orange County, and re-elected in 1837, and again in
    1840. In 1832 he established at Goshen a Baptist periodical,
    called the _Signs of the Times_, which is still in existence,
    and edited and published at Middletown, New York, by Elder
    Beebe, the venerable Old-School Baptist preacher. He, also, in
    1844, established in Goshen the _Clarion_, the first Free-Soil
    newspaper ever established in this part of the State of New
    York. His religious and political opinions were regarded as
    _ultra_ or _radical_, and he was a recognized leader of his
    sect or party. His general urbanity and good judgment, and his
    enthusiastic nature, combined with his fine appreciation of the
    arts, made him popular with all classes of people. He died in
    Goshen.

    "Mrs. Vail survived him over a quarter of a century. She was
    devotedly attached to him and his children. She was a beautiful
    woman, and her happiness seemed to centre in their welfare,
    which her husband reciprocated by leaving her his entire
    estate, which she left unimpaired at her death, after a life
    of over four-score years. Their youngest daughter is the well
    known Madame Martinez, the eminent soprano vocalist and teacher
    of the voice."

We are indebted to Nathaniel Vail, Esq., of Goshen, for the foregoing
record and sketch of Lebbeus L. Vail and family.


I. SARAH, daughter of Phineas Horton and Bethia Luce (_Nathan_,
_Caleb_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born in Chester, N. J., 27 March,
1799; married about 1820, JEREMIAH WILCOX. He died in Illinois. His
widow married a MR. RHOADS.

Children, probably, born in Chester:

    1. Wilbur.

    2. Phineas; he was taken by the Mormons and probably killed.

    3. Esther Ann.


II. NATHAN, son of Phineas Horton and Bethia Luce, born in Chester,
27 Dec., 1801; married about 1825, JULIA HORTON, daughter of
Nathaniel Horton and Eunice Horton, and born in Chester, about 1803.

Children, probably all born in Chester:

    1. Nathaniel Jackson, born 1804; died 21 Jan., 1859;
    unmarried.

    2. Phineas W.; died 2 May, 1849.

    3. Eunice Ann, married Westbrook.

    4. Mary Elizabeth.

    5. Caroline.

    6. Julia Elmira, born 28 Aug., 1836; died 8 Jan., 1838.

    7. Martha.


III. ELIAS, son of Phineas Horton and Bethia Luce, born in Chester, 6
Feb., 1803; married MELINDA LEWIS.

Children, born in Chester:

    1. David Lewis, married Mary Ann Dilldine.

    2. Elias.

    3. Mary Ann, married Frederick Morrow.

    4. Esther, married William Moore.


IV. MARY, daughter of Phineas Horton and Bethia Luce, born 6 Feb.,
1806; married DANIEL SKELLINGER, and had

    1. Joseph, dead.

    2. William.

    3. James.

    4. Phineas.

    5. Elias.

    6. Lydia, dead.


VI. DANIEL, son of Phineas Horton and Esther Horton, born in Chester,
3 Aug., 1820; married 8 Nov., 1851, by Rev. Mr. Fisher, to LYDIA
CRAIG HORTON, daughter of Jonah Horton and Hannah Bryant, and born in
Randolph, N. J., 2 Jan., 1827. She died 16 July, 1870; no children.
Daniel Horton resides at the old homestead, a few miles from the
borough of Chester. He is a well-to-do farmer, and his mother, now
(1874) aged and feeble, resides with him. They are pious people, and
of good repute among their neighbors.




_Eighth Generation.--Caleb I._


I. ISAIAH, son of Elisha Horton and Polly (Mary) Horton (_Dea.
Nathaniel_, _Nathaniel_, _Caleb_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born in
Chester, N. J., 21 July, 1796; married in Aurelius, Cayuga Co., N.
Y., 31 Jan., 1817, to CHARLOTTE CHATFIELD. She died 21 Feb., 1854. He
died in Wayland, at Spring Water, Livingston Co., N. Y., 22 May, 1873:

Children, probably all born at Spring Water, N. Y.:

    1. Amarilla, born 1818; married Stephen Pearl.

    2. Maranda, married Luther T. Norton, Esq.

    3. Hiram, married Mary Briggs.

    4. Eliza, married Luther F. Norton, Esq., being his 2d wife.

    5. Esther, married Augustus Boughton.

    6. Elisha C., dead.

    7. Isaiah, married Ruth E. Adams.

    8. Mary, married J. B. Tiffany.

MARY, born at Spring Water, N. Y., 1 Sept., 1833; married 27 Feb.,
1855, at Spring Water, by Rev. H. M. Boothe, to J. B. TIFFANY, son of
Jacob Tiffany and Lavina Andrews, and born in Lenox, Madison Co., N.
Y., 24 March, 1828. His father and mother were born at Austerlitz,
Columbia Co., N. Y.; he, 1 Sept., 1795; she, 25 Sept., 1796; he died
at Spring Water, 8 Jan., 1873; she is still living. Mr. and Mrs.
Tiffany and family reside at East Bloomfield, N. Y. They have one
son, viz.:

    Charles Horton Tiffany, born 2 March, 1875.


ESTHER, born at Spring Water, 17 Aug., 1826; married at Spring Water,
by Rev. Mr. Hunter, 9 Feb., 1848, to FREDERICK AUGUSTUS BOUGHTON, son
of Nathaniel Boughton and Tryphenia Hart.

Children, all born at East Bloomfield, N. Y.:

    1. Dwight Boughton, born 18 Aug., 1849; married Josephine Hunt;
    has Frank Dwight, born 26 Jan., 1873, and Grace Isabella, born
    3 Aug., 1875.

    2. Hiram, born 4 March, 1854; died 25 Sept., 1856.

    3. Harriet Elizabeth, born 15 Nov., 1857.

    4. Frederick, born 28 April, 1868.


HON. NATHANIEL COE, son of Huldah Horton and Joel Coe (_Dea.
Nathaniel_, _Nathaniel_, _Caleb_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born in
Morris Co., N. J., 12 Sept., 1788; moved with his father to
Scipio, N. Y., in 1795; went by sloop to Albany--4 days--thence in
wagons up the Mohawk, by way of Schenectady--thence to Cayuga and
Wood Creek to Auburn, N. Y., and then Scipio, being one month on the
journey. He married in Auburn, N. Y., 5 Oct., 1827, to MARY TAYLOR
WHITE, daughter of Lawrence Emery White and ---- ---- and born on
Pearl Street, near Broadway, N. Y., 11 March, 1801.

Children:

    1. Lawrence White.

    2. Cornelia Elizabeth.

    3. Charles Carroll.

    4. Eugene Francis.

    5. Susan Amelia.

    6. Henry Clay.

Nathaniel Coe was an honest lawyer and an upright politician. He
possessed a superior intellect, and always commanded the respect
and esteem of his fellow men. He was long a magistrate, and for
four years in succession he represented Livingston and Alleghany
Counties in the Legislature of the State of New York. He was often
an arbitrator, both in the Church and out of it. In religion he was
what was then called, by way of reproach, a _radical_. In 1829 he
went to Nevada. In 1851 he was appointed U. S. Mail Agent for Oregon.
He finally settled at Hood River, where, on the 10th Oct., 1868, he
died. For several years before his death, he carried on an extensive
business in raising fruit, and became quite rich. He was a thoroughly
anti-slavery man, and while the Liberty party was in existence, he
was its firm and warm supporter. Mrs. Coe resides at Hood River, and
her son Charles, who was a superior young man, noted for his piety
and sound moral and Christian character, carried on successfully his
father's business until his death, which occurred 24 Dec., 1874. His
mother said of him, "My heart's beloved has left me, nothing can fill
the void. He not only filled his father's place on the farm, but also
at the family altar, and notwithstanding his youth, older men came to
him for advice on matters temporal as well as religious."

Mrs. Coe is an educated, refined and talented Christian lady--an able
and finished writer, and the author of many very pretty verses and
poems, and though aged, and having suffered much from ill health,
yet her penmanship is neat, and her thoughts and words fresh, warm
and vigorous. Speaking of her deceased little infant, Susan Amelia,
she says, "To whom, like a dew-drop, kissed off by the sun's morning
beam, a beauteous existence was given, whose soul seemed to come down
to earth in a dream, only to wake up when it ascended to Heaven." She
has kindly given much valuable information in regard to the Hortons
of New Jersey and their connections, only a small part of which can
appear in the "Chronicles." Mrs. Coe's ancestors, both on her father
and mother's side, were originally from England.

RACHEL BENNET, daughter of David Bennet and Mary Coe, and
grand-daughter of Huldah Horton, is a maiden lady, intelligent, well
educated and possesses good social qualities; she is a successful
teacher. We are indebted to her for many interesting letters, giving
genealogical data of members of the Horton family. Her residence was
in Chicago, where she was a teacher a few years ago.


II. JOHN SEWARD, son of Edward Horton and Charlotte Seward (_David_,
_Nathaniel_, _Caleb_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born in Randolph,
Morris Co., N. J., 24 Oct., 1801; married 13 March, 1823, by Elder
Hough, of Port Byron, N. Y., to PAULINA CARRIER, daughter of Amziah
Carrier and Wealthy Hatch, and born in Brutus, N. Y., 29 Sept., 1804.

Children, all born at Conquest, Cayuga Co., N. Y., except Jane A.:

    1. Charlotte, born 8 Jan., 1826; died 14 Aug., 1858.

    2. Mary Ann, born 1 March, 1828.

    3. Hetty M., born June 9, 1830; died 2 Sept., 1830.

    4. Edward L., born 28 Aug., 1824; died 28 March, 1839.

    5. Paulina E., born 11 Feb., 1842.

    6. Jane A., born at Clarence, Calhoun Co., Mich., 7 Nov., 1847.

Mr. Horton moved with his father to Brutus, N. Y., when three years
old; moved to Calhoun, Mich., in 1846, and resides now at Marengo,
Mich.


III. DAVID, son of Edward Horton and Charlotte Seward, born in
Randolph, Morris Co., N. J., 4 July, 1804; married in Conquest,
Cayuga Co., N. Y., 19 Jan., 1826, by the Rev. Mr. Twist, to JANE
MCCALLAM, daughter of William McCallam and Anna Crowell, all of
Conquest, N. Y.

Children, all born in Conquest, N. Y.:

    1. Margaret Ann, born 13 June, 1827; resides in Folsom, Cal.

    2. Edward W., born 27 Jan., 1831; resides in Helena, Montana
    Ter.

    3. Victoria E., born 1 May, 1839; resides in Conquest, N. Y.

    4. David C., born 2 Sept., 1841; he is a merchant, keeps a
    general country store in Conquest, N. Y., where he resides.
    He was married in Conquest, N. Y., 19 April, 1871, by Rev.
    Daniel D. Davis, to Emma A. Slayton, daughter of Joseph Slayton
    and Nancy Crowell, and born in Conquest, 20 March, 1851; no
    children.

David Horton is a farmer--was largely engaged in the oil
trade--carrying on a large business in the oil region in Pennsylvania
a few years ago. He gave the compiler the first account he ever had
of the old tombstone of Barnabas I., as we happened to meet on the
cars between Lyons and Rochester, in Oct., 1870.


V. HORACE, son of Edward Horton and Charlotte Seward, born in
Randolph, N. J., 2 July, 1810; married MELISSA PUTNAM about 1833.

Children, probably all born in Weedsport or Brutus, N. Y.:

    1. Isabella, born 1834; married William E. Merrick, of
    Weedsport.

    2. Eliza, born 31 Dec., 1836; married in Weedsport, 28 Sept.,
    1869, by Rev. A. R. Hewett, to Augustus Harley Whiting, son of
    Caleb Whiting, and born in Virgil, Cortlandt Co., N. Y.; have
    one son, Horace Horton Whiting.

Horace Horton died at Weedsport, in Jan., 1869. His widow lives at
the homestead with Mrs. Whiting, who is an intelligent, active and
lady-like woman. They are in good circumstances. Mr. Whiting holds
some position under the United States Government, in Washington City.


HARRISON FAULKNER HORTON, son of Gabriel H. Horton and Margaret
Faulkner (_Elihu_, _Silas_, _Barnabas_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._),
born at Newburgh, Orange Co., N. Y., 11 Sept., 1804; reared at
Bloomingburgh, Sullivan Co., N. Y., and educated in the Presbyterian
faith, and Democratic political school. Removed to Warwick, Orange
Co., N. Y., in Nov., 1825; from thence to Newburgh, Orange Co., N.
Y., in March, 1831, and from there to New York City, in Feb., 1841;
married 15 Dec., 1829, at New Milford, Orange Co., N. Y., by Rev.
William Timlough, to EMILY COLEMAN, daughter of Merritt Coleman and
Mary Smith. He is a retired merchant, living in New York City at the
present time.

Children:

    1. Annie M., born at Amity, Orange Co., N. Y., 7 Nov., 1830;
    died at St. Augustine, Fla., 9 May, 1852.

    2. Mary Helen, born at Newburgh, Orange Co., N. Y., 3 Feb.,
    1740.

Mary Smith, the mother-in-law of Harrison Faulkner, was the daughter
of Deacon Smith and Sally Wisner, of Goshen. Dea. Smith was the
father of Dea. William Smith of Florida, Orange Co., N. Y. Margaret
Faulkner, the mother of Harrison, was the daughter of Samuel Faulkner
and Helen Murray, who were early inhabitants of Orange Co., N. Y.,
and pioneers in Wallkill Township. Samuel Faulkner was of French
origin. His wife, Helen Murray, came from Scotland. Samuel Faulkner
and his brother, Col. William Faulkner, were staunch Whigs in 1776.

    "So far as my knowledge extends, the Hortons as a family have
    not been renowned for their attainments in literature, in
    the fine arts, or in natural science; not distinguished as
    warriors or statesmen, or in the learned professions. Indeed
    they have not been celebrated for great heroic achievements
    of any kind. Nevertheless, with but few exceptions, they
    have been industrious, peaceable, law-abiding, and very
    respectable citizens, possessing commendable self-reliance
    and independence. They belong to the middle class of the
    people--the class which has always constituted the basis of
    a good-ordered, well-regulated, and prosperous State and
    Nation. Let their merits and their virtues be inscribed on the
    tablets of our memories, and preserved for our veneration and
    emulation."--_Letter of Harrison Faulkner Horton, September,
    1872._


VI. NELSON, son of Silas Danes Horton and Mary McClean (_Silas_,
_Silas_, _Barnabas_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born in Wallkill, 5
June, 1807; married in Wallkill, 1 Jan., 1836, by Elder Beebe, to
SARAH SHONS, daughter of ----.

Children, all born in Wallkill, N. Y.:

    1. Ruth Ann, born 14 June, 1838.

    2. Ellen V., born 2 Feb., 1840.

    3. Samuel Danes, born 31 Dec., 1843.

    4. James M., born 26 April, 1845.

    5. Charles Shons, born 3 March, 1850.

    6. DeWitt Shons, born 4 Aug., 1857.

Nelson Horton is a well-to-do farmer--resides on the old homestead
farm, to which he has made additions and improvements. He possesses
fine social qualities--a remarkably retentive memory--tracing his
ancestry back to the old Southold home, without the aid of written
records.


VIII. JANE, daughter of Silas Danes Horton and Mary McClean,
married BRINK. "Her son, Leander, is a warm advocate of the Horton
genealogy."--_Ruth A. Horton._


IX. WILLIAM HARRISON, son of Silas Danes Horton and Mary McClean,
born in Wallkill, 18 Jan., 1814; married 1. at Mason, Mich., 8 Aug.,
1840, by Rev. John W. Burchard, to MATILDA ROLF, daughter of Hazen
Rolf and Mary ----, and born in 1814.

On the 27th Sept., 1841, she gave birth to two female babes, and
survived but a short time afterwards. He married 2. 16 April, 1846,
by the Rev. Bezaleel Hill, to ACHSA SAMISA CHAPIN, daughter of Levi
Chapin and Achsa ----, and born in Springfield, Mass., in 1819. They
reside in Eden, Mich.

Children:

    1. Willis Hall, born in Eden, Mich., 23 July, 1849.


I. REBECCA ROSE, daughter of Hiram Horton and Mary Rose (_Dea.
Nathaniel_, _Col. Nathaniel_, _Caleb_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born
in Chester, 29 Dec., 1809; married at Chester, by the Rev. Stephen
Overton, 3 May, 1828, to DAVID SCHUYLER DE CAMP, son of Zechariah De
Camp and Experience Halsey, and born at Chester, 25 May, 1804.

Children, all born in Chester except Stephen H., born in New York:

    1. Hiram Horton, born 6 April, 1829; married Althea Laing; they
    live in Plainfield, N. J.

    2. Stephen Halsey, born 23 May, 1831; married Catherine Maria
    Crouse. He is a Justice of the Peace; resides in Syracuse, N. Y.

    3. Mary Eugenia, born 13 June, 1833; died 4 Oct., 1839.

    4. Alonzo Dickerson, born 28 Sept., 1834; married Loretta
    Dixon; resides at Bound Brook, N. J.

    5. Abbey Louisa, born 18 Sept., 1837.

    6. Alfred Eugene, born 12 June, 1843; married Catherine
    McCurry. He is a hotel keeper, at Succasunna Plains, N. J.

    7. Harriet Elizabeth, born 2 March, 1847; is a music teacher.

    8. Silas Olney, born 3 April, 1849; is a merchant at Kingsland,
    N. J.

Mr. De Camp is a wealthy farmer; his farm, a little below the surface
of the ground, has many valuable beds of iron. He and his wife are
intelligent, conscientious people, kind and hospitable; in religion,
they are firm Universalists. They reside within about three miles of
the borough of Chester, N. J.


I. CLARISSA JANE, daughter of John Horton (_Matthias_, _Silas_,
_Barnabas_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born in Goshen, in 1810; married
in 1832, to DAVID CONGER LOCKWOOD, son of Samuel Lockwood, and born
in Goshen, in 1806; died in 1860. Samuel Lockwood's maternal great
grandmother was JUDITH PECK, who came over in the _May Flower_.

Children, all born in New Windsor, Orange Co., N. Y.:

    1. Susan May, married William Allison; resides in New York City.

    2. Charles Burrell.

    3. Sarah Elizabeth; dead; her family live in Brooklyn, N. Y.

    4. Samuel Mann, lives in Indiana.

    5. Catherine Arletta, lives in New Jersey, near New Brunswick.

    6. Elias Riggs, lives in Indiana.

    7. Abbie Anna, lives in New Brunswick.

    8. Margaret Julia, lives in New Brunswick.

    9. Lewis John, is in College in New Brunswick.

Mrs. Lockwood moved from New Windsor, N. Y., to New Brunswick, N. J.,
some years ago, where she now resides.


II. ANN, daughter of Jason Horton and Sallie Miller (_Israel_,
_Israel_, _Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Caleb I._), born in Lansing,
Tompkins Co., N. Y., 11 Aug., 1808; married in Reading, N. Y., 26
Dec., 1826, by Rev. Elder Noell, of the Baptist Church, to DANIEL
SUTTON. He was born in Ovid, N. Y., 13 May, 1807.

Children:

    1. Lucinda, born in Reading, Steuben Co., N. Y., 13 Nov., 1827;
    married in Phelps, N. Y., 3 July, 1852, to John E. Roberts.

    2. Jason, born in Hector, Tompkins Co., N. Y., 25 Feb., 1830;
    died in Catlin, Chemung Co., (now Schuyler), N. Y., 7 Sept.,
    1831.

    3. Mary Etta, born in Catlin, N. Y., 26 April, 1832; married
    28 Aug., 1866, in the City of Lansing, to James Van Kuren; now
    lives in Wheeling, West Virginia.

    4. Emily Ann, born in Phelps, 9 Nov., 1839; married 9 Aug.,
    1865, in Phelps, to W. W. Minturn; now lives in Williamston,
    Ingham Co., Mich.

    5. Phebe Maria, born in Phelps, 23 Nov., 1845; married in
    Phelps, 16 March, 1864, to Robert Martin Town; lives in Phelps.

    6. Helen Gertrude, born in Phelps, 5 June 1850; unmarried;
    resides with her mother in Lansing.


III. PHEBE, daughter of Jason Horton and Sally Miller, born in
Phelps, N. Y., 11 May, 1811; married to DAVID BEEMAN, 26 March, 1829;
died 1 May, 1844, at Leoni, Jackson Co., Mich.


V. ISRAEL, son of Jason Horton and Sally Miller, born in Lansing, N.
Y., 26 Feb., 1817; married in the town of Rathbone, Steuben Co., N.
Y., 29 April, 1847, to ELIZA ADAMSON, daughter of John Adamson and
Minerva Mulford, and born in Lindley, N. Y., 27 Jan., 1827.

Children, all born in Rathbone, except Nellie, born in Watkins,
Schuyler Co., N. Y.:

    1. Helen, born 29 Feb., 1848; died 9 Jan., 1849.

    2. Florence, born 23 April, 1850.

    3. Allie W., born 14 Dec., 1852.

    4. Samuel B., born 30 June, 1854.

    5. Israel, born 25 Dec., 1859.

    6. Mary L., born 23 April, 1862.

    7. Minnie, born 7 Jan., 1866.

    8. Nellie, born 26 March, 1871.

    "We moved from Rathbone to Morris Run, Pa., in 1870, and
    thence to Watkins, N. Y., 15 March, 1871, and 2 November,
    of the same year, moved back to Rathbone, and next from
    Rathbone to Merchantsville, N. Y., 1 April, 1872, and lastly
    to Williamston, Mich., where we are now located. Father's
    health is quite poor, he has been lame in one ankle from his
    boyhood, and while in Morris Run, Pa., he was nearly killed by
    the cars. Brother Israel has the old powder-horn, made by his
    great grandfather, Israel Horton, of Southold, L. I., N. Y.
    It descended to my father, by virtue of his name, Israel, and
    by him to Israel, my brother, who now has it, and it is to be
    handed down in regular succession to each of the family bearing
    the name of Israel. It will hold about three pounds of common
    rifle-powder; nicely carved on it are the words, 'Lieut. Israel
    Horton, his horn, made at Fort Stanwix, Nov. 3, 1758.' The same
    paint is yet on it that he put on it, and doubtless it will
    long be an heir-loom in the family of Israels."--_Letter of
    Allie W. Horton, 1874._


VII. MINOR THOMAS, son of Jason Horton and Sally Miller, born in
Phelps, N. Y., 2 June, 1819; married in Sandstone, Jackson Co.,
Mich., 7 October, 1841, by J. Haddock, Esq., to LUCINDA SOPHIA
SPAULDING, daughter of Joseph Spaulding and Lucinda Spaulding, and
born in Sandstone, Mich., 18 Sept., 1820.

Children, all born in Williamston, Mich.:

    1. Charles Francis, born 23 Sept., 1842; died in Baltimore,
    Md., 19 March, 1864.

    2. John, born 3 Sept., 1845; died in Williamston, Mich.,
    accidentally shot, 9 July, 1863.

    3. Joseph Nephi, born 23 Sept., 1850.

    4. Matison B., born 24 Sept., 1852; died 30 Sept., 1858.

    5. Mary Ann, born 23 Feb., 1855.

They reside in Williamston, Michigan.


I. JOHN MARTIN, son of John Horton and Rachael Hiler (_Israel_,
_Israel_, _Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Caleb I._), born in Phelps, N.
Y., 30 Dec., 1819; married in Rushville, Ontario Co., N. Y., 25
Nov., 1851, by Rev. Robert Parker, to MARY MARTIN BOARDMAN, born in
the town of Goshen, Ontario Co., N. Y., 30 Dec., 1824. She is the
daughter of Jesse Churchill Boardman and Mary Bunyan.

Children, all born in Phelps:

    1. Ellen Maria, born 25 June, 1853; died 19 Feb., 1859.

    2. Cyrus Van Renssalaer, born 7 Oct., 1859.

    "Our dear little daughter died where she was born. Should you
    ever visit the Pine Wood Cemetery, in Phelps, you will find a
    quite beautiful valley, shaded with evergreens, where she and
    her Grandpa Horton are buried, and they will be no doubt among
    those who have a part in the first resurrection, for they were
    true Christians."--_Letter of Mrs. J. M. Horton._

The little girl whose death is mentioned above, was a remarkable
instance of early piety. She possessed a precocious intellect, which
very early became deeply pervaded with the religious element soon
ripening into genuine Christianity. Her death-bed scene, though she
was less than six years old, was like that of a matured Christian,
exhibiting a brilliant trophy of Divine grace, deeply impressive and
comforting to all who witnessed it.


II. SAMUEL MINNIS, son of John Horton and Rachael Hiler, born in
Phelps, 29 Oct., 1836; married in Phelps, 19 March, 1867, by Rev.
George Van Alstine, to SYLVIA ANN COLE, daughter of Cyrus Chapman
Cole and Charity Boardman.

Children:

    1. Julia May, born in Parma, Jackson Co., Mich., 4 May, 1868.


III. VAN RENSSALAER WAUGH, son of John Horton and Rachel Hiler, born
in Phelps, N. Y., 11 Aug., 1829; married in Orleans, N. Y., 28 Aug.,
1862, by Rev. Jacob Wader, to ROWENA SPENCER RAFTER, daughter of John
Rafter and Eleanor Wilson, and born at Orleans, Phelps Township, 15
April, 1841.

Children:

    1. Edgar Clayton, born at Clifton Springs, N. Y., 9 Feb.,
    1864; died 29 March, 1872. He was a wonderfully intellectual
    little boy. He seemed to pass through childhood and youth in a
    few months, and become, as it were, a man in intellect at the
    age of seven years. He died of scarlatina. On the third day,
    knowing that his sickness would prove fatal, he said, "Oh dear,
    I wish it would not be so long," and then added, "Methusalah
    only lived 969 years." At another time, when his father was
    fixing the pillow under his head, he said, "I would rather
    have a stone for my pillow, for Jacob, when he had a stone for
    his pillow, saw a ladder whose top reached to Heaven, and the
    Angels of God ascending and descending upon it." Just before
    he died he repeated the Lord's prayer, and then said, "I am
    ready to die and go to Heaven," and in a solemn tone, added, "I
    go down into deep water," and soon after, in a cheerful tone,
    exclaimed, "but I got into the Ark." On the evening of the
    third day of his sickness, without a struggle or a groan, "He
    neared the tide,--sunk as to cradle-rest and died."

    2. Minerva Inez, born in Arcadia, N. Y., 6 Sept., 1866.

    3. Carlton, born in Parma, Mich., 28 Oct., 1872.


IV. PETER DAVIS, son of John Horton and Rachael Hiler, born at
Phelps, N. Y., 17 April, 1826; married in Arcadia, Wayne Co., N. Y.,
8 Jan., 1855, by Edwin Pultz, Esq., to MARY SOPHIA AIKEN, daughter
of William Burr Aiken and Mary Marinda Clark, and born in Arcadia, 3
Jan., 1836. They have one son, an only child:

    George, born in Arcadia, 11 Oct., 1857; he graduated at
    Marshall College in June, 1874, with high honors. For his
    graduating thesis, he wrote a very pretty poem, which was
    published. He, also, during the last year of his college
    course, made a translation of a portion of Virgil, remarkable
    for its smooth versification, and also for retaining the
    sublimity of the original.

Mr. P. D. Horton is one of the best masters of penmanship in the
country, is widely known as a teacher, and much respected; he resides
in Marshall, Michigan.


V. WILLIAM PERSON, son of John Horton and Rachael Hiler, born at
Phelps, Ontario Co., N. Y., 26 Dec., 1821; married by E. Jones,
Esq., in Huron, Wayne Co., N. Y., 4 March, 1845, to PHEBE ANN BRINK,
daughter of John Brink and Catherine Brink; she was born in Huron,
Wayne Co., N. Y., 1 July, 1831.

Children:

    1. John Marshall, born at Huron, Wayne Co., N. Y., 4 Dec., 1845.

    2. Eunico De Maris, born at Huron, Wayne Co., N. Y., 6 Jan.,
    1847.

    3. Hiler Hossmer, born at Barton, Washington Co., Wis., 22
    June, 1858.


VI. EUNICE, daughter of John Horton and Rachael Hiler, born in
Phelps, Ontario Co., N. Y., 13 Sept., 1833; married in Phelps, 21
July, 1859, by Rev. John Brown, to EDGAR PHINEAS LAKE, of Shelburn,
Vermont, son of Hazleton Lake and Deborah Miller. He died 13 April,
1867.

Children, all born in Shelburn, Vermont:

    1. Sarah Ina, born 28 July, 1862.

    2. Daniel Horton, born 2 Dec., 1863.

    3. Edgar Willie Hazleton, born 12 Aug., 1865.

    4. Clara Mary, born 5 Aug., 1867.

Mrs. Lake is a very industrious, intelligent Christian lady, and
resides at Shelburn, with her family well cared for.


I. JOSEPH DEMPSTER, son of Peter D. Horton and Hannah Couch
(_Israel_, _Israel_, _Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Caleb I._), born at
Randolph, Portage Co., Ohio, 3 Jan., 1833; married 25 Dec., 1858, by
Rev. Geo. Duffield, to FANNY FINLEY, daughter of Richard Finley and
Ann Fitzpatrick.

Children:

    1. Mary Hannah, born in Detroit, Mich., 16 Dec., 1859.

    2. Jesse Ann, born in Detroit, Mich., 4 Nov., 1861.

    3. Peter Dempster, born at Ravenna, Ohio, 13 Aug., 1865.

    4. Fanny, born at Ravenna, Ohio, 27 Jan., 1870.

Joseph D. Horton is a lawyer of very fair ability and good
reputation; he was a member of the recent Constitutional Convention
of Ohio; he resides at Ravenna, Ohio.


II. THIRZA ANN, daughter of Peter D. Horton and Hannah Couch, born at
Wesleyville, Erie Co., Pa., 12 April, 1836; died at Shalersville, O.,
15 March, 1861, and was buried at Nelson, O.; unmarried.


III. CAPT. MARCUS CORNELIUS, son of Peter D. Horton and Hannah Couch,
born at Nelson, O., 21 June, 1838. He was Captain of Co. D., 104th
Reg. Ohio Vol. Infantry. He died at Dallas, Georgia, 28 May, 1864. He
was buried at Nelson, O. He was much esteemed and respected, both as
a man and as an officer, and his death was very greatly lamented.


IV. GEORGE WASHINGTON, son of Peter D. Horton and his 2d wife, Ann
Chambers, born at Nelson, O., 2 Dec., 1849. He is a farmer, and
resides at Nelson, O. He was married 15 Sept., 1875, at Nelson,
Portage Co., by the Rev. John Vetter, to ERSIE F. VANDERSLICE,
daughter of Benjamin P. Vanderslice and Sylvia W. Llewellen, and born
at Hartstown, Crawford Co., Pa., 23 July, 1856.


I. HARRIET LACY, daughter of Uriah Horton and Elizabeth Fairchild
(_Jason_, _Israel_, _Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Caleb I._), born at
Mendham, Morris Co., N. J., 6 April, 1811; married at Lambertville,
13 Sept., 1830, by the Rev. Peter O. Studdiford, to JAMES GORDON, son
of David Gordon and Margaret West, and born in Trenton, N. J., 19
Dec., 1809. He died in New Orleans, 25 Nov., 1847.

Children:

    1. Anna Elizabeth, born at Lambertville, N. J., 13 Feb., 1831.

    2. William West, born at Kingston, N. J., 9 March, 1833.

    3. Henry Barker, born at Kingston, N. J., 17 Jan., 1835; died
    at Uniontown, Pa., 12 Jan., 1841.

    4. James, born in Trenton, N. J., 13 March, 1838.

    5. Margaret West, born at Uniontown, Fayette Co., Pa., 12 Jan.,
    1841.

Mrs. Gordon now (1874) resides in Trenton, N. J., and is a member of
the Presbyterian Church.


II. ANNA MARIA, daughter of Uriah Horton and Elizabeth Fairchild,
born at White House, N. J., 15 April, 1813. She is a maiden lady--a
member of the Baptist Church--is intelligent, possesses good social
qualities, and is in easy circumstances.


BRACKEY, daughter of Uriah Horton and Elizabeth Fairchild, born at
White House, N. J., 29 Feb., 1819; married at Headquarters, N. J.,
22 Feb., 1839, by the Rev. Geo. Snyder, to ASA PRICE, son of Andrew
Price and Mary Closson, and born at Lumberville, Pa., 2 Dec., 1807.

Children, all born at Lambertville, N. J.:

    1. Andrew Jackson, born 25 January, 1840; died young.

    2. Anna Elizabeth, born 20 December, 1841; married C. W.
    Kitchen.

    3. Harriet Gordon, born 7 Feb., 1844; married David Taylor.

    4. James Gordon, born 18 Nov., 1845; died young.

    5. Catherine Hall, born 23 Aug., 1847; married George Johnson.

    6. Martin Reeve, born 30 April, 1850; unmarried.

    7. Lanning Harrison, born 15 June, 1853; unmarried.

    8. Frank Allison, born 15 July, 1855; unmarried.

They reside at Lambertville, N. J.


VII. ALEXANDER HORACE, son of Uriah Horton and Elizabeth Fairchild,
born at Lambertville, 16 Oct., 1821; married 4 May, 1843, by George
Young, Esq., to CATHERINE CLINE DITMARS, daughter of Abraham Ditmars
and Anne Moore, and born at Canandaigua, N. Y., 22 Feb., 1822.

Children, all born at Lambertville:

    1. Elwood Ely, born 26 Dec., 1844; married 9 May, 1868--is a
    car painter by trade.

    2. Emma Lilly, born 22 Feb., 1846; died 22 May, 1849.

    3. Edward Chandler, born 7 May, 1848; died 30 Nov., 1850.

    4. Albert, born 31 Oct., 1850--a civil engineer.

    5. Emma, born 28 Nov., 1852; died 6 Jan., 1863.

    6. Annie Elizabeth, born 3 June, 1854--a music teacher in
    Virginia.

    7. William Large, born 20 Jan., 1859; died 2 Jan., 1865.

    8. George McClelland, born 2 Aug., 1861; died 19 Jan., 1862.


I. GEORGE WASHINGTON, son of Nathaniel Thompson and Sarah Horton
(_Jeremiah_, _Israel_, _Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Caleb I._), born
in Monroe, Orange Co., N. Y., 2 March, 1824; married 5 Jan., 1848,
CHARITY CONKLIN, daughter of Sylvester Conklin and Charity Reynolds,
and born in Monroe, 15 April, 1826.

Children, both born in Monroe:

    1. Mary, born 18 Nov., 1851; died 12 May, 1857.

    2. Georgianna, born 25 July, 1855.

Mrs. Thompson died 1875; she was a lady of refinement, possessing
fine social qualities, tenderness of heart, and correct moral and
Christian character. She was greatly afflicted with feeble health for
several years before her death; but she always bore her sufferings
with cheerfulness and Christian resignation.


I. SARAH MARIAH, daughter of Benjamin G. Horton and Sarah Jane Stuart
(_Jeremiah_, _Israel_, _Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Caleb I._), born in
Blooming Grove, Orange Co.; married at Blooming Grove, 14 Feb., 1861,
by Rev. Austin Craig, to HENRY VAN CLEFT, son of Lewis Van Cleft and
Henrietta W. Cooper, and born 25 Nov., 1834. Sarah Mariah H. Van
Cleft died 30 Aug., 1871, leaving three children, viz.:

    Henrietta, Anna and Elizabeth.

Mr. Van Cleft is a farmer and dealer in cattle.


IV. CARRIE S., sister of Sarah Mariah (above), married at Vail's
Gate, Orange Co., N. Y., 29 Nov., 1871, to HENRY VAN CLEFT, being his
2d wife.

Children:

    1. Lewis Horton.

    2. Parmelie.


VI. JEREMIAH HENRY, son of Benjamin G. Horton and Sarah Jane Stuart,
born in Blooming Grove, 20 Dec., 1844; married in Newburgh, 20 Aug.,
1872, by Rev. Andrew Longacre, to MARY SMITH PARMELEE, daughter of
John W. Parmelee and Catharine Cole Smith, and born in Newburgh, 31
March, 1846. Have one child:

    Lizzie (Elizabeth) Smith, born 19 July, 1873, in Newburgh.

J. H. Horton is a retired merchant. He and his wife are both very
acceptable members of the Methodist Episcopal Church.


I. JASON, son of Ebenezer Horton and Mary Terry (_John_, _Israel_,
_Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Caleb I._), born at Terrytown, Pa., 13
July, 1807; married in Albany, Pa., 29 Dec., 1835, by Thomas Ingham,
Esq., to OLIVIA LADD, daughter of Horatio Ladd and Asenath Ives,
and born 20 May, 1810. She died at Terrytown, 11 Sept., 1847. He
married again in Terry, 5 Jan., 1848, by Thos. Ingham, Esq., to ROXEY
COVEY, daughter of John Covey and Mary Sabens, and born in Grafton,
Rensselaer Co., N. Y., 15 July, 1819.

Children, all born in the township of Terry. By first wife:

    1. Jane Asenath, born 20 Nov., 1836; died 15 July, 1837.

    2. James, born 15 July, 1840; died 17 July, 1840.

By second wife:

    3. Jane, born 4 Nov., 1848; married in Elmira, N. Y., to Daniel
    Dunham; has one son.

    4. Mary Louisa, born 9 Aug., 1850; died of croup, 23 Jan., 1855.

    5. Josephine Adela, born 22 May, 1852.

    6. Liberty Ann, born 4 July, 1854.

    7. Phebe Theresa, born 27 Jan., 1857.

    8. Eunice Martha, born 30 Aug., 1859.

    9. George Firman, born 26 Dec., 1861.

    10. Infant son, born 4 Oct., 1864; died before naming.

Jason Horton is a farmer, has been a merchant, a hotel keeper and a
Justice of the Peace for one term of five years. He made a public
profession of Christianity in 1871, and united with the Baptist
Church, of Terrytown, Rev. B. Jones officiating at his Baptism.


II. NATHANIEL TERRY, son of Ebenezer Horton and Mary Terry, born at
the old homestead of Ebn'r Horton, in Asylum, now Wilmot, Pa., 5
Jan., 1808; married in Albany, Pa., 15 Dec., 1851, by George Burdick,
Esq., to MEHALA HANCOCK, daughter of Amasa Hancock and Delilah
Vincent, and born in Terry, about 1833.

Children:

    1. Fred., born in Albany, 12 Nov., 1852.

    2. Frank, born in Albany 31 Dec., 1855.

    3. Mary Emma, born in Wilmot, 29 Dec., 1865.

N. T. Horton is a farmer and lumber dealer, was Captain of a militia
company in 1835.


III. JULIA, daughter of Ebenezer Horton and Mary Terry, born in
Wilmot, Pa., 6 Oct., 1810; married in Wilmot, 21 Nov., 1833, by
Thomas Ingham, Esq., to SAMUEL E. MILLER, son of John Miller and
Lydia Gilbert, and born at Frenchtown, Pa., in 1808.

Children:

    1. Mary Jane, born in Wilmot, 19 Oct., 1834; married Geo.
    Capwell.

    2. Debbie Terry, born in Wilmot, 13 Sept., 1836; married Jacob
    Place.

    3. Perry Commodore, born in Terry, 12 May, 1839.

    4. Ebenezer Horton, born in Wilmot, 22 Sept., 1842; died in the
    army in 1864.


IV. EUNICE, daughter of Ebenezer Horton and Mary Terry, born in
Asylum, now Wilmot, Pa., 7 Sept., 1812; married at the old homestead,
6 July, 1837, by Ephraim Beeman, Esq., to JAMES HORACE TURRELL, son
of Beebe H. Turrell and Olive Turrell, and born 1 Nov., 1809; died
in Wilmot, 3 Sept., 1863. She is still living, and has been a worthy
member of the Baptist Church for about fifty years.

Children, all born in Wilmot:

    1. Phebe, born 30 April, 1839; married Morris Turrell; they
    reside in Kansas.

    2. Sarah Jane, born 24 Aug., 1844; died 8 Oct., 1844.

    3. Lydia Ann, born 8 July, 1845; unmarried.

    4. Mary Adela, born 10 May, 1848; died 8 May, 1863.

    5. Jas. Henry, born 21 May, 1850.

Mr. James H. Turrell was a farmer and lumber manufacturer. He was
a prompt business man--a Justice of the Peace for five years, and
enjoyed the confidence and respect of all who knew him. He began the
world with nothing, but at the time of his death he was worth a fine
property.


V. HIRAM, son of Ebenezer Horton and Mary Terry, born in Wilmot, 7
June, 1815. He is unmarried, and has lived all his life at the old
homestead--is a farmer and lumber manufacturer.


VI. EBENEZER, son of Ebenezer Horton and Mary Terry, born in Wilmot,
4 April, 1817; married in Terry, to ELLEN MINERVA CRANDALL, daughter
of Josias G. Crandall and Olive Burdick, and born in Grafton,
Rensselaer Co., N. Y., 18 Oct., 1823.

Children, born in Albany, Bradford Co., Pa.:

    1. Eunice Alice, born 10 Sept., 1855.

    2. John Edmund, born 4 March, 1857.

    3. Olive Turrell, born 14 Feb., 1859.

    4. Mary Jane, born 27 March, 1863.

Ebenezer Horton's residence was in Albany, Pa., but he died at his
father's old residence in Wilmot, where he had gone to spend the
closing days of his life with his mother and her family. He was an
industrious, upright farmer, esteemed by all who knew him. His widow
and family still occupy his old homestead, and live comfortably.


VII. ADELA, daughter of Ebenezer Horton and Mary Terry, born in
Asylum, now Wilmot, Penn'a, 13 April, 1819; married in Towanda, by
Elhanan Smith, Esq., 5 Feb., 1840, to CHESTER SCHOONOVER, son of
Joseph Schoonover and Rachel Corsaw, and born near where the city of
Binghamton now stands, 17 April, 1817.

Children, all born in Terry:

    1. Infant son, stillborn in Nov., 1840.

    2. John Horton, born 24 Jan., 1842; married Emily Jones.

Adela Horton Schoonover died March, 1844, and he married 2. in Sussex
Co., N. J., by the Rev. Mr. Bookstaver, to ELIZA HORNBECK, daughter
of Cornelius Hornbeck. They live in Terry. He has for many years been
a preacher of the Old School Baptist Church.


VIII. JANE, daughter of Ebenezer Horton and Mary Terry, born in
Asylum, now Wilmot, Penn'a, 22 July, 1821; married LEHMAN TURRELL,
brother of J. H. Turrell. They reside in West Webster, Monroe Co., N.
Y., no children. They are both worthy members of the M. E. Church. He
is a carpenter and joiner by trade.


IX. LYDIA ANN, daughter of Ebenezer Horton and Mary Terry, born in
Wilmot, 4 February, 1825; married in Wilmot, 27 Feb., 1851, by Henry
Gaylord, Esq., to MOSES THOMPSON SLOTERY, son of Daniel Slotery and
Elizabeth Firman, and born in Allentown, Pa., 22 July, 1829.

Children, all born in Terry:

    1. George Zachary, born 1st March, 1852.

    2. Eunice Jennie, born 27 Dec., 1853; married Amasa Davids.

    3. Ella Elizabeth, born 30 Sept., 1855.

    4. Julia Adela, born 9 August, 1857.


I. ELMORE, son of Maj. John Horton, Jr., and Nancy Miller, born at
Terrytown, 6 May, 1817; married in Wyalusing, 22 August, 1843, to
MARY STONE, daughter of Raphael Stone and Mary Ingham, and born in
Wyalusing, 8 Dec., 1815.

Children, all born at Sugar Run, Pa.:

    1. George Hamilton, born 8 August, 1844.

    2. Sarah Nancy, born 24 May, 1846.

    3. Rowena Eliza, born 19 Oct., 1850; a very acceptable
    school-teacher.

    4. Twins, born 28 Feb., 1849; died at birth.

Elmore Horton and family reside at Sugar Run, Bradford Co., Pa.
He is a farmer and lumberman; was an engineer on the Pennsylvania
canal when a young man; has some part of his life been engaged in
mercantile business. His son is now one of the partners in carrying
on a general country store and doing a fair business.


II. MARY, daughter of Maj. John Horton, Jr., and Nancy Miller, born
at Terrytown, 19 Nov., 1818; married at Terrytown, 15 June, 1841, by
Rev. Geo. Printz, to DR. NATHAN WELLS, son of Nathan Wells and Sarah
Coleman, and born in Orange Co., N. Y., 15 Oct., 1815. Dr. Wells and
wife are esteemed members of the Presbyterian Church. They settled at
Meshoppen, Wyoming Co., Pa., soon after their marriage, where they
reside at the present time. The Doctor is a first class physician,
has done a large business, has accumulated a fine property, and is
universally esteemed, both as a physician and worthy citizen. He was
Associate Judge of Wyoming Co. for one term of five years.

Children:

    1. Elmore Horton Wells, born in Braintrem, Pa., 19 April, 1842.
    He received the degree of A. M. at the Michigan University, and
    also graduated at Bellevue Medical College, N. Y., in the class
    of 1872. He was married at Meshoppen, 8 May, 1873, by Rev.
    Clark Salmon, to Lavinia W. Eppes; born at Petersburg, Va., 12
    July, 1853. He resides at Meshoppen, practices medicine, and
    also keeps quite an extensive drug store.

    2. Lydia Louisa, born at Meshoppen, 23 Nov., 1845; married 9
    Jan., 1867, at Meshoppen, by Rev. C. R. Lane, to Thos. Alfred
    Wickham; born at Tioga, Pa. They reside in Tioga. He is a
    merchant.

    3. Mary Helen, born at Meshoppen, 31 Oct., 1850; married at
    Meshoppen, by Rev. Dr. Colt, 20 Feb., 1872, to Joseph W.
    Bishop; born at Wysox, Pa., in 1847.

    4. Nancy Amanda, born at Meshoppen, 21 Jan., 1853; unmarried.


III. ORICE MILLER, daughter of Maj. John Horton, Jr., and Nancy
Miller, born at Terrytown, 16 Jan., 1821; married at Terrytown, 1
Sept., 1840, by Rev. Geo. Printz, to AUSTIN STALFORD, son of Benjamin
Stalford and Urania Turrell, and born in Wyalusing, Pa., 15 Dec.,
1812. He settled first in Browntown, Pa., remained there until
1852, when he moved to Rochelle, Ill. He carried on a large farming
business. They were both members of the Presbyterian Church, and he
was a ruling elder. He died suddenly whilst harnessing his horse to
go to the meeting of the Presbytery in Chicago, on the 14 Oct., 1868.

Children: 1, 2, 3, born in Wyalusing; 4, born at Elkhorn, Ill.; 5,
born at Rochelle.

    1. Charles Lewis, born 18 Dec., 1844; married.

    2. Rowena Horton, born 23 March, 1847; married; lives in
    London, Eng.

    3. Matthew Armstrong, born 18 Dec., 1850; married.

    4. Urania Ann, born 10 Feb., 1844.

    5. John Horton, born 16 Feb., 1863; lives with his mother.

[Illustration: Yours Truly

J. H. Horton]

The widow and family, except Rowena, reside near the village of
Rochelle; are well-to do farmers. Charles L.'s wife is a lady of
refinement and education, is a teacher and writer; many of her
poetical lines are excellent, and some of them have been published.


IV. JOHN MILLER, son of Maj. John Horton, Jr., and Nancy Miller, born
at Terrytown, 7 Feb., 1823; married in Huntington, Pa., 13 Nov.,
1849, by Rev. E. Wadsworth, to SUSAN L. BACON, daughter of Rev.
Septimeus Bacon.

Children, all born at Terrytown:

    1. Henry Bacon, born 30 Sept., 1850; now in U. S. Army.

    2. Florence Eudora, born 19 Oct., 1851; died 21 Feb., 1854.

    3. Shepherd Bacon, born 28 Aug., 1852; died 22 Aug., 1860.

    4. Leonard Moss, born 30 June, 1854; clerk and book-keeper in
    Scranton; member of Baptist Church.

    5. James Bacon, born 26 Sept., 1856; he is clerk in a store at
    Huntington.

    6. John Miller, born Oct., 1861; died when two days old.

John M. Horton was a shoemaker and hotel-keeper, a very industrious
and public spirited man. He built the Terrytown Hotel, and kept it in
such a manner as to make it superior to most of the country hotels.
He died suddenly in the midst of his usefulness, 24 April, 1861,
greatly lamented by all who knew him.


JOSEPH HOMET HORTON was born 2 June, 1842, at Terrytown, Bradford
Co., Pa., the youngest son of Major John Horton, and the only son of
his wife, Lydia Horton, _nee_ Kimball.

In boyhood Joseph possessed a person of rare physical beauty, and
evinced a bright and happy disposition. He was frank spoken, open,
genial and social. His native industry, all through his childhood and
youth, displayed great aptitude for business. In all these respects,
as was the boy so is the man.

After availing himself of the schools of his native town, in his 16th
year he entered upon the English and the commercial courses of study,
in the Susquehanna Collegiate Institute, at Towanda, remaining there
through 1858 and 1859. He then continued as an efficient clerk in his
father's store until August, 1862.

The war for the Union had burst upon the nation. His heart was ablaze
with enthusiasm for the Constitution and the Union. His father was
proud of the valor and patriotism of his young son. Joseph had become
as his right hand, and was his main-stay in business. The fond father
hesitated to spare a son so dear to his heart, and so essential to
the success of his affairs. At length, like tens of thousands of
other fathers, he made the sacrifice for his country, consented, and
allowed Joseph to enlist on the 7th of August, 1862, at Wyalusing,
under Captain George W. Jackson, in Company "A," of the 141st
Regiment of Pennsylvania Volunteers. Joseph was a week afterwards
(August 14th,) elected 1st Lieutenant of this Company.

In September his Regiment was assigned to the 1st Brigade of Birney's
(formerly Kearney's) Division in the 3d Army Corps. It was almost
immediately put into most active service. Five days after his first
battle (that of Fredericksburg,) Lieut. Horton was made Captain of
his Company, viz.: on the 18th of December.

On the 4th day of the following May (1863) Captain Horton was engaged
with his Regiment in the battle of Chancellorville, Virginia. The
Regiment went into this engagement with 419 men, and during the fight
had 234 killed or wounded; and for its firm constancy and bravery was
warmly complimented, both by General Birney and General Graham.

At Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, in July, 1863, this Regiment was again
actively engaged. And of Capt. Horton, Gen. Madill, in his report
says: "Capt. Horton, though severely stunned by concussion of shell,
remained in the field, and I am greatly indebted to him for his
services, _as he was the only Captain left with the Regiment_." On
the 3d of July, at Gettysburg, Capt. Horton commanded the Regiment.
At the morning roll-call of this fearful day, 198 men answered to
their names; of this number, 136 were either killed or wounded.
On the 31st of the following January (1864) Captain Horton was
commissioned Major, commanding his Regiment. And on the 28th of the
next month (February, 1864,) he was commissioned Lieutenant-Colonel,
commanding his Regiment until Lee's surrender, April 9th, 1865.

On the 12th of May, Col. Horton was wounded, during the engagement at
Spottsylvania, Virginia, by a gun-shot through his left forearm and
in his left hip.

During his wounded condition, he was visited by his uncle, Hon.
George F. Horton, M. D., and was tenderly nursed by his sister
Louisa, wife of Hon. Uriah Terry. While convalescing, and not
yet well enough to take the field, he was appointed on several
Courts-Martial, and also had charge of several convoys of new men,
conducting them to posts along the southern sea-board.

With his Regiment, he was honorably mustered out of the service at
the close of the war, May 28th, 1865.

Of Col. Horton's old Company "A," consisting of 117 members, there
were killed, 16; died, 9; discharged for disability, 20; discharged
for wounds, 15; transferred to veteran corps for wounds, 7;
transferred to 57th Regiment, Pennsylvania Volunteers, for unexpired
term of service, 14; absent in hospital, wounded, 4; dishonorably
discharged, 1; leaving, at the mustering out of the Regiment, of the
whole 117, only 31.

Col. Horton was engaged in the following battles, namely:
Fredericksburg, Cedars, Chancellorville, Gettysburg, Wilderness,
Spottsylvania, Petersburg, Weldon Railroad, White-Oak Road, Sailors'
Creek, and at Lee's surrender; besides participating in many small
skirmishes.

Honorably freed from his military service by the happy close of the
war, Col. Horton hasted home to be the business stay of his aged
father, and was actively engaged in mercantile pursuits up to 1871.

In October (24th) 1866, he was married, at Worcester, Massachusetts,
to ABBY H. NEWCOMB, only daughter of Charles and Lucy R. Newcomb, of
that city. Miss Lucy Sanderson Horton is their only child; she was
born December 18th, 1872.

Since 1871, Col. Horton has been living at Birch Creek (formerly
Bernice Colliery), Sullivan County, Pa., and is Superintendent of
"The Sullivan Anthracite Coal Company's" works, located at that place.

The high appreciation in which he is held by the Company, is shared
by the community under his employ, who have several times combined
in tendering to him, as their Superintendent and considerate friend,
testimonials of large intrinsic value, but still more valuable as
evidences of their cordial and grateful esteem.

The Republicans of his County unanimously urged him as their nominee
for Congress in the fall of 1874, but were overruled by the other
Counties of the District.


II. JULIA, daughter of Geo. F. Horton and Abigail Terry (_John_,
_Israel_, _Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Caleb I._), born at Terrytown,
Bradford Co., Pa., 24 Oct., 1834; married at Terrytown, 11 June,
1861, by Rev. D. Cook, of the Presbyterian Church, to CHARLES
STEVENS HOMET, son of Charles Homet and Lucy Stevens, and grandson
of Frederick Nicholas Charles Homet and Maria Theresa Scheilenger,
who were born in France, the former being one of the commissaries of
the household of Louis XVI., the latter one of the chambermaids of
the Queen. At the fall of Louis they made their escape and came to
America. They had never had any acquaintance with each other until
they found themselves passengers on the same ship to this country.
Their acquaintance on the ship soon ripened into a mutual attachment,
and on their arrival in New York they were married. After tarrying
awhile at Bottle Hill, now Madison, in New Jersey, where Charley, the
1st child, was born, they came to Asylum, settling for two years away
back in the wilderness, but at length on the Susquehanna River, where
Francis X. Homet, Esq., now resides.

C. S. Homet was born in Asylum 20 May, 1830; settled in Wyalusing in
1861, where he now resides, and is a successful farmer. He and his
wife are members of the Presbyterian Church, and he is one of the
elders.

Children:

    1. William Horton, born 22 March, 1862.

    2. Eliza Horton, born 5 Dec., 1865.

    3. Francis, born 27 August, 1869.


III. JANE ELIZABETH, daughter of Geo. F. Horton and Abigail Terry,
born at Terrytown, 6 June, 1837; married at Terrytown, 11 June, 1861,
by Rev. D. Cook, to REV. DAVID CRAFT, son of William Craft and Phebe
Baker, and born in Carmel, Putnam Co., N. Y., 3 Oct., 1832.

He graduated at Lafayette College, Easton, Pa., in the class of 1857,
was Principal of the Susquehanna Collegiate Institute at Towanda
during the years 1857-'58-'59; spent some six months in Princeton
Theological Seminary in 1859 and '60; commenced his ministry in
Terrytown, 1860, was ordained by the Susquehanna Presbytery, in
August, 1862, and went into the army as chaplain of the 141st Pa.
Volunteers in August, 1862, served for about a year, and then
resigned on account of ill-health, and returned to Bradford Co., was
installed pastor of the 2d Presbyterian Church, Wyalusing, 28 Feb.,
1866, and also installed pastor of the First Presbyterian Church,
Terrytown, 1st March, 1866.

Children, born in Terrytown:

    1. Abigail Horton, born 12 March, 1863.

    2. George Horton, born 6 Nov., 1868.

They reside at the parsonage in Wyalusing, Pa.


IV. WILLIAM TERRY, son of Geo. F. Horton and Abigail Terry, born at
Terrytown, 9 April, 1839; married at Auburn, Susquehanna Co., 14
June, 1871, by Rev. G. Greenfield, to PRUDENCE BEARDSLEY, daughter of
John Beach Beardsley and Lucy S. Kasson, and born in Auburn, 27 Oct.,
1842.

Children, born at Terrytown:

    1. Charles Beardsley, born 13 April, 1872.

    2. Nancy Terry, born 15 May, 1873.

W. T. Horton is a farmer and merchant at Terrytown. He volunteered in
the service of his country in July, 1862, assisted in raising Co. A,
141 Regiment Pa. Volunteers, Infantry, and was chosen 2d Lieutenant.
He was honorably discharged per order of the Secretary of War, by
reason of chronic diarrhœa, in Dec., 1862. He shortly afterwards
engaged in the service again as clerk in the Quarter Master's
department, at Murfreesboro, Tenn., where he remained until the close
of the war.


V. JOHN BURLEIGH, son of Geo. F. Horton and Abigail Terry, born at
Terrytown, 8 Jan., 1842; married at West Danby, Tompkins Co., N. Y.,
24 Feb., 1875, by Rev. Wm. Sharp, to EVA LAMIRA TUPPER, daughter
of James Sturdevant Tupper and Lamira Truesdell, and born in Rush,
Susquehanna Co., Pa., 12 April, 1851.

John B. Horton is a farmer and merchant at Terrytown.


[Illustration: As Ever Yours

Debbie E. H. Hillis]

VI. DEBBIE EMILY, daughter of Geo. F. Horton and Abigail Terry, born
at Terrytown, 7 Nov., 1843; married at Terrytown, 30 June, 1868, by
Rev. D. Craft, to WILLIAM JAMES HILLIS, M. D., son of Richard Hillis
and Margaret Nesbit, and born in Herrick, Bradford Co., Pa., in 1841.
He commenced the practice of medicine at Barclay, Bradford Co., Pa.,
where he commenced housekeeping, but his wife's health failing, she
returned to Terrytown, where she died from tuberculosis; _vide_
obituary.


VII. NANCY TERRY, daughter of Geo. F. Horton and Abigail Terry, born
at Terrytown, 15 July, 1846; _vide_ obituary:

    HILLIS.--On Friday, March 26th, 1869, at the residence of her
    father, Dr. G. F. Horton, in Terrytown, Mrs. Deborah E., wife
    of Dr. W. J. Hillis, of Barclay. She was born Nov., 1844, born
    again Feb., 1866, and has passed from earth to heaven.

The following lines were written by a lady in the West, on the death
of Mrs. HILLIS:


    LINES ON THE DEATH OF COUSIN DEBBIE.

      She faded away in the early spring-time,
          Ere Nature put on her robe of green,
      And with a peaceful look in her clear blue eyes,
          She calmly passed to the land unseen.

      Oh, she has gone from us; so young and so fair,
          Wearing all the charms of youthful bloom,
      And around our hearts there comes a deep sadness,
          O'ershadowing us in midnight gloom,

      Earth's tenderest ties were twined around her,
          And fain would we have had her stay;
      But angels around the throne were beckoning
          As if to hasten her flight away.

      No fear of death could blanch her marble cheek,
          Nor dim the pure lustre of her eye;
      Through faith she looked above this fleeting world,
          Where joys immortal ne'er fade or die.

      Her face was radiant with heavenly glory
          As she murmured a parting prayer,
      And then we knew, by her saint-like beauty,
          That the seal of death was written there.

      We miss her, yes, we miss the cheerful sunshine
          That she cast on every side,
      And we mourn the crushed and blighted hopes,
          Of a fond and loving bride.

      But there's a light to lure us homeward,
          In this sorrowing world of ours;
      And we'll strive to meet the dearly loved one
          Where forever bloom unfading flowers.

  E. I. P. S.

  Rochelle, Ill., May, 1869.

       *       *       *       *       *

    HORTON.--In Terrytown, Jan. 7, 1872, Miss Nancy T., daughter of
    Dr. G. F. and Abigail Horton, aged 25 years.

    Decided in her convictions, yet with charity for all, amiable
    in disposition and warm in her affections, she won a large
    circle of friends, who sympathize with her immediate relatives
    in this bereavement. She availed herself of every advantage
    afforded to store her mind with useful knowledge. Diligent as a
    pupil, she was successful as a teacher, exhibiting unflagging
    energy and patience in the school room, she surpassed most
    in securing the love and advancement of her pupils. She was
    sustained through a long and painful illness by an unfaltering
    trust in her covenant keeping Saviour, and with her feet firmly
    set on the Rock of Ages by a living faith, fearlessly entered
    the dark valley, fearing no evil.

    [Illustration: Truly Yours

    Nancy T. Horton]

    She referred to the following stanzas, as expressing her own
    hopes when near the close of her earthly existence, and which
    are inserted for this as well as for their exquisite beauty:


    NEARER HOME.

    BY ALICE CARY.

      One sweetly solemn thought
        Comes to me o'er and o'er--
      I'm nearer to my home to-day
        Than I have been before.

      Nearer my Father's house,
        Where the many mansions be,
      Nearer the great white throne,
        Nearer the crystal sea.

      Nearer the bound of life,
        Where we lay our burdens down,
      Nearer leaving the cross,
        Nearer gaining the crown!

      But lying darkly between,
        Winding down through the night,
      Is the silent, unknown stream
        That leads at last to the light.

      Closer and closer my steps
        Come to the dread abysm;
      Closer Death to my lips
        Presses the awful chrism.

      Oh! if my mortal feet
        Have almost gained the brink;
      If it be I am nearer home,
        Even to-day, than I think;

      Father, perfect my trust,
        Let my spirit feel in death
      That her feet are firmly set
        On the rock of a living faith.

       *       *       *       *       *

    [_From the Presbyterian._]

    In Terrytown, Pa., on the 7th inst., Miss Nancy T. daughter
    of Dr. G. F. and Abigail Horton, aged twenty-five years. Born
    of pious parents, from infancy she enjoyed the advantages
    of religious culture. In early life she made profession of
    faith in Christ, and ever after adorned that profession with
    a consecrated life and godly deportment. She was among the
    first to unite with the then recently organized Presbyterian
    church at Terrytown, which she loved with the ardor of a
    sanctified affection. Possessed of unusual decision of
    character and strong convictions of the truth of her opinions,
    she nevertheless exercised a broad charity for those whom she
    thought conscientiously differed from her. Her amiability,
    intelligence, purity, and warm affection won her a large circle
    of friends, over whom she had great influence. Her end was
    peace, and in full assurance of a blessed immortality. One
    incident, among many others, may be given as illustrating the
    ground of her confidence. Shortly before her death, clasping
    her arms around her brother's neck, she whispered:

      "Nothing in my hand I bring,
      Simply to the cross I cling."

    This simple clinging to the cross was her support through the
    long months of wasting sickness, the secret of her patience in
    suffering, and the staff of her strength through the valley of
    the shadow of death.

      COM.


VIII. MARY ELIZA, daughter of Geo. F. Horton and Abigail Terry, born
at Terrytown, 24, April, 1850, married at Terrytown, 1 Oct., 1873, by
Rev. D. Craft, to WILLIAM ROSS SUTTON, son of Oliver C. Sutton and
Harriet Maria Ross, and grandson of Robert Blaine Sutton and Juliette
Bradley, and born in Lyons, 27 Nov., 1850. He is a farmer, and also
engaged in the manufacture and sale of an improved forcing pump. They
reside in Lyons, N. Y.


I. JAMES GALLOWAY, son of Samuel Todd Horton and Mary Galloway
(_Joseph Lee_, _Israel_, _Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Caleb I._), born at
Palmyra, N. Y., 23 Feb., 1813; married 26 Jan., 1832, by the Rev. Mr.
Allen, to HANNAH MARIA HORTON, daughter of Benjamin Horton and Hannah
Vance, and born at Belvale, Orange Co., N. Y., 7 May, 1811. She died
at Atlas, Mich., 19 April, 1847, leaving four children, all born in
Atlas, viz.:

    1. Samuel Townsend, born 25 Nov., 1835, the first white male
    child ever born in Atlas.

    2. Milton Augustus, born 27 Oct., 1838.

    3. William Henry, born 1 April, 1842; he was a Union soldier,
    served three years, and was honorably discharged; died in
    Flint, Mich., 10 June, 1867.

    4. Maria Eloise, born 29 Oct., 1844; died 29 August, 1845.

Married 2. in Atlas, 16 July, 1848, to ADALINE SUSAN DORR BALDWIN,
daughter of Dr. Cyrus Baldwin, of Berkshire, Mass., and Susan Dorr,
of Boston. Susan Dorr was a daughter of Joseph Dorr, made historic
from the fact that he was a prominent man of the party who threw the
tea overboard in Boston Harbor. Dr. Baldwin was the founder of the
village of Baldwinsville, N. Y. J. G. Horton, in a letter of August
26, 1874, says: "We moved from Palmyra to Michigan when it was yet a
territory. We were three miles from any white settlers, but we had
plenty of Indians. Where the city of Flint now stands, it was then
all a dense wilderness, and when the town of Atlas was organized,
forty years ago, we had seventeen votes all told. The county of
Genesee has now twelve flourishing villages besides the city of
Flint, which has a population of about eleven thousand."

By his 2. wife he has one daughter, Mary Susan, born in Atlas, 22
May, 1851. They moved from Atlas to Flint in 1859, where they now
reside. He is a farmer and surveyor.


[Illustration: Benj^m Fisk Horton.

St. Louis.]

III. IRA JOSEPH, son of Samuel Todd Horton and Mary Galloway, born 1
April, 1815, in Palmyra, N. Y.; married in Palmyra, 21 April, 1836,
by Rev. H. V. Jones (Baptist) to RUTH HOWARD SPEAR, daughter of
Lemuel Spear and Sarah Rogers, and born in Mendon, N. Y., 23 June,
1815.

Children, all born in Atlas, Genesee Co., Mich.:

    1. Newman Norris, born 29 July, 1838.

    2. Carlton Ira, born 3 Sept., 1841; married Marietta Frost.

    3. Mary Ann, born 7 Nov., 1844; died Dec. 9, 1863.

    4. Marvin Julius, born 30 Nov., 1848.

    5. Charlie Albert, born 13 August, 1857.

Lemuel Spear was born in Conn., died in Macedon, N. Y. Sarah Rogers
was born in Vermont, died in Palmyra, N. Y.


CYNTHIA E., daughter of Samuel Todd Horton and Mary Galloway, born in
Palmyra, N. Y., 27 Feb., 1818; married in Palmyra, 12 Jan., 1837, to
ABRAM NORRIS, born in Fishkill, Dutchess Co., N. Y., 28 April, 1809.
He died.

Children: They have had six children,--one son and five daughters.
Three daughters are dead. The son and two daughters living. Names and
dates not given. Mrs. Norris resides in Buffalo, N. Y. A more full
account was promised, but it has never been received.


I. MARY ELIZABETH, daughter of Milton Horton and Lydia Bennett
(_Benjamin_, _Israel_, _Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Caleb I._), born at
Belvale, N. Y., 10 Aug., 1822; married about 1842, to NELSON BROWN;
died 24 March, 1864.

Children:

    1. Milton.

    2. Edith.

    3. Jessie.


II. BENJAMIN, son of Milton Horton and Lydia Bennett, born at
Belvale. N. Y., 19 Dec., 1823; married 1 Sept., 1852, in Cincinnati,
Ohio, by the Rev. J. W. Weakly, of the Methodist Episcopal Church,
to CARRIE HART, daughter of William and Mary C. Hart, and born in
Cincinnati, 6 Feb., 1833.

Children:

    1. William Milton, born in Cincinnati, 26 Jan., 1854.

    2. Carrie Ben, born in Cincinnati, 11 April, 1856.

    3. Cornelius Comegzes, born in Cincinnati, 18 March, 1858; died
    in Feb., 1870.

    4. Mary Kate, born in St. Louis, Mo., 1 May, 1860.

    5. Benjamin Fisk, born in St. Louis, Mo., 25 Jan., 1862.

    6. Augustus George, born in St. Louis, Mo., 21 Dec., 1865; died
    in Nov., 1866.

    7. Monroe, born in St. Louis, Mo., 5 Oct., 1869.

Benjamin Horton went to Cincinnati in early life, and remained there
until 1859, when he moved to St. Louis, where he now resides. He is
principal of the firm of "B. Horton & Co., Importers and Jobbers
of Tin Plate, Metals, &c.," of St. Louis. He is a prominent and
much respected citizen, and highly esteemed by all who know him. He
and his wife are both active and worthy members of the Methodist
Episcopal Church, with which they have been connected for twenty-six
years.


III. TOWNSEND NICHOLAS, son of Milton Horton and Lydia Bennett,
born at Belvale, 8 March, 1826. In 1835 he moved with his father to
Milan, Ohio, remained there until 1855, when he went to La Crosse,
and was one of the early founders of the city, assisting the early
settlers in surveying and laying it out. He shared the confidence
of the community, was elected a member of the Legislature, and gave
promise of future usefulness as a statesman. He met with success as
a merchant at West Salem. On his way to New York for goods he was
killed, at the dreadful disaster on the Erie Railway, at Carr's Rock,
fourteen miles west of Port Jervis, which occurred on the 13 April,
1868. He lived forty-eight hours after the accident. His sudden and
shocking death cast a deep gloom over all the village where he lived.
He was buried in West Salem.


IV. EUNICE LUCADA, daughter of Milton Horton and Lydia Bennett, born
at Belvale, 27 Dec., 1827; married in Cincinnati, Ohio, to CALEB
EVANS.

Children:

    1. Kate.

    2. Lydia.

    3. Susie.

    4. Jesse.

    5. Lucella.

    6. Carrie.


V. HANNAH, daughter of Milton Horton and Lydia Bennett, born at
Belvale, 19 Aug., 1829; married at Milan, Ohio, by Rev. Mr. Barret,
to CALEB OAKES.

Children:

    1. Lydia.

    2. Emma.

    3. Milton.

    4. Burton.

    5. Benjamin.


VI. SARAH DELIA, daughter of Milton Horton and Lydia Bennett, born at
Belvale, 3 June, 1831; married at Milan, by Rev. Alfred Wheeler, to
A. G. SMITH; died 15 July, 1859. She was a member of the Methodist
Episcopal Church, and greatly beloved by her Christian friends. She
had one child--Dudley; he also died.


VII. JOSEPHINE DEBORAH, daughter of Milton Horton and Lydia Bennett,
born at Belvale, 17 July, 1834. She is an accomplished maiden lady,
and a successful teacher in Cincinnati, Ohio. She is a lady of marked
piety and much beloved.


VIII. EMMA ALMA, daughter of Milton Horton and Lydia Bennett, born in
Milan, Ohio, 4 Sept., 1836; married at West Salem, by Rev. Mr. Clark,
to WILLIAM UPTON, about 1866. One child--Lucius.


II. CAPT. BENJAMIN JASON, son of Nicholas Townsend Horton and Sarah
Van Orden (_Benjamin_, _Israel_, _Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Caleb
I._), born in New York City, 13 Feb., 1831; moved with his father
to Cincinnati, Ohio, in 1832, and here he grew up to manhood, and
was married on the 18 April, 1858, by the Rev. Chauncey Giles, to
VIRGINIA YEATMAN, daughter of Walker M. Yeatman and Eva Ammon, and
born in Cincinnati, Ohio, 8 Feb., 1835. Eva Ammon is a sister of
Gen. Jacob Ammon, formerly of the U. S. Regular Army, and also of
Commodore Daniel Ammon, of the U. S. Navy.

Children:

    1. Eva, born at Glendale, Ohio, 16 Nov., 1861.

    2. Alice Yeatman, born in Glendale, Ohio, 12 Dec., 1863.

    3. Richard Scott, born in Glendale, Ohio, 21 Feb., 1866.

    4. Thomas Yeatman, born in Cincinnati, 7 March, 1868.

    5. Benjamin Yeatman, born in Lawrence, Kansas, 8 Sept., 1872.

Capt. B. J. Horton graduated at Yale College, in 1852; read law
with the Hon. Timothy Walker, of Cincinnati, closing up with a six
months' term at Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Mass. He was admitted
to the bar in 1854. At the breaking out of the great Rebellion he
volunteered in the service of his country, and entered the army as
1st Lieutenant of Co. "I," 24th Ohio Vol. Inf., and was placed on the
staff of Col. Nelson; and after Gen. Nelson's death, he was on the
staff of Maj. Gen. Gilbert. He was in the action at the taking of
Nashville; at the battle of Pittsburg Landing, also at the taking of
Corinth, and went as far as Athens, Alabama; then came to Kentucky
with Gen. Nelson, and was at the battle of Richmond, Kentucky, and
at the battle of Perryville, on the staff of Gen. Gilbert, and
subsequently in command of Co. "I," 24th Ohio Vol. Inf., at Stone
River, where he lost his left leg, and received several other wounds.
He was honorably discharged from the service in August, 1863. He is
now engaged in the practice of law at Lawrence, Kansas.


VIII. The HON. DEXTER HORTON, son of Henry W. Horton and Adah
Jennings (_Joseph_, _Israel_, _Israel_, _Jonathan_, _Jonathan_,
_Caleb I._), born at Groveland, 24 June, 1836; married 25 April,
1861, by O. H. P. Green, Esq., to LAVINIA LOSEEL.

Children, all born at Fenton, Mich., except Mary A., born at
Groveland:

    1. Glen L., born 21 June, 1863.

    2. Mary A., born 1 Sept., 1864.

    3. Maybell, born 5 June, 1866.

    4. Byron D., born 28 Sept., 1871.

    5. Elmira, born 12 June, 1873.

Maj. D. Horton is an extensive dealer in flour, grain and wool, and
also in farming implements. He was Postmaster at Fenton, in 1861,
which office he resigned in 1863, to accept an appointment from
President Lincoln as Captain and Commissary of Subsistence in the
United States Volunteers, and remained with the armies of Tennessee
and Georgia until they were disbanded. While in the army he was
promoted to the rank of Major by President Lincoln, for meritorious
services. In 1869 he was a member of the Legislature of Michigan.


I. JOHN WALLER, son of Miller Horton and Elizabeth Waller (_John_,
_Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Caleb I._), born at South
Wilkesbarre, 22 Nov., 1814; married in Kingston, 9 Jan., 1844, by
Rev. L. S. Bennet, to SARAH GATES, daughter of Nathaniel Gates
and Ruth Richards, and born in Kingston, Pa. He was formerly a
contractor, but is now (1873) Ticket Agent of the L. V. R. R., at
South Wilkesbarre Depot.

Children:

    1. Emily Cortland, born in South Wilkesbarre, 21 Jan., 1845.

    2. Harriet Waller, born in South Wilkesbarre, 5 Aug., 1846.

    3. Ruth Burritt, born in South Wilkesbarre, 11 March, 1848;
    died 28 Feb., 1857.

    4. James Gallup, born in Tamaqua, 31 July, 1849.

    5. David Richards, born in South Wilkesbarre, 3 July, 1851;
    died 21 Sept., 1852.

    6. Sarah Elizabeth, born in South Wilkesbarre, 6 Feb., 1854.

    7. John Carlysle, born in South Wilkesbarre, 5 Sept., 1855.

    8. Harry Miller, born in South Wilkesbarre, 10 Dec., 1857.


II. ELIZABETH, daughter of Miller Horton and Elizabeth Waller, born
in South Wilkesbarre, 14 Oct., 1816; married about 1835, to P. M. C.
GILCHRIST. He kept the Phenix Hotel, in Wilkesbarre for many years;
died a few years ago. She remains his widow, and now keeps a boarding
house in Philadelphia.

Children, all born in Wilkesbarre:

    1. Miller Horton Gilchrist, born about 1837; keeps a livery
    stable in Philadelphia. They had several daughters, but I have
    not succeeded in getting their record.


III. MARY, daughter of Miller Horton and Elizabeth Waller, born in
South Wilkesbarre, 23 Oct., 1818; married WILLIAM L. COOK, son of
William Cook and Martha Lemon. They reside in Washington, D. C. He is
a clerk in the U. S. Pension Office.


IV. NATHAN MILLER, son of Miller Horton and Elizabeth Waller, born at
Wilkesbarre, Pa., 5 Jan., 1821; married in Wilkesbarre, in 1840, by
the Rev. John Darrom, to SUSAN RICHARDS, daughter of David Richards
and Mary Primer, and born in Wilkesbarre, 15 Feb., 1824. He is a
contractor on public works, resides at South Wilkesbarre.

Children, all born in Wilkesbarre:

    1. Nathan Waller, born 1 Dec., 1841; married Lizzie Cook,
    daughter of William Cook and Mary Horton.

    2. Mary Pruner, born 20 Feb., 1844; married Lyndon Ryan.

    3. Elizabeth Waller, born 20 Feb., 1844. (Twins.)

    4. William Richards, born 6 Jan., 1845; married Junietta
    Salsbury; died 5 Nov., 1870. One child--Orlando, 3 years old.


I. ZEPHANIAH, son of Col. Nathan Horton and Mary Young (_Zephaniah,
Esq._, _Capt. Nathan_, _Caleb_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born 20
Feb., 1818; married 31 Oct., 1841, CHARLOTTE T. MAST, born in Ashe
Co., 25 Nov., 1820; died 13 Feb., 1872. Mr. Horton was for several
years, Col. commander of the 84th Reg., N. C. Militia.

Children, all born in Yancey Co., N. C.:

    1. John P., born 28 Sept., 1842; died 18 Aug., 1856.

    2. David M., born 18 Dec., 1844.

    3. Elizabeth I., born 4 March, 1847.

    4. Benjamin T., born 14 March, 1849.

    5. William F., born 8 July, 1852.

    6. Maria E., born 2 May, 1854.

    7. James E., born 29 Oct., 1856.

    8. Nicholas, born 19 May, 1859.


II. MARTHA E., daughter of Col. Nathan Horton and Mary Young, born
16 Sept., 1819; married 16 Aug., 1834, MARCUS L. PENLAND of Buncombe
Co., N. C., 6 Feb., 1813.

Children, all born in Yancey Co., except Charles M., born in Buncombe
Co.:

    1. Milton F., born 19 Aug., 1840.

    2. Noble Z., born 25 March, 1842.

    3. Charles M., born 29 April, 1845.

    4. Mary A. E., born 8 March, 1847.

    5. Phebe I., born 28 Feb., 1849.

    6. Catherine M., born 5 May, 1851; died 25 Jan., 1851.

    7. Nathan L., born 11 Dec., 1853.

    8. William L., born 18 Jan., 1856.

    9. Clarissa E., born 4 April, 1858.

    10. Angelina, born 15 May, 1861.


III. MALCOLM, son of Col. Nathan Horton and Mary Young, born 9 Feb.,
1822; married CLARISSA A. WESTALL, of Yancey, and born in Buncombe,
26 July, 1832. He died 4 Nov., 1870.

Children, all born in Yancey:

    1. Noble W., born 10 April, 1851.

    2. Edwin, born 10 June, 1853.

    3. Mary M., born 12 Dec., 1854.

    4. Margaret V., born 6 July, 1856.

    5. William M., born 8 Oct., 1858.

    6. Eliza M., born 12 Aug., 1860.

    7. Julia A., born 28 March, 1862.

    8. Lillian, born 17 Aug., 1864.

    9. Ariadne, born 7 April, 1866.

    10. Lorenzo P., born 8 Aug., 1868.

    11. Dudley I., born 2 June, 1870.


IV. LOCKY, daughter of Col. Nathan Horton and Mary Young, born 27
Dec., 1823; married 29 Sept., 1846, WILLIAM E. PIERCY, ESQ., of
Yancey, formerly high sheriff of that County, and born in Buncombe
Co., 2 Sept., 1820.

Children, all born in Yancey:

    1. Robert H., born 2 Sept., 1847.

    2. Sarah, born 18 Sept., 1849.

    3. Ephraim B., born 9 Nov., 1852.

    4. John W., born 22 April, 1855.

    5. William H., born 4 Jan., 1858.

    6. Mary I., born 7 Nov., 1859.

    7. Myra W., born 28 Dec., 1861.

    8. Adolphus E., born 1 April, 1864.

    9. Julia A., born 15 Nov. 1866.


V. JOSHUA, son of Col. Nathan Horton and Mary Young, born 21 Oct.,
1825; married 20 April 1856, SARAH C. DEYTON, of Yancey, and born 12
June, 1833.

Children, all born in Yancey:

    1. John W., born 15 Sept., 1857.

    2. Jesse, born 26 Sept., 1859.

    3. Nathan W., born 29 Sept., 1861.

    4. Zephaniah L., born 4 Aug., 1865.


VI. JESSE, son of Col. Nathan Horton and Mary Young, born 11 Nov.,
1828; married 29 Oct., 1865, HARRIET E. MCCOURRY, of Yancey, and born
19 Aug., 1839.

Children, all born in Yancey:

    1. Sarah E., born in Sept., 1866.

    2. Isaac H., born 12 Nov., 1869; died 22 Sept., 1872.

    3. Eliza L., born 2 Dec., 1871.


VII. NATHAN YOUNG, son of Col. Nathan Horton and Mary Young, born 21
March, 1831; married about 1855, LOUISA E. STUART, of Yancey, and
born 11 June, 1840. He died 4 July, 1864.

Children, all born in Yancey:

    1. Martha I., born 3 April, 1856.

    2. Theresa, born 31 Jan., 1859.

    3. Edmonia L., born 4 Jan., 1862.


VIII. NAOMI A., daughter of Col. Nathan Horton and Mary Young, born
10 Dec., 1832; married 1 Sept., 1849, SAMUEL I. WESTALL, of Yancey,
and born in Buncombe, 26 April, 1828.

Children, all born in Yancey:

    1. Mary M., born 5 Oct., 1850.

    2. Sophronia I., born 12 Aug., 1853.

    3. Martha E., born 8 June, 1855; died 20 Aug., 1856.

    4. Noble A., born 5 May, 1857.

    5. Locky I., born 29 July, 1859.

    6. Adam P., born 13 Aug., 1862; died 22 June, 1863.

    7. Edwin McB., born 4 May, 1864.

    8. Louellen, born 29 Jan., 1867.

    9. Lucy H., born 13 Jan., 1871.


[Illustration: Yours &c,

Albert H. Horton.]

[Illustration: Truly Yours,

Anna A. Robertson Horton.]

I. HARVEY ADDISON, M. D., son of Dr. Harvey Horton and Mary Bennet
(_Barnabas_, _Silas_, _Barnabas_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born at
Greenville, Orange Co., N. Y., 12 March, 1832; married in Middletown,
N. Y., in March, 1859, to FANNY CAROLINE BEEBE, daughter of Elder
Gilbert Beebe, the distinguished and able editor of the "_Signs
of the Times_," and sister of the Hon. George M. Beebe, member of
Congress from Orange Co., N. Y., and born in Middletown, N. Y., exact
date not given. Dr. Horton graduated in Albany Medical College,
Class of 1856. He established an office and commenced the practice
of medicine at Middletown, N. Y., and was very successful. After his
marriage he removed to Kansas, and settled at Atchison. On his way
returning home from a journey East he was instantly killed, 3 Sept.,
1861, by the fall of a bridge with a train of cars upon it, one of
which he was in, which spanned the Little Platte River, nine miles
east of St. Joseph, Missouri. The bridge had been partly burned by
the rebels, but left standing ready to fall when the cars came upon
it, for the purpose of killing Union soldiers. Thirteen persons were
killed, and over eighty badly injured by this barbarous outrage.
The Doctor's corpse was taken to Middletown, and buried in the Hill
Cemetery by the side of his father, and mother, and sisters.

They had one child, Mary Evelyn, born 3 Aug., 1861. After the death
of her husband, the Doctor's wife returned to Orange Co., where the
little child died, 21 Oct., 1861, and was buried by the side of its
dead father.

Dr. Horton was a man of superior mental capacity, possessed high
literary talent, was deeply learned in his profession, and doubtless,
had he lived, would have attained to great eminence in the science of
medicine.


III. HON. ALBERT HOWELL, son of Dr. Harvey A. Horton and Mary Bennet,
born near Brookfield, in the town of Minnisink, Orange Co., N. Y., 13
March, 1837; married in Middletown, N. Y., by the Rev. Mr. Harris,
26 May, 1864, to ANNA AMELIA ROBERTSON, daughter of William Wells
Robertson and Adaline Sayer, and born in Centerville, Minnisink
Township, 2 July, 1840.

Children:

    1. Carrie Robertson, born in Middletown, N. Y., 22 April, 1865.

    2. Mary Bennet, born in Atchison, Kansas, 12 July, 1868.

    3. Rosa Sayer, born in Atchison, Kansas, 2 June, 1871.

    4. Albert Howell, born in Atchison, Kansas, 1 April, 1874.

Albert H. Horton attended the public school at West Town, N. Y.,
until 13 years of age, and then attended the "_Farmer's Hall
Academy_," at Goshen, Orange Co., New York, and was there prepared
for college. He entered the "University of Michigan," as a freshman,
and remained there two years, but was compelled to leave college on
account of inability to study, owing to some trouble with his eyes.
In 1857, he entered the law office of Hon. Joseph W. Gott, at Goshen,
New York, as a law student, and remained there until December 18th,
1858, when he was admitted as a counsellor and attorney at-law, at
a general term of the N. Y. Supreme Court, held in Brooklyn, New
York. In 1859, he went West, with his brother, and the Hon. George M.
Beebe, now member of Congress from New York State, to engage in the
practice of the law. He formed a partnership in the law business with
Mr. Beebe, under the firm name of Beebe & Horton, at Macon, Moscow,
Mo., in 1859, but both parties soon became tired of Missouri, and
removed to Kansas. Mr. Beebe soon became Secretary of the Territory
of Kansas, and their acting Governor. Mr. Horton selected Atchison,
Atchison Co., Kansas, as his adopted home, and has resided there
ever since. In 1860, he was appointed City Attorney of Atchison, by
the Mayor, the Hon. Geo. H. Fairchild. In the Spring of 1861, he
was elected City Attorney of the same city, on the Union ticket. In
September of 1864, he was appointed District Judge of the 2d Judicial
District, of Kansas, by the Governor, Hon. Chas. H. Robinson. He was
elected and re-elected to the same office, and then resigned in 1865,
to continue the practice of his profession. On his entering practice,
he was again elected City Attorney of Atchison, and held the position
one year. In 1868, he was elected as one of the State Electors on the
Republican State ticket in Kansas, and was selected the messenger
to take the vote of Kansas to Washington, to be deposited with the
Vice-President for Grant and Colfax. From 1861 to 1864, in addition
to attending to the duties of Judge of the District Court, he edited,
with Hon. John J. Ingalls, the weekly "_Champion_,"--a newspaper
printed and published at Atchison. Mr. Ingalls is now the U. S.
Senator from Kansas. In May, 1869, Mr. Horton was appointed, by
President Grant, U. S. District Attorney of Kansas, and he held this
office till July 18th, 1873, and then resigned the position. Upon the
resignation of Judge Delabay, U. S. Judge of Kansas, in 1874, Mr.
Horton's name was mentioned very prominently in connection with the
vacant Judgeship, and at a State Bar meeting, called to recommend
names for the position, Mr. Horton was presented by the majority
of the lawyers present for the place. Owing to some difference of
opinion among the Kansas delegation in Congress, however, Hon.
C. G. Foster, of Atchison, was appointed in his stead. Mr. Horton
still continues the practice of his profession at Atchison, and is
the local attorney of the Chicago and Rock Island R. R. Co., and
the Atchison, Topeka, and Santa Fe R. R. Co., at that place. In
March, 1873, Horton was associated with the Hon. Caleb Cushing, of
Massachusetts, in the defence of Senator S. C. Pomeroy, before the U.
S. Senate Investigating Committee, charged to inquire into certain
pretended charges of bribery, connected with the Senatorial election
in Kansas, in January, 1873. After a lengthy examination, Senator
Pomeroy was acquitted by a majority of the Senatorial Committee.
Afterwards the charges against Mr. Pomeroy were dismissed in Kansas,
and the case against him never came to trial. In the Fall of 1873,
Horton was elected by upwards of 500 majority to the Legislature of
Kansas, and took a prominent part in the impeachment of Hon. Josiah
E. Hayes, State Treasurer of Kansas. Mr. Horton was chairman of the
committee which reported and carried the impeachment through the
House, in February, 1874, and was then appointed Chairman of the
Board of Managers to prosecute the impeached Treasurer before the
State Senate. The State Treasurer then resigned, and the impeachment
ended. In politics Mr. Horton is a Republican, but belongs to the
Conservative side of the party.

The celebrated York-Pomeroy Bribery Case was brought to a final
termination on the eleventh of March, 1875, and the $7,000 historic
package was turned over to Mr. Pomeroy's counsel, the Hon. A. H.
Horton. Great credit is due Judge Horton for his untiring efforts in
having such an unjust and malicious prosecution brought to a close.


IV. ANNA ELIZA, daughter of Parmenas H. Horton and Milicent Howell
(_Barnabas_, _Silas_, _Barnabas_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born in
Middletown, N. Y., 15 Jan., 1830; married in Middletown, 23 March,
1859, by the Rev. Daniel F. Wood, to John Wheeler Gardner, son of
John Gardner and Elizabeth Wheeler, and born in Warwick, N. Y., 7
Feb., 1827.

Children, born in Middletown:

    1. Charles Horton Gardner, born 11 Feb., 1860.

    2. John Wheeler Gardner, Jr., born 27 Jan., 1866.

They reside in Middletown, N. Y., and rank among the first families
of that village. Mrs. Gardner says: "Milicent Howell was the name of
both my paternal and maternal grandmothers, and yet they were not
at all related as we know of; we have often spoken of it as quite a
singular coincidence."

Mrs. Gardner was the first to propose a GENERAL GATHERING and SOCIAL
UNION and RE-UNION of the Horton family of our country, which is to
take place in Philadelphia in July, 1876.


VII. ALSON WARREN, son of Benjamin Horton and Almira Osborn
(_Barnabas_, _Barnabas_, _Barnabas_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born
in Onondaga, N. Y., 28 May, 1829; married in DeWitt, N. Y., 10 Feb.,
1852, by Elder R. R. Raymond, to ELECTA LOUISA AINSLEE, daughter
of William Ainslee and Nancy Pinney. He is now living in DeWitt,
Onondaga Co., N. Y.; is a farmer.

Children, probably all born in DeWitt:

    1. Charles Albert, born 2 Nov., 1853.

    2. Philip Brewster, born 6 Jan., 1857.

    3. William Benjamin, born 5 Oct., 1859.

    4. Henry Broadhead, born 28 Nov., 1861.

    5. Gardner Stanton, born 28 Jan., 1867.

    6. Helen Elizabeth, born 15 July, 1871.


I. THOMAS WHITE, son of Henry Horton and Elizabeth White (_Nathan_,
_Richard_, _Caleb_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born at Broadtop, Pa.,
12 June, 1813; married 1. BARBARA BARNETTE; she died, and he married
2. the widow, ELIZABETH WOOD. Reside at Wells' Tannery, Fulton Co.,
Pa. He died in 1875.


II. NATHAN WHITE, son of Henry Horton and Elizabeth White, born at
Broadtop, Pa., 3 May, 1815; married 1. about 1835, to ROSANNA MILLER;
she died about 1860, and he married 2. the widow SUSANNA READY. They
reside at Spearsville, Fulton Co., Pa.

Children, by 1st wife:

    1. Samuel Miller, born 5 May, 1836; married Sarah Dunnica.

    2. Joseph Miller, born 22 April, 1840; married Bell M. Lee.

    3. Maria, born in 1842; married Dr. Wishart, of Fulton, Pa.

    4. Catherine, born in 1844; married Harry Markley, of Fulton
    Co., Pa.

    5. Edwin A., born at Johnstown, Pa., 1846; unmarried; resides
    at Bedford Springs.

    6. Laura, born at Johnstown, Pa., 1849; married William Spear
    Dickson, and reside in Fulton Co., Pa.


III. HON. WILLIAM, son of Henry Horton and Elizabeth White, born at
Broadtop, Pa., 4 July, 1817; married at Broadtop, 15 March, 1837, by
Rev. Zophar D. Pasco, to ANNA CERATHERS, daughter of Andrew Cerathers
and Ellen Cerathers.

Children, born at Wells' Tannery, Fulton Co., Pa.:

    1. Milton Murat, born 6 Nov., 1838.

    2. Jonathan, born 5 April, 1840; died in the army in 1864.

    3. Zophar Pasco, born 12 April, 1842.

    4. Reuben, born 2 Sept., 1843; died in the army in 1864.

    5. Nancy, born 22 March, 1845.

    6. Calvin, born 25 July, 1846; died young.

    7. Alfred, born 16 March, 1848.

    8. Ruth, born 1 Feb., 1850.

    9. Mary, born 12 Aug., 1851.

    10. Elizabeth, born 18 May, 1855.

    11. James B., born 4 Feb., 1857.

The Hon. William Horton resides at Wells' Tannery, Pa. He is a
farmer, intelligent and self educated, and a few years ago was a
member of the Pennsylvania Legislature. He is one of the leading men
of the county, and he has kindly given his assistance in looking up
the Hortons of West Chester, Pa. He remarks in one of his letters,

    "The Patriarchs, Nathan and Samuel Horton, who settled in
    Bedford Co., Pa., seemed to live in a quiet, Quaker-like way,
    as they left no records save a few deeds and other legal
    papers, which we found on the county records. They were both
    practical blacksmiths, and that trade has been adopted by a
    great many of both families, and many of their descendants are
    at this time the best mechanics of the country. I have myself
    a set of blacksmith tools, brought from Philadelphia by my
    grandfather when he moved out, and the bellows bears the brand
    'D. C. Dawson, Philadelphia, 1774,' and I do not keep them as
    an heirloom, for they are in active use almost every day."


I. JAMES C., son of Gen. William Horton and Milley Dula (_Nathan_,
_Nathan_, _Caleb_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born on New River, Ashe
Co., N. C., 9 March, 1817; married SARAH DICKSON, daughter of Col.
Dickson, of Caldwell Co., N. C. He is a first class farmer, resides
on the Yadkin River one mile below Elkville. He was a volunteer in
the Cherokee war, and had command of a company at the age of 19. He
was county surveyor for many years.

Children, all born near Elkville:

    1. William, died young.

    2 and 3, Amelia and Margaret, twins.

    2. Amelia, married Arthur Duvall Cowles, son of Calvin J.
    Cowles and Martha Duvall. He is a merchant at Gap Creek, Ashe
    Co., N. C. They have James, Calvin and Martha Horton.

    3. Margaret is not married.

    4. Dickson, a merchant, in company with his brother-in-law A.
    D. Cowles.


II. WILLIAM LEANDER, son of Gen. William Horton and Milley Dula,
married FRANCES CORPENING. They have:

    1. Eliza, married John Wagoner, resides in Oregon.

    2. Millard, also in Oregon.

    3. William.

    4. Corpening.

    5. Rufus.

William Leander was also a volunteer in the Cherokee war at the age
of 16, and was a Lieut. in his brother's company.


III. ELIZA, daughter of Gen. William Horton and Milley Dula, married
JACKSON CORPENING of Burke Co., N. C. He is dead. He was a prominent
man and much respected--left several children. One of his daughters
married Col. Burgers S. Gaithers, a lawyer and politician, and one of
the foremost men in the State.


IV. THEODOCIA ELVIRA, daughter of Gen. William Horton and Milley
Dula, born at Yadkin River, in Wilkes Co., N. C., 22 Aug., 1825;
married at the residence of her father, 23 Jan., 1845, by the Rev.
Smith Ferguson, a Baptist minister, to GEO. HAGA HAMILTON, born at
Salem, N. C., 5 Jan., 1814. He is a first class farmer; resides near
Jefferson, Ashe Co., N. C.

Children, all born at Jefferson:

    1. William, born 8 Dec., 1845; married 2 Dec., 1869, to Martha
    Virginia Perkins.

    2. Mary Jane, born 29 March, 1847; married 19 March, 1866, to
    Dr. Levi C. Gentrey.

    3. Rufus Alexander, born 8 Oct., 1850; unmarried.


V. REBECCA, daughter of Gen. William Horton and Milley Dula, married
DAVID E. BOWER. They have several children--we only have names of
two, as follows:

    1. William Horton Bower, is a lawyer.

    2. John Bower, is a clerk in a store at Elkville.


VI. NATHAN, son of Gen. William Horton and Milley Dula. He is a
farmer; resides at Beaver Creek, Wilkes Co., N. C.; unmarried.


VII. PHINEAS, son of Gen. William Horton and Milley Dula. He is a
farmer and merchant; resides at Elkville. He was a member of the
House of Representatives of North Carolina in 1860-'63-'65 and '67,
and in 1872 he was elected Senator.


IX. LAMIRA LOUISA, daughter of Gen. William Horton and Milley Dula,
born at Yadkin River, N. C.; married at Elkville, Wilkes Co., N. C.,
13 April, 1853, by the Rev. Smith Ferguson, to WILEY PERKINS THOMAS,
son of Stephen Thomas and Rebecca Perkins, and born at Heltore, Ashe
Co., N. C., 20 April, 1823. Mr. Thomas resides at Jefferson, Ashe Co.
He is a well-to-do farmer, also a merchant and stock dealer.

Children, born at Jefferson:

    1. Alexander Hamilton, born 20 April, 1854.

    2. John D., born 2 July, 1861.

    3. Elizabeth Elvira, born 26 April, 1866.

    4. Lamira Caroline, born 26 March, 1871.


X. ALEXANDER HAMILTON, son of Gen. William Horton and Milley Dula,
born at Yadkin River; married MARY JANE VOGLER, of Salem, N. C. They
reside at Elkville. He is a merchant, in company with his brother,
Phineas Horton; he is also Clerk of the Superior Court of Wilkes
County.


XI. RUFUS DULA, son of Gen. William Horton and Milley Dula, born at
Yadkin River. He resides at Elkville, at the old homestead of his
father, and his sister Sarah lives with him. He is not married.


I. HON. WILLIAM, son of Phineas Horton and Rebecca Councill
(_Nathan_, _Nathan_, _Caleb_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born on New
River, 9 March, 1828; married at the residence of his wife's father,
near Boone, N. C., 1860, to _Nancy Rebecca Blair_, only daughter of
Henry Blair and Mary ----, and born in Caldwell Co., N. C., 26 Aug.,
1835,--the Rev. Joseph Harrison, a _deaf_ preacher, officiating.

Children, all born at New River:

    1. James Crittenden, born 20 Jan., 1861.

    2. Jonathan Blair, born 12 Dec., 1862.

    3. Julia Rebecca, born 12 Nov., 1864.

    4. William Phineas, born 14 Feb., 1867.

    5. Mary Emma, born 23 Feb., 1869.

    6. Addie Elizabeth, born 1 May, 1871.

    7. Henry Walter, born 5 July, 1873.

William Horton, at the early age of 18 years, was elected Lieutenant
in the militia, and afterwards from one position to another, until he
held the office of Colonel, in 1862, and during the war. He also held
the office of County Surveyor, from 1849 to 1862, when he was elected
to the State Legislature, and re-elected in 1864, and again in 1866.
Notwithstanding his official stations, he still claims the honor of
being a farmer, and makes his home with his honored father, making
the old gentleman's closing years as pleasant as possible.

    "Many of the Horton Family of North Carolina have lived to old
    age. They are generally regarded as a clever, honest, liberal,
    and charitable people. They possess good social qualities,
    and are generally very popular, and these characteristics,
    capability being added, account for so many of them holding
    public positions. Many of them are public professors of
    Christianity, and belong to the Baptist and Methodist
    denominations.

    "In politics they were formerly Whigs,--were all faithful to,
    though not fully approving, the cause of the late Southern
    Confederacy. They are now all conservative, and acting with the
    Democratic party. Though generally intelligent, educated, and
    talkative, there has never yet one of them been a preacher or a
    lawyer, and but one a physician. They are nearly all engaged
    in agricultural pursuits, and generally fond of amusements,
    such as hunting, fishing, etc."--_Letter of Hon. William
    Horton, of Boone, N. C., Dec., 1874._


II. NATHAN, son of Phineas Horton and Rebecca Councill, born on New
River, 22 Oct., 1829. He was a Captain in the militia before the war,
and also held the office of county processioner for several years.

He volunteered in Capt. T. V. Crumpter's Co. A., 1st Reg't, N. C.
Troops (cavalry), and was promoted to a Lieutenancy in Capt. Jonathan
Horton's Co. (B.), 37 Reg't, N. C. Troops (infantry), in the Fall of
1863. He was in the battle of Chancellorsville, Va., and others which
followed, until he reached Gettysburg, where he was severely wounded
by a minnie ball, which he yet carries under his shoulder. He was
captured and taken to the hospital near Chester, Pa., I think, where
he remained about two months. He was then taken to Johnson's Island,
Ohio, where he says, that the suffering from hunger was so great that
rats were freely eaten by the prisoners. After remaining there about
twenty months, he was released on parole, and got home in March,
1865. Soon after his return home he was elected County Surveyor, and
he has been re-elected several times, and he still holds the office.
He was married 27 May, 1875, by Rev. Dr. Wogg, to JULIETT GENTRY,
daughter of W. H. Gentry, of Jefferson, N. C.


III. JONATHAN FILLMORE, son of Phineas Horton and Rebecca Councill,
born 3 March, 1836. He was a Capt. in the militia before the war.
When the war broke out he also volunteered, with his brother Nathan,
in Capt. Crumpter's Co. He died from relapse of fever, at Moore's
Hospital, Manassas Junction, Va., 2 March, 1862.


IV. JAMES HARRISON, son of Phineas Horton and Rebecca Councill,
born 27 May, 1841. He was an officer in the militia, and like his
brothers, volunteered in Capt. Miller's Co. I., 58th Reg't, N. C.,
Troops (infantry), and was chosen Lieutenant. He was slightly wounded
at the battle of Chickamauga. He acted as Adjutant for Col. J. B.
Palmer at the battle of Missionary Ridge. He died from brain-fever at
Dalton, Ga., 22 Dec., 1863. His body was brought home and interred on
the hill in front of his father's house.


JAMES THEODORE, son of David Eagles Horton and Sarah Dula (_Col.
Nathan_, _Nathan_, _Caleb_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born in Caldwell
Co., N. C., 16 Oct., 1829; married in Yadkin Co., N. C., 12 Oct.,
1859, by John Williams, Esq., to SARAH ROSA LYNCH, daughter of
Larkin Lynch and Elizabeth Hunter. Moved to Yadkin Co., N. C., in
Oct., 1863, and in Dec., 1866, removed to the old homestead again in
Caldwell Co. He is a well-to-do farmer, and respected by those who
know him.

Children:

    1. Alice Conrad, born in Yadkin Co., 22 Aug., 1860.

    2. Ida Lynch, born in Yadkin Co., 2 Jan., 1863.

    3. Rosa Virginia, born in Yadkin, Co., 3 Dec., 1864.

    4. James Walter, born in Yadkin Co., 26 Jan., 1867.

    5. Harriet Augusta, born in Caldwell Co., 30 April, 1869.

    6. Lillie Gertrude, born in Caldwell Co., 2 May, 1872.


I. EDMUND BURKE, son of Edmund Bani Horton and Matilda Devoy
(Jonathan Bani, _Barnabas_, _Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Caleb I._), born
in New York City, 14 April, 1845; married 25 Oct., 1866, by Rev. F.
Rallston Smith, D. D., to HARRIET MOORES, daughter of Charles W.
Moores and Susan Ann Mallory.

Children, born at White Stone, L. I.:

    1. Charles Edmund.

    2. Elizabeth Mallory, both died young.

Harriet Moores Horton died in 1872. He married 2. in the Reformed
Church, Port Richmond, Staten Island, 11 Nov., 1874, by the Rev. Dr.
James Brownlee, to KATE CROCHERON BROWNLEE, eldest daughter of the
officiating clergyman, and born at the parsonage in Port Richmond,
Staten Island, on the 9 Feb., 1845.

Mr. Horton is a clerk and bookkeeper for the Howe Sewing Machine Co.,
in the city of New York.




_Ninth Generation.--Caleb I._


I. DR. SAMUEL MILLER, son of Nathan White Horton and Rosanna Miller
(_Henry_, _Nathan_, _Richard_, _Caleb_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born
at Broadtop, Pa., 5 May, 1835; studied medicine with Dr. John Lowman,
of Johnstown, Pa., and graduated at Jefferson Medical College,
Philadelphia, in the Class of 1862. He married SARAH DUNNICA,
daughter of the Hon. Judge Dunnica, of St. Louis, Mo. They have three
children: names not given. He is now (1874) a Surgeon in the U. S.
Army, and stationed at Fort McKavitt, Texas. He was breveted Major at
the battle of Vicksburg.


II. JOSEPH MILLER, son of Nathan White Horton and Rosanna Miller,
born at Broadtop, Bedford Co., Pa., 22 April, 1840; married in
Philadelphia, 19 May, 1864, by the Rev. M. C. Sutphin, to BELL
MATHEWS LEE, daughter of Matthias H. Lee and Ellen Mathews, of
Philadelphia, born in Philadelphia, in 1836; died 8 Jan., 1871.

Children, born in Philadelphia:

    1. Laura born 1 Oct., 1867; died in infancy.

    2. Walter, born in 1868; died in early infancy. (Twins.)

    3. Harrison, in 1868; died in early infancy.

He married 2. in Philadelphia, 14 Oct., 1875, CLARA EUGENIA GIRVIN,
daughter of John Girvin and Emily Bowman, and born in Philadelphia.

Mr. Horton is now, and has been for about twelve years past,
compositor in the "_Evening Bulletin Office_," Philadelphia. He
has had charge of the Religious department of that paper for about
eight years past. He is the Philadelphia correspondent of the
"_Nashville Bulletin_." He was a Union soldier, served one year, and
was honorably discharged. He edits the "_Home Circle_," a monthly
literary journal, published in Philadelphia. He is an active member
of the Spring Garden Presbyterian Church, and is also a member of the
Board of Trustees. In October, 1874, he formed a partnership with R.
F. Thorne and E. C. Cake, under the name of Thorne, Cake & Co., and
they are now the proprietors of the Home Circle Publishing Company,
of Philadelphia.

He is a ready, racy writer, and possesses a mind of good culture,
enjoying the confidence and respect of all who know him.


IX. ELIZABETH, daughter of Eunice Horton and George Bockover
(_Jason_, _Israel_, _Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Caleb I._), born at
Beemerville, N. J., 5 July, 1833; married 1. THOMAS C. WILDER, a
merchant, who died leaving no issue; married 2. at Beemerville, 8
March, 1859, by Rev. Mr. Crosette, to the HON. JOHN PARKER JORDAN,
of North Carolina. A happy union of the North and South. The bridal
party left immediately for New York City, stopping for a few days
at the St. Nicholas, where they received the _elite_ of the city,
and then went to Baltimore, where at Barnum's, Mrs. Jordan, with the
ease and grace of manner so natural to her, received their friends,
and made the entertainment very interesting. From Baltimore they
proceeded to Mr. Jordan's home in the Old North State.

Mr. Jordan is a son of Matthias Jordan and Sally Smith, both of
illustrious English descent, and on the mother's side tracing back to
the Colonial Governor of Virginia. They were planters, on the James
River, but moved to North Carolina in early life, engaged largely in
the East India trade--lost a large fortune by the ravages of the war
of 1812.

Hon. J. P. Jordan is a lawyer, self-educated, but rose gradually to
eminence in his profession, and has several times been a member of
the Legislature. He is at present (Dec., 1875,) engaged in important
business in Washington, D. C.


I. RUTH ANN, daughter of Nelson Horton and Sarah Shons (_Silas
Danes_, _Silas_, _Silas_, _Barnabas_, _Barnabas_, _Caleb I._), born
in Wallkill, N. Y., 14 June, 1838. She is an intelligent maiden
lady--a live member of the Old School Baptist Church. She has
rendered valuable assistance in gathering up genealogical data of her
branch of the Horton family; under date of May, 1871, she says:

    "In regard to leading traits of character of the Horton family,
    I may speak of the disposition manifested in my own line. Some
    might set them down as too dogmatical. I do admit that most of
    them are rather tenacious of their own opinions. Especially
    were my grandfather and his brother Barnabas positive and firm
    men. But I do not think this trait of character is so prominent
    in other branches of the family. In regard to punctuality
    and uprightness, they can present as untarnished a record as
    any other family. I have never heard of any of them being
    imprisoned for debt or misdemeanor. Their social standing has
    always been good. As to mental capacity, I believe they have
    generally been people of good common sense. They have not, so
    far as I know, ever made any special mark in the literary or
    scientific world. Politically, as a general thing, they embrace
    and adhere to the _Democratic idea_--the idea of freedom and
    equal rights. They have mainly followed agricultural pursuits.
    I believe frugality has ever been a leading characteristic
    of the family, in all its history, and we find this trait
    of character still prominent, despite the great amount of
    prodigality and unthrift witnessed in these times."


I. ELWOOD ELY, son of Alexander Horace Horton and Catherine Cline
Ditmars (_Uriah T._, _Jason_, _Israel_, _Jonathan_, _Jonathan_,
_Caleb I._), born at Lambertville, N. J., 26 Dec., 1844; married
in Trenton, N. J., 9 May, 1868, by the Rev. Mr. Bartine, to LYDIA
GAMBLE, daughter of Ellis Gamble, and born at Lambertville, 1 April,
1850. She died in Trenton, N. J., 7 May, 1874, leaving one son:

    William Horton, born 22 Oct., 1869.

Elwood E. Horton resides at Lambertville, and is a car painter by
occupation.


II. CARLTON IRA, son of Ira Joseph Horton and Ruth Howard Spear
(_Samuel Todd_, _Joseph_, _Israel_, _Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Caleb
I._), born in Atlas, Genesee Co., Mich., 3 Sept., 1841; married in
Atlas, 1 Oct., 1863, by Isaac Crawford, Esq., to MARIETTA FROST,
daughter of Jonathan Frost, and born in Atlas, 17 Sept., 1840.

Children, born in Atlas:

    1. Sumner Green, born 16 June, 1865.

    2. William Henry, born 29 March, 1869.




_Third Generation.--Joshua I._


I. JOSHUA, Ensign, son of Joshua Horton I. and Mary Tuthill, born in
Southold, 1669; married 1. ELIZABETH GROVER, daughter of Simon Grover
and Elizabeth Moore, and born in Southold, 15 Sept., 1672; died in
1713. He married 2. the widow MARY GILLAM. He died about 1744.

Children, all by first wife, and all born in Southold:

    1. Eliza, born 1694; married in 1719, John Halloway.

    2. Patience, born 1696; married in 1716, Joseph Lamb.

    3. Deborah, born 1698; married in 1721, Nathaniel Buell.

    4. Martha, born 1701; married in 1724, Robert Tustin.

    5. Mary, died in 1724; unmarried.

    6. Rhoda, died 1720.

    7. Simon Grover, born 1711.

    8. Joshua, married Sarah Hull in 1734.


II. JOSEPH, son of Joshua Horton I. and Mary Tuthill, born in
Southold, about 1671; married.

Children, probably all born in Southold:

    1. Joshua, born 1730.

    2. Benjamin.

    3. Joseph.

    4. Martha.

    5. Lydia.

    6. Deliverance, died young.


IV. MARY, daughter of Joshua Horton I. and Mary Tuthill, born in
Southold, 1687; married 2 Jan., 1708, ZACCHEUS GOLDSMITH, son of John
Goldsmith and Anna Wells, and born in Southold about 1689.

Children:

    1. David, born 1709.

    2. Mary.

    3. Joseph.


V. BETHIA, daughter of Joshua Horton I. and Mary Tuthill, born in
Southold, 1679; married in 1716, ICHABOD HALLOCK, son of Thos.
Hallock and Mary Hope. He died in 1759. She died in 1753.

Children:

    1. Thomas, born 1717.

    2. Ichabod, born 1719.

    3. Bethia, married Reeve.

    4. Sarah, married Jeremiah Billard.

    5. Patience, married Silas Moore.

    6. Anna, married William Homan.


VII. EPHRAIM, son of Joshua Horton I. and Mary Tuthill, born in
Southold, in 1786; married about 1707, MARTHA VAIL, born in
Southold, 1788.

Children:

    1. Joseph.

    2. Benjamin.

    3. Jeremiah, died 1729.

    4. Joshua, died 1729.




_Fourth Generation.--Joshua I._


I. JOSEPH, son of Ephraim Horton and Martha Vail (_Joshua I._), born
in Southold in 1708; married perhaps DELIVERANCE REEVES.

Children, all born in Southold:

    1. Joshua, born in 1733; married Asenath Mapes.

    2. Benjamin, born 1735; married Anna Horton.

    3. Joseph, born 1737; married Mary Hallock.

    4. Mary, born 1739.

    5. Martha, born 1741; married 6 April, 1769, Recompense Howell.

    6. Lydia, died young.

    7. Lydia, born 1744; married 13 Feb., 1775, to James Overton.

    8. Deliverance, born 1747; she was sent to a wind grist-mill
    when 11 years old, and venturing too near the wings, she was
    struck by one of them and fatally injured; she was taken to the
    house of Joseph Reeves and died the same day.


II. BENJAMIN, son of Ephraim Horton and Martha Vail, born in
Southold, about 1710; married.

Children:

    1. Joseph, born 1735.

    2. Jeremiah, born 1738.

    3. Joshua, born 1740.

    4. Eliza, born 1742; married 20 Nov., 1763, Josiah Gibbs.


III. JEREMIAH, son of Ephraim Horton and Martha Vail, born in
Southold, about 1712; married.

Children:

    1. Joshua, born in 1747.

    2. Justus, born in 1749.

    3. Joseph, born 1757.

    4. John, born in 1760; married and settled in Rhode Island, and
    had John, Benjamin and Joseph.


VII. SIMON GROVER, son of Joshua Horton and Eliza Grover (_Joshua
I._), born in Southold, 30 March, 1711.

    "He graduated at Yale College in 1731; was bred a
    Congregationalist, but he was installed pastor of the
    Presbyterian Church, in Connecticut Farms, L. I., between
    Sept., 1734 and Sept., 1735. In 1746 he accepted a call to
    Newtown, L. I., where he labored until 1772, when he resigned
    and remained in retirement till his decease, 8 May, 1786, at
    the residence of his son-in-law, Judge Benjamin Coe. He was
    a man of unquestioned purity, and always sustained a good
    character and standing. He was of middle size and solemn
    deportment."--_Hatfield's History of Elizabeth, N. J._

He was twice married; his first wife, ABIGAIL HOWELL, died 5 May,
1752, and 7 Jan., 1762, he married ELIZABETH FISH, daughter of Samuel
Fish, Esq. He had but one child:

    Phebe, who married the late Hon. Benjamin Coe.

He was an exile during the Revolutionary War, with his son-in-law, at
Warwick, Orange Co., N. Y. They returned to Newtown, L. I., in the
fall of 1783, and there he died, as stated above. He was a zealous
and active Whig, and early espoused the cause of the colonies against
the mother country.




_Fifth Generation.--Joshua I._


I. JOSHUA, son of Joseph Horton and Deliverance Reeves (_Ephraim_,
_Joshua I._), born in Southold about 1733; married about 1750,
perhaps ASENATH MAPES.

Children, all born in Southold:

    1. Joshua, born 22 Sept., 1851.

    2. Havens.

    3. Gilbert.

    4. William.

    5. Deliverance.

    6. Permela.

    7. Asenath.


II. BENJAMIN, son of Joseph Horton and Deliverance Reeves, born about
1735; married about 1756, to ANNA HORTON, daughter of Calvin Horton
and Elizabeth Burnette, and born in Southold, in 1737.

Children, all born in Southold:

    1. Elizabeth.

    2. Elam Potter.

    3. Joseph.

    4. Benjamin.

    5. Davis.

    6. Martha.


III. JOSEPH, son of Joseph Horton and Deliverance Reeves, born about
1737; married MARY HALLOCK, and settled at Riverhead, L. I.

Children, all born at Riverhead:

    1. Joseph, born 1759; married 1. Sally Decker, 2. Widow Cox.

    2. William; born 1761; married Osborn.

    3. Sybil, married Homan.

    4. Mary, married Wm. Terry.

    5. Hannah, married Hallock.

    6. Benjamin, married Charlotte Wells.




_Sixth Generation.--Joshua I._


I. JOSHUA, son of Joshua Horton and Asenath Mapes (_Joseph_,
_Ephraim_, _Joshua I._), born in Southold, 22 Sept., 1751; died in
Putnam Valley, N. Y., 11 Nov., 1811; he went to Orange Co., N. Y., in
early life; married about 1777, PHEBE RUMSEY, moved to Philipstown,
now Putnam Valley, N. Y., where he settled. His wife was born in
Goshen, N. Y., 15 Jan., 1760; died 8 Sept., 1807, in Putnam Valley.
He was an honest, Christian man, a worthy member of the Baptist
Church, and much respected by all who knew him.

Children, probably all born in Putnam Valley:

    1. Isaac, born in 1778; married Margaret Odell.

    2. John, born 1780.

    3. James, born 1782.

    4. Cyrus, born 1 June, 1784; married Sarah Mead.

    5. Jasper, born in 1787.


III. GILBERT, son of Joshua Horton and Asenath Mapes, born in
Southold, 1753; married and settled in Shenandoah Valley, Dutchess
Co., N. Y.


IV. WILLIAM, son of Joshua Horton and Asenath Mapes, born in
Southold, 1755; married MARY WRIGHT, in 1795; moved to Orange Co.,
and thence to Oneida Co., N. Y., and settled at Rome, N. Y. He was a
soldier in the Revolutionary war, served during the war and came out
unharmed.

Children, probably all born in Rome, N. Y.:

    1. Anannias, born 1796; resides in Oriskany, N. Y.

    2. Liberty, born 1798; resides in Whitesboro, N. Y.

    3. Jeremiah, born 28 Oct., 1800; married Abigail Brownell.

    4. Richmond Wright, born 30 Jan., 1803; married Martha McNall.

    5. Irene, married ---- Knaggs; lives at Little Falls, N. Y.

    6. Rhoda, married ---- Streetor.

    7. Mary Shields, died in Rome, 9 Aug., 1855.


I. DEA. JOSEPH, son of Joseph Horton and Mary Hallock (_Joseph_,
_Ephraim_, _Joshua I._), born about 1761; moved to Orange Co., N.
Y., in early life, settled in Wallkill; married SALLY DECKER. After
her death he married the widow Sally Cox. He was a Deacon in the
Presbyterian Church of Wallkill, Orange Co., N. Y.

Children, born in Wallkill:

    1. Joseph, married Mary Cox.

    2. Polly.

    3. Benjamin, married Phebe Vail.

    4. Levi Decker.

    5. Anna, born 1789; married Isaac M. Gillett.

    6. Hannah.

    7. Phebe.

    8. John.

    "In the year 1824 or 1825, Dea. Joseph Horton, with his horse
    and buggy, left home in the morning and went to work in a field
    about two miles from his house alone. Not returning, his family
    made search for him, and going to the field they found him
    dead, lying upon his face on the ground, and the bridle in his
    hand, indicating plainly that his horse had been turned into
    the pasture-field in the morning, and that he had finished his
    day's work, and started to get his horse to return home when he
    fell dead."--_Letter of L. D. Horton, August, 1874._

His residence was in Wallkill, Orange Co., N. Y. He was about
sixty-three years old at the time of his death, and living with his
2d wife, who was the widow Sally Cox.




_Seventh Generation.--Joshua I._


I. JOSEPH, son of Dea. Joseph Horton and Sally Decker (_Benjamin_,
_Joseph_, _Ephraim_, _Joshua I._), born in Wallkill, in 1776; married
in Wallkill, N. Y., about 1806, MARY COX, born in Orange Co., N. Y.,
in 1779. They were members of the Presbyterian Church, and he was one
of the Deacons. They settled in Newfield, Tompkins Co., N. Y., in
1813, and there they died, he in 1823, and she in 1862.

Children, 1. and 2. born in Wallkill, the rest in Newfield:

    1. Solomon.

    2. Lewis.

    3. Harry.

    4. Stephen.

    5. Joseph.

    6. Mehitabel.

    7. Sally.

    8. Fanny.

    9. Elizabeth.

    10. James Madison.


III. BENJAMIN, son of Dea. Joseph Horton and Sally Decker, born
in Wallkill, Orange Co., N. Y., 7 July, 1787; married PHEBE VAIL,
daughter of Daniel Vail and Elizabeth Smith, and born in Ulster Co.,
N. Y., 27 July, 1786.

Children:

    1. Maria, born 1809; married Baxter.

    2. Levi Decker, born 22 April, 1811; married Susan Polhamus.

    3. Julia, married Miller.

    4. Betsey, married Kingsbury.

    5. Joseph.

    6. Stephen L., born 15 March, 1818; married Harriet Newell.

    7. Benjamin I., born 13 March, 1820; married Phebe Perry.

    8. Sally Ann, married Baldwin.

    9. Asa C., born 1 Jan., 1822; married Sarah Wood.

    10. Nancy, married Clark.

    11. Clarissa, married Cisson; she is dead.

    12. Amanda M., married Tibbits.

    13. Rufus.


V. ANNA, daughter of Dea. Joseph Horton and Sally Decker, born in
Wallkill, in 1789; married ISAAC M. GILLETT.

Children, all born in Newfield, N. Y.:

    1. Daniel Horton.

    2. David Humley.

    3. Charles Joseph, born 19 March, 1820; married Sarah Ann
    Alexander.


I. ISAAC, son of Joshua Horton and Phebe Rumsey (_Joshua_, _Joseph,
phraim_, _Joshua I._), born in Putnam Valley, N. Y., about 1778;
married MARGARET ODELL.

Children:

    1. Wright James, was born in Philipstown, Putnam Co., N. Y.;
    married Deborah Wilcox.


III. HON. CYRUS, son of Joshua Horton and Phebe Rumsey, born in
Putnam Valley, N. Y., 1 June, 1784, and died there, 13 Feb., 1832. He
was married 27 Sept., 1809, to MARY MEAD. She was born 23 May, 1791,
died 27 May, 1842. She was the daughter of Anna Mead, who was born 12
March, 1765, and died 30 June, 1835.

    "Cyrus Horton was a New York merchant for some years, but
    by reason of ill-health, he abandoned active business and
    purchased the homestead of his father in Philipstown, and
    there he spent the closing years of his life in comparative
    retirement, possessing a moderate competence, acquired in
    merchandising. He died in the same house in which his father
    had lived and died, thus two generations died on the homestead.
    He was distinguished for his gentlemanly deportment, Christian
    life, and public spirit. The old homestead was a _church and
    a religious centre_ for more than sixty years. He knew well
    the advantages of education, and he inculcated it in his
    children."--_Letter of E. J. Horton._

His influence in society was of the true kind, and his death was
greatly lamented.


VI. LEONARD, son of Benjamin Horton and Peninah Newton (_John_,
_Jeremiah_, _Ephraim_, _Joshua I._), born at Naugatuck, Conn., 15
Nov., 1807; married JEMIMA CONOVER, born in New Jersey, 26 Sept.,
1809; moved from Connecticut to Chenango Co., N. Y.

Children, probably all born in Oxford, Chenango Co., N. Y.:

    1. Marcus Nelson, born 6 April, 1830.

    2. Emily Jane, born 1832.

    3. Avis Amelia.

    4. Clark Lawrence.




_Eighth Generation.--Joshua I._


III. HARRY, son of Joseph Horton and Mary Cox (_Dea. Joseph_,
_Joseph_, _Benjamin_, _Ephraim_, _Joshua I._), born in Wallkill,
Orange Co., N. Y., 11 April, 1811; moved with his father, when 18
months old (1813), to Newfield, Tompkins Co., N. Y.; married in
Newfield, 5 May, 1834, by George Bailey, Esq., to SARAH SMITH,
daughter of Henry Smith and Anna E. Hufford, and born in Hamilton,
Northampton Co., Pa., 12 Oct., 1810.

Children, all born in Newfield, the residence of their parents:

    1. William Henry, born 27 Feb., 1835; married Philena Nobles.

    2. Stephen Joseph, born 31 May, 1838; married Kate Seabring.

    3. Catherine Lonesa, born 14 March, 1841; married Nelson Cutter.


X. JAMES MADISON, son of Joseph Horton and Mary Cox, born in
Newfield, N. Y., 14 Dec., 1814; married in Newfield, 27 Aug., 1835,
by George D. Bailey, Esq., to ELIZABETH SMITH, daughter of Henry
Smith and Nancy Hofford, and born in Newfield, 31 July, 1816.

Children, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 born in Newfield, 9 and 10 in
Republic, Ohio:

    1. A daughter, born 3 Feb., 1837; died unmarried.

    2. Sarah Maria, born 26 Jan., 1838; married David Hubbard Clark.

    3. Fannie Minerva, born 12 July, 1840; married Rufus Bishop
    Hall.

    4. Clara Jane, born 20 Aug., 1842; married Harry Axtel Palmer.

    5. Francis Asbury, born 22 Oct., 1845; married Marian Chitenden.

    6. Levi Wisner, born 8 Dec., 1847; married Alchamedy Lapham.

    7. Ann Elizabeth, born 12 Oct., 1850; married William Clink.

    8. Matilda Adelia, born 30 May, 1853; unmarried.

    9. A son, born in 1856; died without a name.

    10. Willie Eugene Seabring, born 29 March, 1858; unmarried.

Mr. Horton and family moved from Newfield to Republic, Seneca Co.,
Ohio, in Oct., 1855. He has been afflicted with ill-health for nine
years past. He resides at Green Springs, Ohio, and stands fair in the
community.


II. LEVI DECKER, son of Benjamin Horton and Phebe Vail (_Dea.
Joseph_, _Joseph_, _Joseph_, _Ephraim_, _Joshua I._), born in
Newfield, N. Y., 22 April, 1811; married in Enfield, Tompkins Co., N.
Y., 12 July, 1834, by Rev. Obediah Chase, to SUSAN POLHAMUS, daughter
of Cornelius Polhamus and Polly Caniff, and born in Ulster Co., N.
Y., 18 Feb., 1813.

Children:

    1. Amos Curry, born in Newfield, 27 April, 1835; died 6 July,
    1862.

    2. Ruth Ann, born in Newfield, 20 Nov., 1836; married 30 April,
    1860, by the Rev. Volney Powell, to John Hamilton Danthemus.

    3. Phebe Jane, born in Newfield, 6 July, 1839; married 12 May,
    1858, by the Rev. Volney Powell, to Charles W. Johnson.

    4. George Washington, born in Newfield, 6 July, 1841.

    5. John Gillett, born in New Milford, Ill., 23 Oct., 1844; died
    14 Jan., 1849.

    6. Clara Elizabeth, born in New Milford, Ill., 20 Feb., 1848;
    unmarried.

    7. Eva Louisa, born in New Milford, Ill., 12 Jan., 1853;
    married by Rev. Henry Mahil, 25 Dec., 1871, to Charles Peake.

Levi D. Horton moved from Newfield, about 1842, to New Milford, Ill.,
where he now resides.


VI. STEPHEN L., son of Benjamin Horton and Phebe Vail, born in
Newfield, Tompkins Co., N. Y., 15 March, 1818; married in Harlem,
Winnebago Co., Ill., in 1847, by Rev. Mr. Wilson, to HARRIET NEWELL,
born 4 Jan., 1827, in Litchfield, Mass.; died in New Milford, Ill.,
23 May, 1868.

Children, by first wife:

    1. Haskell V., born in New Milford, Ill., 16 March, 1850;
    married Celestia Jameson.

    2. Harvey, born in New Milford, Ill., 7 August, 1852.

    3. Alva, born in New Milford, Ill., 5 Sept., 1856.

    4. Wesley Gibbs, born in New Milford, Ill., 25 Sept., 1858.

Married 2. in Newfield, N. Y., 5 Nov., 1868, by Rev. Reuben C. Fox,
to MARY JANE STARR, born in Newfield, N. Y., 19 March, 1823.

Children:

    1. Starr La Motte, born 19 Feb., 1870.


VII. BENJAMIN JOSEPH, son of Benjamin Horton and Phebe Vail, born in
Newfield, N. Y., 13 March, 1820; married in Newfield, 19 Oct., 1842,
by Rev. P. A. Johnson, to PHEBE PERRY, daughter of James E. Perry and
Susanna Adams, and born in Schoharie Co., N. Y., 13 Oct., 1819.

Children, probably all born in Newfield, N. Y.:

    1. Henrietta, born 23 July, 1843; died 25 Sept., 1858.

    2. La Fayette, born 12 April, 1846; died 21 Sept., 1849.

    3. Augusta Maria, born 24 Feb., 1851.

    4. Oscar Perry, born 26 Dec., 1853.

    5. Bela Joseph, born 5 Oct., 1856.

    6. Elmer Elsworth, born 8 Dec., 1862.


IX. ASA CALDWELL, son of Benjamin Horton and Phebe Vail, born in
Newfield, N. Y., 1 Jan., 1822; married at Beloit, Wis., in June,
1854, to SARAH WOOD, daughter of Joseph and Elizabeth Wood, and born
at Chatham, now Ontario, Canada, 22 June, 1831. They reside at New
Milford, Ill.

Children, all born at New Milford, Ill.:

    1. Grace Edna, born 27 Dec., 1855.

    2. Floyd Wallace, born 4 Nov., 1857.

    3. William Wirt, born 16 March, 1861.

    4. Amos Curry, born 6 Nov., 1863.

    5. Lucy Lura, born 22 Nov., 1868.


I. WRIGHT JAMES, son of Isaac Horton and Margaret Odell (_Joshua_,
_Joshua_, _Joseph_, _Ephraim_, _Joshua I._), born in Philipstown,
Putnam County, N. Y., 25 October, 1813; married in Fishkill, N. Y., 1
January, 1837, by the Rev. Geo. Horton, of the same place, to DEBORAH
WILCOX, born in Pleasant Valley, Dutchess Co., N. Y., 13 Oct., 1812;
she was daughter of Abner Wilcox and Sally ----. He was born 16
March, 1784. She was born 24 Sept., 1787.

Children, all born in Fishkill except Sarah Ann, who was born in Mt.
Morris, Genesee Co., Mich.:

    1. Rev. Isaac, born in Fishkill, Dutchess Co., N. Y., 29 Aug.,
    1839. A graduate of Rochester University, class of 1865; also a
    graduate of Rochester Theological Seminary, class of 1868.

    2. Amelia, born 24 Oct., 1841; a teacher.

    3. Abner, born 24 June, 1844; a telegraph operator and
    bookkeeper.

    4. Cyrus B. Horton, born 13 Dec., 1846; a farmer.

    5. Sarah Ann, born 26 July, 1849; married 3 Sept., 1867, to
    Prof. Jefferson H. Lewis. Mr. Lewis is the Principal of the Mt.
    Morris School. They have Nellie E. Lewis, born Sept., 1873.

Wright James Horton moved from Fishkill to Mt. Morris, Mich., in
1848, where he now resides.


I. EZRA JAMES, son of Hon. Cyrus Horton and Sarah Mead (_Joshua_,
_Joshua_, _Joseph_, _Ephraim_, _Joshua I._), born 20 July, 1826, in
Putnam Valley, Putnam Co., N. Y., about seven miles from Peekskill,
his present place of residence. He was married at Cold Springs
Village, 8 Sept., 1850, by Rev. S. W. Jones, to SARAH DAVENPORT, only
daughter of William Davenport and Euphemia Perry, and born at Cold
Springs.

Children, all born in Peekskill, N. Y.:

    1. Rushman Davenport, born 7 July, 1853; died 10 Aug., 1854, at
    Cold Springs.

    2. Cyrus William, born 19 June, 1855; is now cadet midshipman,
    3d class, Annapolis Academy.

    3. Euphemia, born 17 Feb., 1857; died same day.

    4. Linda E., born 24 Jan., 1859; died 2 Aug., 1859.

    5. Walter, born 24 Sept., 1860; died 31 Oct., 1863, at
    Philipstown.

    6. Annie Woolsey, born 24 Sept., 1863; died at Philipstown.

    7. Cornelia Southard Lelia, born 12 Dec., 1864.

    8. Charles Davenport, born 16 Sept., 1866, at Peekskill.

    9. Ezra James, born 7 Jan., 1869, at Peekskill.

    10. Clarence Frost, born 10 Feb., 1871, at Peekskill.

    11. Arthur, born 26 Dec., 1872, at Peekskill.

E. J. Horton came to Peekskill in 1844. He has been an editor and
publisher for twenty-four years, and he still follows the same
occupation, being at present editor and publisher of the "_West
Chester News_," an interesting and useful weekly paper, published at
White Plains, the Seat of Justice of West Chester Co., N. Y. He spent
two years at the New York University, but by reason of ill-health,
he was compelled to leave it. He also studied medicine, but for the
same reason he was forced to give this up also, and abandon all ideas
of a professional life. Publishing and editing seemed better adapted
to his health, and in this occupation he has been successful. He is
now (1875) also publishing a paper at Port Jervis, N. Y.


I. MARCUS NELSON, son of Leonard Horton and Jemima Conover
(_Benjamin_, _John_, _Jeremiah_, _Ephraim_, _Joshua I._), born at
Oxford, Chenango Co., N. Y., 6 April, 1830; married at Walton,
Delaware Co., 1 July, 1861, by Rev. J. S. Pattingill, to ADALINE MEAD
BRISACK, daughter of Sylvester Brisack and Ann Mead, and born in
Walton, 22 Feb., 1833.

Children:

    1. Edward Bates, born at Watertown, Jefferson Co., N. Y., 30
    July, 1862.

    2. Ernest Wayne, born at Elmira, N. Y., 4 August, 1871; dead.

    3. John Marcus, born No. 25 Park Avenue, Williamsport, Pa., 19
    July, 1873.

Mr. M. N. Horton was Superintendent of the public schools of the
city of Williamsport for some years past. He is now Superintendent
of the public schools of the city of Franklin, Venango Co., Pa. He
is a skillful educator, and a gentleman much distinguished for his
scholarly attainments, and correct moral habits and principles. He
graduated at Williams College, Mass., in 1853. Received his degree
of A. M. five years later. Studied law, and was admitted to the bar
in 1862, but did not continue in practice of law, preferring other
pursuits.




_Ninth Generation.--Joshua I._


VI. CHARLES WESLEY, son of Alvah Horton and Mary Elizabeth Tuthill
(_Benjamin_, _Dea. Joseph_, _Joseph_, _Joshua_, _Ephraim_, _Joshua
I._), born at Riverhead, about 1828; married SARAH OVERTON.

Children:

    1. Francis.

    2. Alvah.


VII. HENRY EGBERT, son of Alvah Horton and Mary Elizabeth Tuthill,
born at Cutchogue, L. I., 19 Sept., 1830; married in 1856, by Rev.
Frs. Hill, to ISABELLA GRAHAM HORTON, daughter of B. Bailey Horton
and Hannah Reeves, and born in Cutchogue, 19 Sept., 1831. They reside
at East Hampton, L. I.

Children, probably all born at East Hampton:

    1. Charlotte Beatrice, born 1857.

    2. Mary Elizabeth, born 7 August, 1859.

    3. David, born in 1861; died in infancy.

    4. Maggie Cora, born in Dec., 1863.

    5. Susan Hannah, born in 1866.

    6. Isabella Rose, born in 1868.

    7. De Forest, born 15 June, 1871.


I. WILLIAM HENRY, son of Harry Horton and Sarah Smith (_Joseph_,
_Dea. Joseph_, _Joseph_, _Joseph_, _Ephraim_, _Joshua I_.), born in
Newfield, N. Y., 27 Feb., 1835; married 6 Dec., 1863, by the Rev. D.
Weaver, to PHILENA NOBLES, daughter of Amon Nobles and Mary Wilbour,
of Long Island, and born in 1837.

Children, born in Newfield, N. Y.:

    1. Amanda Belle, born 12 August, 1865.

    2. Kate Evelyn, born 25 Dec., 1872.


II. STEPHEN JOSEPH, son of Harry Horton and Sarah Smith, born
in Newfield, 31 May, 1838; married in Newfield, 5 May, 1859, to
KATE SEABRING, daughter of Richard Seabring and Betsey Hughes, of
Newfield, and born in 1840.

Children, born in Newfield:

    1. Willie, born 5 August, 1862.

    2. Lida May, born 11 April, 1865.


III. CATHERINE LONESA, daughter of Harry Horton and Sarah Smith, born
in Newfield, 14 March, 1841; married in Newfield, 3 Oct., 1864, to
NELSON CUTTER, son of Nyrum Cutter, Esq., and Rebecca Dennis, and
born in Newfield, in 1838. No children.

They reside in Newfield.




_Third Generation.--Jonathan I._


I. JONATHAN, son of Jonathan Horton I. and Bethia Wells, born at the
"Old Castle," 23 Dec., 1683; married 27 Nov., 1707, MARY TUTHILL,
daughter of Henry Tuthill, brother of John Tuthill, the Pilgrim. He
died 2 April, 1768; she died. Both buried in Southold Cemetery.

Children, probably all born in the Old Castle, at Southold:

    1. Mary, born 1708; married Edward Mabel; had Moses and others.

    2. Eliphaz, born 1710; disappeared mysteriously when 18, never
    heard of afterwards.

    3. Mehitabel, born 1712; married 2 Dec., 1743, to Walter
    Brown, being his 3d wife. 4. Azariah W., born 20 March, 1715;
    married. 5. Lazarus (Lawrence), born 1717; married Anna Corey.
    6. Ambrose, born 1720; married.

In "_New Haven Colonial Records_," as furnished by Stuart T. Terry,
of Southold, we learn that he was a very prominent man; a merchant,
an auctioneer, teacher of a select school, and often drew up legal
documents. He also had charge of the church money, and under date
of 5 Nov., 1716, he says: "Uncle Joshua Horton came to my house and
weighed the church's money, Uncle Wells also being present." To
his eldest son, Azariah W., he wills Rawley's History and a small
cane, and to his grandson, son of Jonathan Horton, deceased, "my
homestead and houses in the first Parish of Southold, also my gun
and silver-hilted sword." He gives to the three daughters of his son
Lazarus, £15 each; to his grandsons, sons of his son Ambrose, "all
the buildings where my son Ambrose now lives--son Ambrose to have
the improvement of the land as long as he lives--also the farming
implements he hath at Rone Oak." He also makes bequests to his
daughter Mary Mabel, and her son Moses. He appoints for his executors
"my trusty friend William Horton and my son Joseph Cleveland." Will
signed 3 Oct., 1764. We have no other record of Joseph Cleveland.


II. JAMES, son of Jonathan Horton I. and Bethia Wells, born in
Southold, at the "Old Castle," in 1694; married in 1717, ANNA
GOLDSMITH, born in Southold, in 1698. He was an office-bearer
in the church at Southold from his majority to the close of his
life--a strong pillar of the church, eminent for his piety and sound
Christian character. He was universally known as "Dea. James," and
greatly respected. It is said that he often accompanied the Rev. Mr.
Whitefield, and took an active part in his public meetings.

Jonathan Goldsmith Horton, as quoted by Stuart T. Terry, says of him
in his epitaph:

      "Intombed beneath this ponderous load
      Lies the man who loved and feared the Lord;
      A husband dear, a father ever kind,
      To the poor a close and constant friend:
      Sober, blameless, to charity inclined,
      Meriting well of all he left behind."

He died 16 May, 1762; Anna, his wife, died 8 March, 1783. Both buried
in Southold Cemetery.

Children, all born in Southold:

    1. James, born 1718; married, and had an only child, James,
    Jr., who died without issue.

    2. Barnabas, born in 1720; married Susan Bailey.

    3. Abigail, married 1. Pierson; 2. Jackson.

    4. Anna, married Joseph Terry, son of Joseph Terry and Sarah
    Dimond.

    5. Thomas, married Susan Conklin.

    6. Silas, born 25 Dec., 1730; married Mary Bull.

    7. Ezra, born 25 Dec., 1733; married Mary Hempstead.

    8. Bethia, married Jonathan Burnette Horton, son of Barnabas
    Horton and Elizabeth Burnette.




_Fourth Generation.--Jonathan I._


I. CAPT. BARNABAS, son of Dea. James Horton and Anna Goldsmith
(_Jonathan I._), born in Southold, in 1720; married about 1742, to
SUSANNA BAILEY.

Children, all born in Southold:

    1. Barnabas, married Mehitabel Wells.

    2. Abigail, married Gershom Terry.

    3. Anna, married Joseph Wickham.

    4. Julia Ann, married Jonathan Wells.

    5. Susanna, married Gilbert Case.

    6. Col. Benjamin, married 1. Mehitabel Osborn; 2. Harmony
    Reeves.

    7. Capt. James, born 1 Sept., 1757; married 1. Elizabeth Wood;
    2. Elizabeth Milliken.

    8. Bethia, married William Rogers.

    9. Gilbert, married Returah Terry.

    10. Jonathan, married Bethia Hallock.


IV. THOMAS, son of Dea. James Horton and Anna Goldsmith, born in
Southold, in 1728; married 24 Feb., 1757, to SUSANNA CONKLIN. Moved
to Goshen, N. Y., about 1762, and settled there.

Children, all born in Goshen, except Thomas, who was born in Southold:

    1. Thomas, born 5 Oct., 1760; married Hannah Moore.

    2. James, married Abigail Tuthill.

    3. Samuel, married Margaret Consalaris.

    4. Hannah, born about 1773; married Abiram Reeve.

    5. Gamaliel, died young.

    6. Ezra, married Hannah Gardiner.

    7. Paul, married Ruth Hardin.

    8. Peter, died young.

    9. Susan, married 1. Little; 2. Daniel Carpenter.

    10. Bethia, married Peter Johnson.


VI. SILAS, son of Dea. James Horton and Anna Goldsmith, born in
Southold, 25 Dec., 1730; married MARY BULL, about 1756. Her parentage
is not known, although her name is illustrious in the annals of
Orange Co.--_Vide History of Orange Co._

He went to Orange Co. about 1750, where he settled and died.

Children, all born in Goshen Township:

    1. Bethia, born in 1757; married 28 Feb., 1778, Benjamin
    Hallock.

    2. Anna, born 20 June, 1758; died 18 Sept., 1767.

    3. Margaret, born 4 Sept., 1760; died 4 Sept., 1767.

    4. James, born 5 Feb., 1762; died young.

    5. Sarah, born 28 Nov., 1764; married 15 August, 1795, David
    Hawkins.

    6. Silas, born 19 May, 1768; died 13 April, 1782.

    7. William, born 2 July, 1771; married 21 Dec., 1793, Phebe
    Rumsey.

    8. James, born 11 Sept., 1774; married.


VII. REV. EZRA, son of Dea. James Horton and Anna Goldsmith, born in
Southold, 25 Dec., 1733; married in the town of Hempstead, L. I., in
1757, MARY HEMPSTEAD, daughter of Robert Hempstead, and born in 1736.
He graduated at Princeton College, N. J., in the class of 1754. He
studied for the ministry in Princeton, and the honorary degree of A.
M. was conferred upon him by Yale College, in 1772. He was ordained
at Union, Ct., 14 June, 1759, and from that time until 1783, he was
pastor of the Congregational Church at Union. After twenty years of
faithful service, his health failing, at his own request, 6 August,
1783, he was dismissed from his charge. He died at Union, 13 Jan.,
1789. His wife, remaining his widow, died at the residence of her
son-in-law, Rev. Calvin Ingals, West Stafford, Conn., 23 Jan., 1815,
aged 79.

Children, all born in Union:

    1. Ezra.

    2. Anna.

    3. Mary.


IV. AZARIAH, son of Jonathan Horton and Mary Tuthill (_Jonathan I._),
born in the "Old Castle," at Southold, 20 March, 1715; married EUNICE
----.

He was educated at Yale College, graduated in the close of 1735,
being only twenty years of age.

Children, probably all born at Southold:

    1. Mary, married Jacob Morrill, Esq.

    2. Hannah, married Lewis Woodruff, son of the Mayor of
    Elizabeth, N. J.

    3. Charles, a surgeon in the Revolutionary Army; died in the
    service.

    4. Forster, a very prominent man in the Parish; a merchant in
    Chatham Village, N. J.

    5. Charlotte, married a Christy.

The Rev. Azariah Horton was a missionary among Long Island Indians
from 1741 to 1750. He kept a very interesting diary of his labors
from day to day, a part of which is published in PRIME'S History of
Long Island. In 1751, he was installed pastor of the Presbyterian
Church of Bottle Hill, now Madison, N. J. In Nov., 1776, at his own
request, he was dismissed from his charge, and on 27 March, 1777, he
died. He was an active and faithful minister, and he was one of the
prominent men in founding the College of New Jersey. His wife kept a
store at Bottle Hill. She was an energetic and successful business
woman--active in the work of the church and highly esteemed.

About 15 or 20 years ago, some unknown gentleman came to Madison and
put up a very pretty monument at the grave of the venerable Azariah
Horton.

We are indebted to Mrs. Cuyler, mother of the Rev. Dr. Theodore S.
Cuyler, of Brooklyn, for the above facts. She being a grand-daughter
of Jacob Morrill, Esq., and great-grand-daughter of the Rev. Azariah
Horton.


I. DEA. WILLIAM, son of William Horton and Christiana Youngs
(_Jonathan I._), born in 1708; married 21 Jan., 1730, to MEHETABEL
WELLS, daughter of Joshua Wells and Hannah Tuthill, and born in
Southold, about 1709. He died 26 Sept., 1788.

Children, all born in Southold:

    1. William, born 1731.

    2. Jonathan.

    3. Mehetabel, born 29 Sept., 1743; married James Corwin.

    4. Hannah.

    5. Asenath.

    6. Bethia.


II. JONATHAN, son of William Horton and Christiana Youngs, born in
1710, in Southold; married about 1730, to ABIGAIL HORTON, daughter
of Joseph Horton (_Ephraim_, _Joshua I._). He was remarkable for
his kindness of heart, and his constant efforts to do good, so much
so, that he was appropriately called "Good Jonathan," and by this
appellation he has always been known.

Children, all born at Southold:

    1. David.

    2. William.

    3. Joshua.

    4. Mehetabel.

    5. Abigail.

    6. Phebe.

    7. Hannah.




_Fifth Generation.--Jonathan I._


I. BARNABAS, son of Capt. Barnabas Horton and Susanna Bailey (_Dea.
James_, _Jonathan I._), born in Southold, 7 March, 1745; married 3
Nov., 1773, MEHETABEL WELLS, born in Southold, in Nov., 1747.

Children, all born in Southold:

    1. James Wells, born 28 Oct., 1774; married Mary Terry.

    2. Justus, born 13 June, 1776; married Nancy Conklin.

    3. Bethia, born 25 August, 1799; married Joshua Billard.

    4. Barnabas B., born 16 Dec., 1803; married Eliza Case.

    5. Harrison, born 28 Nov., 1811; died young.

    6. William, born 27 May, 1810; married Elizabeth Dickerson.


II. ABIGAIL, daughter of Capt. Barnabas Horton and Susanna Bailey,
born in Southold, about 1747; married Gershom Terry, son of Gershom
Terry and Bethia Wells, and born in Southold.

Children, probably all born in Southold:

    1. Betsey.

    2. Barnabas.

    3. Abigail.

    4. Rensselaer.

    5. Bethia.

    6. Hetty.


IV. JULIA ANN, daughter of Capt. Barnabas Horton and Susanna Bailey,
born in Southold, in 1751; married JONATHAN WELLS.

Children, all born in Southold:

    1. James.

    2. Jonathan.

    3. Giles.

    4. Julia.

    5. Susanna.

    6. Deborah.

    7. Temperance.

    8. Polly.


VI. COL. BENJAMIN, son of Capt. Barnabas Horton and Susanna Bailey,
born in Southold, 2 April, 1755; married 22 Dec., 1778, to MEHITABEL
OSBORN. She died 16 Oct., 1787. In 1788, he married HARMONY REEVES,
daughter of Lawyer Reeves.

Children, all born in Southold. By his 1st wife:

    1. Benjamin Hull, born 10 July, 1779; married Abigail Booth.

    2. Barnabas, born 22 May, 1781; married 1. Anna Hawkins; 2.
    Sally Hawkins; 3. Sally Penny.

    3. Osborn, born 1783.

By 2. wife:

    4. James Reeves, born 2 July, 1789; married Amy Philips.

    5. Mehitabel, born 24 June, 1791; married Albert Goldsmith.

    6. Salter Storrs, born 12 Nov., 1793; married Harriet Case.

    7. Silas, born 13 Nov., 1794; married Mary Landon.

    8. Harmony, born 12 Sept., 1796; died unmarried.

    9. Thomas Jefferson, born 6 Nov., 1798; married Eliza Davids.

    10. Benjamin Franklin, born 8 Dec., 1800; unmarried; died in
    1820.

    11. Ezra L'Hommedieu, born 16 Nov., 1802; died young.

    12. David Austin, born 5 July, 1804; married Mary Conklin; no
    children.

Col. Benjamin Horton was a prominent and genial man, highly
respected. He was a Colonel of militia, and for many years a
Deacon, and also a Trustee, of the Southold Church. He was a man of
unblemished character. Griffin, in his Journal, says: "Col. Benj.
Horton was esteemed as an officer, and as a valuable member of
society, and a pillar of the church, as was his brother Gilbert, who
with much and deserved respect, held the rank of Major, and was a
Deacon of the church."


VII. CAPT. JAMES, son of Capt. Barnabas Horton and Susanna Bailey
(_Dea. James_, _Jonathan I._), born 1 Sept., 1757; married 1. the
WIDOW ELIZABETH WOOD, of Orange Co., N. Y., born 14 Feb., 1751.
She died of consumption, 27 March, 1787; married 2. 27 Dec., 1787,
ELIZABETH MILLIKEN of Southold, born 25 July, 1770. She died 17 July,
1822. He died 30 July, 1825.

Children. By his 1st wife:

    1. Elizabelh, born in Guilford, Conn., 14 March, 1783; died 25
    Sept., 1864; unmarried.

    2. Julia Ann, born in Southold, 16 May, 1785; married.

By his 2d wife:

    3. Hector Youngs, born 15 March, 1789; married Dency Tuthill.

    4. Mary, born 2 June, 1792; died 20 August, 1841; unmarried.

    5. James Edwin, born 1 March, 1797; married Rejoice Horton;
    died 7 July, 1843.

    6. Ezra, born 17 March, 1802; married 15 May, 1851, Hannah
    Bloomingburg.

    7. Comfort, born 27 August, 1809; died 23 Oct., 1809.

Capt. James Horton was a blacksmith and farmer; a faithful soldier
in the war of 1812-'15, bearing the commission of a Captain, and was
honored and respected by all who knew him.


IX. MAJ. GILBERT, son of Capt. Barnabas Horton and Susanna Bailey,
born in Southold, in 1763; married 7 Dec., 1784, KETURAH TERRY,
daughter of Jonathan Terry and Keturah Reeves, and born in Southold,
in 1766.

Children, all born in Southold:

    1. Jonathan Terry, married Mehitabel Horton, daughter of
    Benjamin Horton and Charlotte Wells.

    2. Keturah.

    3. Gilbert, born 6 Nov., 1799; married Lydia Bailey.

    4. Martha.

    5. Susan Bailey.

Maj. Gilbert was a farmer and a blacksmith; also a Major in the
militia, and a prominent man of fair reputation. He and his wife
were members of the Presbyterian Church, and he was a Deacon of the
church. He died 6 May, 1822, and his wife died 2 Feb., 1844.


X. JONATHAN, son of Capt. Barnabas Horton and Susanna Bailey, born in
Southold, Sept., 1765. "Dea. Jonathan, as he was familiarly called,
was the fifth son of Capt. Barnabas Horton of Hogneck, now Bay View,
L. I. He married MISS HALLOCK, with whom he lived about thirty
years in Mattituck Center. In early life he pursued the trade of a
blacksmith. In later years that of a farmer. He embraced religion
in early life, and united with the Presbyterian Church of Southold,
and was chosen a Deacon and an Elder. He filled these offices for
more than thirty years. For the greater part of his life he stood in
official stations, and by them he was much burthened. But in all his
civil, military, ecclesiastical and judicial relations, he was well
sustained and gave general satisfaction. The many and complex cares
wore upon his naturally good constitution, and at length led on to a
lingering consumption which called him to his grave, 19 Jan., 1819,
in the 54th year of his age.

His children were two sons and two daughters, viz.:

    1. Silas, who died under one year of age.

    2. Lydia, born in 1788; married John Clark.

    3. Rejoice, born in 1792; married James E. Horton, son of Capt.
    James Horton and Elizabeth Milliken.

    4. Barnabas Bailey, born 2 June, 1797; married Hannah
    Reeves."--_Letter of B. Bailey Horton._


I. WILLIAM, son of Dea. William Horton and Mehetabel Wells
(_William_, _Jonathan I._), born at Southold, about 1732. "We have
always heard him spoken of as 'Uncle' William. He was a large
landholder--owned and occupied the old house in which I was born.
It was taken down in 1854, and the house in which my father, Joseph
Hazzard Horton, now lives, was erected upon its site. It was built
by his grandfather, son of Jonathan I. He was thrice married, 1.
to PATIENCE CORWIN; 2. MARTHA GARDINER, a very pious lady. She was
confined to her bed a long time by sickness, previous to her death,
and by her request, the Rev. Elam Potter prepared her funeral sermon,
and read it to her previous to her death, which occurred in 1792;
married 3. MARY GOLDSMITH.

    "He occupied the east side of the old house, my grandfather,
    David Horton, the west side. My grandfather took the farm,
    and cared for 'Uncle' William's mother, who lived to be very
    aged. He always lived in good style, and kept several slaves.
    His third wife had the first woolen carpet ever known in that
    vicinity. A good stock of liquors was always found upon his
    board, and he allowed no wood except hickory to be used for
    fuel.

    "He was a gentleman who always rode in his chaise, and spent
    much of his time in fishing and other amusements, and the
    'William Horton Rock,' one of his most frequent fishing points,
    is famous to this day. He died without issue. His third wife
    survived him, and after his death she sold 'Tom' for $100, and
    'Hagar' for $70. She married JOSIAH VAIL--lived happily for
    many years in the cottage a little west of the old Barnabas
    Horton Homestead."--_Letter of D. P. Horton, 1872._


I. DEA. JOHN BUDD, son of Jonathan Horton and Mary Budd (_Dea. James_,
_Jonathan I._), born in Goshen, 19 August, 1762; married in 1796, to
HANNAH WEBB, born in 1776. She died 22 Jan., 1835. He died 22 Jan.,
1841. They were pious people, much esteemed by those who knew them.
He was for many years a respected Deacon of the Presbyterian Church
of Goshen.

Children, all born in Goshen:

    1. Elizabeth Webb, born 29 Dec., 1797; died unmarried.

    2. Sarah Ann, born 24 Dec., 1799; unmarried.

    3. Spencer, born 12 Nov., 1801; married Emily Lewis.

    4. Mary, born 5 Sept., 1803; unmarried.

    5. James, born 17 Dec., 1805; married Mary G. Cummins; moved to
    Iowa.

    6. Abigail, born 23 Nov., 1807; unmarried.

    7. Susan M., born 8 Jan., 1811; unmarried.

    8. Silas, born 14 May, 1813; married Mary A. C. Thompson; she
    died.


I. DEA. EZRA, son of Rev. Ezra Horton and Mary Hempstead (_Dea.
James_, _Jonathan I._), born in Union, Conn., 12 April, 1761; married
15 May, 1785, OLIVE MAY, daughter of Nehemiah May, of Holland, Mass.,
and Anna Lyon, of Woodstock, Conn., and born in Holland, Mass., about
1787. He died 31 May, 1848. She died 15 March, 1833,--both buried in
Union Cemetery.

Children, all born in Union:

    1. Thomas, born 8 Oct., 1786; died, unmarried, by drowning in
    Lake Erie, at Erie, Pa., in 1836.

    2. Erastus, born 6 Oct., 1787; married Tryphena Burleigh.

    3. Philena, born 12 June, 1789; married Salmon Strong.

    4. Gurdon, born 24 Feb., 1791; married Lucy Davidson.

    5. Lucinda, born 28 August, 1792; married Alfred Moore.

    6. Ezra, born 12 June, 1794; married Lucy Shepherd.

    7. Norman, born 5 Dec., 1795; married Esther Griggs.

    8. Chauncey, born 13 May, 1797; married Amanda Chaffee.

    9. Mary, born 17 Oct., 1798; married Elijah Kinney.

    10. Joseph, born 16 Feb., 1799; died 27 March, 1800.

    11. Almira, born 27 April, 1801; married Dwight Foster.

    12. Eli, born 6 May, 1803; married Catharine E. Ellsworth.

    13. Olive, born 1 April, 1805; married Elbert Foster.

    14. Laurens, born 21 March, 1807; married 1. Almira Coe; 2.
    Laura Bennet.

    15. Fidelia, born 5 Jan., 1809; married Thomas Moore.


II. ANNA, daughter of Rev. Ezra Horton and Mary Hempstead, born 13
April, 1763; married 30 Jan., 1783, ROBERT LAWSON, ESQ., son of Capt.
Thomas Lawson, of Union, and born at Union, 11 Jan., 1759. He died 19
April, 1835. She died 14 Dec., 1841.

Children, all born in Union:

    1. Margaret, born 3 Dec., 1783; married Nathan Howard, of
    Stockbridge, Mass.

    2. Susannah, born 3 June, 1786; died 8 Feb., 1857.

    3. Paul, born 31 March, 1789; married Lydia Holman, 9 Dec.,
    1824; died 27 Sept., 1871.

    4. Phebe, born 12 Feb., 1792; married Lyman Moore, 31 May,
    1827; died 3 April, 1868.

    5. Ira, born 4 July, 1796; married 1. Amy Remmington; 2. Anna
    Bartlett.

    6. David, born 8 July, 1800; married Polly Corbin, at
    Woodstock, 17 Nov., 1844.

    7. Esther, born 14 March, 1803; married John Moore, 28 Nov.,
    1827.

    And 8. Mary, born 14 March, 1803; married Roswell Blodgett, 19
    July, 1857.


III. MARY, daughter of Rev. Ezra Horton and Mary Hempstead, born
24 Dec., 1768; married 28 May, 1795, REV. CALVIN INGALS, of West
Stafford, Conn., and born at Pomfret, Conn., 22 Nov., 1760.

Children:

    1. Catherine, born at Union, 12 June, 1796; married William
    Thompson, 1 Dec., 1815.

    2. Mary, born at West Stafford, 11 June, 1800; married Milo
    Knight, 17 May, 1824.


VII. WILLIAM, son of Silas Horton and Mary Bull (_Dea. James_,
_Jonathan I._), born in Goshen, 2 July, 1771; married 21 Dec., 1793,
PHEBE RUMSEY, born 12 March, 1768.

Children, all born in Goshen, N. Y.:

    1. Sarah, born 12 Oct., 1794; died 15 August, 1795.

    2. Dr. William, born 16 May, 1796; married Maria Ryneck.

    3. Margaret, born 4 Oct., 1797; died 15 Jan., 1817.

    4. Charlotte, born 31 Oct., 1807; married Dr. Jerome Welles.
    Their children all died young.




_Sixth Generation.--Jonathan I._


II. ERASTUS, son of Dea. Ezra Horton and Olive May (_Rev. Ezra_,
_Dea. James_, _Jonathan I._), born in Union, Ct., 7 Oct., 1787;
married in Union, 28 April, 1808, by Samuel Crawford, Esq., to
TRYPHENA BURLEIGH, daughter of Jacob Burleigh and Lucy Laflin, and
born in Union; 25 March, 1788.

Children:

    1. Almyra Minerva, born in Union, 1 June, 1809; married Anson
    Ranney.

    2. Mary Emily, born in Union, 19 July, 1811; married Henry
    Francisco.

    3. Alonzo Erastus, born in Union, 24 Oct., 1813; married 1.
    Sally Millington Wright; 2. Sarah Babe.

    4. Ezra, born at Augusta, N. Y., 12 Feb., 1816; married.

    5. Nelson Burleigh, born at Smithfield, N. Y., 27 March, 1818;
    died in Wisconsin, 1858.

    6. Thomas de Lafayette, born at New Haven, N. Y., 16 Dec.,
    1824; died in Wisconsin, 17 Sept., 1850.

    7. Lucy Jane, born at Scriba, N. Y., 7 April, 1835; married W.
    W. Bowers, Esq.

Erastus Horton moved, in 1815, to Oneida, N. Y.; thence, in 1832, to
Scriba, N. Y., and next, in 1841, to Oakland, Jefferson Co., Wis.,
and finally to San Diego, Cal., where he and his wife both died, the
latter 5 March, 1873, the former 19 Feb., 1875.

Jacob Burleigh, son of John Burleigh, was born in Union, 5 June,
1756. John Burleigh was the first settler in Union; came there as
early as 1732. The family originally came from England. Lucy Laflin
was the daughter of John Laflin and Susanna Galbraith, and born 2
Feb., 1762. John Laflin came from Stowe, Mass., and bought land in
Union, Ct., 9 Sept., 1740.--See _Town Record of Deeds, I. Vol.,
page 146_. John Burleigh (Burley) is said to have emigrated to this
country with Gov. Belcher, of Mass., about 1740, when he was 14 years
old.--See _Obituary Records of Yale College, 1863_. The Burleighs
were connected by marriage with Gov. William Bradford, of Mass., and
many of them are celebrated as writers and speakers.

William H. Burleigh, the poet and editor, and Charles C. Burleigh,
the eloquent anti-slavery and temperance lecturer, are known
throughout the country.


III. PHILENA, daughter of Dea. Ezra Horton and Olive May, born 12
June, 1789; married 9 Jan., 1812, SALMON STRONG, ESQ., of Augusta, N.
Y., son of Alexander Strong, and born at Union, 1 March, 1784.

Children:

    1. Salmon, born at Union, 25 Oct., 1812; died 18 Jan., 1834.

    2. Philena, born at Augusta, N. Y., 14 Sept., 1815; married
    Oliver Frank Ranney, Nov. 9, 1836, and died without issue, 17
    Sept., 1838.

    3. Alvin, born 14 Feb., 1817; married Persis S. A. Powers, May,
    1838; died 5 Nov., 1866; she was killed by a horse running
    away, in 1875.

    4. Olive Adelpha, born 7 March, 1821; died 14 April, 1842;
    unmarried.

    5. Abigail, born 4 June, 1824; married Sept. 1, 1848, Oliver
    Brown Kinne; she died.

    6. Julius Alexander, born 20 Nov., 1826; married 8 April, 1849,
    Caroline Miranda Powers, daughter of Walter Powers.

    7. Warren Groves, born 30 Oct., 1832; married Sept. 22, 1857,
    Fanny Smith.


IV. GURDON, son of Dea. Ezra Horton and Olive May, born 24 Feb.,
1791; married 1 May, 1816, LUCY DAVIDSON, of Wales, Mass.

Children:

    1. Roysel, born 31 July, 1819; died 25 Sept., 1820.

    2. Theodore Dwight, born 3 Aug., 1821; died in the hospital,
    Washington, D. C., 13 March, 1863.

    3. Charles Riley, born 31 May, 1823; died 10 Sept., 1830.

    4. Herman M., born 23 Feb., 1825; died 28 Oct., 1825.

    5. Olive, born 23 April, 1827; died 27 August, 1830.

    6. William Morgan, born 6 July, 1829; married Mary Ann Williams.

    7. Francis G., born 6 July, 1829; died 26 Oct., 1833. (Twins.)

    8. Eli, born 23 Nov., 1834; resides at Oaks, Wis.

    9. Philena, born 22 Aug., 1838; married Williams; lives at N.
    Scriba, N. Y.

Gurdon Horton resides at a Shaker community, Albany Co., N. Y.


V. LUCINDA, daughter of Dea. Ezra Horton and Olive May, born 28
August, 1792; married 28 Jan., 1819, ALFRED MOORE, son of Thomas
Moore, born at Union, 16 Jan., 1796. She died 2 April, 1845, at
Smithfield, Madison Co., N. Y.

Children:

    1. Alfred Austin, born 26 April, 1820; married Mary McQien;
    died 21 June, 1871.

    2. Lucinda, born 3 June, 1822; died 6 Oct., 1826.

    3. Olive Louisa, born 25 Sept., 1824; died 16 Oct., 1826.

    4. Azubah Louisa, born 25 Sept., 1824; (Twins;) married William
    Baird; died 1 Aug., 1857.

    5. Thomas, born 20 March, 1827; died 20 July, 1828. 6. Lucinda,
    born 2 Dec., 1828; died 8 August, 1830.

    6. Ezra Horton, born 11 June, 1835; died 2 June, 1836.


VI. EZRA, son of Dea. Ezra Horton and Olive May, born 12 June, 1794;
married LUCY SHEPHERD, daughter of Whitmore Shepherd, of Hartford,
Conn., and born 18 March, 1822.

Children, all born in Union, where he resides:

    1. Jared, born 18 Jan., 1822; married Harriet Louisa Tredeau.

    2. Helen, born 5 August, 1823; married 1 Dec., 1843, Orrin
    Morse.

    3. Thomas, born 4 May, 1825; married 22 April, 1850, Delight
    Wales.

    4. Edwin, born in 1826; died in infancy.

    5. Elvira, born 30 July, 1828; married 27 Jan., 1851, Thomas P.
    Leonard.

    6. Edward Haskell, born 27 July, 1830; died 24 Dec., 1834.

    7. Ezra Mason, born 3 June, 1832; married 2 August, 1859, Jane
    Bartlett.

    8. Charles, born 3 July, 1834; married 23 March, 1859, Jane
    Frances Percy.

    9. Olive, born 27 June, 1836; married 10 April, 1860, Joseph R.
    Langdon.

    10. William Harrison, born 10 Oct., 1837; married 13 Feb.,
    1866, Armena Corbin; resides at Putnam, Ct.; no children.

    11. Robert Bruce, born 13 Oct., 1843; married 8 Nov., 1865,
    Mary E. Coon, daughter of Isaac Coon and Sabrina Hall; no
    children.


VII. NORMAN, son of Dea. Ezra Horton and Olive May, born 5 Dec.,
1795; married 27 Nov., 1823, ESTHER GRIGGS, daughter of Elisha
Griggs, and born 13 Jan., 1800, in Union.

Children:

    1. Harriet, born at Union, 22 August, 1824; married William
    Barron; died at Koskonong, Wis., 3 Sept., 1855.

    2. Carlo, born at Union, 13 Feb., 1826; died at Koskonong,
    Wis., 3 Nov., 1846.

    3. Norman Sanford, born at Union, 17 April, 1828; married 25
    Dec., 1855, Lucy Lewis.

    4. Elisha Griggs, born at Stockbridge, N. Y., 20 August, 1830;
    married Harriet Rawson.

    5. Ezra, born at Stockbridge, N. Y., 13 August, 1832; died 21
    April, 1862.

    6. Esther Ann, born at Stockbridge, N. Y., 26 July, 1836;
    married 15 Nov., 1860, Frank Delong.

    7. Sarah L., born at Stockbridge, N. Y., 6 Feb., 1839.

    8. Malvin M., born at Koskonong, Wis., 13 May, 1843; married 24
    Dec., 1863, Sophronia Cheesebro.

    9. Charlotte, born at Koskonong, 9 May, 1846; married 6 April,
    1866, Charles Wilby.

Norman Horton resides at Cold Spring, Wis.


VIII. CHAUNCEY, son of Dea. Ezra Horton and Olive May, born 13 May,
1797; married 30 Sept., 1824, AMANDA CHAFFEE, daughter of Amos
Chaffee, of Ashford, Conn., and Eunice Cummings, and born 4 July,
1801.

Children:

    1. Sophronia, born at Ashford, Ct., 5 Jan., 1826; married 17
    May, 1849, John J. Carver.

    2. Almira Amanda, born in Ashford, Ct., 20 Jan., 1828; married
    18 Oct., 1849, H. A. Coolidge; she died in the Spring of 1875.

    3. Emeline born at Ashford, 22 Sept., 1829; married 8 March,
    1854, Giles B. Cleveland.

    4. Mary Ann, born at Ashford, 1 Feb., 1831; married 16 May,
    1854, Rev. R. H. Clark.

    5. Cynthia Malvina, born at Stockbridge, 22 Feb., 1833; married
    3 Sept., 1857, Justus Williams.

    6. Chauncey Chaffee, born at Stockbridge, 24 March, 1835;
    married Elizabeth Hurlburt; died 24 July, 1870.

    7. Harvey L., born at Stockbridge, 26 April, 1837; married 18
    Oct., 1866, Clarissa Chapman, born at Smyrna, Chenango Co., N.
    Y.; no children.

    8. Eunice Angeline, born at Stockbridge, 30 Sept., 1839; died 4
    Feb., 1841.

    9. Gerrit Smith, born at Stockbridge, 9 Sept., 1841; died 3
    Sept., 1848.

Chauncey Horton died 15 Sept., 1848, at Stockbridge, Madison Co., N.
Y.


IX. MARY, daughter of Dea. Ezra Horton and Olive May, born at Union,
Ct., 17 Oct., 1798; married 31 May, 1821, at Union, ELIJAH KINNEY,
son of Eleazar Kinney, of Union, and born 25 May, 1797.

Children, all born at Union:

    1. Elisha Edwin, born 25 Sept., 1822; died 27 March, 1828.

    2. Mary Olive, born 12 Dec., 1823; died at Ft. Atkinson, Wis.,
    6 June, 1859.

    3. Harrison born 7 July, 1825; resides at Salem, Wis.

    4. Eli Edwin, born 20 July, 1827; resides at Salem, Wis.

    5. Decatur, born 30 Oct., 1830; died 18 Sept., 1832.

    6. Fidelia, born in Madison Co., N. Y., 25 Jan., 1834; married
    at Ft. Atkinson, Wis., 2 Sept., 1861, by Rev. D. C. Curtis,
    to JOSEPH ALAND SHEPHERD, son of James Shepherd and Elizabeth
    Joyce, and born in Melksham, England, 19 June, 1827. They
    reside in San Diego, Cal., and he is a lawyer, and also, the
    accomplished and very competent clerk and bookkeeper of A. E.
    Horton, Esq., of San Diego, Cal.


XI. ALMIRA, daughter of Dea. Ezra Horton and Olive May, born at
Union, 27 April, 1801; married at Stockbridge, N. Y., 31 March,
1825, DWIGHT FOSTER, of Ft. Atkinson, Wis., and born at Union, Ct.,
16 April, 1801; died 8 Feb., 1870; son of Edward Foster, a lineal
descendant of Samuel Foster and his wife Esther, who came from
England to Winham, Mass., as early as 1648.

Children:

    1. Alvin, born 31 July, 1828; died 8 Oct., 1846.

    2. Celeste, born 21 August, 1834; married 28 May, 1857, Henry
    Southwell.


XII. ELI, son of Dea. Ezra Horton and Olive May, born at Union, Ct.,
6 May, 1803; married KATHERINE E. ELLSWORTH, of East Windsor, Ct.,
daughter of Stoddard Ellsworth and Clarissa Alden.

Stoddard Ellsworth was a lineal descendant of Josiah Ellsworth, of
Windsor, son of John Ellsworth, who was a resident of Windsor as
early as 1646.

Children, all born at Stafford, Conn.:

    1. Stoddard Ellsworth, born 31 March, 1833; married Fanny C.
    Chase.

    2. Anna Ellsworth, born 17 Sept., 1835.

    3. Katie Elsie, born 6 Jan., 1837; married Ezra B. Bailey, of
    Franklin, Ct.

    4. Eli, born 24 August, 1839; died at Stafford, 3 March, 1841.

Eli Horton settled at Stafford, Ct., remained there till ---- ----;
then moved to Windsor Locks, where he now resides. His life has been
characterized by industry, economy and strict integrity. He has
been an active business man,--become wealthy, and has always shared
largely the respect and esteem of his fellow-men.

He was the inventor of an _improved chuck for a turning-lathe_, which
he patented, and manufactures at a great profit. He also invented a
machine for setting pins, for which he secured a patent, and for the
right, he has been offered $10,000.


XIII. OLIVE, daughter of Dea. Ezra Horton and Olive May, born at
Union, 1 April, 1805; died 19 April, 1855, married 30 April, 1830,
ELBERT FOSTER, of Stockbridge, N. Y., son of William Foster, Esq.,
Union, Ct., a descendant of Samuel Foster, of Chelmsford and Winham,
1648, and born at Union, 21 Oct., 1805. He died 1874.

Children:

    1. Olive Lorinda, born 7 May, 1831; died 30 May, 1835.

    2. Elbert Judson, born 3 Oct., 1834; died 30 March, 1836.

    3. Edward Burke, born 31 Dec., 1837; unmarried; lives at the
    old homestead.

    4. Olive Adelphia, born 10 May, 1842; married William G.
    Potter, of Anaheim, Los Angeles Co., Cal.


XIV. LAURENS, son of Dea. Ezra Horton and Olive May, born at Union,
21 March, 1807; moved to Smithfield, N. Y., in 1825, and to Oswego,
N. Y., in 1832; married 1. 11 June, 1834, ALMIRA COE, daughter of
Albert Coe, of Scriba, N. Y. She died 21 June, 1842. He married 2.
LAURA BENNET, of Kingston, Canada, who died 5 July, 1867.

He had two children by his 1st wife; 4 by his 2d wife:

    1. Emily, born at Scriba, N. Y., 21 May, 1835.

    2. William Henry, born at Smithfield, N. Y., 12 Feb., 1840;
    lives in San Francisco, Cal.; unmarried; now in company with W.
    W. Bowers in the Bee business.

    3. Almira, born at Oswego, N. Y., 8 March, 1850.

    4. Alvin, born at Oswego, N. Y., 1 April, 1853, died 8 May,
    1855.

    5. Nora, born at Oswego, N. Y., 27 August, 1857.

    6. Celia, born 8 Sept., 1861; died 20 Sept., 1863.


XV. FIDELIA, daughter of Dea. Ezra Horton and Olive May, born at
Union, Ct., 5 Jan., 1809; married at Smithfield, N. Y., 15 Sept.,
1835, THOMAS MOORE, of Smithfield, N. Y., son of Thomas Moore, of
Union, Ct., and born at Union, Ct., 6 Oct., 1806; died at Smithfield,
N. Y., 5 July, 1853. She died 13 June, 1844.

Children, born at Smithfield:

    1. Florilla, born 10 July, 1836; married Rev. Gordon Moore, son
    of Dr. James Moore, of Stockbridge, N. Y.

    2. Franklin, born 3 Nov., 1843; married 28 June, 1870, Mary M.
    Clark.


II. DR. WILLIAM, son of Wm. Horton and Phebe Rumsey (_Silas_, _Dea.
James_, _Jonathan I._), born in Goshen, N. Y., 16 May, 1796; died
in Goshen, at the age of 47 years. He married 9 April, 1817, Maria
Ryneck, of Schenectady.

Children, all born in Goshen:

    1. Silas Ryneck.

    2. Eugene.

    3. William.

    4. Egbert, died young.

    5. Emily, married J. J. Dobson.

    6. Margaret, married S. W. Teddel.

    7. Charlotte, married Jesse E. Moffat.

    8. Gertrude, married Brown C. Ward.

At the age of 18 the Doctor entered the junior class at Union
College, and he was soon distinguished for his close application to
his studies and strict regard for integrity. After his collegiate
course, he studied medicine, and attended medical lectures in the
medical department of the University of New York, during the palmy
days of Mitchell and Hosack, and like these eminent teachers, he
cultivated a taste for patient, cautious and bold investigation,
which afterwards made him so distinguished and successful in the
medical profession.

He commenced the practice of medicine at the residence of his father,
and he soon possessed the confidence of the people and secured a
large practice. He afterwards moved to the village of Goshen, and
soon became a prominent man among his medical brethren, and, though
young, he was nevertheless called upon to perform all the difficult
and grave surgical operations occurring in the village, and also in
the surrounding country. He was a good surgeon, but he was still
more celebrated as a physician. By his skill and honorable bearing,
he early secured the confidence of his medical brethren, and he was
frequently called in consultation with the aged and experienced
physicians of his day. He was remarkably successful in the treatment
of fevers, carefully studying their pathology at the bedside, and
also by post-mortem examinations, and in his views he was greatly in
advance of the profession of his day. He prepared with great labor a
work on fevers, but never published it. His pamphlet on Dysentery,
and his Geological Reports, are his only published works, and these
are sufficient to establish his reputation as a profound thinker and
a clear and powerful writer.

At the bedside he was cheerful, affectionate and soothing, and always
dignified. In his intercourse with his medical brethren he was always
honorable, and in harmony with the code of medical ethics.

In the midst of his career of usefulness as a physician, he turned
his attention to the study of botany, mineralogy and geology, and
soon became one of the most noted men of his day in these sciences.
His great delight in these studies led him, at the age of 37, to
relinquish the practice of medicine and devote himself wholly to
these sciences, and had he lived a few days longer, he would have
published a large work on these subjects. The Doctor was also fond of
archæological lore, and he was the first to attempt a genealogical
history of the descendants of our old progenitor, Barnabas, of 1640.
The old Horton roll of names and lineage which he got up some 60
years ago, was kindly furnished me by his son, Dr. William Horton,
of Craigville, N. Y., and has rendered me valuable assistance in
compiling the "Chronicles."

Dr. Horton was always rigidly moral, and never sacrificed principle
to expediency. He had early been taught to respect the teachings
of the Bible, and towards the close of his life he was led, with a
child-like faith, to believe the doctrine of salvation by grace, and
to publicly give himself to the Saviour, wondering and regretting
that he had so long remained ignorant of the beauty, simplicity and
sublimity of the Gospel scheme of salvation. Thus he died, in hope of
a glorious immortality.


IV. BARNABAS BAILEY, son of Dea. Jonathan Horton and Bethia Hallock
(_Capt. Barnabas_, _Dea. James_, _Jonathan I._), born in Southold,
2 June, 1797; married 22 January, 1824, by Rev. Lathrop Thompson,
to HANNAH REEVES, daughter of Benjamin Reeves and Anna Corey, and
born in Southold, 4 Dec., 1799. They reside in Cutchogue, L. I.,
are very pious, intelligent, worthy people--esteemed members of the
Presbyterian Church of Southold--and he has given much valuable
information in regard to his branch of the family.

Children, all born in Cutchogue:

    1. Jonathan Edwards, born 25 Dec., 1824; dedicated in baptism
    30 Dec., 1824, and died 31st of same month.

    2. Susan Evangelia, born 26 Feb., 1826; married Henry E. Wells,
    of Greenport.

    3. Andrew Philo, born 21 Sept., 1827; resides at Mattituck, L.
    I.

    4. Isabella Graham, born 19 Sept., 1831; married Henry Egbert
    Horton.


I. BENJAMIN HULL, son of Col. Benjamin Horton and Mehetabel Osborn
(_Capt. Barnabas_, _Dea. James_, _Jonathan I._), born 10 July, 1782;
married 14 Oct., 1802, ABIGAIL BOOTH, born in Southold, in 1784. He
was drowned in Plumb Creek, 16 Dec., 1810.

Children, all born in Southold:

    1. Philander, born 9 Aug., 1803; died young.

    2. Helen, born 18 June, 1805; married Cartwright.

    3. Benjamin, born 2 March, 1807; died young.

    4. Orange Hull, born 9 June, 1808; married Elmira Houston.

    5. Benjamin Hull, born 28 July, 1810; married Phebe West.


III. OSBORN, son of Col. Benjamin Horton and Mehetabel Osborn, born
in Southold, 5 Oct., 1787; married in 1812, SALLY PHILIPS.

Children:

    1. Mary Elizabeth.

    2. Benjamin.

    3. Theodore King.


IV. JAMES REEVES, son of Col. Benjamin Horton and Harmony Reeves (2d
wife), born in Southold, 2 July, 1789; married AMY PHILIPS, daughter
of Samuel Philips and Mary Corwin. He was long a magistrate, and a
prominent man in Southold.

Children:

    1. Lydia Rogers, married Franklin H. Overton.

    2. Lydia, married J. Halsey Tuthill.

    3. James.

    4. George.

    5. Fanny, married Oscar L. Case.

    6. Benjamin Franklin, married Ann Eliza Horton.


VI. SALTER STORRS, son of Col. Benjamin Horton and Harmony Reeves,
born in Southold, 12 Nov., 1792; married 18 Jan., 1823, by Rev.
Nath'l Huntting, to HARRIET CASE, daughter of Moses Case and Lydia
Goldsmith, and born in Southold, about 1794. He died 15 May, 1846.
She perished on the _Golden Gate_, which was burned on the Pacific,
27 July, 1862.

Children, all born in Southold:

    1. Salter Storrs, born 10 Nov., 1825; went to California about
    1849; died 24 June, 1855.

    2. Emma Harriet, born 5 Dec., 1827; married Dr. Frank Tuthill.
    She was assistant editor of the _New York Times_ for some
    years--went to California, became wealthy, and she is now
    (1874) in Europe, educating her daughter Anna.

    3. Sarah Elizabeth, born 8 March, 1830; married Blakey; resides
    in California.

    4. Jerusha Wickham, born 3 July, 1834. She is a teacher in
    Brooklyn, N. Y.

    5. Josephine L., born 16 Dec., 1838; died 9 Oct., 1838.

    6. Silas Austin, born 19 April, 1839; died in 1857.

    7. Henry Wickham, born 29 July, 1841.


VII. HON. SILAS, son of Col. Benjamin Horton and Harmony Reeves, born
in Southold, 13 Nov., 1794; married in Southold, 10 Jan., 1827, by
the Rev. Noble Thomas, to MARY LANDON, daughter of Elijah Landon and
Nancy Conklin, and born in Southold, 17 Dec., 1797. She died 19 Jan.,
1872. He is still living.

He was a member of the Legislature of New York in 1844--was Sheriff
of Suffolk Co., N. Y., in 1835. He has always been a prominent
man--is widely known, possesses an unblemished character, and
commands the respect and esteem of the community. His companion was
a lady of refinement, intelligence and piety, and her death was
deeply lamented, not only by a large circle of relatives and personal
friends, but by the whole community.

Children, all born in Southold:

    1. Nancy Landon, born 17 March, 1828; married 8 Jan., 1850, by
    Rev. J. Huntting, to David H. Horton.

    2. Martha Virginia, born 4 March, 1829; married 5 July, 1855,
    by Rev. E. Whittaker, to Rev. Carson W. Adams, of Wilmington,
    Del.

    3. Adaline Bethia, born in 1831; died in infancy.

    4. Angeline Margaret, born 17 March, 1833.

    5. Mehetabel, born 13 Aug., 1836; married by Rev. E. Whittaker,
    12 Nov., 1867, to Geo. W. Dayton, of Southampton, L. I. They
    reside in Brooklyn, N. Y.


VIII. HARMONY, daughter of Col. Benjamin Horton and Harmony Reeves,
born in Southold, 12 Sept., 1796. She was a maiden lady, greatly
distinguished for her hospitality and practical piety. She died some
years ago.


IX. THOMAS JEFFERSON, son of Col. Benjamin Horton and Harmony Reeves,
born in Southold, 6 Nov., 1798; married in Southold, 29 Jan., 1829,
by Rev. Jonathan Huntting, to ELIZA DAVIDS, daughter of Samuel Davids
and Nancy Wickham, and born in Southold, 22 May, 1804. He died 24
June, 1855. She is still living.

Children, all born in Southold:

    1. Henrietta, born 14 June, 1830.

    2. Mary Elizabeth, born 11 Jan., 1832; married Stuart T. Terry.

    3. Henry Davids, died young.

    4. Nancy Wickham, born 20 Jan., 1839. 5. Henry Davids, born 23
    Jan., 1845; married Miriam R. Osborn.


I. WILLIAM, son of Micah Horton and Bethia Tuthill (_William_,
_William_, _Jonathan I._), born in Minnisink, 25 Dec., 1757; married
1. HANNAH CROSSMAN; married 2. about 1791, ELIZABETH MASTERS.

Children, all born in Minnisink, Orange Co., N. Y.; by his first wife:

    1. Julia, born 30 July, 1782; died 29 July, 1807.

    2. Henry, born 20 Sept., 1783; died 6 May, 1848.

    3. Bethia, born 26 Dec., 1784; married Ferguson; moved to
    Pennsylvania; died 24 Feb., 1860.

    4. Hannah, born 7 Jan., 1786; died unmarried.

By his second wife:

    5. William, born 30 July, 1792; died 20 Sept., 1806.

    6. Susan, born 1 July, 1793; unmarried.

    7. Elizabeth, born 29 May, 1795; married Howell; died 12 May,
    1863.

    8. Mehetabel, born 29 July, 1798; married Joseph Doty; moved to
    Bradford Co., Pa.; died 6 Sept., 1863.

    9. Benjamin, born 5 March, 1809; married 27 August, 1832,
    Mehitabel Reeves.

    "Elizabeth Masters was born in Minnisink, 21 March, 1757, then
    a wilderness with but few inhabitants. When she was an infant
    the settlement was attacked by the Indians. The mother, with
    her child in her arms, fled, and made her way to a place of
    safety, just before being taken by the Indians. Her mother's
    sister, Mary Walling, was seized by them; and killed and
    scalped. Her grandmother, Susan Walling, in making her escape
    through the swamps, sank in the mire and mud. The Indians
    passed within a few feet of her, but did not discover her. She
    was found by her friends after the Indians left, and extricated
    almost dead, having remained in the mud almost one whole
    day."--_Letter of Henry Albert Horton, 1874._


III. HECTOR YOUNGS, son of Capt. James Horton and Elizabeth Milliken
(_Capt. Barnabas_, _Dea. James_, _Jonathan I._), born in Southold,
15 March, 1789; married in Southold, 28 Nov., 1812, by Rev. Lathrop
Thompson, to DENCY TUTHILL, born 29 Oct., 1791. She was a lineal
descendant of James Tuthill, brother of John, the Pilgrim. He died 6
August, 1825. She died.

Children, born in Southold:

    1. John Franks, born 15 Dec., 1813; married Phebe Maria Reeves.

    2. James Edwin, born 15 Jan., 1816; married Jerusha Worth.


I. JONATHAN GOLDSMITH, son of Capt. Jonathan Horton and Mary
Goldsmith (_Lazarus_ (_Lawrence_), _Jonathan_, _Jonathan I._),
born at the old homestead in Southold, 19 May, 1789; married 1. in
Southold, 9 Dec., 1813, by Rev. Jonathan Huntting, to HANNAH BROWN,
daughter of James Brown and Rhoda Youngs, and born 25 Nov., 1792;
died 6 Sept., 1822, without issue; married 2. 25 Jan., 1825, by Rev.
Jonathan Huntting, to RUTH AUGUSTA TERRY, daughter of James Terry
and Mary Booth, and born in Southold, 23 Nov., 1792; died 30 Oct.,
1869, childless; married 3. 27 Nov., 1870, by Rev. Ezra Youngs, to
the widow BETHIA HORTON OVERTON BROWN, daughter of Jonathan Overton
and Lydia Rogers, and born 14 Feb., 1804; died July, 1872. Her first
husband was Samuel Brown, Jr., by whom she had David Horton and Lydia
Catherine.

Jonathan Goldsmith Horton died 3 July, 1873, having no issue. He
lived all his lifetime in the "Old Castle" built by Barnabas I., in
1660. He was a man of good social disposition, of little business
capacity, of short, stout make, and rosy complexion. He bequeathed
the old Homestead to Rev. Mrs. Charles S. William, of Brooklyn, who
was formerly his foster-daughter Hannah, who married 1. Goldsmith.
Jonathan G. Horton was Drum-Major of the 107th Reg., N. Y. Militia,
in 1812, and Deputy-Sheriff of Suffolk Co., in 1814.


III. RENSSELAER, son of Capt. Jonathan Horton and Mary Goldsmith,
born 5 March, 1793; married at Southampton, L. I., 10 March, 1814, to
RUTH RACHEL HALSEY, daughter of Moses Halsey and Sarah Rogers, and
born 1795; died 6 May, 1868.

Children, born at Greenport, L. I.:

    1. Mary Caroline, born 17 July, 1819; married John Calvin
    Wells; had W. H. Harrison Wells; died 14 Jan., 1847.

    2. Ruth Elmira Halsey, born 29 May, 1830; died 29 August, 1845.

Rensselaer Horton is a plain, unassuming man; member of the
Presbyterian Church, and possesses good social qualities. He resides
at Greenport with his daughter, Mrs. S. E. Wells, who is a widow.


I. DAVID, son of "Good" Jonathan Horton and Mary Case (_Dea.
William_, _William_, _Jonathan I._), born in Southold, about 1777;
married about 1795, MARY CASE.

Children, all born in Southold:

    1. Joseph Hazzard, born 25 Jan., 1796; married Mehitabel Horton.

    2. William, married 1. Clara Manny; 2. Leura Horton, daughter
    of Joseph Horton.

    3. David Laurens, married Charlotte Jennings, daughter of
    Lazarus Jennings.

    4. Christiana, married Ezra Boisseau.

    5. Mary, married Samuel Hutchinson.

    6. Julia, married Mathew Osborn.

    7. Bethia, married Alvah Stratton Mulford. S. Harriet Newell,
    married Capt. Benjamin Cole.


III. SPENCER, son of Dea. John Budd Horton and Hannah Webb
(_Jonathan_, _Dea. James_, _Jonathan I._) born 12 Nov., 1801, in
Goshen; married 27 Feb., 1828, EMILY LEWIS; died 18 Oct., 1864.

Children, probably all born in Wallkill, Orange Co., N. Y.:

    1. Mary Jane, born 5 Jan., 1829.

    2. John William, born 8 August, 1830.

    3. Hannah Matilda, born 26 May, 1832.

    4. James Edwin, born 13 Jan., 1835. 5. Amzi Spencer, born in
    1838; died 28 August, 1849.


IV. BETHIA, daughter of Thomas Horton and Hannah Moore (_Thomas_,
_Dea. James_, _Jonathan I._), born in Goshen, Orange Co., N. Y.,
25 Sept., 1789; married 1. BENJAMIN C. MCCLURE in 1811; married 2.
WILLIAM DALES.

Children, all by her first husband, and probably all born in Hector,
N. Y.:

    1. John, born 17 July, 1811; died 10 April, 1862.

    2. Oliver Perry, born 17 Nov., 1813.

    3. Daniel, born 17 Sept., 1815; died 6 Feb., 1868.

    4. Thomas Horton, born 16 Oct., 1817.

    5. Almena Cully, born 18 Sept., 1822; died 19 Aug., 1827.

Under date of Feb. 22d, 1873, "Aunt" Bethia writes:

    "My Dear Friend and Cousin, Dr. Geo. F. Horton:

    "Yours of the 5th came to hand on the 10th inst. I was away
    from home when it came, or I should have replied sooner. I
    thought I would write to-day, and let you hear once more from
    your old cousin, now nearly 83 years old....

    "My father's name was Thomas Horton. My mother's maiden name
    was Hannah Moore. My grandfather's name was also Thomas Horton.
    He was a soldier in the Revolutionary War, and he and his
    brother-in-law, Nathan Moore, were taken prisoners when the
    British captured Fort Montgomery, and they were imprisoned in
    a vessel in New York Harbor, called 'a prison ship.' I never
    heard any other name for it. In that prison, by hard treatment
    and starvation, they were reduced so low that when set at
    liberty they both died before they got home. There were several
    other prisoners on that prison ship who lost their lives by the
    same cruel treatment.

    "My father had ten children--4 sons and 6 daughters--all lived
    to be heads of families. I have often heard my father speak of
    a certain cup with the name of a bank on it, where a large sum
    of money was left by his father. When that cup was taken to the
    bank they could draw money. He said the cup was lost and how
    much money with it he did not know."




_Seventh Generation.--Jonathan I._


I. JOSEPH HAZZARD, son of David Horton and Mary Case (_"Good"
Jonathan_, _Dea. William_, _William_, _Jonathan I._), born in
Southold, 25 Jan., 1796; married 28 Nov., 1816, by the Rev. Jonathan
Huntting, to MEHITABEL HORTON, daughter of Jonathan Horton and Mary
Goldsmith, and born in Southold, 17 June, 1796.

Children, all born in Southold:

    1. Orinda McGee, born 20 Feb., 1816.

    2. Jonathan Azariah, born 7 April, 1821.

    3. David Philander, born 31 Aug., 1827.

    4. Martha Day, born 10 Oct., 1836; married Jonathan Horton
    Boisseau.

Mr. J. H. Horton is well preserved--still active upon his farm--very
industrious, and always temperate. He and his family are esteemed
members of the Presbyterian Church.


BENJAMIN, son of William Horton and Elizabeth Masters (_William_,
_William_, _Jonathan I._), born in Minnisink, 5 March, 1809; married
27 Aug., 1832, to MEHITABEL REEVES, born 12 Jan., 1803.

Children, probably born in Minnisink, Orange Co., N. Y.:

    1. Susan, born 13 May, 1823; died 24 June, 1825.

    2. William, born 20 Feb., 1825; married 16 Nov., 1844, to
    Emeline S. Clark.

    3. Charles W., born 9 May, 1827; married 13 Jan., 1869, to
    Elizabeth E. Post, of Wawaganda, N. Y.

    4. Howell Reeve, born 24 Sept., 1829; married Julia Knapp.

    5. Henry Albert, born 29 Aug., 1832; married Fanny Owens.

    6. Mary Elizabeth, born 27 Oct., 1835; married Floyd Halstead;
    2. Isaac Andrews.


V. EZRA, son of Thomas Horton and Anna Cully (_Thomas_, _Thomas_,
_Dea. James_, _Jonathan I._), born in New York in 1818; married in
Clearfield Co., Pa., 18 Jan., 1841, by the Rev. Mr. Chapman, to
ELIZA WEAVER, daughter of John Weaver and Ruth Zimmerman, and born in
1820.

Mr. Horton was a farmer and a mason, and resided in Banks Township,
Indiana Co., Pa., where his children were born, and where his widow
now resides. He died 31 Oct., 1852.

Children:

    1. Samantha Catherine.

    2. Sarah Elizabeth.

    3. Ruth Ann.

    4. Hannah Amanda.

    5. Happylonia Amelia.

    6. John F.


VI. JUSTUS ELBERT, son of Justus Horton and Nancy Conklin (_Justus_,
_Barnabas Burnette_, _Barnabas_, _Jonathan I._), born on Shelter
Island, Long Island, 8 July, 1816; married at Southampton, L. I., 9
Dec., 1840, by the Rev. Hugh N. Wilson, to SOPHIA HALSEY, daughter of
Joshua Halsey and Experience Payne, and born in Southampton, 27 May,
1809.

Children:

    1. Nancy Halsey, born in East Hampton. L. I., 29 April, 1842;
    died 21 July, 1845.

    2. Charles Henry, born in East Hampton, L. I., 28 Feb., 1844;
    died 2 Aug., 1857.

    3. Ann Eliza, born at Greenport, L. I., 22 May, 1846.

    4. Schuyler Bogart, born at Greenport, L. I., March, 1849.

Justus E. Horton resides at Greenport. He is an elder in the
Presbyterian Church at Greenport--is a quiet, unassuming and pious
man. He and his son are undertakers, and dealers in all kinds of
household furniture, spring beds, mattresses, &c., Main Street,
Greenport, L. I.


I. JOHN FRANKS, son of Hector Youngs Horton and Dency Tuthill (_Capt.
James_, _Capt. Barnabas_, _Dea. James_, _Jonathan I._), born in
Southold, 15 Dec.; married in Southold, 19 Nov., 1836, by the Rev.
Abraham Luce, to PHEBE MARIA REEVES, daughter of Dea. Nathaniel
Reeves and Nancy Rogers, and born in Southold, 16 Nov., 1814.

Children:

    1. Nancy Rogers.

    2. Sophia Reeves; both died in infancy.

Mr. J. F. Horton and his wife are pious people--members of the
Presbyterian Church of Southold, and he is one of the ruling elders
of the church.


II. CAPT. JAMES EDWIN, son of Hector Youngs Horton and Dency Tuthill,
born in Southold, 15 Jan., 1816; married in Mattituck, 10 May, 1848,
by Rev. Abraham Luce, to JERUSHA WORTH, daughter of James Worth and
Nancy Tooker, and born in Mattituck, 7 Jan., 1820.

Children, born in Southold:

    1. Theodore Worth, born 7 Oct., 1849.

    2. Edwin Willis, born 20 Jan., 1854.

Capt. Horton commenced a sea-faring life when about 19 years old,
with Capt. Nathaniel Case, in the ship _Triad_. With a crew of about
25 men, they made a voyage of about nine months in the South Atlantic
Ocean, in latitude 35 to 40°, and longitude 10 to 20°. The voyage was
prosperous and the business paid well. He afterwards made a voyage
on the Indian Ocean and South Sea. He followed the business for 13
years, and during that time, he circumnavigated the earth four times.
It is a remarkable fact that, notwithstanding all the hazard and
danger of a sea-faring life, they never lost a man by accident or
sickness. They were all temperate men, and this had much to do with
their immunity from danger, sickness and death. The Captain quaintly
remarks that a half gallon demi-john of liquor was not used by the
whole crew, as a beverage, during any one of their voyages. During
the time he followed the sea he visited the Sandwich Islands, the
Society Isles, and also New Zealand. On the island of Owyhee he saw
the place where Capt. Cook was killed by the natives.

The last voyage was in 1846-47 and 48, and during this voyage the
Captain had command of the ship. He took but two gallons of spirits
with him on that voyage, and part of that he brought back with him.

The Captain is beautifully situated at Peconic, L. I.--has a
beautiful farm, which he knows how to keep in good order, and his
house, among the best in the township of Southold, is admirably kept
by his amiable and accomplished lady, and nearly every room in it is
richly ornamented with frames and cases of rare, costly and beautiful
sea-shells, most tastefully arranged, and all done by the delicate
hands of Mrs. Horton herself. Great skill and persevering effort were
required to accomplish so much.


I. MARY ELIZABETH, daughter of Osborn Horton and Sally Philips (_Col.
Benjamin_, _Capt. Barnabas_, _Dea. James_, _Jonathan I._), born at
West Hampton, L. I., 17 March, 1813; married 1. 13 Aug., 1833, by
Rev. Dr. Carroll, of Brooklyn, N. Y., to SAMUEL DRAPER, son of Pliny
Draper, and born in Pompey, N. Y., 26 Oct., 1808--had one son, viz.:
Geo. Horton Draper, born 23 March, 1835. Sam'l Draper died in New
Orleans, in Aug., 1839. She married 2. in Brooklyn, 25 July, 1849,
by the Rev. M. Jacobus, to JOHN LEWIS, son of Benjamin Lewis and
Cynthia Merritt, and born in Canterbury, Conn., 25 April, 1800. They
have:

    Osborn Horton Lewis, born in Greenport, L. I., 21 June, 1851.

Mr. John Lewis resides in Brooklyn; he was a merchant, but retired
from business about eight years ago. He is a prominent member of
Plymouth Church.


II. THEODORE KING, son of Osborn Horton and Sally Philips, born in
Brooklyn, N. Y., 12 Aug., 1819; married in Brooklyn, 3 Feb., 1847, by
Rev. Dr. Stone, to MARTHA ALETTA SMITH, daughter of Isaac N. Smith
and Clarissa Talmadge, and born in Ballston, N. Y., 14 Nov., 1823.

Children, all born in Brooklyn:

    1. Franklin Munn, born 15 March, 1848.

    2. Philip Hallock, born 14 Feb., 1850.

    3. Talmadge Baker, born 25 Jan., 1852.

    4. Benjamin Theodore, born 26 May, 1856.

    5. Grace, born 8 Nov., 1860.

    6. Howard, born 7 Oct., 1864.

Mr. T. K. Horton is a first-class merchant in the city of Brooklyn,
and is doing a large business. He visited Europe a few years ago,
and when in England he went to Mousely, the birthplace of the old
puritan, Barnabas. But he found no one there who knew anything of the
ancestry of Barnabas.

Mr. Horton is distinguished for his business capacity, industry,
strict integrity and honorable dealing with his fellow men. He is
highly esteemed as a citizen and Christian gentleman, and is a
liberal supporter of the Gospel.


III. BENJAMIN DE WITT, son of Osborn Horton and Sally Philips,
born in Brooklyn, N. Y., 8 Nov., 1823; married 15 August, 1859, by
Rev. Dr. Thrall, to AMANDA F. WELCH, daughter of William Welch, of
Rockland, Me. Mrs. Horton died 12 Feb., 1871, leaving two daughters:

    Florence Isabell and Elizabeth, who survived their mother but
    a few days, the former dying the 15th, and the latter the 22d
    of Feb., 1871. All died of malignant scarlatina, leaving the
    deeply-afflicted father and one son, viz.:--Frederick Osborn,
    born 4 July, 1860.

Mr. Horton married 2. in Brooklyn, 20 June, 1872, by Rev. Dr. Dillon,
to LYDIA A. HOLBROOK, daughter of Capt. Samuel Holbrook, of Portland,
Maine (a gentleman who weighs only about 300 lbs.), and Catherine
Rogers, of Liverpool, England, and born in Rockland, Me., 8 Feb.,
1851. Mr. Horton was formerly a partner in the dry goods business of
the old-established firm of Horton & Sons, of Brooklyn. He retired
from business some years ago, and now lives in princely style, with
his amiable and accomplished young wife in Brooklyn, 223 Clermont
Avenue. She is a member of the Episcopal Church.


II. MARY ELIZABETH, daughter of Thomas Jefferson Horton and Eliza
Davids (_Col. Benjamin_, _Capt. Barnabas_, _Dea. James_, _Jonathan
I._), born in Southold, 11 Jan., 1832; married in Southold, 26
June, 1856, by the Rev. Mr. White, to STUART TUTHILL TERRY, son
of Daniel Tuthill Terry and Eunice Case, and born in Southold, 20
July, 1831. They reside in Southold near Hallock's Landing. They
are both live members of the Presbyterian Church of Southold, and
he is one of the ruling elders, and they are both wielding a strong
influence for Christianity, and command the respect and esteem of
the community. They own a good farm beautifully situated. Mr. Terry
is a farmer, doing much of his farm-work himself, but still he finds
time for study and reading, and for some years past he has been
engaged in looking up, and collating and compiling the genealogy of
the descendants of Richard Terry I. He has the work in a good state
of forwardness, and much of it ready for the press. They have no
children.

In a recent letter, he says, "I can truly say that I am a descendant
of Barnabas Horton, the Pilgrim, although I do not bear his name. I
descend from him thus:

    "I. Stuart T. Terry; D. T. Terry; Esther Tuthill Terry;
    Christopher Tuthill; Henry Tuthill, who married Bethia Horton,
    grand-daughter of Barnabas I., being the 8th Generation.

    "II. Stuart T. Terry; D. T. Terry; Thomas Terry; Lydia Tuthill,
    daughter of Mehitabel Bradley Horton, who married Deacon Daniel
    Tuthill, and was a daughter of Capt. Jonathan Horton, son of
    Barnabas I., 7th Generation.

    "III. Stuart T. Terry; D. T. Terry; Eunice Case Terry; Israel
    Case, who married Zeruiah Horton, daughter of Joshua Horton,
    son of Barnabas I., 7th Generation."


V. HENRY DAVIDS, son of Thomas Jefferson Horton and Eliza Davids,
born in Southold, 23 Jan., 1845; married in New York City, 28 Dec.,
1868, by Rev. J. C. Annan, to MIRIAM REEVES OSBORN, daughter of
Thomas Osborn and Miriam Reeves, and born in Southold, about 1847.
They reside in Southold, and have--

    1. Thomas Osborn, born 2 June, 1870.


I. MEHULA, daughter of Barnabas Horton and Anna Hawkins (_Col.
Benjamin_, _Capt. Barnabas_, _Dea. James_, _Jonathan I._), born
at Mt. Hope, Orange Co., N. Y., 7 April, 1809; married NATHANIEL
CONKLIN; reside in Middletown, N. Y., and have--

    1. Charles.

    2. De Witt.

    3. Robert.

    4. Alice.--All born in Middletown.


X. FRANK, son of Barnabas Horton by his 2 wife, Sally Penny, born at
Mount Hope, 28 Sept., 1828; married in Brooklyn, N. Y., 21 Sept.,
1854, by Rev. Mr. Lewis, Rector of Trinity Church, Brooklyn, SARAH
JANE REYNOLDS, daughter of John A. Dayton and Adelia Trowbridge, and
born in New York City, 21 June, 1835.

Children, born in Brooklyn:

    1. Franklin Reynolds, born 17 August, 1856.

    2. and 3. Twins, Edwin and Ella, born 27 Oct., 1854.

Frank has a jewelry store in New York. His residence is in
Brooklyn. He is an out-spoken, intelligent man, apparently in good
circumstances.


XII. GILBERT, son of Barnabas Horton and Sally Penny, born at Mt.
Hope, 22 March, 1833; married in New York City, 8 March, 1855,
ELIZABETH PARDEE PERKINS, born in Ridgefield, Conn., 19 May, 1834.

Children:

    1. Mary Perkins, born in New York, 7 March, 1856.

    2. William Robinson, born in New York, 19 July, 1860.

    3. Jessie Pardee, born in New York, 12 August, 1862.

    4. Gilbert La Fayette, born in Elizabeth, N. J., 9 July, 1864.

They moved to St. Paul, Minn., where his wife and children now
reside, and where he died 10 Jan., 1873. He was a blacksmith by trade.


XIII. CAROLINE, daughter of Barnabas Horton and Sally Penny, born at
Mt. Hope, 10 Nov., 1837; married in New York City, 14 Sept., 1858,
by Rev. R. G. Dixon, to HENRY ALFRED BRADFORD, of New Jersey, son of
Judge D. Bradford and Ann Brightwell, and born in England in 1830. He
died in New Jersey, 7 April, 1866.

Children:

    1. and 2., David and Carrie, twins, born 6 July, 1859, in New
    Jersey; David lived to be thirteen months old; Carrie died
    twelve hours after her birth.

    3. David, born 23 Sept., 1860.

    4. Lizzie, born 30 July, 1862, both in New Jersey.

Mrs. Bradford, with her children, now resides in Brooklyn. She is
an intelligent and pious lady, a member of the Presbyterian Church,
and attending faithfully to the proper training and education of her
children.


I. ALMIRA MINERVA, daughter of Erastus Horton and Tryphena Burleigh
(_Dea. Ezra_, _Rev. Ezra_, _Dea. James_, _Jonathan I._), born at
Union, Ct., 1 June, 1809; died 17 March, 1860; married about 1830,
ANSON RANNEY. They have two children:

    Horton and Frances. Horton is now (1875), engaged as Inspector
    on the boundary line of Mexico.


II. MARY EMILY, daughter of Erastus Horton and Tryphena Burleigh,
born at Union, Ct., 19 July, 1811; married at Ft. Atkinson, Wis., 5
Jan., 1835, HENRY FRANCISCO, son of John Francisco, who came from
France, and born in Wellstown, Montgomery Co., N. Y., 20 March, 1811;
died 13 April, 1865, at Lake Mills, Wis., where he moved in 1845.

Children, 1, 2, 3, and 4 born in Augusta, Oneida Co., N. Y.; 5, 6,
and 7 born in Oakland, Jefferson Co., Wis.; 8 born at Ft. Atkinson,
Wis.:

    1. Philena Theressa, born 28 Sept., 1837.

    2. Henry Alonzo, born 2 Sept., 1839.

    3. Oscar Newton, born 16 Oct., 1841.

    4. John Day, born 25 Sept., 1843.

    5. Charles Francis, born 2 Sept., 1845.

    6. Horton Erastus, born 25 Nov., 1848.

    7. San E., born 29 Sept., 1852.

    8. Manley Clayton, born 25 Sept., 1858.

Mrs. Francisco now resides in San Diego, Cal. Her son, Charles
Francis, married Mary Evelyn Harvey, a niece of Gov. Harvey, of
Wisconsin.


III. ALONZO ERASTUS, son of Erastus Horton and Tryphena Burleigh,
born at Union, Ct., 24 Oct., 1813; married in Jefferson, Wis., 22
Dec., 1841, by Charles Rockwell, Esq., to SALLY MILLINGTON WRIGHT,
eldest daughter of William Cobb Wright and Sylvia Shelden, and born
in Russia, Herkimer Co., N. Y., 11 May, 1822. She died in Jefferson,
Wis., 29 Dec., 1846, leaving no issue. He married 2. at Keyport,
N. J., 29 July, 1861, by N. J. Beedle, Esq., to SARAH WILSON BABE,
daughter of Joseph Babe and Margaret Wilson, and born at Sing Sing,
N. Y., 3 Sept., 1824. They have no children.

We are indebted to Mr. J. A. Shepherd, of San Diego, for the
following interesting sketch of the life of Mr. A. E. Horton:


ALONZO E. HORTON.

    To a person acquainted with this gentleman our introduction
    would sound unfamiliar. "Here is A. E. Horton, of San Diego,"
    is all that he would allow to be said before he would be
    acquainted with a room-full of strangers. His motto is
    "action," and he has practiced it long and faithfully. He would
    leave ceremony in the lurch to talk _business_, and never think
    apology necessary; and we can think of no better rule to follow
    in writing what we know of him.

    His parents commenced their westward march in 1815, from
    Union, Ct., when Alonzo was two years old. Their home for the
    next four years was in Stockbridge, Madison Co., N. Y. Then a
    residence of two years in New Haven, Oswego County, where the
    first school lessons were taken under the direction of Miss
    Patty Woodward. When he was eleven years old the family reached
    the shore of Lake Ontario, in the town of Scriba, and moved
    into their new log-house.

    Then followed a year of muscular as well as mental discipline
    to the lad Alonzo. His father was suddenly bereft of sight by
    a severe inflammatory attack upon his eyes. School was two
    miles away, and to and fro our student made his morning and
    evening tramps in pursuit of knowledge. But he was the eldest
    boy of the household, and to him after study came toil. His
    evenings were spent in basket-making, which assisted largely in
    providing for the wants of the family. Thus for about a year he
    bravely essayed to lift the burden from his father's shoulders.
    From that time until he was half through his twenty-first year,
    he was first assistant wood-chopper on the home-lot, where they
    filled Oswego orders for hewed timber.

    He commenced business for himself by purchasing the remaining
    six months of his minority, agreeing to pay $50 to his father
    for that purpose. In eight months from that time he had been a
    grocery clerk at $12 a month; a lake sailor before the mast;
    and the last half of the time owner and captain of the "Wild
    Goose," a small vessel he had purchased, and put into the
    wheat trade between Oswego and Canada. His marine speculation
    proved quite a profitable one for those days; he sold out and
    closed business, paid all his obligations, and had $300 in his
    pocket. During the winter of 1834-'35 he learned the trade
    of a cooper, and his specialty for a time was flour-barrels.
    Then the city of Oswego elected him constable, by the largest
    majority given to any man on the Whig ticket. The young officer
    was too kind-hearted to make his office pay, and he lost all he
    made in trade by failing to enforce payment from poor debtors
    according to law. Out of office he invested $7 in a contract
    for land, and in a month made $336 on the venture. Young Horton
    had another strong point, which was often brought into play in
    the inevitable wrestling-matches incident to town-meetings of
    long ago. His 130 pounds was a most animated and unmanageable
    load for his largest companions to handle, and at "square
    hold" he was the acknowledged champion of the township. Yet he
    was pronounced a consumptive by Dr. Van Schaick, with the
    advice "Go West--it may do you good; but I think it probable
    you will not live more than six months." He took the doctor's
    prescription, and went West.

    [Illustration: A. E. Horton]

    He landed in Milwaukee, in May, 1836, and soon after was one
    of a party of six on the _trail_ for the Rock River country.
    There were no roads, and the best inn to be found was to
    turn in their blankets under an oak tree. But the mosquitoes
    promptly presented bills for their lodgings. After thirty
    nights camping, they reached the cabin of Mr. and Mrs. Janes,
    the parents of the now lively city of Janesville. Theirs was
    the only house, and that about 10x16 feet in size, but immense
    in hospitality. After partaking of the latter, the party (among
    whom were the names of Churchill, Odell, Ogden and Jewett)
    continued on until reaching the foot of Koskonong Lake, where
    each one made a quarter-section claim, built a cabin, and went
    back to Milwaukee. One of those claims, at least, was left for
    another pre-emptor, with the cabin thrown in, for Horton was
    soon too busy to think farther about it. Others waited, with
    hands in pockets, for the approaching land sales; he took up
    the shovel and worked on the new streets. Money was worth too
    much to be wasted by idleness. A working-man always gains more
    profitable knowledge than a loafer. His capital was labor and
    observation, and out of these were to be wrought a fortune.

    Of the two hotels then in the new city, he had selected the
    Bellevue for his lodgings. Two bits a night paid for his share
    of a room, and his own blankets were bed and bedding. His
    room-mates were sometimes as many as sixteen; and his rule was
    "early to bed." Two nephews of the Receiver at the Land-Office
    came in one evening full of an important secret which they must
    talk over. The young fellow who worked on the road was the
    only one retired, besides themselves, and his hearty snoring
    satisfied them that he was beyond hearing. Their authority was
    official, so no danger of mistakes. The bills of the Michigan
    State Bank and Farmers' and Mechanics' Bank would be taken
    at par at the land sales, and consequently would be as good
    as gold, and worth the premium of at least 10 per cent. They
    would quietly gather it in for the occasion. The next day our
    sleeper was _not_ shoveling on the street. He was learning the
    whereabouts of holders of certain styles of Michigan currency,
    and was soon doing a brisk exchange business with his New York
    Safety Fund Savings, amounting to $300. At night he was in
    his room, happy in the prospective addition to his funds; but
    there were two other persons there who thought they had little
    success in securing the coveted currency. It was unaccountable,
    for were they not the only individuals to whom the secret had
    been imparted?

    The sales of Government land commenced the following day, and
    Horton was present with his receivable funds. He bought no
    land, but his money was in immediate and continuous demand.
    Many times during the sale he retired to replenish his bank
    stock by exchanging bank notes with numerous parties according
    to previous arrangement. The enterprise was a financial
    success. Here his quick perception did him good service, for he
    was marked as a prize by a thieving gang. One of them formed
    his acquaintance on the evening of a profitable day, and tried
    to learn his intended movements. Yes, he would soon go to his
    lodging-place; but that night he concluded it would be best
    _for him_ to remain where he was, and he did so. But another
    young man, about his age, and similarly dressed, was waylaid on
    the very route Horton was expected to travel, caught, gagged
    and carried off to a safe place for robbery. In the dark they
    had captured the wrong man, as his empty pockets and the cut of
    his coat proved on careful examination.

    Thinking the country a safer place, he went out three miles, to
    where his uncle, Dwight Foster, was superintending one of the
    first saw-mills built in Wisconsin. While there another attempt
    was made to entrap him. One, Robinson, came from town to inform
    him that a man named Johnson would take a named sum for some
    land which he had talked of buying. He must be sharp if the
    trade was secured, and should take his money with him for that
    reason. Horton promptly decided to take _more_, and quietly
    deposited a loaded pistol in each pocket of his hunter's
    coat. His caller carried a suspicious-looking hickory cudgel,
    altogether too cumbersome for a cane, and explained that he had
    been tracking a wild animal, which he hoped they could identify
    by the marks. In a low, marshy place, a little off their road,
    its tracks were most clearly made. Descending to the spot
    indicated, he urged Horton to follow him, and determine what
    sort of creature had crossed there. Instead of complying Horton
    presented a pistol, told his man if he found no tracks there
    as described, he would shoot him without further notice. The
    villain was outwitted, and preferred returning to town a short
    distance in advance of the ready weapons of his captor. It was
    ascertained that Johnson knew nothing of the fellow's errand,
    and that the only foot-prints about the miry trap in which
    Robinson had hoped to catch his game, were made by himself.
    He was next heard of, a few years afterwards, in the Iowa
    penitentiary, committed for horse-stealing.

    Returning to the East Mr. Horton passed the time until 1840,
    in various places and employments, the last being at St.
    Mary's with the American Fur Co. His first western _home_ was
    purchased in the town of Oakland, Wis., that year, to which
    locality his father and family followed not long after. In a
    few months more he had established himself matrimonially and
    happily. Three years engaged in miscellaneous trade, land
    figuring as the principal item, he became a cattle-dealer.
    He bought his beef in Illinois, did the largest part of the
    driving, and averaged two trips in five weeks. He furnished his
    customers so satisfactorily in his own and adjoining counties,
    that in one year his original capital of $150 was increased
    to $4,000. In St. Louis he saw profits in land-warrants, and
    bought sufficient to locate 1,500 acres of land. Out of this
    investment grew the village of _Hortonville_, in Outagamie
    Co., Wis. His first town was buried in the woods, and he went
    to work with eight men to cut a four-mile road to his proposed
    mill-site. By the time he had lots to sell, he was sawing
    lumber with which to improve them. The prices and payment for
    material was of small account with the proprietor. Houses
    must be built, whether settlers had money or not. In a year
    from the completion of the mill, 150 people were _living_ in
    Hortonville, and at the end of two years sold out the remaining
    property, being $7,188 better for his enterprise.

    In 1851, Mr. Horton went to California for the first time.
    Mining-stock was his first business experience, and it cost
    him $1,000. It was his _last_ transaction in that line also.
    Spent a few months at mining in El Dorado and Placer Counties,
    and then opened a store at Pilot Hill. There also he devised
    and constructed a ditch 6½ miles in length, purposing to
    supply the miners with water as well as other commodities. At
    the end of a year he had sold out his water-works and other
    interests for $6,500, of which sum he had used the larger
    portion in his improvements. Next he was trading in gold-dust
    on account of Adams' Express Co., realizing usually $30 a
    day in commissions. A day or two before the failure of his
    employers, in 1853, a friend suggested to him, that his money
    remaining in their office at ----, might be safer in his own
    pocket. It was "a word to the wise," and before noon the next
    day he had ridden 30 miles, and much to the dissatisfaction of
    the agent, drawn his money from the safe of the company. His
    next care was for his friends hard at work in the mining-camps
    and elsewhere. To all whom he could reach he gave the hint,
    and thousands of dollars were secured, by his prompt efforts,
    to those who had earned the money by the hardest of toil. The
    following day the express offices were closed, and payments
    suspended. He was in capital standing in the mining districts
    where he had operated, and resumed the business with himself
    for banker. He bought at the mines and sold in the towns, often
    with a profit of $4.50 per ounce. He was a man of _dust_, and
    with his native adroitness, managed to carry valuable deposits
    of the precious article upon his person without a single
    mishap. Sometimes his outer garments would scarcely secure him
    other than the slightest attentions. His landlords were afraid
    their bills would be unpaid, except his fares were collected
    in advance. He arrived one evening at one of the rough taverns
    of those times, with treasure enough about him to incite the
    gamblers about him to worse crimes for its possession. His good
    clothes were covered with very dirty overalls and woolen shirt.
    In calculating Yankee phrase, he interrogated the proprietor as
    to his accommodations for man and beast, and the reasonableness
    of his _charges_. Card-playing ceased for a time in the general
    astonishment, then the party shouted with laughter at the
    green chap from Connecticut. They bantered him to play off a
    Yankee trick. He showed them how to eat the mush and milk,
    which he had stipulated for as his supper, and with a yawn of
    indifference to the jests made at his expense, he signified
    his desire to sleep. The door of his room was without lock or
    bolt, but the landlord laughingly assured his guest, that he
    would be the last man anybody would think of robbing. He awoke
    next morning from an undisturbed sleep, and at breakfast-time
    was up and _dressed_. He passed over a small package of _dust_
    in settlement, which was accepted and pronounced all right.
    Word was sent to the stable, his horse could _now_ be brought
    out--his bill was paid.

    "Mister, want to _buy_ some more o' that stuff?"

    "Yes;" replying with a surprised look.

    "How much?"

    "Suppose I can buy all _you_ have to sell."

    "Will you treat this 'ere crowd ef you can't?"

    "Yes, I will, and _yeou_, too."

    Diminutive sacks of dust were handed to the wondering host, and
    the coin counted out in return. By the time $2500 had exchanged
    hands, the landlord's $20-pieces were exhausted, and our Yankee
    had played the "trick" with a $250 pile still in reserve. The
    laugh came in then louder than the night before; and as the
    glasses were being filled the buyer of gold-dust remarked,
    irreligiously, that he would have robbed the fellow himself if
    he had known how he was playing him.

    The business was as suitable as profitable to the man, and so
    well did he manage it, that his profits for the last quarter
    of 1854, were $1000 per month. Another success was in a novel
    undertaking for those golden days. He went prospecting for
    ice-fields, and finding a favorable situation 25 miles above
    Georgetown, in El Dorado County, put up 312 tons of the cool
    mountain product. A few months afterwards the speculation
    returned him eight thousand dollars.

    In March, 1856, among the passengers on board the steamship
    _Cortez_, for Panama, was Mr. Horton. Soon after their arrival
    at the isthmus, the memorable rising of the natives took place.
    The mob would have had easy work in carrying out the plan of
    outrage and plunder, but for the prompt and courageous action
    of our friend and a few of his companions. Among nearly 200
    people from the steamer, who were dining at the hotel where
    the attack was made, there were but three with fire-arms. The
    announcement that the rioters were coming, caused a stampede
    from the table to the upper rooms. On bursting into the house,
    the leading ruffians were halted at the stairway by _Capt._
    Horton and his aids, and as the attempt to ascend was made,
    a few effective shots drove the assailants into the street.
    Immediately the reign of terror and bloodshed began.

    "Please, sir, save my father!" was an appeal from a little
    boy, as he pointed to where a swarthy assassin stood taking
    aim at a defenceless man. The American's revolver was leveled
    and fired just in time to render the other's shot harmless by
    his own fall. Others were protected by the same faithful hand
    and stern purpose as they retreated towards the only place of
    safety--the American steamer. Arriving at the water, the crowd
    rushed on to a small steam-tug, and but for the quick thought
    and bold action of our leader, would have been overtaken by
    the pursuing mob. He took command, gave his orders to fasten
    to a lighter near at hand, transferred his passengers to the
    larger craft, and signalled the engineer to start for the
    _Cortez_. Fortunately, he was obeyed without question, and a
    more successful trip was never made by the _Wild Goose_ and her
    commander on Lake Ontario! His money loss was some $10,000, but
    he could count untold gain in the saving of lives, and to this
    day he refers to his participation in those fearful scenes with
    satisfaction not to be calculated in coin.

    On their arrival in New York, Mr. Horton was named by his
    fellow-passengers as the person to proceed to Washington, to
    make a statement of the occurrences at Panama, in response to
    a call from the authorities to that effect. From that time
    until his marriage in 1861, he made several journeys between
    Washington and Wisconsin, as a witness in the riot case and a
    claimant for damage. His testimony was important in deciding
    the demand for reparation made by the United States upon the
    Government of New Grenada. His own claim was most strenuously
    and successfully opposed by the Spanish commissioner. He
    had done too much injury to his people to have _his_ losses
    repaid. _All_ other claims were not so objectionable; and as
    a compromise in the final settlement, the man who deserved
    a General's commission for courage and strategic skill, and
    liberal pay for the personal risks taken in his defense of
    American citizens, was stricken from the list of creditors.

    Starting again for the Pacific coast soon after the civil war
    was began at Sumpter, he included a trip to British Columbia
    in his travels. At Lewiston, on the Columbia River, he began
    to think of the outfit needed for the journey. His effects
    inventoried one gold pencil, a single-barreled pistol, and $15
    cash. To his brother-in-law, Mr. Charles Wright, who was one
    of his traveling companions, and much better provided with
    equipments, he intimated that he must do a little _trading_
    before he could proceed. In half a day he had exchanged his
    jewelry and pistol for a pair of horses; sold one of them again
    at a clean profit of $50; paid $15 for a third; and early in
    the afternoon returned to camp with two good animals, fine
    revolver, saddles, blankets, and about $60 in money. Trading
    was his special success--speculation invariably a failure. For
    a distance of 1400 miles through the northern wilderness, that
    Lewiston revolver brought down most of the game upon which the
    company feasted by the way. In the Salmon River country, trees
    and the feathery snow furnished most comfortable bedding. They
    sold their surplus provisions to a British customs officer
    on the route, at a profit of 66 per cent. At Lytton, they
    replenished their stock, and loaded five of their horses with
    saleable goods. They found a market at Williams' Creek for
    flour at $1.00 per pound, and for bacon at $1.25.

    Arriving at the Cariboo mining district, the party bought the
    "Darkey's Claim." It was a rich prospect, and they worked the
    lead until snow closed the operations, taking an ounce of gold
    from a bucket of dirt. At this time the claim would have sold
    for thousands of dollars. After wintering at Victoria they
    returned to make their fortunes, securing a force of workmen
    at $10 a day. After working four feet further their riches
    "jumped" and vanished beyond recovery. Not a hundred feet off
    three miners were taking out 75 ounces per day, and others
    doing equally well. But the "Darkey" had "run out," and the
    owners accepted $200 for their lost treasure. Mining has had no
    attraction for him to this day.

    When Mr. Horton reached San Francisco again, his financial
    condition would have caused a "panic" in any other man. In
    capital he was "broke," but in nothing else. Then as now, there
    were the strength and elasticity of steel in the man's spirit
    and nerves. He first tried a stall in the market; but the
    dollar a day realized caused him to retire from business in a
    short time. Buying and selling a ranch in Rio Visto concluded
    his real-estate operations in that part of the State. He was
    a dealer in second-hand furniture in San Francisco, when he
    first heard San Diego discussed as one of the great cities of
    the future. The value of its harbor and climate was the topic
    of the evening at a private literary gathering where he was
    a frequent listener. What he had heard so impressed itself
    in his thoughts that he could not sleep that night, until he
    had jumped out of bed, and satisfied his inquisitiveness by a
    careful study of the map of California. The situation seemed
    revealed as a prize especially for him. He determined to secure
    it, and--slept.

    Here was the opportunity long sought and never despaired
    of. In three days the stock was disposed of, and the store
    closed. The proceeds were small--perhaps less than $500. No
    one among his friends could be induced to join him in his
    visionary enterprise. Alone, on the 6th of April, 1867, Mr.
    Horton reached San Diego. It exceeded his expectations, and
    obstacles in the way of purchase were quickly swept aside by
    his indomitable energy. The few people there were having such
    a quiet time, that they had become indifferent to the charm
    of office. The first work was to get an election called for
    Trustees, those officers only being empowered to sell lands
    belonging to the city. Candidates were provided and elected.
    The desired property was legally advertised and sold, and on
    the 11th day of May following, a deed of some 750 acres was
    made. Thirty-six cents an acre, and but one bidder! Mr. Horton
    was the happy purchaser, and little did he care that his
    investment was looked upon by most of the 150 people then in
    San Diego, as a wild expenditure of money.

    The work of advertising the new city was immediately commenced.
    The tin case in which he carried the first map of "Horton's
    Addition to San Diego," through the streets of San Francisco,
    is carefully treasured in his office, and could not be bought
    for its weight in gold. Horton was everywhere, and irresistible
    in glowing dreams of the future of his city. His labors were
    untiring from the time he measured off blocks and lots with a
    tape-line, and laid out the streets for his workmen to clear
    from cactus and sage-brush, until the winter of 1869-'70, when
    his sales averaged $15,000 a month. From $3,000 in 1867, his
    receipts increased to nearly $85,000 in 1869. His money built
    up the place as fast as received, and it is safe to state, that
    $300,000 have been used by him for that purpose.

    This is but an imperfect sketch of Mr. Horton's business
    career in San Diego. He has richly earned the sobriquet of
    "Father of the City," and the respect and best wishes of his
    fellow-citizens. His faith and works have been the _life_ of
    the place, when crops failed for want of rain, railroad hopes
    were delayed, or croakers insisted on publishing its death as
    a certainty. Long may Horton live, and great the prosperity he
    may witness in the pet child he has so bravely matured--HIS OWN
    SAN DIEGO!

    Mr. Horton is a man of liberal views, and has always been
    an ardent and practical advocate of political and religious
    freedom. To the poor, both black and white, he has been a
    faithful friend. To-day, an honest man in homespun receives as
    cordial a grasp of his hand, as the man in broadcloth and fine
    linen. That he has the sympathy and respect of the masses of
    his fellow-citizens, was manifested in a most gratifying manner
    in the vote given him in his county for State Senator, in the
    contest of 1871. His opponent was the Democratic chief of the
    county, that had never before failed to give a large Democratic
    majority. San Diego honored the Republican Horton with a
    majority of 50, and he only failed in election by the adjoining
    county (forming the balance of the district) voting as usual,
    largely Democratic. Socially he is a warm-hearted, affable
    gentleman, true to his friends, and watchful of those who play
    him false. Temperate in his habits, and always active in mind
    and body, his health is as robust, and his personal appearance
    as young as most men at 50 years. Last and best tribute to his
    character, is the kind care for his parents in their helpless
    age, and that love for his MOTHER, which to her was the dearest
    and last earthly tie broken in her departure to the better Home.


VII. LUCY JANE, daughter of Erastus Horton and Tryphena Burleigh,
born at Scriba, N. Y., 7 April, 1835; married at Hebron, Jefferson
Co., Wis., about 1857, WILLIAM W. BOWERS, Esq., born at Whitesboro',
N. Y., 20 Oct., 1834. They reside in San Diego, Cal.

Children, all born in San Diego:

    1. Grace, born 6 Dec., 1869.

    2. Vine, born 17 July, 1873.

Mr. Bowers moved from Whitesboro' to Oakland, Wis., 30 Nov., 1851,
and thence to San Diego, 30 Sept., 1869. He is engaged in the bee
business, which, it is said, pays remarkably well.


VI. WILLIAM MORGAN, son of Gurdon Horton and Lucy Davidson
(_Dea. Ezra_, _Rev. Ezra_, _Dea. James_, _Jonathan I._), born at
Stockbridge, Madison Co., N. Y., 6 July, 1829. Enlisted 4 Sept.,
1861, in Co. B.. 81st Reg. N. Y. Volunteers--was honorably discharged
19 Jan., 1865, by reason of wounds received in action. He married
8 April, 1848, in Oswego, by the Rev. Dr. Voltair, to MARY ANN
WILLIAMS, daughter of Charles Williams and Ann Kenally. He is now
living at North Scriba, Oswego Co., N. Y., and is a cooper by
occupation.

Children, all born in Oswego Co., N. Y.:

    1. Lucy Jane, born 8 April, 1849.

    2. Wm. Henry, born 31 Dec., 1852.

    3. Caroline Kate, born 7 Sept., 1859.

    4. Charles Gurdon, born 5 May, 1861.

    5. Anna Mary, born 14 May, 1863.

    6. Janette, born 8 Aug., 1867.


I. JARED, son of Ezra Horton and Lucy Shepherd (_Dea. Ezra_, _Rev.
Ezra_, _Dea. James_, _Jonathan I._), born at Hartford, Ct., 18 Jan.,
1822; moved to Albany, N. Y., in 1840, where he now resides. He is
a butcher by occupation; married at Albany, 30 Dec., 1847, by Rev.
Joseph Belnap, to HARRIET TREDEAU, daughter of Alaxcie Tredeau and
Sary Ann Percy.

Children, all born in Albany:

    1. Ezra Tredeau, born 29 Oct., 1850.

    2. Clara Ann, born 18 May, 1853.

    3. Frederick, born 16 May, 1855.

    4. Alaxcie, born 27 Sept., 1857.

    5. Edward Grant, born 4 Nov., 1866.

    6. Harriet Louisa, born 19 July, 1871.


II. HELEN, daughter of Ezra Horton and Lucy Shepherd, born 5 Aug.,
1823, at Union, Conn.; married at Union, Conn., 1 Dec., 1843, ORRIN
MORSE, of Putnam, Conn., born in Union, Ct., 27 Jan., 1822, son of
Jedediah Morse, born 14 Sept., 1780, son of Nathan Morse, of Ashford,
Ct., born at Sturbridge, in 1734, son of David Morse, of Sturbridge,
born in Medfield, in 1709, son of David Morse, born in 1683, son of
Ezra Morse, born 5 Feb., 1644, the sixth child of John Morse, born in
England, in 1611, and had eleven children, who was the son of Samuel
Morse, of Medfield, the common ancestor of the Morses in New England,
who was born in Old England, in 1585.

Children:

    1. Sanford, born 27 April, 1845; died 14 June, 1845.

    2. Helen Jennette, born 9 June, 1848.

    3. Seth Herbert, born 14 May, 1852.

    4. Delpha Adela, born 23 July, 1864.


III. THOMAS, son of Ezra Horton and Lucy Shepherd, born in Union,
Ct., 4 May, 1825; married in Union, 29 April, 1850, DELIGHT WALES,
daughter of Aaron Allen Wales, of Union, who was a lineal descendant
of Dea. Nathaniel Wales, who came from England in 1635, in the ship
_James_, of Bristol, a fellow-passenger with Rev. Richard Mather.

Children:

    1. Emma, born at Union, 2 Aug., 1852; died at Stafford, Ct., 1
    Oct., 1867.

    2. Ellsworth Wales, born at Stafford Springs, 4 Jan., 1862.

They reside at Stafford Springs.


V. ELVIRA, daughter of Ezra Horton and Lucy Shepherd, born in Union,
30 July, 1829; married 27 Jan., 1851, THOMAS P. LEONARD, of Putnam,
Ct., son of Daniel Leonard, of Union, and born 22 Aug., 1828.

Children, born in Putnam:

    1. Ida Elvira, born 29 April, 1853.

    2. Eugene Thomas, born 26 March, 1857.

    3. Lucy Maria, born 2 Feb., 1861.


VII. EZRA MASON, son of Ezra Horton and Lucy Shepherd, born in Union,
3 June, 1832; married in Union, 2 Aug., 1859, JANE BARTLETT, daughter
of Daniel Bartlett and Lucy Paine, and born in Union, about 1834.

Children, all born in Union, where he resides:

    1. Balzamond Mason, born 15 March, 1862.

    2. Emmons Burr, born 17 Sept., 1863.

    3. Lucy Paine, born 11 May, 1865.

    4. and 5. (twins,) Mary Percy, born 24 June, 1868; died 28
    June, 1870; Martha Priscilla, born 24 June, 1868; died 16 July,
    1868.

    6. Knowlton Howard, born 16 Aug., 1871; died 29 June, 1872.


VIII. CHARLES, son of Ezra Horton and Lucy Shepherd, born in Union,
3 July, 1834; married in Albany, N. Y., 23 March, 1859, JANE FRANCES
PERCY, daughter of John Percy and Eliza Ann ----, and born in Albany;
reside in New York City.

Children:

    1. Florence Effie, born in Albany, 4 April, 1860.

    2. Frances Charlena, born in Albany, 13 Nov., 1863.

    3. John Charles, born in Brooklyn, N. Y., 16 May, 1867.


IX. OLIVE, daughter of Ezra Horton and Lucy Shepherd, born in
Union, 27 June, 1836: married 10 April, 1860, JOSEPH R. LANGDON, of
Woodstock Valley, Ct., born in Yorkshire, Eng., in 1834; died 29
July, 1872.

Children:

    1. Essie E., born 21 Feb., 1867; died 26 Aug., 1872.

    2. Lucy Evelyn, born 13 April, 1870.


[Illustration: E. H. CLEVELAND, M. D.]

IV. ELISHA GRIGGS, M. D., son of Norman Horton and Esther Griggs
(_Dea. Ezra_, _Rev. Ezra_, _Dea. James_, _Jonathan I._), born at
Stockbridge, N. Y., 20 Aug., 1830; married 1 April, 1855, HARRIET
RAWSON, daughter of Emery Rawson and Julia Ruggles, and born in
Linden, Vt., 2 Sept., 1832.

Children, born at Whitewater:

    1. Minnie I., born 9 April, 1856.

    2. Emery Norman, born 22 June, 1859.

    3. Hattie May, born 2 March, 1870.

They reside at Whitewater, Wis. The Doctor is a skillful physician,
doing a fair business.


VIII. MELVIN MORRIS, son of Norman Horton and Esther Griggs, born at
Koskonong, Wis., 13 May, 1843; married at Koskonong, 24 Dec., 1863,
SOPHRONIA CHEESEBRO, born at Koskonong, Jan., 1843.

Children, born at Cold Spring, Wis., where he resides:

    1. Leo Leslie, born 1 Sept., 1864.

    2. Everett Ezra, born 1 June, 1867.


I. SOPHRONIA, daughter of Chauncey Horton and Amanda Chaffee
(_Dea. Ezra_, _Rev. Ezra_, _Dea. James_, _Jonathan I._), born at
Ashford, Ct., 5 Jan., 1826; married 17 May, 1849, JOHN J. CARVER, of
Stockbridge, N. Y. No children.


II. ALMIRA AMANDA, daughter of Chauncey Horton and Amanda Chaffee,
born in Ashford, Ct., 20 Jan., 1828; married 18 Oct., 1849, H. A.
COOLIDGE. She died in Feb., 1875.

Children:

    1. Edward Horton, born 13 July, 1850, in Cazenovia, N. Y.; died
    in 1854.

    2. Mary Frances, born 31 May, 1858, in Litchfield, Ill.

    3. Kate, born 27 Nov., 1860, in Litchfield, Ill.


III. EMELINE, daughter of Chauncey Horton and Amanda Chaffee, born in
Ashford, Ct., 22 Sept., 1829; married in Stockbridge, Madison Co., N.
Y., 8 March, 1854, to the REV. GILES BUTLER CLEVELAND, born 12 Aug.,
1825, in Durham, Greene County, N. Y. They have one son, viz.:

    Arthur Horton Cleveland, born in the city of Philadelphia, 10
    Feb., 1865.

Mrs. Cleveland graduated from the Ladies' Department of Oberlin
College (Ohio), in 1853, and from the Woman's Medical College of
Pennsylvania, in 1855. She was elected to the Chair of Anatomy in
that College, in 1857, which she held until 1862, when she was
transferred to the Chair of Obstetrics. This she still occupies, and
is also a member of the Board of Corporators.

In 1860, at the solicitation of a number of philanthropic ladies
of Philadelphia, who had in view the establishment of a Hospital
for Women and Children, Professor Cleveland went abroad for medical
study, and to make herself acquainted with the arrangements and
management of hospitals. She entered the School of Obstetrics in
connection with the _Maternite_ of Paris, and after receiving the
diploma of that institution, found ready access to the wards and
lecture-rooms of other hospitals, and was allowed free inspection of
their administrative departments.

On her return, she was chosen Resident Physician of the then
chartered Woman's Hospital of Philadelphia, which position she
continued to fill for seven years. She has been one of the Managers
of the Hospital from its organization, and a member of the Consulting
Board since her retirement from the office of Resident Physician.

Professor Cleveland has made a number of important surgical
operations, and is the first woman, so far as known, who ever
performed ovariotomy. In her second case, a tumor, weighing fifty
pounds, was successfully removed, the patient making a good recovery.


IV. MARY ANN, daughter of Chauncey Horton and Amanda Chaffee, born in
Ashford, Ct., 1 Feb., 1831; married 16 May, 1854, the REV. RICHARD
HOLTON CLARK, born in Carolina Centre, Tompkins Co., N. Y., about
1828.

Children:

    1. Mary Frances, born in Stockbridge, N. Y., 20 May, 1856.

    2. Emma, born in Nelson, N. Y., 5 Aug., 1858.

    3. Charles Richard, Cuyler, N. Y., born 17 Nov., 1862.


V. CYNTHIA MALVINA, daughter of Chauncey Horton and Amanda Chaffee,
born in Stockbridge, N. Y., 22 Feb., 1833; married 27 Aug., 1857,
JUSTUS WILLIAMS, of Ft. Atkinson, Wis., born at Cazenovia, about 1830.

Children:

    1. Edith Virginia, born at Jefferson, Wis., 25 June, 1859.

    2. Herbert Leslie, born at Ft. Atkinson, Wis., 28 April, 1868.


VI. CHAUNCEY CHAFFEE, son of Chauncey Horton and Amanda Chaffee,
born in Stockbridge, N. Y., 24 March, 1835; married 18 Jan., 1859,
ELIZABETH HURLBURT, born about 1837.

Children, all born in Stockbridge, where he resided:

    1. Eddie, born in 1860; died young.

    2. Anna P., born 20 Oct., 1863.

    3. Nellie, born in March, 1865; died in 1869.

    4. Harry, born 1868; died in 1868.


I. STODDARD ELLSWORTH, son of Eli Horton and Katherine E. Ellsworth
(_Dea. Ezra_, _Rev. Ezra_, _Dea. James_, _Jonathan I._), born at
Stafford, Ct., 31 March, 1833; died 24 Jan., 1873, at his residence,
Windsor Locks, Ct. He was a man of excellent character, and talent as
a machinist; married 14 Nov., 1865, FANNY E. CHASE, daughter of John
Chase and Emma Greenleaf, and born 16 March, 1816, at Lyme, N. H.

Children, all born at Windsor Locks:

    1. Myra Elsie, born 16 April, 1866.

    2. Katie Elvise, born 30 Nov., 1867.

    3. Sydney Ellsworth, born 28 Oct., 1869.

    4. Alice Chase, born 18 May, 1872.


III. KATIE ELSIE, daughter of Eli Horton and Katherine E. Ellsworth,
born at Stafford, Ct., 6 Jan., 1837; married 14 Dec., 1870, EZRA B.
BAILEY, born at Franklin, Ct., about 1835. They reside at Windsor
Locks and have one son, viz.:

    Phillips Horton, born 24 Aug., 1872.


REV. WILLIAM HORTON THOMPSON, son of William Thompson and Catherine
Ingals, and grandson of the Rev. Calvin Ingals and Mary Horton (_Rev.
Ezra_, _Dea. James_, _Jonathan I._), born at West Stafford, Ct., 7
July, 1818. He fitted for college at Morison Academy, Mass., in 1840,
under the care of Rev. Charles Hammond. Entered Amherst College,
and remained there three years. In 1844, he entered the Theological
Seminary at Columbia, S. C., whence he graduated, in 1847. Settled
first in the ministry at Atlanta, Ga. In 1849, he had charge of a
mission church in Augusta, Ga. He was settled in Chattanooga in
1851, and in Bolivar, West Tennessee, for twelve years. In 1865, he
was settled in Columbus, Kentucky, and in July, 1873, he moved to
Lexington, Miss., where he is now engaged in the ministry.

He married 11 May, 1852, MARY JANE SAFFORD, daughter of Rev. Henry
Safford, of Greenboro, Georgia, and Eliza Burr, daughter of Dr.
William Burr, of Philadelphia, who was a nephew of President Burr, of
Princeton College, N. J. The Safford family is large, and includes
many persons of distinction. The Hon. A. B. Safford, of Cairo, has
written the history of the family, and says he has written to every
penitentiary in the United States, and not a Safford can be found on
their records.

Children:

    1. William Henry, born in Bolivar, Tenn., 14 Dec., 1855.

    2. Mary Eliza, born in Bolivar, Tenn., 11 Jan., 1857.

    3. Catherine Alethea, born in Bolivar, Tenn., 20 Jan., 1860.


I. SUSAN BAILEY, daughter of Gilbert Horton and Lydia Bailey (_Maj.
Gilbert_, _Capt. Barnabas_, _Dea. James_, _Jonathan I._), born at Bay
View, Southold Township, 11 July, 1820; married at Bay View, 12 Dec.,
1839, by the Rev. Ralph Smith, to HIRAM TERRY, son of Jesse Terry and
Hannah ----, and born in Southold.

Children, all born in Southold:

    1. Marietta A., born 4 April, 1841; died 19 April, 1865.

    2. Charles E., born 4 Dec., 1843.

    3. George I., born 9 August, 1850; died 28 August, 1868.

    4. Lydia Bailey, born 18 Nov., 1854; died 27 Nov., 1869.


II. GILBERT WILSON, son of Gilbert Horton and Lydia Bailey, born at
Bay View, 31 March, 1824; married in Cutchogue, L. I., 13 Dec., 1848,
by the Rev. Ezra Youngs, to PHEBE ANN YOUNGS, daughter of Richard
Youngs and Deborah Tuthill. She died 27 Nov., 1858, without issue,
and he married 2. in Bridge Hampton, L. I., 12 Nov., 1862, by the
Rev. Thomas Gray, to JANIE MARIA HALSEY, daughter of Daniel S. Halsey
and Amanda Smith, and born in Bridge Hampton, about 1826.

Children, both born at Bay View:

    1. Gilbert Wilson, born 9 April, 1865.

    2. Daniel Halsey, born 5 Dec., 1871.

Mr. Horton has a farm and a very pretty situation at Fair View,
Southold Township, and he owns the celebrated old cask in which were
brought over a portion of the household goods of the old puritan,
Barnabas, facetiously called "Uncle Barney's Money Pot," which it was
said, he brought over with him, filled with _gold_ and _silver_.


I. NANCY LANDON, daughter of Hon. Silas Horton and Mary Landon (_Col.
Benjamin_, _Capt. Barnabas_, _Dea. James_, _Jonathan I._), born in
Southold, 17 March, 1828; married 8 June, 1850, by Rev. Jonathan
Huntting, to DAVID HAWKINS HORTON, son of Barnabas Horton and
Mehetabel Osborn, and born at Mt. Hope, N. Y., 25 Feb., 1817.

Children:

    1. Adelaide Landon.

    2. Josephine.

    3. Marietta.

    4. Mary Landon.


IV. JAMES EDWIN, son of Spencer Horton and Emily Lewis (_Dea. John_,
_Budd_, _Jonathan_, _Dea. James_, _Jonathan I._), born in Wallkill,
Orange Co., N. Y., 13 Jan., 1835; married in Newburgh, 24 Oct.,
1806, by Rev. John Brown, D. D., to SARAH SNEEDEN HATHAWAY,
daughter of Col. Odell S. Hathaway and Helen Maria Birdsall, and born
in Newburgh, 11 June, 1836.

Children, all born in Newburgh:

    1. George Hathaway, born 19 August, 1863.

    2. Ida Cushman, born 31 May, 1866.

    3. Edith Alden, born 19 August, 1868.

    4. Hiram Falls, born 28 Aug., 1869.

    5. Helen Marie, born 25 April, 1874.

Mr. Horton is a successful merchant in the city of Newburgh. He and
his wife are both members of the Methodist Episcopal Church, and
highly respected in the community.


I. BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, son of Jonathan Terry Horton and Mehetabel
Horton (_Maj. Gilbert_, _Capt. Barnabas_, _Dea. James_, _Jonathan
I._), born in Southold; married 22 Nov., 1848, MARY FRANCES TERRY,
daughter of Gilbert Terry and Nancy Hedges, and born in Southold,
about 1826.

Children, all born in Southold:

    1. Benjamin Carpenter.

    2. Hetty Eliza.

    3. Franklin Terry.

    4. Edward Barton.

I. SILAS RYNECK, son of Dr. William Horton and Maria Ryneck
(_William_, _Silas_, _Dea. James_, _Jonathan I._), born on the old
Horton farm, between Goshen and Craigville, Orange Co., N. Y., 26
June, 1820; married 7 August, 1859, at Philipsport, N. Y., by Rev.
A. Ackerly, to SARAH JANE DECKER, daughter of Jacob J. Decker and
Lucretia Cameron, and born near Ellensville, Ulster Co., N. Y., 21
July, 1836. One child, viz.:

    Maggie B., born at the old homestead, 10 Dec., 1862.

Silas R. Horton has been for twenty years a noted fire-insurance
agent, and he is still engaged in this business for some of the best
companies in the country. Mr. Horton, like his father, possesses a
fine taste for scientific studies. He is well-known as a geologist
and mineralogist. A few years ago he discovered a new and rare
mineral, which has since been named by Prof. George J. Brush, of Yale
College, "Horton-olite."


II. EUGENE, son of Dr. William Horton and Maria Ryneck, born 27
Sept., 1824; married 7 June, 1867, ANNA T. HALEY.

Children:

    1. Eugene B., born 20 Dec., 1872.

    2. William R., born 13 July, 1874.

Mr. Horton is a noted agriculturalist; resides on the old homestead
farm, which has now been in the possession of the Hortons for five
generations.


III. DR. WILLIAM, son of Dr. William Horton and Maria Ryneck, born
in Goshen, opposite the old Court-House, 10 April, 1827; married
in Blooming Grove, N. Y., 8 Dec., 1853, by the Rev. Austin Craig,
to SARAH LOUISA TOWNSEND, daughter of Sylvanus Smith Townsend and
Elizabeth Rogers, of New York City.

Children:

    1. Eugenia Townsend, born 18 March, 1858.

    2. Elizabeth Emily, born 21 May, 1867.

Dr. Horton, in his letter, after giving his record as above, remarks:
"Our old home has been in the Horton name for five generations. It is
characteristic of the Horton Family to be fixed to one spot."




_Eighth Generation.--Jonathan I._


DAVID PHILANDER, son of Joseph Hazzard Horton and Mehitabel Horton
(_David_, _"Good" Jonathan_, _Dea. William_, _William_, _Jonathan
I._), born in Southold, 31 Aug., 1827; married 3 Nov., 1857, by the
Rev. B. Pillsbury, to CAROLINE RUSHMORE, of Hempstead, Queens Co., L.
I., daughter of Benjamin Rushmore and Elizabeth Clowes, and born in
Hempstead, 16 March, 1829.

Children, all born in Brooklyn, N. Y.:

    1. Caroline Rushmore, born 1 March, 1863.

    2. Mary Goldsmith, born 9 Dec., 1865.

    3. George Ellis, born 12 Aug., 1868.

Prof. D. P. Horton became a resident of Brooklyn in 1849, as a
student in music, both vocal and instrumental. In December, 1856, he
was employed to give instruction in music in the Public Schools of
the city, and also to large classes of private pupils. Soon after
this, he commenced leading the music in the Churches, and in this
employment he has been engaged ever since, devoting his time during
the week to giving instruction in the Public Schools, and leading
the music in one or more Churches every Sabbath.

He possesses fine social as well as musical qualities, and he and his
companion are both live members of the Presbyterian Church, and their
influence for good is largely felt in the Church and congregation,
and also wherever they are known. They have also given very valuable
assistance in looking up the history of the Horton family--putting
into my hands family records which Prof. Horton had been gathering up
for some years past--and it has given me much pleasure to make their
house my home, and enjoy their generous hospitality whenever I have
had occasion to visit their beautiful city.


I. CAPT. WILLIAM HENRY, son of Henry Horton and Caroline Rogers
(_Benjamin_, _Micah_, _Moses_, _William_, _Jonathan I._), born in
Southold, about 1837; married about 1865, LYDIA CATHERINE BROWN,
daughter of Bethia Horton Overton and Samuel Brown, Jr., and born in
Southold, about 1840. In June, 1872, she was living with her mother,
who was the third wife of Jonathan G. Horton. The Captain was then in
Boston, having just returned from a voyage to the East Indies.




"ADDENDA."




_Eighth Generation.--Caleb I._


II. STEPHEN OVERTON, son of Hiram Horton and Mary Rose, born at
Chester, N. J., 21 July, 1811; married 21 May, 1833, by Rev. Oliver
Bryant, to DENCY COOPER HORTON, daughter of Daniel Horton and Esther
Terry.

Children all born at Chester:

    1. Alma Cornelia, born 28 April, 1834; married Henry Clay
    Randolph.

    2. Hiram, born 1 May, 1836; died 2 Sept., 1837.

    3. Emma Elizabeth, born 25 June, 1838; died 27 June, 1839.

    4. Stephen Lester, born 4 Nov., 1841.

    5. Esther Emily, born 28 Oct., 1846.

Stephen O. Horton is a farmer, also a contractor on public works. He
resides at Plainfield, N. J., and he is a prominent man, possessing
good business capacities, and is highly respected.


III. ELIZABETH CELINA, daughter of Hiram Horton and Mary Rose, born
at Chester; married 1. SILAS OLNEY, and had children as follows:

    1. Corydon, now a real estate agent in Kansas.

    2. Alonzo Schuyler, resides in Dover, N. J.

    3. Mary Rose.

    4. Hiram Horton, resides in Iowa.

Silas Olney died, and she married CAPT. LEMON, being his 2d wife. She
was thrown from a wagon a few years ago and instantly killed.


V. ANNA, daughter of Maj. John Horton, Jr., and Nancy Miller,
(_John_, _Israel_, _Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Caleb I._), born at
Terrytown, 19 Nov., 1825; married at Terrytown, by the Rev. Mr.
Brown, to DR. JAMES DE WOLF, son of Giles M. De Wolf and Anna
Spaulding.

Children:

    1. Mary, married Albert E. Strong, merchant at Vail, Iowa.

    2. John H.

    3. Geo. H.

    4. Anna.

    5. James.

Dr. De Wolf practiced medicine successfully at Terrytown, Mehoopany
and Meshoppen, Pa. About 1850 he moved to Carroll Co., Ill. He was a
member of the Legislature of Illinois, and also County Superintendent
of Common Schools of Carroll County, Illinois. He now resides at
Vail, Iowa--is a Magistrate and Postmaster. Dr. De Wolf and his wife
embraced Christianity in early life, and they, together with their
family, are intelligent and active members of the Presbyterian Church.


VI. LYDIA MILLER, daughter of Maj. John Horton and Nancy Miller, born
at Terrytown, Pa., 31 Dec., 1827; married at Terrytown, 30 June,
1852, by Rev. Mr. Huntington, to REV. SAMUEL FISHER COLT, M.D.,
son of Samuel Colt and Phebe Andress, and born in Paterson, N. J.,
19 April, 1817. His classic course was at Lafayette College; his
theologic at Princeton Seminary. He was ordained by the Presbytery of
West Jersey--was for many years the Pastor of the Presbyterian Church
of Wyalusing, Pa. He founded and built the Susquehanna Collegiate
Institute at Towanda, and he is now pastor and practising physician
at Laporte, Pa.

Children:

    1. Caroline Vansann, born at Towanda, 12 Aug., 1853.

    2. Samuel Fisher, born at Towanda, 12 Aug., 1855.

    3. Frederika Rowena, born in Wysox, Pa., 4 Oct., 1857; married
    Earnest V. Ingham, editor of the _Press and Standard_, Laporte,
    Pa.

    4. John Horton, born at Pottsville, Pa., 17 Jan., 1859; died 19
    Jan., 1862.

    5. Horace Austin, born at Pottsville, 2 Dec., 1860.

    6. Harriet Elmer, born at Pottsville, 24 April, 1863.

    7. Susan Kearcher, born at Pottsville, 15 Nov., 1864.

    8. William Montelius, born at Troy, Pa., 5 Sept., 1866.

    9. Louisa Josephine, born at Towanda, 7 March, 1868.

    10. and 11. Joseph and John (twins), born at Towanda, 7 June,
    1870; died 24 and 25 July, 1870.


ROWENA NANCY, daughter of Maj. John Horton, Jr., and Nancy Miller,
born at Terrytown, 4 Dec. 1832; married 16 Aug., 1874, by Rev. A.
M. Duboe, of the Baptist Church, Dennison, Iowa, to CAPT. WILLIAM
FAMILTON, born in Harrison Co., O., 22 Sept., 1825. The Captain is
a very generous-spirited and energetic man, engaged as an agent of
Iowa Land Company, in the sale of real estate, receiving a liberal
salary. Mrs. Familton was long a teacher; but for a few years past
she has kept a fashionable millinery store in Dennison, and has
a large business, giving good satisfaction to her customers. She
embraced Christianity in early life, and is an esteemed member of the
Presbyterian Church.




_Tenth Generation.--Joseph I._


III. OMAR FLAVIUS, son of Elijah Horton and Eliza Hiney (_Isaac S._,
_Elijah M._, _Elijah_, _Richard_, _John_, _David_, _Joseph I._),
born in Sheshequin, Pa., 24 Aug., 1853; married in Towanda, Pa., 26
Dec., 1873, by Rev. M. C. Dean, to JEMIMA ELLIOTT, daughter of Isaac
Elliott and Olive Billings, and born in Illinois 23 April, 1856. They
reside at North Towanda, Pa.

    "My oldest brother, Alvin Le Roy, was born in Sheshequin, 2
    Aug., 1846. He was married at Susquehanna Depot, Pa., 25 Feb.,
    1871, by Rev. L. W. Peck, to Charlotte Maria Tinsman. My 2d
    brother, Levi Christopher, was born 2 April, 1848; died 13
    Jan., 1849. 4. Orrin Day, my brother next younger than myself,
    was born 17 Dec., 1850; died 8 Jan., 1864. 5. The next brother,
    George Harris, born 23 Nov., 1855, and my youngest brother, Guy
    Earl, was born 16 June, 1866."--_Letter of O. F. Horton, 1874._




    LINES

    ON THE DEATH OF COUSIN NANCY T. HORTON.


      The years are passing, but their changes
        Do not allay our pain;
      For oft in the hush of the twilight hour
        We hear her loving voice again.

      We hear her step on the floor beside us,
        We turn to greet her there,
      And as we would take her outstretched hand
        We only meet--a vacant chair.

      We wander with noiseless step
        Again in her silent room;
      There are her pictures and her books,
        But, alas! they're shrouded in gloom.

      No speaking eye is there to see
        The beauty of earth or sky;
      No melody cheers our sadness
        But the song bird's floating by.

      We think of the pupils whom she loved,
        And taught with a teacher's pride;
      They too will fondly remember
        The days spent by her side.

      Oh death! why did you rob us
        Of the treasure we held so dear?
      Why did you enter again our household
        Claiming another victim here?

      Why was the work so quickly ended,
        Of a short but useful life?
      For she lived not for herself alone
        Amid this busy world of strife.

      "Simply to the cross she clung"
        As she stemmed the rolling tide--
      With full assurance in her faith,
        We know she lived and died.

      The tears in our eyes are gathering,
        But we brush them sadly away;
      For afar in the distant future,
        We see an unclouded day.

      Yes, there we shall bind again,
        These sundered broken bands;
      There with the dearly loved and lost,
        We'll meet with clasping hands.

      We rejoice in the promise left us,
        That she has only gone before,
      For soon we shall win _our_ crown of joy,
        Across the vale on the other shore.

  E. J. P. S.

  ROCHELLE, ILL., April, 1876.




_Eighth Generation.--Caleb I._


MARIA MINNIS HOMET, M.D., daughter of Samuel Minnis and Sarah Horton
(_Israel_, _Israel_, _Jonathan_, _Jonathan_, _Caleb I._), was born
in Phelps, Ontario Co., N. Y., on the 16 June, 1820. Married, in
Wyalusing, Bradford Co., Penna., 13 Nov., 1856, by Rev. Ezekiel
Carpenter, to EDWARD HOMET, son of Charles Homet and Lucy Stevens,
and born in Asylum, Bradford County, Penna., 3d of May, 182-. Mr.
Homet followed the business of a civil engineer during his early
manhood. He is now an excellent and well-educated farmer, owning a
large and beautiful farm on the Susquehanna River, about four miles
above the mouth of Wyalusing Creek.

Dr. Maria M. Homet commenced the study of medicine, in Phelps,
with Dr. Bannister. In early life she was a very acceptable and
successful school-teacher. In 1850 she came to Pennsylvania, and
entered the office of Dr. Horton at Terrytown, Pa., and continued
the study of medicine. She graduated at the Woman's Medical College
of Pennsylvania, in Philadelphia, in the class of 1853. She returned
to Terrytown, and commenced the practice of medicine. She was very
successful and popular, and for three years she did an extensive
country practice.

They have one child, viz., Lucy Jane Homet, an interesting and
amiable young lady, born in Wyalusing 2d April, 1858.




FOOTNOTES:

[1] Southold (Southwold), is the name of an old town in England,
from which several of the original thirteen Puritans came, when they
emigrated to America.

[2] Sarah has 4 children:

    1. Victoria Adelaide, married Hiram Young, of White Haven, Pa.;
    resides there.

    2. Emma Louisa, married Charles Benjamin; have one daughter,
    viz., Montey May.

    3. Ella Arloe, married Michael McDermady, of White Haven, Pa.

    4. Ida Lucinda.


[3] Percilla Adaline, born in Sheshequin; married, at Terrytown, Pa.,
29 Oct., 1873, by Rev. Mr. Clark, of the M. E. Church, to William L.
Fanning, son of Elisha Fanning and Mary Ayres. Mr. Fanning and wife
reside at Leona, Bradford Co., Pa.; no children.

[4] Joshua Horton was the son of William Horton and Ruth Wright.
Children: Eliza Jane, Emily Clara, and Charles Edgar. Eliza Jane
married Samuel F. Loder, has Orson E. Charles Edgar, married Ann
McCord, daughter of Caleb McCord and Ann Purdy, and has 2 children.
1. (name not given.) 2. Albert L. They trace back to Joshua I.

[5] The Golden Wedding was celebrated in good style in Black River
Falls, attended by the Presbyterian minister, the physician, the
editor of the village paper, and many of the citizens of the village,
also Edmund Horton and George F. Horton, of Pennsylvania, brothers
of Mrs. Baillet--all of their children and grand-children now
living,--many valuable tokens of respect and esteem were presented to
the _new_ married, youthful-looking, aged pair.

[6] Lorenzo D. Poteet is an accomplished gentleman and scholar, a
good writer and eloquent speaker, and has kindly furnished us the
records of the descendants of Zephaniah Horton, Esq., of Buncombe,
now Ashe Co., N. C.

[7] The _Bayard_ was the square-rigged topsail sloop, named after
the old merchant, of New York, anterior to the Revolution. He was
afterwards known as the American Banker, Col. William Bayard. This
vessel was afterwards rigged a brig, and sent to sea and lost at Cape
Horn, about 1825. Another vessel, bearing the same name, in honor of
Col. Bayard, was on the French line of packets--the first established
between New York and France, and owned principally by Messrs. Le Roy,
Bayard & Co.




ALPHABETICAL INDEX OF THE HORTON CHRISTIAN NAMES.


  Aaron, 87, 89.

  Aaron Decatur, 89.

  Abbertina Miller, 52.

  Abbie, 90, 93.

  Abbie Anne, 134.

  Abbie Louisa, 133.

  Abbie Wilson, 94.

  Abigail, 182, 184, 185, 188.

  Abner, 178.

  Abraham Lincoln, 38.

  Adah, 119.

  Adah A., 119.

  Adaline, 41, 59.

  Adaline Bethia, 197.

  Adam, 67.

  Addie Elizabeth, 165.

  Adela, 45, 99.

  Adelaide Landon, 220.

  Adelia, 120, 143.

  Adriana, 110.

  Alaxcie, 215.

  Albert, 116, 140.

  Albert F., 26, 56.

  Albert Howell, 159.

  Albion Nathaniel, 113.

  Alexander, 116.

  Alexander Hamilton, 121, 165.

  Alexander Horace, 139.

  Alexander Webster, 51.

  Alfred, 61, 117, 163.

  Alfred Eugene, 133.

  Alfred M., 90.

  Alice Chase, 219.

  Alice Conrad, 167.

  Alice M., 54.

  Alice Yeatman, 155.

  Allen, 135.

  Allen D., 50.

  Allen H., 54.

  Allie W., Almira, 188, 193, 194.

  Almyra Amanda, 192, 217.

  Almyra Minerva, 189, 207.

  Alonzo Dickerson, 133.

  Alonzo Erastus, 189, 207.

  Alson Warren, 163.

  Alva, 177, 179.

  Alvin, 194.

  Alvira, 62.

  Alvor, 20.

  Amanda Belle, 180.

  Amanda M., 174.

  Amarilla, 128.

  Amazilla, 44, 66.

  Ambrose, 14, 181.

  Amelia, 114, 163, 178.

  Amos, 98.

  Amos Curry, 176, 177.

  Amos O., 123.

  Amy, 98.

  Amy I., 123.

  Amzi Spencer, 200.

  Anannias, 173.

  Anasthasia, 62.

  Andrew, 45.

  Andrew Jackson, 94, 120.

  Andrew Marcus, 35, 48.

  Andrew Philo, 196.

  Angeline Cook, 29, 53.

  Angeline Margaret, 197.

  Ann, 27, 41, 77, 91, 134.

  Anna, 15, 17, 25, 31, 48, 70, 78, 84, 90, 93, 99, 100, 107, 110, 171,
        173, 174, 182, 183, 188.

  Ann Caroline, 22, 36.

  Ann Eliza, 30, 118, 161, 202.

  Ann Elizabeth, 35, 45, 140, 176.

  Anna Ellsworth, 193.

  Anna M., 132, 215.

  Anna Maria, 94, 114, 139.

  Anna P., 219.

  Annie Woolsey, 178.

  Annis, 23.

  Ansell Phinney, 33.

  Archer, 38.

  Archibald, 87.

  Ariadne, 157.

  Arietta, 80, 92.

  Arthur, 178.

  Asa, 62.

  Asa C., 174, 177.

  Asenath, 172, 184.

  Augustus George, 153.

  Augustus Maria, 177.

  Avis Amelia, 175.

  Azariah, 14, 183.

  Azariah W., 181.


  Balzamond Mason, 216.

  Barnabas, 11, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 76, 78, 84, 87, 90, 118, 182, 184,
        185.

  Barnabas B., 184, 187, 196.

  Bela Joseph, 177.

  Belle Amanda, 100.

  Benjamin, 14, 18, 19, 20, 24, 41, 48, 60, 71, 72, 73, 75, 83, 116,
        153, 171, 172, 173, 174, 196, 198, 201.

  Benjamin Carpenter, 221.

  Benjamin, Col., 182, 185.

  Benjamin De Witt, 204.

  Benjamin F., 61, 153, 185, 196, 221.

  Benjamin Goldsmith, 98.

  Benjamin Hull, 185, 196.

  Benjamin, 174, 177.

  Benjamin J., 112, 154.

  Benjamin Porter, 51.

  Benjamin Rose, 116.

  Benjamin T., 157, 204.

  Benjamin Yeatman, 155.

  Bernard, 115.

  Bessy Grant, 57.

  Bethia, 11, 12, 67, 68, 69, 70, 75, 170, 182, 184, 198, 200.

  Betsy, 25, 76, 84, 90, 174, 185.

  Betsy Ann, 24.

  Beulah A. G., 37.

  Bishop, 46

  Brackey, 94, 139.

  Burton, 58.

  Byron, 39.

  Byron D., 155.


  Caleb, 11, 12, 16, 67, 68, 69, 72.

  Calista, 58.

  Calvin, 69, 163.

  Carlo, 191.

  Carlton, 108, 137.

  Carlton Ira, 170.

  Caroline, 30, 90, 91, 93, 110, 115, 119, 206.

  Caroline Denispaugh, 52.

  Caroline Kate, 215.

  Caroline Rushmore, 222.

  Carrie, 114.

  Carrie Ben., 153.

  Carrie Eliza, 47.

  Carrie Ella, 112.

  Carrie Josephine, 40.

  Carrie Robertson, 159.

  Carrie S., 140.

  Catherine, 27, 39, 77, 83, 112, 162.

  Catherine Arlette, 134.

  Catherine Conover, 85.

  Catherine Elizabeth, 59.

  Catherine Julia, 111.

  Catherine Lonesa, 180.

  Celestia, 87.

  Celia, 39, 194.

  Cevellon, 60.

  Charles, 23, 25, 36, 38, 43, 45, 50, 56, 117, 120, 183, 191, 216.

  Charles Albert, 152, 163.

  Charles Burrell, 134.

  Charles Davenport, 178.

  Charles Edmund, 167.

  Charles Francis, 135.

  Charles Gurdon, 215.

  Charles H., 123, 202.

  Charles Herbert, 98.

  Charles Jayne, 59.

  Charles Mahlon, 60.

  Charles Pierson Baldwin, 120.

  Charles Riley, 190.

  Charles Shons, 133.

  Charles Wesley, 179, 201.

  Charlotte, 91, 92, 112, 120, 183, 189, 192, 194.

  Charlotte Beatrice, 180.

  Chauncy, 62, 188, 192.

  Chauncey Chaffee, 192, 218.

  Christiana, 115, 200.

  Clara Ann, 215.

  Clara Elizabeth, 176.

  Clara Jane, 176.

  Clarence Frost, 178.

  Clarissa, 23, 27, 39, 119, 134, 174.

  Clark, 91.

  Clark Lawrence, 175.

  Claude, 48.

  Clayton, 61.

  Cleveland Kemble, 52.

  Comfort, 186.

  Cora Burr, 57.

  Cornelia, 20, 31, 55.

  Cornelia Southard Lelia, 178.

  Cornelia W., 36.

  Cornelius, 80, 93.

  Cornelius C., 37, 153.

  Cornelius Mandeville, 52.

  Cornelius Miller, 30, 52.

  Cornelius W. Van Rantz, 22, 37.

  Cynthia, 153.

  Cynthia Malvina, 192, 218.

  Cyrus, 50, 175.

  Cyrus B., 178.

  Cyrus J., 50.

  Cyrus Van Rensselaer, 136.

  Cyrus William, 178.


  Daniel, 14, 15, 18, 19, 20, 69, 76, 89, 128.

  Daniel Halsey, 220.

  Daniel Jayne, 41, 59.

  Daniel Sullivan, 59.

  Daniel Taylor, 30, 51.

  Darwin D., 37.

  David, 10, 11, 14, 15, 17, 19, 20, 25, 27, 41, 59, 68, 69, 71, 73,
        76, 89, 119, 131, 170, 180, 184, 200.

  David Austin, 185.

  David Claudius, 111.

  David C., 131.

  David D., 123.

  David Eagles, 121, 124.

  David Laurens, 200.

  David Lee, 30, 51.

  David Lewis, 128.

  David M., 157.

  David Philander, 222.

  David Richards, 156.

  David Snyder, 58, 63.

  David Thomas, 115.

  Davis, 172.

  Debbie Emily, 149.

  Deborah, 75, 77, 85, 170.

  Deborah Ann, 22.

  De Forest, 180.

  Delia Adelaide, 56.

  Delight, 27.

  Deliverance, 170, 171, 172.

  Dexter, 155.

  De Witt Shons, 133.

  Diana, 25.

  Dickson, 163.

  Dorothy, 71, 78.

  Dorr, 29, 54.

  Dudley I., 157.

  Durfee Delano, 110.


  Ebenezer, 99, 142.

  Edie, 219.

  Edgar Clayton, 137.

  Edith Alden, 221.

  Edith Lucinda, 45.

  Edmonia L., 158.

  Edmund, 107.

  Edmund Bani, 120.

  Edmund Burke, 167.

  Edward, 62, 73, 89.

  Edward Augustus, 58.

  Edward Baker, 30.

  Edward Barton, 221.

  Edward Bates, 179.

  Edward Delany, 34.

  Edward Grant, 215.

  Edward Haskell, 191.

  Edward Livingston, 119.

  Edward W., 37, 131.

  Edwin, 85, 157, 191, 206.

  Edwin A., 162.

  Edwin Willis, 203.

  Egbert, 191.

  Elam Potter, 172.

  Elbert S., 124.

  Elbridge Micajah, 33, 56.

  Eleanor, 18, 80, 91, 93.

  Eleazer, 26.

  Eli, 188, 191, 193.

  Elias, 75, 128.

  Elias Quereau, 24, 31.

  Elias Riggs, 134.

  Elihu, 68, 71, 78.

  Elijah, 17, 18, 25, 42, 62, 68, 70, 84, 116.

  Elijah Augustus, 117.

  Elijah Harrison, 27, 46.

  Eliphaz, 180.

  Elisha, 73, 87.

  Elisha C., 129.

  Elisha Griggs, 192, 216.

  Eliza, 21, 27, 28, 81, 84, 120, 128, 131, 163, 154, 170, 171.

  Eliza Ann, 41, 115.

  Eliza Estella, 59.

  Eliza L., 158.

  Eliza M., 157.

  Elizabeth, 16, 17, 18, 20, 22, 27, 38, 42, 44, 62, 65, 69, 75, 76,
        66, 84, 95, 105, 113, 117, 123, 156, 163, 172, 174, 186, 198,
        204.

  Elizabeth Bockover, 168.

  Elizabeth Emily, 222.

  Elizabeth M., 31, 54, 167.

  Elizabeth R., 84, 107.

  Elizabeth Waller, 157.

  Elizabeth Webb, 188.

  Ella, 110, 206.

  Ella Isadore, 37.

  Ella S., 92.

  Ellen, 44.

  Ellen Maria, 136.

  Ellen V., 98, 133.

  Ellsworth Wales, 216.

  Elmer Ellsworth, 177.

  Elmira, 155.

  Elmore, 143.

  Elmore E., 48, 53.

  Eloise, 84.

  Elsie, 26.

  Elstine Jennings, 109.

  Elvira, 191, 216.

  Elwood Ely, 169.

  Emeline, 192, 217.

  Emery Norman, 217.

  Emily, 23, 40, 42, 50, 61, 62, 83, 112, 194.

  Emily Agnes, 35.

  Emily Ann, 144.

  Emily Cortland, 156.

  Emily Eveline, 60.

  Emily Jane, 175.

  Emily Robinson, 107.

  Emma, 33, 62, 216.

  Emma Alma, 111, 154.

  Emma A., 37, 61.

  Emma F., 29.

  Emma Harriet, 197.

  Emmerson C., 109.

  Emmerson Jennings, 109.

  Emmons Burr, 216.

  Enoch, 20.

  Ephraim, 11, 71.

  Ephraim Coleman, 84.

  Erastus, 189.

  Ernest Wayne, 179.

  Essie E., 216.

  Estella, 29.

  Esther, 11, 15, 18, 22, 23, 24, 26, 39, 73, 74, 75, 83, 87, 128, 129.

  Esther Ann, 192.

  Esther Jemima, 27.

  Eugene, 37, 40, 222.

  Eugene B., 222.

  Eugene Henry, 64.

  Eugene Townsend, 222.

  Eunice, 72, 81, 84, 92, 96, 99, 101, 137, 142.

  Eunice Alice, 142.

  Eunice Angeline, 182.

  Eunice Ann, 128.

  Eunice De Maris, 131.

  Eunice Lucada, 174.

  Eunice Martha, 141.

  Euphemia, 178.

  Eva, 155.

  Eva A., 37.

  Eva Estella, 47.

  Eva Jane, 34.

  Eva Louisa, 176.

  Everett Ezra, 217.

  Eveline, 120.

  Ezra, 182, 183, 186, 188, 189, 191, 192, 201.

  Ezra James, 178.

  Ezra L'Hommedieu, 185.

  Ezra Mason, 191, 216.

  Ezra Tredeau, 215.


  Fannie Minerva, 176.

  Fanny, 26, 81, 90, 96, 138, 174, 196.

  Fidelia, 188, 194.

  Florence, 39, 135.

  Florence Effie, 216.

  Florence Isabella, 204.

  Floyd Wallace, 177.

  Fluta Belle, 46, 56.

  Forster, 183.

  Frances Charlena, 216.

  Frances E., 39.

  Francis, 106, 179.

  Francis A., 30, 54.

  Francis Asbury, 176.

  Francis G., 191.

  Francis Newell, 35, 47.

  Francis W., 106.

  Frank, 141, 206.

  Frank A., 30.

  Franklin, 63.

  Franklin Munn, 104.

  Franklin Reynolds, 206.

  Franklin Terry, 221.

  Frederick, 141, 215.

  Frederick Osborn, 204.

  Freeman, 27.

  Frost, 24, 31.

  Frost Joshua, 55.


  Gabriel, 78, 119.

  Gabriel C., 90.

  Gabriel H., 78.

  Gamaliel, 71, 182.

  Gardnear Stanton, 162.

  George, 17, 18, 20, 23, 35, 36, 42, 63, 110, 116, 137.

  George W., 15, 24, 31, 59, 92, 116, 120, 135, 140, 186, 196.

  George W. P., 33.

  George Bertrand, 30.

  Geo. Clifford, 112.

  Geo. Clinton, 47.

  Geo. Cummins, 18.

  Geo. Dinsmore, 46.

  Geo. Ellis, 222.

  Geo. Firman, 141.

  Geo. Hamilton, 143.

  Geo. Hathaway, 221.

  Geo. Ingersoll, 47.

  Geo. Landon, 61.

  Geo. Lewis, 62.

  Geo. Philip, 30.

  Georgiana, 53.

  Georgia Ann, 37.

  Gerrit Smith, 192.

  Gertrude, 194.

  Gertrude Elizabeth, 47.

  Gilbert, 18, 56, 90, 172, 173, 182, 186, 206.

  Gilbert La Fayette, 209.

  Gilbert Wilson, 220.

  Glen L., 155.

  Grace, 204.

  Grace Edna, 177.

  Gurdon, 188, 190.

  Gurdon B., 39, 57.

  Guy, 62.


  Hampton Howell, 78.

  Hannah, 11, 14, 16, 19, 41, 42, 49, 58, 60, 61, 62, 63, 71, 78, 116,
        154, 172, 173, 183, 184, 198.

  Hannah Amanda, 202.

  Hannah E., 48.

  Hannah Jane, 111.

  Hannah Lucinda, 45.

  Hannah Maria, 112.

  Hannah Matilda, 200.

  Hannen, 53.

  Happylonia Amelia, 202.

  Harmony, 185, 197.

  Harrison, 90, 168, 184.

  Harrison Faulkner, 131.

  Harry, 30, 116, 175, 219.

  Harry Lawrence, 44, 64.

  Harry Miller, 156.

  Harry Morgan, 100, 107.

  Harry Thomas, 115.

  Harriet, 114, 117, 120, 191.

  Harriet Augusta, 167.

  Harriet Elizabeth, 124, 134.

  Harriet Huntley, 33.

  Harriet Larey, 139.

  Harriet Louisa, 215.

  Harriet Milicent, 118.

  Harriet Newell, 200.

  Harriet Waller, 156.

  Harvey, 78, 177.

  Harvey Addison, 118, 159.

  Harvey L., 192.

  Haskell V., 177.

  Hattie, 17.

  Hattie May, 217.

  Havens, 172.

  Hector, 78.

  Hector Y., 198.

  Helen, 135, 191, 199, 215.

  Helen Agnes, 47.

  Helen Delia, 33.

  Helen Elizabeth, 162.

  Helen Gertrude, 134.

  Helen Marie, 221.

  Helen Mather, 52.

  Henrietta, 117, 177, 198.

  Henry, 17, 20, 21, 29, 76, 77, 119.

  Henry Albert, 201.

  Henry Brock, 51.

  Henry Broadhead, 162.

  Henry Davids, 205.

  Henry E., 53, 179.

  Henry H., 54.

  Henry Lee, 109.

  Henry M., 119.

  Henry Walter, 165.

  Henry Wickham, 197.

  Henry Wisner, 108.

  Herbert Doty, 54.

  Herman M., 190.

  Hetty, 185.

  Hetty Eliza, 221.

  Hetty M., 131.

  Hiler Hosmer, 137.

  Hiram, 27, 73, 78, 99, 128, 133.

  Hiram Falls, 221.

  Hiram Hoskins, 116.

  Horner, 23, 38.

  Horace, 44, 45, 65, 78, 89, 80, 131.

  Howard, 204.

  Howell Reeve, 201.

  Huldah, 73, 86, 87, 89.


  Ichabod, 170.

  Ida Caroline, 40.

  Ida Cushman, 221.

  Ida May, 54, 60.

  Ira, 78.

  Ira Joseph, 152.

  Irene, 173.

  Isaac, 17, 18, 22, 26, 38, 61, 63, 75, 174, 178.

  Isaac Cook, 54.

  Isaac H., 158.

  Isaac Jackson, 38.

  Isaac Jayne, 25.

  Isaac Rufus, 43, 63.

  Isaac Snyder, 25, 42.

  Isaac T., 92.

  Isabella, 114, 131.

  Isabella D., 19.

  Isabella Graham, 196.

  Isabella Rose, 180.

  Isadore M., 56.

  Isaiah, 19, 128, 129.

  Israel, 19, 70, 71, 72, 79, 94, 116, 134, 135.

  Ithil, 26.


  Jackson, 58.

  Jacob, 16, 67, 115.

  Jacob L., 53.

  Jacob R., 21.

  James, 12, 17, 21, 12, 23, 38, 42, 53, 57, 62, 75, 78, 89, 121, 173,
        181, 182, 183, 188, 196.

  James B., 163.

  James C., 120, 163, 165.

  James Edward, 49.

  James Edwin, 186, 202, 221.

  James Elliott, 115, 157.

  James Franklin, 59.

  James Galloway, 152.

  James Gallup, 156.

  James Holiday, 39.

  James Harrison, 121, 166.

  James I., 22, 37.

  James L., 54, 110.

  James Le Roy, 29.

  James M., 90, 133, 176.

  James Mills, 47.

  James Muldor, 54.

  James P., 124.

  James Parshall, 91.

  James Perry, 53.

  James Reeves, 185, 196.

  James Robert, 107.

  James Theodore, 121, 166.

  James Walter, 167.

  James Welles, 184.

  James White, 35, 47.

  Jane, 24, 25, 90, 99, 115, 123, 131, 133, 141, 143.

  Jane Adelaide, 119.

  Jane De Puy, 18.

  Jane Elizabeth, 31, 106, 148.

  Jane Jemima, 25, 34.

  Jane M., 124.

  Janette, 215.

  Jannetz, 14.

  Jared, 215.

  Jason, 72, 90, 99, 141.

  Jasper, 173.

  Jemima, 25, 70, 74, 75.

  Jennie, 57.

  Jeremiah, 10, 14, 72, 171, 173.

  Jeremiah Henry, 140.

  Jerusha Conklin, 85.

  Jerusha Wickham, 197.

  Jesse, 17, 24, 49, 77, 113, 116, 123, 157, 158.

  Jesse Davis, 114.

  Jesse M., 38.

  Jessie Ann, 138.

  Jessie Burr, 57.

  Jessie Lorena, 61.

  Jessie Pardee, 206.

  Joel, 24, 45.

  Joel Stephen, 45.

  John, 10, 14, 15, 17, 19, 20, 25, 26, 44, 67, 69, 72, 75, 77, 79, 89,
        92, 100, 113, 115, 119, 145, 171, 173.

  John Andrews, 115.

  John B., 187.

  John Burleigh, 146.

  John C., 50, 156, 216.

  John Edmund, 143.

  John Elliott, 42.

  John Franks, 202.

  John F., 202.

  John Gillett, 176.

  John Hix, 17.

  John Holabird, 51.

  John McCrea, 29.

  John Marcus, 179.

  John Marshall, 137.

  John Martin, 92, 130.

  John Miller, 100.

  John P., 157.

  John Seward, 117, 120.

  John S., 29, 56.

  John Todd, 21, 29.

  John Waller, 156.

  John White, 22, 34.

  John Williams, 55, 150, 200.

  Jonah, 87.

  Jonathan, 11, 12, 14, 67, 68, 69, 72, 122, 124, 122, 180, 182, 184,
        186.

  Jonathan Azariah, 201.

  Jonathan Blair, 165.

  Jonathan Bani, 85, 120.

  Jonathan Edwards, 196.

  Jonathan Filmore, 166.

  Jonathan Goldsmith, 199.

  Jonathan Terry, 186.

  Joseph, 10, 11, 14, 16, 17, 19, 24, 42, 48, 61, 62, 91, 170, 171,
        172, 173, 174, 188.

  Joseph Dempster, 138.

  Joseph Elliott, 41.

  Joseph Hazzard, 201.

  Joseph Hornet, 145.

  Joseph Lee, 72, 80, 94, 109.

  Joseph Miller, 167.

  Joseph Nephi, 136.

  Joseph Osborn, 85.

  Joseph Robert, 30.

  Joseph Rose, 67.

  Joseph Strong, 48.

  Josephine, 25, 220.

  Josephine Adela, 141.

  Josephine Deborah, 111, 164.

  Josephine L., 197.

  Josiah, 70, 77, 113.

  Josiah Spaulding, 60.

  Joshua, 11, 18, 26, 158, 170, 171, 172, 173, 184.

  Joshua I., 50.

  Judson A., 37.

  Julia, 75, 78, 81, 99, 106, 119, 141, 147, 174, 198, 200.

  Julia Ann, 182, 185, 186.

  Julia Ann E., 84, 109, 157.

  Julia Elmira, 128.

  Julia J., 54.

  Julia May, 136.

  Julia Rebecca, 165.

  Junius Roy, 40.

  Justin, 69.

  Justus, 171, 184.

  Justus Elbert, 202.


  Kate Evelyn, 180.

  Kate Elsie, 219.

  Katie Elvise, 219.

  Keturah, 186.

  Knowlton Howard, 216.


  La Fayette, 177.

  Lamira Louisa, 121, 164.

  Laura, 162, 168.

  Laura Beach, 51.

  Laurens, 188, 194.

  Lavanda Candis, 34, 53.

  Lazarus, 181.

  Lawrence Clinton, 42.

  Lebbeus Dathrop Vail, 126.

  Lee, 19.

  Lemuel, 58.

  Leonard, 20, 175.

  Leonard Moses, 145.

  Le Roy, 21, 29, 57.

  Leo.

  Lesli, 217.

  Levi, 62.

  Levi D., 29, 173, 176, 177.

  Levi Eugene, 40.

  Levi Wesner, 176.

  Lewis, 26, 45, 90, 174.

  Lewis Beers, 110.

  Lewis John, 134.

  Lewis Mullerson, 77.

  Liberty, 173.

  Liberty Ann, 141.

  Licetta Augusta, 34, 53.

  Lida May, 180.

  Lillian, 157.

  Lillie May, 37.

  Lillie Gertrude, 167.

  Linda E., 178.

  Locky, 158.

  Lorenzo D., 124.

  Lorenzo P., 157.

  Lorinda, 25.

  Loton, 90.

  Lovilla.

  Louisa, 39.

  Louisa Maria, 34, 52.

  Lucien, 38, 56.

  Lucinda, 26, 27, 39, 44, 134, 188, 191.

  Lucinda Elizabeth, 34, 52.

  Lucretia, 71.

  Lucy, 26.

  Lucy Ann, 28.

  Lucy Evelyn, 216.

  Lucy Jane, 189, 214, 215.

  Lucy Lovina, 37.

  Lucy Paine, 216.

  Lucy Lura, 177.

  Luman P., 26.

  Lydia, 46, 67, 70, 74, 89, 97, 99, 170, 171, 187, 196.

  Lydia Ann, 91, 99, 143.

  Lydia Corwin, 84.

  Lydia Miller, 100.

  Lydia Rogers, 196.


  Maggie B., 221.

  Maggie Cora, 180.

  Malcolm, 76, 157.

  Malvin M., 192.

  Maranda, 128.

  Marcus Cornelius, 138.

  Marcus Nelson, 179.

  Margaret, 15, 29, 54, 163, 182, 189, 194.

  Margaret Ann, 131.

  Margaret Julia, 134.

  Margaret Vance, 110, 157.

  Margaretta, 52.

  Maria, 50, 162, 174.

  Maria Eloise, 151, 157.

  Maria P., 108.

  Marietta, 50, 220.

  Martha, 22, 128, 170, 171, 172, 186.

  Martha Ann, 30.

  Martha Cora, 114.

  Martha Cordelia, 30.

  Martha Day, 201.

  Martha E., 113, 157.

  Martha I., 158.

  Martha Maria, 35.

  Martha M., 192, 48, 56.

  Martha Louisa, 37.

  Martha Priscilla, 216.

  Martha Virginia, 197.

  Martin Van Buren, 61.

  Mary, 11, 15, 19, 20, 25, 27, 30, 38, 46, 58, 61, 67, 68, 69, 71, 72,
        75, 76, 77, 83, 95, 100, 113, 115, 116, 119, 128, 129, 144,
        156, 163, 170, 171, 172, 180, 183, 186, 188, 189, 192, 200.

  Mary Ann, 49, 50, 91, 115, 119, 128, 136, 152, 153, 192, 218.

  Mary Antoinette, 33.

  Mary Bennet, 159.

  Mary Bethia, 98.

  Mary Caroline, 198.

  Mary Catherine, 120.

  Mary Eliza, 151.

  Mary Elizabeth, 111, 114, 128, 153, 180, 201, 203, 205.

  Mary Ellen, 44, 66.

  Mary Emeline, 63, 118.

  Mary Emily, 189, 207.

  Mary Emma, 141, 165.

  Mary Etta, 134.

  Mary Eugenia, 133.

  Mary Goldsmith, 222.

  Mary Hannah, 138.

  Mary Helen, 132.

  Mary I., 123, 200.

  Mary Kate, 153.

  Mary Loudon, 220.

  Mary Louisa, 31, 117, 48, 141.

  Mary L., 135.

  Mary Lucretia, 107.

  Mary M., 157.

  Mary Percy, 216.

  Mary Perkins, 206.

  Mary Pruner, 157.

  Matilda Adelaide, 59.

  Matilda Adelia.

  Matilda Ann, 50.

  Matison B., 136.

  Matthias, 68, 70, 71, 78, 119, 120.

  Mayhew, 27.

  Maybell, 155.

  Mazor L., 20.

  McWilliam, 124.

  Mehala, 78, 206.

  Mehetabel, 12, 69, 73, 74, 75, 89, 174, 180, 184, 185, 197, 198.

  Melinda, 67.

  Melina, 39, 57.

  Melvin Morris, 217.

  Mercy, 9.

  Micajah, 17, 22.

  Miles Emmet, 44, 66.

  Milicent, 15, 90.

  Milicent Ellen, 78, 118.

  Millard, 163.

  Miller, 77, 113.

  Millie.

  Millie Ann, 83.

  Milton, 111.

  Milton Augustus, 152.

  Milton Murat, 162.

  Minerva Inez, 137.

  Minnie, 135.

  Minnie I., 217.

  Minor Thomas, 91, 135.

  Miranda, 116.

  Molly, 78.

  Monroe, 153.

  Mortimer, 119.

  Mortimer Stillwell, 120.

  Myra Elsie, 219.

  Myron, 43, 92.

  Myrtie Stella, 60.


  Nancy, 61, 163, 174.

  Nancy Halsey, 202.

  Nancy H., 109.

  Nancy Loudon, 197, 220.

  Nancy Rogers, 202.

  Nancy Strickland, 41, 59.

  Nancy Terry, 149.

  Nancy Wickham, 198.

  Naomi A., 158.

  Nathan, 11, 68, 69, 70, 74, 75, 76, 77, 120, 121, 122, 124, 128, 164,
        166.

  Nathan Miller, 113, 156.

  Nathan Priest, 77.

  Nathan Waller, 157, 158.

  Nathan White, 162.

  Nathan Youngs, 158.

  Nathaniel, 68, 69, 73.

  Nathaniel Buell, 170.

  Nathaniel Charles, 89.

  Nathaniel Jackson, 128.

  Nelson, 26, 132.

  Nelson Burleigh, 189.

  Nellie, 71, 78, 135, 219.

  Nellie Maria, 47.

  Newman Norris, 152.

  Nicholas, 157.

  Nicholas Townsend, 14, 112.

  Noble W., 157.

  Nora, 194.

  Norman, 188, 191.

  Norman Sanford, 191.


  Olive, 188, 190, 191, 193, 216.

  Olive E., 62.

  Olive Grant, 64.

  Olive Turrell, 142.

  Omar, 62, 73.

  Orange Hull, 196.

  Orin Miller, 144.

  Orinda McGee, 201.

  Orlando, 49.

  Orrin, 43, 61, 62.

  Orville Carlton, 46.

  Osborn, 196.

  Oscar, 109.

  Oscar Perry, 177.

  Ovid, 23, 39.


  Pamela, 43.

  Parmenas Howell, 78, 118.

  Parshall Terry, 107.

  Patience, 12, 14, 17, 67, 170, 171.

  Patty, 69.

  Patty Coleman, 84.

  Paul, 182.

  Pauline Emily, 119, 131.

  Pearce, 20.

  Peleg, 20.

  Penelope, 67.

  Percilla Adaline, 45.

  Perley, 43.

  Perley Ainsworth, 56.

  Permela, 172.

  Peter, 20, 182.

  Peter Davis, 92, 137.

  Peter Dempster, 138.

  Peter Quereau, 24.

  Peter Williams, 22.

  Phebe, 14, 15, 17, 21, 24, 28, 58, 67, 135, 172, 173, 184.

  Phebe Ann, 117.

  Phebe D., 76, 124.

  Phebe E., 123.

  Phebe Jane, 48, 50, 176.

  Phebe Maria, 134.

  Philander, 46, 196.

  Philena, 24, 188, 190, 191.

  Philip Brewster, 162.

  Philip Hallock, 204.

  Phineas, 70, 75, 121, 124, 164.

  Phimos W., 128.

  Platt, 20.

  Polly, 69, 73.


  Rachel, 15, 16, 38, 68, 76.

  Rachel Amanda, 28.

  Ray, 23.

  Rensselaer, 185, 199.

  Rejoice, 187.

  Rebecca, 73, 77, 86, 120, 164.

  Reuben, 27, 62, 163.

  Reuben Emmerson, 47, 60.

  Rhoda, 20, 68, 73, 170, 173.

  Rhoda B., 41, 58.

  Richard, 15, 17, 18, 24, 25, 41, 58, 68, 69, 70, 75, 76, 115.

  Richard Currie, 27, 46.

  Richard Joshua, 45.

  Richard Newell, 41, 58.

  Richard Scott, 155.

  Richard Thompson, 45.

  Richmond Wright, 173.

  Robert Bruce, 191.

  Robert Mills, 35, 47.

  Rosa Sayer, 159.

  Rosa Virginia, 167.

  Rosina, 113.

  Rowena Eliza, 143.

  Rowena Hortense, 44, 66.

  Rowena Nancy, 100.

  Roysell, 190.

  Rufus, 163, 174.

  Rufus Dula, 165.

  Rushman Davenport, 178.

  Ruth, 84, 57, 163.

  Ruth Ann, 169, 176, 202.

  Ruth Burritt, 156.

  Ruth Elmira Halsey, 199.

  Ruth Naomi, 60.


  Sally, 26, 69, 104, 174.

  Sally Ann, 174.

  Salter Storrs, 197.

  Samantha Catherine, 202.

  Samuel, 10, 14, 19, 72, 76, 83, 84.

  Samuel Black, 115, 135, 182.

  Samuel Danes, 133.

  Samuel Huston, 46.

  Samuel Mann, 134.

  Samuel McCrea, 20, 21, 29.

  Samuel Miller, 167.

  Samuel Minnis, 92, 136.

  Samuel Todd, 108.

  Samuel Townsend, 152.

  Sarah, 9, 11, 16, 17, 22, 24, 38, 45, 49, 68, 70, 72, 75, 76, 77, 79,
        91, 92, 94, 97, 119, 121, 123, 165, 171, 182, 189.

  Sarah Ann, 49, 113, 117, 120, 178, 188.

  Sarah Delia, 154.

  Sarah Elizabeth, 119, 134, 156, 197, 202.

  Sarah Estella, 30, 158.

  Sarah Frances, 118.

  Sarah Jane, 31, 112.

  Sarah J. E., 124.

  Sarah L., 192.

  Sarah Maria, 22, 30, 38, 140, 176.

  Sarah Nancy, 143.

  Sarah Parshall, 19, 109.

  Sarah R., 91.

  Schuyler Bogart, 202.

  Selah, 76.

  Septimus, 70.

  Shepherd, 27.

  Sidney Chaffie, 45.

  Silas, 67, 68, 70, 71, 77, 84, 89, 182, 185, 187, 188, 197.

  Silas Austin, 197.

  Silas Danes, 78, 89, 90.

  Silas Olney, 134.

  Silas Ryneck, 221.

  Silas Horton Stringham, 124.

  Simon Grover, 171.

  Smith, 90.

  Snyder, 42, 62, 63.

  Solomon, 174.

  Sophia, 67.

  Sophia Reeves, 202.

  Sophronia, 192, 217.

  Spencer, 73, 188, 200.

  Starr La Mott, 177.

  Stephen, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 40, 49, 69, 74, 174.

  Stephen D., 24, 31, 33, 55.

  Stephen Edwin, 117.

  Stephen Frost, 55.

  Stephen Halsey, 133.

  Stephen Joseph, 176, 180.

  Stephen Lines, 49.

  Stephen L., 174, 177.

  Stoddard Ellsworth, 219.

  Susan, 87, 97, 114, 182, 198, 201.

  Susan Bailey, 186, 220.

  Susan Evangelia, 196.

  Susan Green, 170.

  Susan Hannah, 180.

  Susan May, 134, 188.

  Susan Olive, 21.

  Sybil, 172.

  Sydney Ellsworth, 219.

  Sylvester, 21.


  Tabitha, 25, 41, 59.

  Tabitha Amanda, 42.

  Tabitha Maria, 58.

  Talmage Baker, 204.

  Tamar, 19.

  Theodore, 37, 117.

  Theodore Dwight, 190.

  Theodore F., 48.

  Theodore King, 204.

  Theodore Marcena, 30, 51.

  Theodore Parker, 45.

  Theodore Worth, 203.

  Theodoria Elvira, 120, 164.

  Theresa, 158.

  Theron Kimble, 37.

  Thirza Ann, 138.

  Thomas, 14, 15, 17, 30, 70, 116, 170, 182, 188, 191, 215.

  Thomas Carrier, 40.

  Thomas De La Fayette, 189.

  Thomas Hyatt, 40.

  Thomas Ingham, 98.

  Thomas Israel, 49.

  Thomas Jefferson, 185, 198.

  Thomas Minor, 113.

  Thomas Osborn, 206.

  Thomas Van Devort, 80.

  Thomas Van Heusen, 55.

  Thomas White, 162.

  Thomas Yeatman, 155.

  Townsend Nicholas, 111, 153.

  Truman, 20.

  Tunis, 93.


  Ulysses, 26.

  Ulysses David, 61.

  Uriah, 80.

  Uriah Terry, 94.

  Ursula, 91.


  Valiant McCrea, 36.

  Van Rensselaer W., 136.

  Verdine, 90.

  Victoria E., 131.


  Walter, 38, 168, 178.

  Walter Van Routz, 36.

  Warren, 90.

  Warren Gavitt.

  Washington, 50.

  Watkins L., 36.

  Webb, 23, 40.

  Welles, 46.

  Wesley Gibbs, 177.

  Wilfred, 48.

  William, 15, 16, 17, 18, 22, 26, 27, 58, 62, 73, 74, 77, 120, 121,
        162, 163, 165, 169, 172, 173, 184, 187, 189, 193, 198.

  William Benjamin, 162.

  William Benton, 36.

  William Bullard, 26, 44, 66.

  William Cook, 21.

  William Drake, 29, 53, 56.

  William Drinker, 113.

  William Edward, 30.

  William Franklin, 41, 157.

  William Harrison, 133, 191.

  William Henry, 37, 50, 120, 152, 170, 176, 180, 194, 215, 220.

  William James, 55.

  William John, 50.

  William Leander, 120, 163.

  William Mervin, 62.

  William M., 108, 153, 157, 191, 214.

  William Nelson, 57.

  William Person, 137.

  William Perse, 41.

  William Phineas, 165.

  William Richards, 157.

  William Robinson, 206.

  William Ryneck, 222.

  William Terry, 148.

  William Thomas, 55.

  William Van Hocsin, 31.

  William Wallace, 36.

  William Wirt, 37, 137.

  Willie, 180.

  Willie Eugene Seabring, 176.

  Willie Gaylord, 36.

  Willis Bruce, 36.

  Wilson Osborn.

  Wines, 73.

  Winfield Scott, 38.

  Wright, 16, 22, 24, 33, 57.

  Wright Frost, 24.


  Zaccheus, 73.

  Zephaniah, 75, 76, 133, 157.

  Zephaniah I., 124.

  Zephaniah L., 158.

  Zopher Pasco, 163.




HORTON INDEX.

Alphabetical Index of surnames of persons intermarried with the
Horton Family, and also names of clergymen or magistrates who
officiated at the marriage. With a few exceptions only one page is
referred to, but many of these names occur frequently.


  Accla, 27.

  Ackerman, 34.

  Adams, 177.

  Adamson, 53, 54, 96, 177, 135.

  Aiken, 137.

  Ainslee, 162.

  Ainsworth, 59.

  Albert, 107.

  Allen, 95.

  Allison.

  Alloways, 45.

  Ames, 65.

  Ammon, 159.

  Andrews, 129.

  Annen, 205.

  Arbuckle, 98.

  Arms, 34.

  Atwood, 87.

  Austin, 106.

  Ayres, 45.


  Babe, 208.

  Bacon, 145.

  Bailey, 175, 182, 219.

  Baldwin, 103, 113.

  Bancroft, 30.

  Baillet, 105.

  Ball, 118.

  Bannister.

  Barker, 91.

  Barner, 44.

  Barnes, 42.

  Barnette, 162.

  Barnum, 67.

  Barr, 60.

  Barrett, 116.

  Barstow, 46.

  Bartine, 169.

  Bartlett, 216.

  Bates, 55.

  Beadle, 24.

  Beardsley, 44.

  Beatty, 54.

  Bedell, 110.

  Beebe, 132, 159.

  Beedle, 208.

  Becks, 90.

  Beemer, 95.

  Belcher, 111.

  Belnap, 215.

  Bennet, 86, 111, 118, 194, 156.

  Benjamin, 69.

  Bidlock, 62.

  Billings, 62.

  Birdsall, 221.

  Blackman, 28, 43, 44, 62.

  Black, 95.

  Blair, 165.

  Blake, 47.

  Bliss, 22.

  Bliven, 24.

  Blodgett, 54.

  Blount, 53.

  Boardman, 92.

  Bogart, 22.

  Bockover, 96.

  Boone, 122.

  Booth, 196.

  Bookstover, 149.

  Border, 54.

  Bostwich, 110.

  Boughton, 120.

  Bouse, 29.

  Bowers, 120.

  Bowman, 168.

  Boyce, 110.

  Bradford, 206.

  Bradley, 12.

  Brainard, 59.

  Breed, 64.

  Brewster, 76.

  Brigham, 59.

  Bright, 52.

  Briggs, 128.

  Brightwell, 206.

  Brink, 137.

  Brinkley, 115.

  Brisack, 167.

  Broadhead, 111.

  Brooks, 116.

  Brown, 223.

  Brownell, 66.

  Brownlee, 167.

  Broyles, 124.

  Bryant, 128.

  Buckley, 57.

  Budd, 9.

  Bull, 182.

  Bullis, 26.

  Bunyan, 136.

  Burchard, 133.

  Burleigh, 187.

  Burnette, 172.

  Burr, 219.

  Burt, 96.

  Bush, 53.

  Butler, 92.


  Calender, 90.

  Cameron, 221.

  Campbell, 113.

  Caney, 31.

  Canfield, 60.

  Caniff, 176.

  Capron, 57.

  Carpenter, 55.

  Carver, 217.

  Carrier, 130.

  Carroll, 203.

  Case, 68.

  Cash, 118.

  Cerathers, 162.

  Chaffer, 192.

  Chase, 176.

  Chambers, 92.

  Chapin, 133.

  Chase, 219.

  Chauncey, 115.

  Cheesebro, 217.

  Cheney, 103.

  Clapp, 33

  Claprodale, 31.

  Clark, 218.

  Clements, 23.

  Cleveland, 217.

  Closson, 139.

  Clowes, 222.

  Coburn, 105.

  Coddington, 120.

  Coe, 194.

  Cole, 92.

  Coleman, 140.

  Colfax, 160.

  Conklin, 182.

  Conley, 113.

  Collins, 63.

  Coloway, 122.

  Colt, 100.

  Conover, 175.

  Cook, 114.

  Coolbough, 27.

  Coolidge, 217.

  Cooly, 61.

  Cooper, 88.

  Corey, 15.

  Cornell, 57.

  Corpening, 164.

  Cortwright, 18.

  Corwin, 187.

  Covert, 16.

  Couch, 92.

  Councill, 121.

  Covey, 99.

  Cowell, 27.

  Cox, 174.

  Coykendall, 96.

  Craft, 106.

  Craig, 222.

  Cramer, 87.

  Crandall, 99.

  Crawford, 189.

  Crisman, 114.

  Crocker, 47.

  Crone, 96.

  Cronin, 100.

  Crosette, 168.

  Cross, 100.

  Crossman, 198.

  Crouse, 133.

  Crowell, 131.

  Crumpter, 166.

  Culver, 25.

  Cummings, 192.

  Cunningham, 112.

  Currie, 17.

  Curtis, 192.

  Cushing, 161.

  Cutter, 180.


  Dales, 200.

  Dallsom, 33.

  Dalrymple, 87.

  Danes, 77.

  Darrow, 157.

  Davenport, 178.

  Davidge, 33.

  Davids, 198.

  Davidson, 190.

  Davis, 131.

  Dayton, 206.

  De Camp, 133.

  Decker, 222.

  Dietrick, 62.

  De la Montanye, 77.

  Delany, 34.

  Delaboy, 160.

  Deihl, 100.

  Delma, 30.

  De Money, 63.

  Denham, 123.

  Denispaugh, 52.

  Dennis, 180.

  Denniston, 80.

  Deo, 59.

  De Poe, 96.

  De Voy, 120.

  Deyton, 158.

  Dewes, 28.

  De Witt, 113.

  De Wolf, 100.

  Dickerson, 76.

  Dickson, 163.

  Dilldine, 128.

  Dillen, 204.

  Ditmass, 139.

  Disbow, 58.

  Dixon, 206.

  Dobbins, 88.

  Dorr, 152.

  Doty, 54.

  Drake, 25.

  Draper, 203.

  Duffield, 13.

  Dula, 121.

  Dunham, 29.

  Dunnica, 167.

  Durfer, 109.

  Dusenbury, 48.

  Dutcher, 63.

  Duval, 116.

  Dwalf, 115.


  Eagles, 74.

  Easterbrooks, 36.

  Eckhert, 59.

  Edgar, 36.

  Edwards, 79.

  Eggleston, 92.

  Elliott, 42, 44.

  Ellis, 18.

  Ellsworth, 193.

  Emmons, 30.

  Entrolt, 50.

  Essey, 116.

  Evans, 154.


  Finley, 138.

  Firman, 143.

  Fitzpatrick, 138.

  Fairchild, 160.

  Familton, 100.

  Fanning, 45.

  Farmer, 28.

  Farrand, 119.

  Faulkner, 78.

  Fawkes, 115.

  Fee, 105.

  Ferguson, 164.

  Ferris, 92.

  Field, 37.

  Figart, 116.

  Fish, 172.

  Fisher, 128.

  Fishing, 114.

  Fitch, 96.

  Fonda, 52.

  Forbes, 44.

  Fordyce, 73.

  Forster, 46.

  Foster, 193.

  Fountain, 31.

  Fowler, 120.

  Fox, 177.

  Francisco, 207.

  Frost, 170.


  Gaithers, 164.

  Galloway, 108.

  Gamble, 169.

  Ganner, 114.

  Gardner, 187.

  Garlock, 119.

  Garritt, 116.

  Gasper, 39.

  Gates, 152.

  Gaylord, 143.

  Gentry, 166.

  Gibson, 66.

  Gilchrist, 156.

  Gildersleeve, 39.

  Giles, 155.

  Gilkey, 79.

  Gillam, 170.

  Gillette, 174.

  Gillingham, 36.

  Gilston, 97.

  Girvin, 168.

  Goff, 27.

  Goldsmith, 187.

  Good, 96.

  Goodsell, 18.

  Gordon, 139.

  Gore, 66.

  Gott, 160.

  Grant, 160.

  Gray, 220.

  Green, 155.

  Greenfield, 148.

  Greenleaf, 219.

  Gregory, 97.

  Griffin, 31.

  Griffis, 116.

  Griggs, 191.

  Gross, 92.

  Grover, 170.

  Guest, 84.

  Gulick, 85.


  Hacket, 89.

  Hadden, 48.

  Haddock, 135.

  Hagar, 20.

  Hagins, 28.

  Haight, 49.

  Holey, 222.

  Hallock, 186.

  Halsey, 220.

  Halstead, 79.

  Hamilton, 164.

  Hammond, 53.

  Hancock, 99.

  Hannos, 77.

  Harmer, 91.

  Harris, 159.

  Harrison, 165.

  Hart, 153.

  Hartzog, 123.

  Harwood, 86.

  Hatfield, 120.

  Hathaway, 221.

  Haviland, 58.

  Hawk, 89.

  Hayden,63.

  Hayes, 161.

  Headley, 113.

  Hedges, 221.

  Hempstead, 183.

  Hewitt, 60.

  Hickok, 40.

  Hicks, 124.

  Hildreth, 98.

  Hiler, 92.

  Hill, 179.

  Hillis, 106.

  Hills, 19.

  Hines, 67.

  Hiney, 62.

  Hix, 16.

  Hodgkin, 116.

  Hofford, 176.

  Holabird, 51.

  Holbrook, 204.

  Holcomb, 61.

  Holiday, 39.

  Hollenback, 100.

  Hollow, 24.

  Homet, 106.

  Hope, 170.

  Hopper, 50.

  Hough, 130.

  Hovey, 79.

  Howard, 121.

  Howe, 125.

  Howell, 172.

  Howland,15.

  Hoyt, 28.

  Hubbard, 37.

  Huff, 119.

  Hughes, 180.

  Hughson, 75.

  Hulse, 71.

  Hunsike, 119.

  Hunt, 129.

  Hunter, 167.

  Huntting, 201.

  Hurlburt, 218.

  Hutchins, 120.

  Huyck, 27.

  Huyler, 95.

  Hyatt, 17.


  Ingols, 189.

  Ingusoll, 46.

  Ingham, 101, 143.

  Ingraham, 64.

  Insley, 96.


  Jackson, 120.

  Jacobus, 203.

  James, 53.

  Jarvis, 113.

  Jaycox, 49.

  Jayne, 72.

  Jennings, 108.

  Johnson, 177.

  Joice, 192.


  Keck, 119.

  Kelsey, 85.

  Kenolly, 215.

  Kerrick, 46.

  Kilmer, 44.

  King, 87.

  Kinney, 192.

  Knapp, 51.

  Kremer, 23.


  Ladd, 99.

  Laflin, 189.

  Laing, 133.

  Lake, 138.

  Lance, 116.

  Landrus, 58.

  Langdon, 216.

  Landon, 197.

  Lane, 31.

  Larkin, 92.

  Laser, 109.

  Lauer, 29.

  Laurene, 116.

  Lawson, 188.

  Lee, 71, 168.

  Leek, 74.

  L'Hommedieu, 185.

  Lemon, 88.

  Lent, 41.

  Leonard, 216.

  Letts, 60.

  Lewis, 206.

  Lindsley, 115.

  Lines, 49.

  Llewellyn, 113.

  Lobdell, 52.

  Lockwood, 134.

  Loder, 55.

  Loseel, 155.

  Luce, 202.

  Lung, 113.

  Lynch, 166.

  Lyons, 188.


  Mack, 56.

  Main, 52.

  Mallory, 167.

  Manley, 100.

  Mansfield, 38.

  Mapes, 172.

  Marks, 47.

  Martin, 100.

  Maryatt, 59.

  Mast, 157.

  Masters, 198.

  Mathers, 215.

  May, 188.

  Mayhew, 27.

  McClean, 90.

  McClure, 200.

  McCollom, 131.

  McCord, 55.

  McCoy, 39.

  McCurry, 158.

  McDaniel, 76.

  McDermody, 45.

  McKeel, 33.

  McNair, 38.

  Mead, 119.

  Means, 46.


  Meeks, 30.

  Merrick, 131.

  Merrifield, 54.

  Merritt, 204.

  Miller, 166.

  Milliken, 186.

  Mills, 22.

  Minier, 34.

  Minnis, 91.

  Minturn, 134.

  Molther, 100.

  Moore, 78, 79, 120, 126, 167, 191, 194.

  Moren, 28.

  Morgan, 97.

  Morrow, 128.

  Morse, 215.

  Mulford, 135.

  Myer, 41.


  Naylor, 94.

  Nelson, 49.

  Newcomb,100.

  Newell, 177.

  Nichols, 112.

  Nobles, 180.

  Noell, 134.

  Norris, 159.

  Norton, 128.


  Oakes, 111.

  Oakford, 88.

  Odell, 175.

  Ogden, 25.

  Olney, 88.

  Osborn, 205.

  Overton, 199.

  Owens, 28.


  Page, 55.

  Paine, 216.

  Palmer, 166.

  Park, 45.

  Parker, 136.

  Parshall, 92.

  Paschal, 115.

  Pasco, 162.

  Passage, 46.

  Patten, 44.

  Pattengill, 179.

  Pauling, 107.

  Payne, 202.

  Pearl, 128.

  Peebles, 65.

  Penne, 114.

  Penland, 157.

  Percy, 216.

  Perkins, 206.

  Perry, 178.

  Petit, 28.

  Phelps, 28.

  Philips, 196.

  Pierce, 27.

  Piercy, 158.

  Piersall, 49.

  Pierson, 54.

  Pillsbury, 222.

  Pinney, 162.

  Pitcher, 105.

  Pixley, 56.

  Pluche, 30.

  Polhomus, 176.

  Pomeroy,161.

  Pope, 106.

  Porter, 120.

  Post, 42.

  Poteet, 124.

  Potts, 52.

  Powers, 112.

  Pray, 112.

  Price, 139.

  Priest, 77.

  Printz, 144.

  Pruner, 157.

  Pultz, 137.

  Purcell, 63.

  Purdy, 55.

  Putnam, 131.


  Quereau, 24.


  Rackett, 68.

  Radaker, 40.

  Rafter, 136.

  Ranney, 207.

  Ransom, 62.

  Raymond, 162.

  Ready, 162.

  Reed, 119.

  Reeves, 206.

  Reynolds, 206.

  Rhoads, 127.

  Richards, 124.

  Ricket, 95.

  Rippet, 66.

  Robbins, 21.

  Roberts, 134.

  Robertson, 159.

  Robinson, 160.

  Rockwell, 207.

  Roe, 109.

  Rogers, 222.

  Rolf, 133.

  Root, 112.

  Rose, 117.

  Rouse, 61.

  Ruggles, 219.

  Rumsey, 189.

  Rundell, 27.

  Rushmore, 222.

  Ryder, 36.

  Ryneck, 194.


  Sackett, 61.

  Safford, 219.

  Savage, 58.

  Sawyer, 106.

  Schenick, 92.

  Schoonover, 143.

  Scoville, 100.

  Scott, 41.

  Sealring, 180.

  Sebie, 42.

  Seely, 68.

  Service, 92.

  Seward, 89.

  Shalls, 77.

  Sharp, 149.

  Sheldon, 207.

  Shelly, 24.

  Shepherd, 192.

  Sherman, 79.

  Sherwood, 56.

  Shields, 64.

  Shoemaker, 56.

  Shons, 132.

  Shores, 67.

  Skellinger, 128.

  Sibley, 119.

  Slawson, 90.

  Slayton, 131.

  Sleight, 48.

  Sliker, 75.

  Slotery, 143.

  Smith, 18 _to_ 223 _almost inclusive_.

  Smock, 95.

  Snyder, 139.

  Spaulding, 135.

  Spear, 152.

  Spencer, 62.

  Spinner, 83.

  Spoor, 91.

  Starr, 177.

  Stalford, 144.

  Stansbrough, 119.

  Stanton, 53.

  Stebbins, 28.

  Stedman, 120.

  Steel, 114.

  Stephens, 41.

  Stephenson, 61.

  Stevens, 44.

  Stoddard, 78.

  Stone, 204.

  Stoute, 75.

  Stringham, 79.

  Strong, 24, 190.

  Stuart, 158.

  Studdiford, 139.

  Sturdevant, 100.

  Sutphin, 168.

  Sutton, 134.

  Swackhammer, 75.

  Swain, 59.

  Swarthout, 51.

  Sweazy, 75.


  Talmadge, 204.

  Taylor, 103.

  Terry, 11, 67, 68, 69, 70, 74, 75, 80, 99, 185, 186, 199, 205, 220,
        221.

  Thomas, 164.

  Thompson, 219.

  Thrall, 204.

  Tiffany, 129.

  Timlow, 132.

  Todd, 96.

  Tompkins, 31.

  Tooker, 203.

  Torrance, 40.

  Tower, 134.

  Towner, 63.

  Townsend, 222.

  Trany, 91.

  Treadeau, 215.

  Trowbridge, 206.

  Trumper, 29.

  Tupper, 106.

  Turrell, 143.

  Tuthill, 9, 26, 27, 69, 78, 180, 199, 220.

  Twist, 131.


  Underhill, 55.

  Upton, 111.


  Vadenburg, 96.

  Vail, 174.

  Van Alstine, 136.

  Vance, 83.

  Vanderslice, 138.

  Van Devort, 93.

  Van Doren, 75.

  Van Duzen, 78.

  Vandyke, 51.

  Van Heusen, 24.

  Van Kuren, 134.

  Vanleer, 115.

  Van Orden, 111.

  Van Ordell, 88.

  Van Scoy, 92.

  Verder, 56.

  Vetter, 138.

  Vibbert, 25.

  Vogler, 164.

  Voltair, 215.

  Vought, 62.


  Wader, 136.

  Wadsworth, 145.

  Wales, 215.

  Waller, 113.

  Warner, 90.

  Warren, 50.

  Washburn, 103.

  Weakly, 153.

  Weaver, 202.

  Webb, 188.

  Webster, 51.

  Webus, 31.

  Weeks, 55.

  Welch, 204.

  Wells, 11, 68, 69, 99, 144, 184, 185.

  Welsh, 26.

  Wesley, 114.

  Westall, 157.

  Westbrook, 128.

  Wheat, 90.

  Wheeler, 161.

  White, 116, 129, 205.

  Whiting, 131.

  Wickham, 198.

  Wickizer, 113.

  Widding, 79.

  Wightman, 116.

  Wilcox, 178.

  Wilder, 96.

  Wiles, 107.

  Wiley, 75.

  Wilbour, 180.

  Williams, 218.

  Williamson, 98.

  Wilson, 208.

  Winans, 115.

  Winchel, 40.

  Wogg, 166.

  Wood, 185.

  Workman, 95.

  Worth, 203.

  Wright, 207.


  Yeatman, 159.

  Yocum, 39.

  Youngs, 220.


  Zaccheus, 68.

  Zimmerman, 202.




APPENDIX.


  MALONE, N. Y., _16 August, 1871_.

  GEO. F. HORTON, M. D.:

    _My Dear Friend_: Your very kind and interesting letter of the
    18th inst., came duly to hand some days since. I have often
    heard it said that the Hortons of this country sprung from two
    brothers, who emigrated from England at an early day, and that
    one of them settled in Massachusetts, and the other on Long
    Island. My ancestor, Stephen Horton, I think, was a descendant
    of Thomas Horton, who settled in Springfield, Mass., perhaps
    a son of Thomas. My brother, John Horton, many years since
    obtained from Dr. Horton, of Hartford, Ct., the genealogy
    that I send you. There was many years since a Dr. Horton who
    resided at Springfield, whom my eldest sister visited, and who
    was a relative of ours. He had a son who was also a doctor in
    New York City, and also engaged in the grocery and provision
    business. I think he is dead. I am satisfied that Barnabas
    Horton was a brother of Thomas.

    Stephen Horton settled in West Springfield, Mass. He had two
    sons, Benjamin and Stephen. Benjamin, born in 1720; died at
    Brandon, Vermont, 13 Jan., 1803. He left two sons, Gideon and
    Moses, also a daughter, who married a Mr. Underwood.

    Gideon Horton was born in 1744, in West Springfield, Mass.;
    married Sarah Douglass, great aunt to the Hon. Stephen A.
    Douglass. He died at Brandon, Vt., 16 Dec., 1801. His sons
    were Hiram, Gideon, Jr., and John. Hiram, born 5 March, 1764,
    at West Springfield; married Sarah Drury, 16 June, 1785, at
    Pittsford, Vt.; moved to Malone, Franklin Co., N. Y., in 1808.
    He was one of the leading men of the county, holding the office
    of County Treasurer, and first Judge of the Courts for several
    years. He died 5 Oct., 1824.

    He owned a large quantity of land, also mill-property, and
    several mercantile stores. He belonged to the Presbyterian
    Church, and was active and consistent in its duties. He had
    three sons and seven daughters. Sons were: Harry, John, and
    Hiram, Jr. (myself), all born in Brandon, Vt. Harry, born 22
    July, 1796; died in Constable, N. Y., 22 August, 1840. He was
    a farmer, a merchant, and a manufacturer of flour and lumber.
    He belonged to the Congregational Church. He had two children,
    Hiram Safford Horton (married and settled in Wisconsin, and
    has a large family), and Delia A. Horton, who married Howard
    E. King, Esq., merchant at Malone. John, son of Hiram. Sen.,
    born 22 Dec., 1797; died at Madrid, St. Lawrence Co., N. Y.,
    14 Oct., 1859, without issue. He was also a member of the
    Congregational Church, and followed farming, milling, and
    lumbering. Hiram, Jr., born 22 April, 1799; resides in Malone,
    N. Y.; married 20 Jan., 1822, Adaline Wead. Has three children,
    all born at Malone, N. Y. I. William L. Horton, born 28 Oct.,
    1822; died 19 Sept., 1861. He was a lawyer; left two children:
    George F. and Anna M. Horton. II. Adeline Mead Horton, born 21
    Jan., 1834; married in Oct., 1864, Myron G. Horton, grandson
    of Dr. John Horton, who was the son of Gideon Horton, Sen.,
    being her 3d cousin. They reside at Malone, N. Y., and have two
    children. III. Frederick, born 22 August, 1838, and died 13
    April, 1867, childless. I have now named the male members of
    my branch of the family, and for the family of Gideon Horton
    Jr., I refer you to Dr. Charles W. Horton, of Brattleborough,
    Vt., one of his sons, and for the family of Dr. John Horton,
    I refer you to his son, Dr. Geo. Horton, Winauskie Falls, Vt.
    The Hortons seem to have been given largely to the medical
    profession. When your work is accomplished, I shall be glad to
    have you send me one copy.

  I am yours, truly,
  HIRAM HORTON.

Mr. Horton, the writer of the foregoing letter, was a
highly-respected member and Elder of the Presbyterian Church of
Malone. He died 31 August, 1873. He was a dealer in flour, lumber,
and dry-goods, real-estate, and merchandising of various kinds. Mrs.
Myron G. Horton, informing me of his death, remarks that she is now
(1874) the only one of his children living.

       *       *       *       *       *

  17½ WEST 30 ST., CINCINNATI, OHIO, _May, 1871_.

  DR. GEO. F. HORTON:

    _Dear Sir_: While at Pomeroy a few weeks since on a visit,
    my father showed me your letter, requesting information in
    regard to our descent, and asked me to answer your questions.
    I am not really in a condition to give you any particular
    information, for the reason that the notes I once made on the
    subject, when, in 1864, I graduated at Dana College, are out
    of my reach. A sketch of our genealogy and history had to be
    recorded in our "Class Book," and I there broke ground in this
    to me until then, unattractive field, in obedience to that
    necessity. The main facts that I recall are, however, these:
    I did not get very far in tracing my descent. My father,
    Valentine B. Horton, was the son of Zenas Horton, who was the
    son of David Horton--David was born near the beginning of the
    last century; no! in the 2d or 3d decade, and fought in the old
    French war, and was also a soldier in the Revolution, and was
    killed at Saratoga. He lived in Braintree, Mass. Zenas Horton
    moved thence to Windsor, Vt., where my father was born. Beyond
    David I did not spend labor enough to penetrate; but I was
    rendered nearly certain, I remember, that he was a grand-son
    and great-grand-son, respectively, of two certain Thomas
    Hortons, one of Springfield, and the other of Charlestown,
    Mass., the elder of whom landed in Dorchester, from the
    schooner _Mary and John_, in 1633. Barnabas, of Southold, I
    remember coming across, but I was obliged, after following that
    track for some time, to give him up, and settle upon Thomas,
    the ancestor of David.... I shall be glad to communicate with
    you further on this subject. My address I have already given at
    my office (law), as above, and believe most sincerely yours,

  S. DANA HORTON.

I have had some correspondence with this gentleman since the date of
the above letter, but he has given no further information as to his
lineage. The above would run thus: 6. S. Dana; 5. Valentine B.; 4.
Zenas; 3. David; 2. Thomas; 1. Thomas. Some links are missing, for
certainly, counting from the first Thomas, S. Dana Horton must be in
the 8th or 9th generation. S. Dana wields the pen of a ready writer,
and he has achieved considerable notoriety in the political reform
literature of the day, especially in favor of so using the elective
franchise as to give increased representation to minorities. Several
of his articles have appeared in the _Penn Magazine_, of Philadelphia.

       *       *       *       *       *

  BARRINGTON, R. I., _March 27th, 1871_.

  DR. GEO. F. HORTON:

    _Dear Sir_: Your letter of inquiry lies before me, supplying
    more information than I shall be able to give you. Ours is a
    Boston family, where my father and grandfather both resided.
    We were six brothers and four sisters, all of whom lived to
    their maturity, but of whom only five now survive. The eldest
    of these was Rev. Jotham Horton, of whom you inquire, who died
    in Boston, in Feb., 1853. His son, Rev. Jotham Horton, died, a
    martyr to freedom, by the mob spirit in New Orleans, some years
    ago. Our father's name was Jotham, who was a ship-smith, and
    did the iron work of the historic frigate _Constitution_.

    Our family being large, my parents allowed me to go into the
    country (Worcester County), at the early age of seven. I was
    educated a paper-maker previous to entering upon a course
    of liberal education. Thus separated from home, I had less
    knowledge of our ancestry than might otherwise have been the
    case. Supposing that my surviving brother at Mobile has better
    information regarding our ancestry than I have, I take the
    liberty of forwarding your letter to him, requesting him to
    supply any intelligence he may have at hand. He having been
    long a resident there, and loyal to the Union, is an ex-Mayor
    of the city, appointed by Gen. Pope, and is at present,
    happily for him, Judge of Probate for the County. His address
    is "Hon. Gustavus Horton, Mobile, Alabama." From him you will
    probably hear soon. Wishing you much success in your laudable
    investigations, and quite willing to recognize any of our
    cousins in the Keystone State,

  I am yours, &c.,

  F. HORTON.

The Rev. Francis Horton, writer of the foregoing letter, was one of
the excellent of the earth. He was a scholar and quite a poet, and
an able and much loved minister of the Word. He died in 1873. It is
highly probable that he was a descendant of Joshua I.

In connexion with this, we give the following thrilling article,
which was published in the _Boston Watchman and Reflector_, soon
after the barbarous murder of the Rev. Jotham Horton:


  LAST HOURS OF A NEW ORLEANS MARTYR.

  AN AFFECTING SKETCH.

    "Good-by, Emma," he said, "I shall not be gone long. It can't
    take more than ten minutes to open the Convention, and then
    I shall come right away. Look for me at three o'clock, at
    farthest," and the young pastor kissed his wife and hurried
    away to the city.

    That day was destined to be one among the most memorable in the
    annals of human wickedness since the famous St. Bartholomew's.
    The members of the Union Convention had looked forward to
    it with apprehension. They knew that the spirit of the late
    rebellion still survived in New Orleans, and they could not
    hope that they should be permitted to assemble without some
    molestation from disorderly individuals, but they had no
    suspicions that the masses of the city would rise against
    them, _organized_ for deliberate bloodshed. They did not know
    that all the arms had been bought up, till the gun-shops
    contained not so much as a pocket-pistol. They did not know
    that the Mayor had telegraphed to the President that there
    would certainly be a riot, and had received the assurance that
    the military would not interfere with the civil power. They
    did not know that the police force had been increased by the
    addition of a gang of blood-thirsty men, and that the municipal
    authorities had agreed upon signals, and arranged to begin
    the riot themselves. Watched by no suspicion, and awed by no
    Butler's strong right hand, the conspirators were suffered to
    perfect their preparations, and when the morning of the 30th
    of July dawned, the treacherous officials appeared at the
    station-house fully armed, and waiting the opportunity for
    their bloody work.

    The pastor of the Colleseum Baptist Church, Rev. Jotham W.
    Horton, had been requested to open the Convention with prayer.
    Moved by the warmest Christian sympathy for the freedmen,
    this young New England minister had gone to the South with
    his wife, to give his best energies to their welfare. He was
    a man of sincere piety and a large heart; pure as a little
    child, self-denying where duty was concerned to an extent that
    often made him suffer, and so peaceable that though repeatedly
    insulted, and even once fired upon, and though conscious that
    he was fatally marked by malignant disloyalists, he would never
    go armed.

    After taking leave of his wife, Mr. Horton proceeded in the
    cars from his residence in Carrolton to the city. Ever apt to
    look hopefully on the worst prospects, and slow to suspect evil
    of his fellow-men, he had felt no fears of injury for this day,
    beyond perhaps a forcible seizure and commitment to the parish
    prison.

    The hour arriving for opening the Convention, and Mr. Horton
    having entered the hall, stood up to offer prayer just as the
    clock struck twelve. Strongly and fervently his words came
    up, breathing petitions for the peace of his country and the
    deliverance of the oppressed. God heard him, but with that
    prayer His servant's work ended, and then He gave him for a
    little while to the cruel wrath of his enemies, that He might
    make that wrath praise Him. Immediately on the sounding of the
    stroke of noon from the city clocks, and simultaneously with
    the opening of Mr. Horton's prayer, the armed police filed out
    of the several stations, three hundred strong, and marched
    toward the Institute. Some of them entered the hall during the
    prayer, a mob in the meantime rapidly collecting round the
    door, and hardly had the good man uttered the closing "amen"
    when a miscreant fired a bullet at his head.

    There could be no longer any doubt of the intentions of the
    officers and the mob. The latter assailed the windows and
    crushed in at the doors. "Kill him! kill him!" they yelled.
    "Shoot every cursed Yankee in the house!" Just then all the
    bells in the city began to toll. It was the preconcerted signal
    of slaughter, and now the horrors of the day began.

    The disloyalist ruffians rushed in with pistols, knives and
    clubs, and commenced their appointed work of murder. Resistance
    was hopeless. The Convention broke up in the wildest confusion,
    some of its members falling dead, and many mortally wounded in
    the hall, while a few who could, fled. The Union men saw that
    they were doomed. Instead of protecting them, and arresting the
    rioters at the firing of the first shot, as with their force
    they could easily have done, _the police headed the attack_,
    and there is reason to believe that one of their number fired
    the first shot.

    Mr. Horton received five balls in his body, and fell. These
    balls were fired by policemen. Not satisfied with their
    work, they seized him, battered his head with their billies,
    stabbed him, kicked and dragged him on the pavements to the
    first station, the mob following behind, cursing, beating and
    trampling him with their shoes. Thrusting him into a cell, he
    was left mangled and senseless.

    Meantime the shopkeepers of the city had closed their stores,
    and strolled about, gratified spectators of the fiendish
    carnival, greeting the murderers of Horton, and every squad of
    policemen that passed them dragging a bleeding loyalist, with
    shouts of "Good! good! Kill the white nigger."

    Around the Mechanics' Institute and in the adjacent streets
    upwards of one hundred negroes lay weltering in their blood,
    and the dead carts drove by loaded with warm corpses and
    bodies of the wounded still writhing with life, all tumbled
    indiscriminately together.

    In one of these carts the mangled Horton was flung, after lying
    awhile at the station-house, and under a stifling load of dead
    and wounded negroes, his stomach crushed in by a blow of a
    heavy plank, he was taken to the Marine Hospital.

    Furious with the taste of blood, the police and their fellow
    Thugs raged up and down some of the streets of the city,
    calling out the names of well-known loyalists, declaring their
    intention to slaughter every Union man in New Orleans. In the
    midst of the excitement and carnage, the bayonets of Federal
    troops appeared, and further murder was prevented. The mob
    dispersed, and the blood-stained streets, and battered windows,
    and muffled groans from distant hospital wards alone testified
    to the horrors of the 30th of July.

    As the hours of that bloody day passed, the wife of Mr. Horton
    waited at her home, five miles distant, for his return. Three
    o'clock came, the limit he had set for his absence. She looked
    long and anxiously to catch a glimpse of him approaching along
    the familiar street. He did not come, and her anxiety grew into
    alarm. To add to her terror, a breathless messenger arrived
    at her residence, and warned her that she would not be safe
    there that night, for trouble had happened at the State-House,
    and the secessionists were searching for all the Unionists in
    the city and suburbs. Hastily summoning the negro servant, she
    told her to bar the doors and windows, and with a few hurried
    preparations then set off for the city, to learn the fate of
    her husband.

    Having formerly boarded with a Mrs. E----, she took her way
    first to her house, and made known her anxious errand. She was
    told of the riot and massacre, and at once feared the worst.
    Several young men who boarded at the house volunteered to
    search for Mr. Horton. They returned late in the evening, but
    could give her no news, save that he had been badly wounded.
    They dared not communicate their own convictions of his fate.

    Only the darkness of the dangerous streets and the restraint of
    friends prevented the almost distracted woman from going forth
    that night to continue the search herself. As it was, the night
    brought no sleep to her eyes, and as soon as it was morning she
    started on her sad errand.

    Information had been received through the city papers that Gen.
    Baird, the military commandant, had released all who had been
    arrested and confined by the police, giving the name of her
    husband among the rest, and stating that he had returned home.
    Acting on this representation, she went alone to Carrolton,
    but only to return by the next train. He was not there.
    Without waiting for breakfast she set off for Gen. Baird's
    headquarters; a young Methodist clergyman, Mr. Henry, one of
    Mrs. E----'s boarders, insisting on being her company.

    No sooner did Gen. Baird see Mrs. Horton and knew who she was,
    than he expressed much surprise that her husband had not been
    seen, and told her he had ordered his release. Perhaps she
    would find him at the City Hall. To this place she immediately
    went, but she searched in vain. He had not been there. She then
    hurried to the First Police Station, determined to wring from
    the brutal officers a confession of what they had done with
    her husband. Entering the office, she forced her way within
    the rails, and asked of the clerk what had been done with her
    husband. The man declared that "Preacher Horton" had been sent
    by him to Charity Hospital, and she at once hurried thither.
    Again she was disappointed. He had not been seen there! (The
    truth was, the cart which carried Mr. Horton's body had stopped
    there, and been sent away, as it appeared to be occupied only
    by blacks.) The horrible idea now suggested itself to the
    afflicted woman that her husband had been conveyed away with a
    load of dead bodies, and had been buried alive, but, as a last
    resort, she determined to visit the Marine Hospital. This was
    in a low and distant part of the city, and devoted entirely to
    negroes, and she could not have believed he would be carried
    there by his worst enemies, but at a friend's suggestion she
    sought the place, still accompanied by Mr. Henry.

    Arrived at the gate, she was refused entrance, but catching a
    glimpse of Dr. Harris, the head surgeon, whom she knew, she
    called to him, and asked him if her husband was there. Dr.
    Harris could give her no positive assurance, but immediately
    ordered the servant to admit her. Forgetting her weariness
    in her joy that her long quest had at last succeeded, the
    faithful woman bounded up the steps, and without waiting to be
    directed, rushed in among the patients, found out her husband,
    and sank exhausted upon his bosom. What a spectacle! The form
    she loved a bruised and helpless mass of flesh and blood, his
    head swollen to the size of two, his left arm useless, and his
    right shattered and mangled. He moved perpetually about with
    the restless, nervous gestures of a dreaming infant. So badly
    trampled and beaten was his head and face that his eyes were
    blinded, and a painful retching, produced by the injuries to
    his stomach, obstructed his breath and speech. But through all
    the anguish and darkness of his wreck he knew his wife. That
    she should have recognized him is a miracle to all who do not
    understand the inspired sagacity of a wife's affection.

    "Wipe my face, Emma," he gasped, as if she had been bending
    over him ever since he fell.

    Worn and broken-hearted, the poor woman sat down by her
    husband's side, and tried to strengthen herself for the task of
    soothing and comforting his last hours, for she knew too well
    that he could not live. Nineteen long hours she had searched
    for him, and now to find him thus!

    Few comforts were to be found in that hospital, though the
    attendants, seeing her distress, evidently meant to treat
    her kindly. Up to this time the wounded man had lain in the
    warden's room, but on the next morning, which was Wednesday,
    he was removed to a more airy apartment. The operation of
    trepanning was then performed on his head, though with little
    hope of permanent benefit. When this was over, and the burden
    upon his brain was thus relieved, the sufferer looked up and
    repeated,

      "When I can read my title clear
        To mansions in the skies,
      I'll bid farewell to every fear,
        And wipe my weeping eyes.

      "Should earth against my soul engage--"

    Here weakness prevented him, and he whispered to his wife,

    "You finish it."

    He slept a good deal, but seemed always conscious of his wife's
    presence, frequently putting up his restless hand to touch
    her face, and remind himself, in his blindness, of her loved
    features. When he talked, it was of his unfinished work, his
    conviction of the justice of the cause in which he fell, his
    anxieties for his wife, left alone in a cruel world, and of his
    enemies and murderers always forgivingly, as if they knew not
    what they did. At different times, too, he spoke of the riot,
    relating facts and incidents as I have set them down.

    It afflicted him much to leave his wife penniless. He had had a
    little money in his pocket when he came to the Convention, but
    that, with the gold studs in his bosom, had been plundered by
    some of the ruffians who took part in mutilating his person.

    Thus he lingered until the sixth day after his injury. When
    the morning of Sunday, the 5th of August, came, he remembered
    that he had an appointment to exchange pulpits with a colored
    brother in the city, and said,

    "Emma, we must send word to Bro. Miles that I can't come. I
    don't feel quite well enough to preach."

    As time went on, his mind began to wander, and he fancied
    himself in his own pulpit. He invoked the Divine blessing, he
    gave out a hymn and sung, wounded and suffering as he was;
    his wife, who wept as she thought of the melody of his own
    fine voice, joining him at his request, half choked by her
    tears. Then he prayed with her, sung again, and preached,
    taking for his text, "Out of the abundance of the heart the
    mouth speaketh." After these exercises, he expressed his wish
    to close with the Lord's Supper, and immediately began the
    beautiful ceremony. His wife, anxious to gratify him, skilfully
    aided with such meagre conveniences as were at hand, to carry
    out his touching fancy. He partook with her what seemed to him
    the symbolic bread and wine.

    "We both drink from the same cup, Emma," said he.

    Another hymn, a benediction, and the sufferer began to grow
    weak, as if, indeed, his work was done.

    "I am going now, Emma," he whispered. "I'm sorry you can't come
    with me. In the fall you'll come."

    Then there were no more connected sentences, but incoherent
    syllables of prayer, and whispers of saintly hope, "In the
    vale--the vale--home yonder--good-by," and at six o'clock that
    Sabbath evening the gentle-spirited Horton fell asleep in Jesus.

    Thus perished a martyr to freedom and equal rights, as sincere
    and pure a man as God ever welcomed "through great tribulation"
    to the immortal pleasures of His presence.

    To the tender consideration of her friends, never so numerous
    as now, and to the merciful consolation of Almighty God, who
    never pitied her as He now pities her, we commend the weeping
    widow, and pray that she may long live to share the honor of
    her martyred husband's fame.

  THERON BROWN.

       *       *       *       *       *

  MONSON, MASS., _May 27th, 1874_.

  A. E. HORTON, ESQ.

    _My Dear Sir_: I have received several copies of the "_San
    Diego Union_," the last No., April 30, also a copy of the
    "_World_," March 20th, which contains a picture of San Diego.
    Also a sketch of the city on a small sheet, which gives an
    account of the origin of the new city, and of your relation to
    it as the founder and the source of its enterprise.

    For these favors I desire to express my cordial thanks. The
    growth of your new city is indeed wonderful, and a brilliant
    future is certain to come. Were I a young man, the temptation
    would be strong to cross the continent and join in your great
    enterprise. But my future is short, and must be devoted to the
    commemoration of the past.

    It has so happened that in my work as the genealogist of my
    native town of Union, I have recently devoted special efforts
    to the two families of _Horton_ and _Burleigh_. Dr. Horton, of
    Terrytown, Pa., proposes to publish the annals of the Horton
    family in this country, nearly all of whom are the posterity of
    BARNABAS, who came from England.

    I have in charge the genealogy of Rev. Ezra Horton, your
    grandfather, and have nearly completed the collection of nearly
    all his descendants of the fourth generation (to which you
    belong), from Rev. Ezra, of Union. I have the names, with dates
    of birth, of three of your father's children who (including
    yourself) were born in Union. The rest of your father's family
    I have not. I desire very much to obtain a complete list of
    all the children of your father's family, with date of births,
    marriages, and deaths, so far as possible. I understand that
    your father is still living, though at an advanced age. I have
    an obituary notice of your mother, published in a San Diego
    paper soon after her death, a year ago last March.

    Rev. Lucien Burleigh, the son of _Rinaldo Burleigh_, of
    Plainfield, Conn., is endeavoring to obtain a complete record
    of all the descendants of _John Burleigh_, the first comer of
    the name to which your mother belonged. Your mother was first
    cousin to Rinaldo Burleigh, who was a long time Principal of
    Plainfield Academy, and the father of a number of sons who are
    well known as writers, and as editors.

    I visited Union last week, and saw my uncle, Capt. Chauncey
    Paul, and his wife, whose name before marriage was Polly
    Armour, daughter of John Armour. They both recollect your
    father and mother. John Armour was a near neighbor of Mr. Jacob
    Burleigh, and the children of the families grew up together.

    The effort of Rev. Lucien Burleigh will result in obtaining
    full accounts of all branches of his family. I was able to give
    him a full account of the children of the first comer, _John_,
    and his wife, _Meriam Fuller_, whose ancestry I have traced far
    back among the early settlers of Willington and Ashford, in
    Conn., and in Rehoboth, Mass.

    My interest in the two families of Horton and Burleigh, arises
    not from the recent efforts to procure genealogies of those
    two families by parties specially interested. I have long been
    engaged in collecting facts pertaining to the history of Union,
    my native town. I have made it a point to study the history of
    all the early settlers and long residents. I have traced the
    ancestry of very many back to England and Scotland, through the
    Scotch-Irish emigration, which took place nearly one hundred
    and sixty years ago. Very many of the early settlers of Union
    were Scotch-Irish--as the Pauls, the Lawlors, the Moores, the
    Armours, the Crawfords, the McNalls, and others who, like all
    the race, were genuine Scotch in their character, and were
    among the best of the emigrants of the olden times. They were
    not connected at all with the modern or ancient Irish race.

    The Hortons, Burleighs, and Laflins were genuine Englishmen in
    their ancestry. So were the Fosters, the Badgers, the Sessions,
    the Newells, the Loomises, the Abbotts, and the Waleses.

    From that little town, a great many enterprising emigrants have
    gone forth to people the mighty West. The people of Union,
    in respect to enterprise and education, are higher than the
    average emigration of towns in Connecticut and Massachusetts.
    My long and patient explorations into the history of Union, has
    led me to such results as that I am not ashamed of the fame or
    the name of my native town.

    Having lost all my own children, and always cherishing a
    sincere regard for the people of Union, I determined long ago
    to find out all I could of their history and the fortunes of
    their descendants.

    The old town holds its own in population and in valuation. I
    have a good memory of all who have lived there during the last
    half century, and I think the town is as respectable now as it
    was in my childhood. Some of the worthy names of the olden time
    have wholly gone; though the descendants of some remain.

    It is an interesting circumstance, that from that little town
    _you_ have gone forth, and on the other side of the new world
    have laid the foundations of a great city. Thus New England has
    sent forth its best mind and muscle to build up new States in
    this greatest Empire of freemen the sun has ever shone upon.

    New England was founded by the best people of Old England
    and Scotland. I like to look back, and also forward. It is
    well that all parts of our great country can be able to trace
    their origin to common sources. Great as are the intervening
    distances in time and space which separate the different
    generations, yet are they not wholly severed in interest, nor
    ought they to be separated in sympathy. I hope that my long
    studies in relation to the families of my native town, will
    be of some benefit in making those of the same name somewhat
    acquainted with each other; or at least it will prevent those
    who are of kindred race and blood from utter forgetfulness of
    each other.

  Very Truly Yours,

  C. HAMMOND.

The Rev. Mr. Hammond, writer of the foregoing letter, is, and has
been for many years past, the Principal of Monson Academy. His work
is nearly ready for the press. Prof. Hammond kindly furnished us the
records of the descendants of the Rev. Ezra Horton, of Union, which
will also appear more fully in his history of Union.




SUBSCRIBERS.

  Subscribers.                   Copies.    Amount.

  Milton Horton,                     3       $9 00
  Benjamin Horton,                   3        7 50
  Hon. Frost Horton,                10      125 00
  V. R. W. Horton,                   1        3 00
  Geo. W. Horton,                    1        3 00
  Capt. James E. Horton,             3        7 50
  B. Bailey Horton,                  1        3 00
  Milicent H. Lee,                   4       10 00
  Cyrus B. Horton,                   1        3 00
  Stuart T. Terry,                   2        5 00
  Lucien Horton,                     4       10 00
  Stephen Horton,                    2        5 00
  James Horton,                      1        3 00
  Wm. H. Horton,                     1        3 00
  Walter Horton,                     1        3 00
  Geo. W. Thompson,                  2       10 00
  Webb Horton,                       4       10 00
  Hon. A. H. Horton,                 4       10 00
  Mrs. Mary Horton,                  1        3 00
  Dea. J. W. Horton,                 8       13 25
  Norman Horton,                     1        3 00
  George Horton,                     2        5 00
  Le Roy De Horton,                  2        5 00
  Rev. Wm. H. Thompson,              3        7 50
  Prof. E. H. Cleveland,             2       $5 00
  Mrs. J. W. Gardner,                2        5 00
  Gurdon B. Horton,                  4       10 00
  Geo. W. Horton,                    2        5 00
  David C. Horton,                   2        5 00
  Mrs. Sawyer and Mrs. Austin,       2       10 00
  Prof. D. P. Horton,                2        5 00
  T. K. Horton,                      6       15 00
  J. Elbert Horton,                  1        3 00
  Mrs. Mary Welles,                  2        5 00
  Gordon Horton,                     1        3 00
  H. L. Horton,                     10      100 00
  A. E. Horton,                     12      100 00
  Mrs. A. C. Ryder,                  1        3 00
  Frank Bruce Ryder,                 1        3 00
  Stephen O. Horton,                 2        6 00
  Hon. T. J. Ingham,                 3       10 00
  Parshall T. Horton,                4       10 00
  James Usher,                       2        5 00
  Hon. Wm. Horton,                   3       10 00
  Joseph M. Horton,                  2        5 00
  E. M. Horton,                      5       15 00

100 copies subscribed for, on which nothing has yet been paid.




  TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE

  The two Indexes are incomplete and contain many errors. With a few
  exceptions these errors have not been adjusted; one valid page
  number has been added to an entry when none was present in the
  original Index. See below.

  Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been
  corrected after careful comparison with other occurrences within
  the text and consultation of external sources.

  Except for those changes noted below, all misspellings in the text,
  and inconsistent or archaic usage, have been retained. For example,
  real-estate, real estate; heir-loom, heirloom; first class,
  first-class; manumitted; cotemporary.

  Pg xiii, 'History, vol. 1' replaced by 'History, vol. i'.
  Pg xiii, 'ffremen and servants' replaced by 'freemen and servants'.
  Pg 10, missing heading '_Second Generation.--Caleb I._' inserted.
  Pg 16, 'wildness was soon' replaced by 'wilderness was soon'.
  Pg 16, 'David Horton and Esther Lane' replaced by 'Daniel Horton and
          Esther Lane'.
  Pg 18, 'whip Bully Horton' replaced by 'whip Billy Horton'.
  Pg 24, heading 'JOSEPH I.' changed to '_Joseph I._' for consistency.
  Pg 26, 'He and and his two' replaced by 'He and his two'.
  Pg 30, 'Abbey Gos   ' replaced by 'Abbey Gaspar'.
  Pg 37, 'Ohio Cavalary' replaced by 'Ohio Cavalry'.
  Pg 38, '21 January' replaced by 'died 21 January'.
  Pg 38, Duplicate heading "Eighth Generation.--Joseph I." removed
         from the text. (Correct heading is on Pg 41.)
  Pg 60, 'the Claas of 1849' replaced by 'the Class of 1849'.
  Pg 63, '1. Mary Emeline' replaced by '2. Mary Emeline'.
  Pg 72, 'Anna Vandevort' replaced by 'Anna Van Devort'.
  Pg 79, 'Terra Haute' replaced by 'Terre Haute'.
  Pg 84, '4. Julia Ann' replaced by '3. Julia Ann'.
  Pg 95, 'By second wife' replaced by 'By second husband'.
  Pg 95, 'Lambertsville' replaced by 'Lambertville'.
  Pg 96, 'born at Beemerville:' replaced by 'born at Beemersville:'.
  Pg 116, 'Rebecca Preist' replaced by 'Rebecca Priest'.
  Pg 120, '5. William Henry' replaced by '6. William Henry'.
  Pg 127, 'Libbeus L. Vail' replaced by 'Lebbeus L. Vail'.
  Pg 128, 'Daniel Skilenger' replaced by 'Daniel Skellinger'.
  Pg 128, 'He did in Wayland' replaced by 'He died in Wayland'.
  Pg 139, 'Lambertsville, 13' replaced by 'Lambertville, 13'.
  Pg 160, 'among the the Kansas' replaced by 'among the Kansas'.
  Pg 164, 'lawyer and politican' replaced by 'lawyer and politician'.
  Pg 164, 'Lemira Louisa' replaced by 'Lamira Louisa'.
  Pg 169, 'Lambertvile, 1' replaced by 'Lambertville, 1'.
  Pg 170, 'Genessee Co.' replaced by 'Genesee Co.'.
  Pg 176, 'Nelson Cutting' replaced by 'Nelson Cutter'.
  Pg 195, 'he was lead' replaced by 'he was led'.
  Pg 201, 'Elizabeth Marsters' replaced by 'Elizabeth Masters'.
  Pg 213, 'Carriboo mining' replaced by 'Cariboo mining'.
  Pg 213, 'his inquistiveness' replaced by 'his inquisitiveness'.
  Pg 218, 'Elizabeth Hurlbutt' replaced by 'Elizabeth Hurlburt'.


  In the Index of Horton Christian (first) names:
    Alvord, replaced by 'Alvor'.
    Angeline Margaret, page number '197' added.
    Archibald, page number '87' added.
    Ariadne, page number '157' added.
    David Snyker, replaced by 'David Snyder'.
    Edward Delany, page number '34' added.
    Eugene, page number '4' replaced by '40'.
    Eunice Martha, page number '141' added.
    Frank A, page number '30' added.
    Haskell V, page number '177' added.
    John Gillett, page number '176' added.
    Justin, page number '69' added.
    Lamira Louisa, page number '164' added.
    Lemira Louisa, removed.
    Liberty, page number '173' added.
    Martha Louisa, page number '37' added.

  In the Index of surnames:
    Budd, page number '9' added.
    Closson, page number '139' added.
    Cortright, replaced by 'Cortwright'.
    De Poe, page number '96' added.
    Fitzpatrick, page number '138' added.
    Gaylord, '443' replaced by '143'.
    Hewitt, page number '60' added.
    Hofford, page number '176' added.
    Holbrook, page number '204' added.
    Lafflin, replaced by 'Laflin' and page number '189' added.
    L'Hommedien, replaced by 'L'Hommedieu' and '185' added.
    Mills, page number '22' added.
    Noel, replaced by 'Noell'.
    Pinney, page number '162' added.
    Service, page number '92' added.
    Skillinger, replaced by 'Skellinger'.
    Strong, two entries combined into '24, 190'.
    Studdiford, page number '139' added.
    Twist, page number '131' added.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HORTON GENEALOGY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


