The Project Gutenberg eBook of The rat and its relation to the public health
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The rat and its relation to the public health

Creator: United States. Public Health and Marine Hospital Service

Release date: August 4, 2025 [eBook #76630]

Language: English

Original publication: Washington: Public Health and Marine Hospital Service of the United States, 1910

Credits: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RAT AND ITS RELATION TO THE PUBLIC HEALTH ***





                          TREASURY DEPARTMENT

     Public Health and Marine-Hospital Service of the United States




             THE RAT AND ITS RELATION TO THE PUBLIC HEALTH

                           BY VARIOUS AUTHORS

              PREPARED BY DIRECTION OF THE SURGEON-GENERAL

[Illustration: [Logo]]

                               WASHINGTON
                       GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                                  1910




                           TABLE OF CONTENTS.


                                                                   Page.

 _Introduction_ (Walter Wyman)                                         9

 _Natural History of the Rat_ (David E. Lantz)                        15

    Classification of rats                                            15

    Distribution of the genus _Mus_ in America                        17

    History of the brown rat                                          19

    General description of the species in America and key to the
      species                                                         20

    Habits of rats                                                    22

       Breeding habits                                                22

       Abundance                                                      23

       Migrations and invasions                                       24

       Food                                                           26

       Feeding habits                                                 26

       Ferocity                                                       27

 _Plague Infection in Rats_ (George W. McCoy)                         29

    Mode of examination                                               30

    Gross lesions of natural rat plague, acute                        32

       Subcutaneous injection                                         32

       The bubo                                                       33

       The granular liver                                             34

       The spleen                                                     35

       Pleural effusion                                               35

    Gross lesions of natural rat plague, chronic                      36

    Rat plague without gross lesions                                  37

    Microscopical examinations                                        37

    Bacteriological diagnosis of rat plague                           38

    Pest-like bacteria found in rats                                  41

    Artificial infection of rats with plague                          41

       Modes of infection                                             42

       Local reaction                                                 43

       The bubo                                                       44

       The liver and spleen                                           44

    Chronic plague due to artificial inoculation                      44

    The histology of rat plague                                       45

       Natural rat plague                                             46

       Immunity of rats to plague                                     46

    References                                                        48

 _Rat Leprosy_ (Walter R. Brinckerhoff)                               49

    Introduction                                                      49

    Review of literature                                              49

    Description of disease                                            50

    Etiology                                                          52

    Summary                                                           52

    Bibliography                                                      53

 _Bacterial Diseases of the Rat other than Plague_ (Donald H.
   Currie)                                                            55

    Danysz bacillus or bacillus typhi Murium of Loeffler              55

    Pneumonia                                                         55

    Staphylococcus abscesses                                          56

    Bacillus pseudo-tuberculosis rodentium (Pfeiffer)                 57

    Toyama’s bacillus                                                 57

    Infections of mice                                                57

 _Organic Diseases of the Rat, Including Tumors_ (George W. McCoy)    59

    Usefulness of wild rats for laboratory purposes                   59

    Circulatory apparatus                                             60

    Pulmonary apparatus                                               60

    Digestive tract                                                   61

       Cirrhosis of the liver                                         61

       Fatty degeneration of the liver                                61

       Hernia                                                         61

    Genito-urinary tract                                              62

       Nephritis                                                      62

       Abscess of the kidney                                          62

       Atrophy of the kidney                                          63

       Vesical calculi                                                63

    Tumors                                                            64

       Metastases                                                     67

       Histological structure                                         67

          Lipomata                                                    67

          Fibromata                                                   67

          Sarcomata                                                   67

          Adenomata and Carcinomata                                   67

 _Ectoparasites of the Rat_ (Nathan Banks)                            69

    Fleas—Siphonaptera                                                69

    Lice—Anoplura                                                     77

    Mites—Acarina                                                     80

 _Internal Parasites of Rats and Mice in Their Relation to
   Diseases of Man_ (Ch. Wardell Stiles and Charles G. Crane)         87

    Summary                                                           87

    Introduction                                                      87

    Protozoa                                                          88

    Cestoda                                                           95

    Nematoda                                                         101

    Acanthocephala                                                   108

 _Compendium of Animal Parasites Reported for Rats and Mice—(Genus
   Mus)_ (Ch. Wardell Stiles and Albert Hassall)                     111

 _The Flea and Its Relation to Plague_ (Carroll Fox)                 123

    Theories as to the transmission of plague                        123

    Insects that have been suspected in the transmission of plague   124

    Experiments proving that fleas can transmit plague               125

    The bacillus in the flea                                         126

    How the flea clears itself of bacilli                            127

    Regional distribution of fleas on rats                           127

    Anatomy of the mouth parts of the Ceratophyllus Fasciatus        128

       Outside the head                                              128

       Inside the head                                               129

    The act of biting                                                131

    How the flea infects its host                                    132

    Enumeration of fleas that have been found on rats                133

    Results of identification of fleas in California                 135

    Synopsis of fleas commonly found on rats                         136

    Ceratophyllus Fasciatus, Bosc                                    136

    Lœmopsylla Cheopis, Rothschild                                   138

    Ctenopsyllus Musculi, Dugés                                      140

    Pulex Irritans, Linnæus                                          142

    Ctenocephalus Canis, Curtis                                      143

    References                                                       144

 _Rodents in Relation to the Transmission of Bubonic Plague_
   (Rupert Blue)                                                     145

    Epidemiological observations in San Francisco                    147

    Theories as to the cause of seasonal prevalence                  149

    The occurrence of plague in the marmot of Asia and ground
      squirrel of California                                         150

    Plague infection in ground squirrels                             150

    The natural habitat of plague                                    151

    References                                                       152

 _Rodent Extermination_ (Wm. Colby Rucker)                           153

    Trapping                                                         154

    Poisoning                                                        156

    Natural enemies                                                  159

    Cutting off of the rat’s food supply                             160

    Building the rat out of existence                                161

 _Natural Enemies of the Rat_ (David E. Lantz)                       163

    Animals that destroy rats                                        163

       Hawks                                                         163

       Owls                                                          164

       Wild mammals                                                  166

          Skunks                                                     166

          Weasels                                                    166

          Minks                                                      167

       Domestic animals                                              167

          Dogs                                                       167

          Cats                                                       167

          Ferrets                                                    168

       Other animals                                                 168

          Mongoose                                                   168

          Alligators                                                 168

          Snakes                                                     169

    Bounties on predatory animals                                    169

 _Rat-Proofing as an Antiplague Measure_ (Richard H. Creel)          171

    Rat-proofing of primary importance                               173

    Rat-proofing is expensive                                        174

    Methods of rat-proofing                                          175

    Rat-proofing ordinances should be specific                       177

    Choice of architecture and building materials                    178

 _Inefficiency of Bacterial Viruses in the Extermination of Rats_
   (Milton J. Rosenau)                                               179

    Introduction                                                     179

    Experiments upon rat virus in the Hygienic Laboratory            183

    Experiments with microorganisms for destroying rats by the U.
      S. Biological Survey                                           186

    Experiments during the San Francisco plague outbreak             188

    Opinions of others                                               190

    Pathogenicity for man                                            193

    References to the literature                                     201

    Résumé                                                           204

 _Plague Eradication in Cities by Sectional Extermination of Rats
   and General Rat-Proofing_ (Victor G. Heiser)                      205

 _The Rat in Relation to Shipping_ (Wm. C. Hobdy)                    207

    Adaptability of the rat to his surroundings                      208

    Damage to cargo                                                  209

    Fumigation                                                       211

    Summary                                                          213

 _The Rat as an Economic Factor_ (David E. Lantz)                    215

    Introduction                                                     215

    Utility of the rat                                               215

    Destructiveness of the rat                                       216

       Grains                                                        216

       Merchandise in stores and warehouses                          218

       Merchandise in transit                                        219

       Poultry and eggs                                              219

       Game and wild birds                                           220

       Fruit and vegetables                                          221

       Flowers and bulbs                                             221

       Fires                                                         222

       Buildings and furniture                                       222

       Miscellaneous                                                 223

    Amount of losses caused by rats                                  224

       Indirect losses                                               225

 _The Rat in Relation to International Sanitation_ (John W. Kerr)    227

    International sanitary regulations                               228

    Inquiry into the crusade against rats throughout the world       230

    Rat extermination in United States ports                         231

    Rat extermination in Chinese cities                              232

    Rat extermination in Madras, Bombay, and Calcutta, India         234

    Rat extermination in Yokohama and Nagasaki, Japan                235

    Rat extermination in East Africa                                 237

    Rat extermination in Cape Town, South Africa                     238

    Rat extermination in Alexandria and Cairo, Egypt                 238

    Extermination of rats at the port of Constantinople              238

    Rat extermination in Russian ports                               239

    Destruction of rats in Trieste, Austria                          240

    Destruction of rats in Genoa, Italy                              240

    Destruction of rats in Barcelona, Spain                          241

    Rat destruction in French ports                                  241

       Ministerial decree relating thereto                           242

    Destruction of rats in German ports                              243

    Measures against rats in Rotterdam, Holland                      245

    Destruction of rats at Antwerp, Belgium                          245

    Destruction of rats in Denmark                                   245

       Danish law of March 22, 1907                                  245

       Collection and destruction                                    247

    Destruction of rats in Swedish ports                             248

    Destruction of rats in English ports                             249

    Measures against rats in Australian ports                        250

    Measures against rats in South American ports                    252

    Measures against rats in West Indian ports                       252

    Destruction of rats in Panama                                    253

    Measures against rats in Vancouver, B. C.                        253

    Necessity of concerted action of nations                         254




                         LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


                                                                   Page.

 Fig. 1a. Upper molars of the brown rat (_Mus_): tubercles in         16
            three rows

 Fig. 1b. Upper molars of the rice rat (_Oryzomys_): tubercles in     16
            two rows

 Fig. 2a. Right hind foot of brown rat, showing long sixth foot       17
            pad

 Fig. 2b. Right hind foot of house mouse, showing round sixth         17
            foot pad

 Fig. 3a. Ears of brown rat and black rat, showing relative size      21
 fig. 3b.

 Fig. 4.  Necropsy appearance of normal rat                           48

 Fig. 5.  Necropsy appearance of plague-infected rat                  48

 Fig. 6.  Flea, showing the various parts                             70

 Fig. 7.  Louse—_Polyplax spinulosus_                                 78

 Fig. 8.  Mite—_Lælaps echidninus_                                    81

 Figs. 9  Internal parasites of rats and mice                     90–109
 to 58.

 Fig. 59. Isolated plague-infected center, Manila, P. I.             206

 Fig. 60. Scheme for testing rat-plague infection, Manila, P. I.     206

 Plate I. Mouth parts of _Ceratophyllus fasciatus_                   130

      II. _Ceratophyllus fasciatus_                                  136

     III. _Lœmopsylla cheopis_, Rothschild                           138

      IV. _Ctenopsyllus musculi_, Duges                              140

       V. _Pulex irritans_, Linnæus                                  142

      VI. _Ctenocephalus canis_, Curtis                              144




             THE RAT AND ITS RELATION TO THE PUBLIC HEALTH.

                            By WALTER WYMAN,

  _Surgeon-General of the Public Health and Marine-Hospital Service_.




                             INTRODUCTION.


The science of bacteriology has elucidated many facts with respect to
the causation of disease, and with this advance in knowledge, old
theories regarding the miasmatic and humoral origin of human ills have
been abandoned.

Epidemiological studies have likewise determined the methods of
transmission of many of the infectious and contagious diseases, thus
eliminating erroneous conceptions that they are attributable to some
mysterious condition of the atmosphere or soil, or to a visitation of
the wrath of the Almighty.

Both these sciences have contributed to our knowledge of the
relationship of living things, particularly with respect to their
influence upon each other in relation to health and disease. It is now
known, for instance, that mosquitoes are the pests of man, not only
because of their bites, but because they at times transmit malaria,
dengue, filariasis, and yellow fever. So, too, it is known that rodents
are the enemies of man, not only because of the toll exacted from him,
but because they are the principal agents in the propagation and spread
of bubonic plague.

Ancient writings abound in allusions to pestilences and their connection
with epizootics among rats and mice.

In the Book of Samuel there is reference to a pestilence having relation
to mice, and that it might be stayed the Philistines made offerings of
golden images of the mice that marred the land.

During the centuries that have intervened rats have migrated to
practically every quarter of the earth, causing untold losses on account
of their depredations. They have also, in all probability, been the
primary agents of transmission in the pandemics of plague which have
visited the earth. The fact that plague is due to a specific
microorganism, and that its presence in man is also associated with
epizootics in rats, has led to a more careful study of this animal,
particularly in relation to his habits, the diseases from which he
suffers, and the methods necessary to his control. Prior to the
beginning of the present pandemic of plague which had its origin in
China, interest in the rat was almost wholly an economic and financial
one. Since that time evidence has been rapidly accumulating which proves
that this animal and his parasites are responsible for the transmission
of plague and that plague itself is essentially a disease of the rat.

A knowledge of this animal on the part of the sanitarian therefore
becomes essential. During the enforcement of antiplague measures in
California, Hawaii, the Philippine Islands and elsewhere, observations
of great value have been made and their practical application has
resulted in better directed efforts for the elimination of the disease.

In studies of plague and leprosy with the view to their diagnosis and
control, it is not enough now to isolate the microorganisms responsible
for these diseases, but the sanitarian must be able to recognize the
pathological conditions present in animals affected, and to do so he
must have practical knowledge of this subject in order that he may
differentiate between the various diseases from which these animals
suffer.

Opportunity for observation and study of the diseases of rats and the
methods necessary to their eradication has been afforded to the officers
of the Public Health and Marine-Hospital Service who are constantly
stationed on the outposts in the warfare against exotic diseases. The
results of these observations have been utilized by officers of the
service, and some of them have been published for the benefit of others.

The rat has received much attention of late in other parts of the world.
In Denmark, for instance, a legalized warfare against rodents has been
begun, principally on account of their influence in the transmission of
trichinosis. In England there exists The Incorporated Society for the
Destruction of Vermin, and in other places rat destruction is being
agitated both from economic and public health standpoints.

In view of the great importance of the rat in relation to the public
health, it has been thought advisable to collect and publish all
pertinent information on the subject, in order that public health
officials who should be on the lookout for the appearance of plague
among rodents might have available a reliable treatise on the subject.

Studies of rodents from a biologic and economic standpoint come within
the province of other departments of the public service, and the
cooperation of the Biological Survey and Bureau of Entomology of the
Department of Agriculture was therefore requested and received.

The subjects dealt with in this publication have been prepared by those
having wide experience.

In the chapter on natural history by Mr. David E. Lantz there is given a
classification of rats as well as the distribution of the genus _Mus_ in
America. An interesting and important fact is mentioned that the
Biological Survey has no records of the presence of the brown rat in
Nevada, Utah, Wyoming, Idaho, and the greater part of Montana. Mr. Lantz
also describes the different species in America, and refers to their
habits as to breeding, feeding, migrations, invasions, and ferocity. The
facts presented by him emphasize the great difficulty of ridding cities
of these pests.

Passed Assistant Surgeon McCoy discusses plague infections in rats and
describes the methods of examination. He also describes the gross
lesions found in plague rats, gives the bacteriologic diagnosis of rat
plague and the cultural characteristics of the plague bacillus on
various media. He gives the methods of artificial infection of rats with
plague, and reviews the recent work of Ledingham in relation to the
histology of rat plague. Finally, he presents results of his own
investigations to show that the wild rat is not especially susceptible
to plague infection, and that a certain percentage of such animals enjoy
a natural immunity to plague.

Doctor Brinckerhoff discusses rat leprosy; states that it is very
similar to human leprosy, and that it is caused by a bacillus which
closely resembles the bacillus of Hansen. He describes the pathological
changes found, and expresses the hope that the disease will receive
further earnest study, in order that additional information may throw
light on the problems presented by leprosy in man.

Passed Assistant Surgeon Currie briefly outlines the bacterial diseases
of the rat, other than plague and leprosy. He mentions the great utility
that would follow the discovery of a rat destroying bacterium, but
states that it appears now more than probable that few such natural
diseases of rats exist.

In a chapter on organic diseases of the rat, Doctor McCoy summarizes the
results of his observations made during examinations of these animals in
the Federal laboratory of the service at San Francisco. These
observations are of interest, and will assist those engaged in such work
to further classify the pathological changes noted as well as
differentiate them from plague.

The ectoparasites of the rat are classified and described by Mr. Nathan
Banks, and he has presented in condensed form information of much
practical value upon the subject.

Dr. Ch. Wardell Stiles discusses the internal parasites of rats and mice
in relation to the diseases of man. He regards the rat as a permanent
reservoir for trichinosis, and states that this disease will probably
never be eradicated from man until rats and mice are practically
eradicated, and a national campaign directed against trichinosis must
take the rat into consideration.

A compendium of animal parasites reported for rats and mice is presented
in a chapter by Ch. Wardell Stiles and Albert Hassall. While, as the
authors state, no list of this kind can ever lay claim to being
complete, it represents the present knowledge of the subject.

In a discussion of the flea and its relation to plague, Passed Assistant
Surgeon Fox summarizes the theories as to the transmission of this
disease. He also mentions the insects that have been suspected of
transmitting plague and presents accumulated evidence that fleas
actually convey the infection. He then gives the anatomy of the mouth
parts of the _Ceratophyllus Fasciatus_, the common rat flea of North
America. He also enumerates the fleas that have been found on rats, and
gives the results of identifications of 19,768 fleas in San Francisco
and Oakland, Cal. The plates accompanying this article, and their
description should be of great value to those engaged in antiplague
measures.

Surgeon Blue briefly discusses the subject of rodents in relation to the
transmission of bubonic plague. He discusses the theories as to the
cause of seasonal prevalence of this disease and presents a table
showing the number of rats examined during the different months of the
year, the number found infected, the average temperature and rainfall
for those months and the character of the days, as to the number clear,
partly cloudy, or cloudy. He refers to plague infection in ground
squirrels in California and warns against the possibility that this
animal may become responsible for the establishment of a permanent focus
of plague on the Pacific coast of the United States, as the marmots are
so concerned with regard to India.

The all-important subject of rodent extermination is considered in
detail, various phases of the subject being dealt with by different
authors.

Passed Assistant Surgeon Rucker discusses the destruction of these
animals by trapping, poisoning, cutting off of food supply, and
destroying of existing nests and at the same time preventing the making
of new ones. He describes the methods of use of the various mineral
poisons, but finally states that rodents must be builded out of
existence; in other words, habitations must be rendered rat proof.

Mr. Lantz, in discussing the natural enemies of the rat, mentions the
animals that destroy these pests. He concludes that on account of this
function bounties for the destruction of small animals that prey on
rodents can not be justified and that they should in the future be
protected in every way possible.

Passed Assistant Surgeon Creel discusses rat proofing as an antiplague
measure, and gives in detail the principles of construction necessary.
He concludes that rat proofing is the most valuable antiplague measure,
and that it should precede auxiliary measures such as trapping and
placing of poisons.

Surgeon Rosenau discusses the bacterial viruses in relation to rat
destruction. As a result of his investigations in the hygienic
laboratory and the reports of investigations and practical use
elsewhere, he concludes that the bacterial viruses have signally failed
to accomplish the mission for which they were intended, and that they
are not entirely harmless to man, as has been stated.

Passed Assistant Surgeon Heiser briefly outlines the measures
recommended for the eradication of plague in cities by means of
sectional extermination of rats and general rat proofing. He gives
results following this method of procedure in Manila, and presents
charts showing how to deal with infected city districts.

Passed Assistant Surgeon Hobdy, in a chapter on the rat in relation to
shipping, refers to the voyage-making tendencies of the rodent, its
destructiveness aboard ship, and its power of adapting itself to unusual
conditions and surroundings. In one small lumber vessel fumigated by
Doctor Hobdy at the Angel Island quarantine station there were collected
525 dead rats. Mention is also made of another vessel on which were
collected 1,700 rats after fumigation. He discusses the methods by which
it gains access to vessels, and outlines the practices that should be
observed to keep it off. He also describes in some detail the measures
to be adopted for its destruction after it has gotten aboard ship, and
mentions the different methods of fumigation.

Mr. Lantz, in a third paper, discusses the rat as an economic factor,
and states in his paper that they do not serve any useful purpose. On
the other hand, they cause enormous loss through damage to grain,
merchandise, poultry and eggs, game and wild birds, fruit and
vegetables, and flowers and bulbs. They also cause damage by setting
fire to buildings and destroying furniture. He refers to various
estimates made of the losses in the United States from rats, and they
vary from $35,000,000 to $50,000,000 a year; but at the same time he
states that, with present information, any attempt to state the amount
of loss from rats would be largely guesswork.

Assistant Surgeon-General Kerr refers to the rat as a factor in
international sanitation, and briefly outlines the provisions contained
in international sanitary agreements for their eradication. He reviews
the efforts being made at the more important seaports to exterminate
rats, as well as the methods being employed to that end. The information
presented is, in part, compiled from consular reports received through
the Department of State. There are given, so far as obtainable, copies
of laws and ordinances enacted for the destruction of rats and the
different methods practiced in ports where plague has prevailed, and the
facts presented indicate that a more or less widespread crusade against
rats is being carried on. He expresses the belief that it is too much to
expect that the rat population can ever be exterminated from any city,
but that it is not too much to expect that ocean carriers can be freed
from rodents and kept so, which action would confine plague within
continental boundaries.

Epidemiological studies made of plague since the adoption of the
International Sanitary Convention of Paris and the International
Sanitary Convention of Washington have proven that the rat and its
parasite, the flea, are the agents of transmission of the disease. In
other words, where rats go plague will go. I believe, therefore, that in
order to stop the further progress of plague, radical measures should be
adopted, and in a communication of February 26, 1909, addressed to the
Secretary of State, I suggested the advisability of submitting the
question of a systematic destruction of rodents aboard ship to an
international sanitary conference, with the view to the adoption of an
international sanitary regulation on the subject. The adoption of such a
regulation would undoubtedly lessen quarantine restrictions, prevent the
destruction of cargo by rodents, and obviate the danger of the further
spread of plague.

Until ships are freed from rats, each country must take all necessary
precautions, consistent with international agreements, to destroy rats;
and the sanitary authorities of infected localities must, at great
expense, determine the extent of infection among rodents, with the view
to its elimination. This problem when it presents itself in a community
is of great magnitude, and those responsible for its solution should be
familiar with all its phases.

It is with the view to supplying the necessary information in one
treatise that this publication is issued. In its preparation the bureau
has had the cooperation of the Department of Agriculture and
acknowledgements are due, and here made to, the officers of that
department for their hearty cooperation in contributing some of the
chapters which follow.




                      NATURAL HISTORY OF THE RAT.

                           By DAVID E. LANTZ.

    _Assistant, U. S. Biological Survey, Department of Agriculture_.


                             INTRODUCTION.

The extermination of rats has become one of the serious problems of
modern times. That such noxious animals should have flourished so long
is not creditable to our civilization. While no kind of rat can be
regarded as harmless, the various species differ greatly in harmfulness.
In comparison with the cosmopolitan species that have reached our shores
from the Old World, our native rats do little damage. It is important,
therefore, to be able to recognize the introduced forms, to understand
their habits, and to concentrate efforts for their extirpation.


                        CLASSIFICATION OF RATS.

Rats and mice belong to the _Rodentia_, an order which comprises more
than a third of all living species of mammals. Also, it exceeds any
other mammalian order in the number of its individuals.

Rodents are mainly herbivorous mammals, mostly of small size, having a
furry, sometimes a spiny, integument, clawed digits, and usually
plantigrade feet. The most important distinguishing character of the
order is its dentition. This is marked by the absence of canine teeth
and the presence of strongly developed incisors growing from permanent
pulps. The incisors are never more than two in the lower jaw and usually
but two in the upper. They are elongated, curved, chisel-like in shape,
and continue to grow throughout the life of the animal. Only the front
of these teeth is covered with enamel, a provision which keeps them
sharp by the more rapid wearing away of the softer dentine in the body
of the tooth, as the upper and lower pairs meet in gnawing. Between the
incisors and the cheek, or molar, teeth of rodents there is a wide,
vacant space, marking the entire absence of canines.

The most extensive family of rodents is the _Muridæ_, a name which
applies to rats and mice in the widest sense of those terms. It is
difficult to characterize the family, since its members differ widely.
However, most of them are rat-like in form and light and active in
movements. None of the family have premolars; and, except in a single
genus (_Hydromys_), the number of molars is three. Oldfield Thomas, the
eminent English zoologist, includes in this family no less than 77
genera, or almost half the total of 159 which he ascribes to the whole
order _Rodentia_.[A] He further subdivides the _Muridæ_ into a dozen
subfamilies, of which the _Murinæ_ and the _Sigmodontinæ_ are the most
extensive. The name _Cricetinæ_ is now generally used instead of
_Sigmodontinæ_, though not always with the same limitations.

Footnote A:

  Proc. Zool. Soc., pp. 1012–1028, 1896.

The _Murinæ_ comprise only Old World rats and mice, while the
_Cricetinæ_ are, in the main, American forms. In the _Murinæ_ the cusps,
or tubercles, of the unworn upper molars are arranged triserially, or in
three longitudinal rows; in the _Cricetinæ_ they are arranged
biserially, one row on the outer and one on the inner margin (fig. 1).
The wearing away of these cusps leaves characteristic curved lines of
hard enamel surrounding areas of dentine. When the cusps are in pairs
the worn pattern looks somewhat like the Greek letter sigma (Σ), whence
the name sigmodont, often applied to native American rats and mice.

[Illustration:

  Fig. 1a.      Fig. 1b.

  FIG. 1a.—Upper molars of the brown rat (_Mus_): tubercles in three
    rows.

  FIG. 1b.—Upper molars of the rice rat (_Oryzomys_): tubercles in two
    rows.
]

The _Murinæ_ are the true rats and mice, typified by the genus _Mus_,
which contains by far the largest number of species. Trouessart, in his
Catalogus Mammalium, enumerates 260 species of _Mus_ described before
1905. Since that date a number of new forms have been described.

The genus _Mus_ is characterized by narrow, ungrooved incisors; three
small, rooted molars; soft fur mixed with hairs, sometimes with spines;
a rudimentary pollex having a short nail instead of a claw; a long tail
bearing rings of overlapping scales and often naked or nearly so. The
ears are rather large, the eyes bright and prominent, and the muzzle
somewhat pointed. The members of the genus are natives of the Old World,
throughout which, with the exception of Madagascar, they are quite
generally distributed. Nearly seven-eighths of the whole number of
species are commonly called rats.

The distinction between rats and mice is arbitrary and based on size.
Exclusive of the tail, rats may be said to vary in length from 4½ to 10
inches or more, while mice measure from 2 to 4 inches. With few
exceptions, rats have six well-defined footpads (plantar tubercles), the
last on the hind foot being elongated in shape; the last hind-foot pad
of mice is usually circular (fig. 2).

Of the many species of _Mus_ only three or four have developed the
ability to adapt themselves to such a variety of conditions as to become
cosmopolitan. Four have found lodgment in America: The common house
mouse (_Mus musculus_); the old English black rat (_Mus rattus_); the
Egyptian, or roof, rat (_Mus alexandrinus_); and the brown rat (_Mus
norvegicus_), known also as the gray rat, barn rat, wharf rat, sewer
rat, and Norway rat. The black rat and the roof rat differ from each
other chiefly in color. Indeed some zoologists regard them as races of
the same species, and the trinomial _Mus rattus alexandrinus_ for the
roof rat is now in use among zoologists.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 2a.—Right hind foot of brown rat, showing long sixth foot pad.

  FIG. 2b.—Right hind foot of house mouse, showing round sixth foot pad.
]


               DISTRIBUTION OF THE GENUS MUS IN AMERICA.

The common house mouse (_M. musculus_) found its way to America soon
after the first settlement by Europeans. It now inhabits all settled
parts of North and South America, as well as nearly the entire Old
World; but in very cold regions it does not always survive the winters,
and is therefore comparatively scarce or local. It almost always reaches
a new settlement sooner than the rat.

The black rat (_M. rattus_) has been known in Europe since the twelfth
century. It was carried to South and Middle America about three and a
half centuries ago (1554). The time of its arrival in the English
colonies of North America is not known with certainty, but it was well
established in the settled parts by the beginning of the eighteenth
century. Soon after the arrival of the brown rat, the black species
began to decrease in numbers, and has become extinct in most localities.
At present it is not uncommon in some parts of the South, and still
occurs in scattered colonies in Canada and some of the States east of
the Mississippi, and also on some of the coastal islands. It is
occasional in many of our seaports, being apparently brought from the
Far East in merchandise. Except in a few ports like San Francisco, where
new arrivals are probably rather frequent, these introduced individuals
are often destroyed before they multiply. The history of the black rat
in Europe and its disappearance before the brown rat is an exact
parallel to its history here, and the animal is now comparatively rare
north of the Alps, except in the Channel Islands.

The Biological Survey has specimens of the black rat from Massachusetts,
New Hampshire, Georgia, Florida, Alabama, California, and Washington,
and also from Mexico, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Hawaii. There are
authentic records of its recent occurrence in Newfoundland, Quebec, Nova
Scotia, New York, North Carolina, Tennessee, West Virginia, and
Mississippi. In parts of South and Middle America it is abundant.

The roof or Alexandrian rat (_M. alexandrinus_) is similar to the black
rat in form and general habits, though not in color. Little is known of
its history, but it is thought to be a native of Egypt, where it is
still abundant. It has established itself in many parts of the world,
mainly in warm climates, and is common near the coast in the southern
parts of the United States.

The Biological Survey has specimens of the roof rat from North Carolina,
Georgia, Florida, Alabama, Mississippi, Texas, Arizona, and California.
In the last-named State it is abundant in the Sacramento Valley. It is
known also from Dismal Swamp, Virginia, and from Cuba, the Bermudas,
Trinidad, San Domingo, Costa Rica, Nicaragua, Mexico, and Hawaii. Also,
it inhabits many parts of South America, where in places it is the
dominant species.

The most destructive of the rat family is the brown rat (_M.
norvegicus_). In most parts of the United States it is the common rat
about houses and barns in the country and about markets, wharves, and
warehouses in cities. It is larger and more robust than either the black
or the roof rat, and differs from both in habits. It is more of a
burrower, and lives in excavations which it makes under buildings and in
loose soil along hedges and river banks. This habit, combined with its
greater strength and ferocity has enabled it to supplant the other
species in temperate latitudes; but in the warmer parts of America and
the Old World it has not been able to drive out the others. The house
mouse everywhere holds its own against the brown rat by its ability to
escape into retreats too small for the rat to follow.

The brown rat inhabits most of the thickly populated parts of America.
North of Panama it occurs generally except in the arid interior, from
the Isthmus to the Yukon Valley and southern Greenland. In the Great
Basin it is practically unknown, and in New Mexico and Arizona it is
confined chiefly to towns along the railroads. The Biological Survey is
without records of its presence in Nevada, Utah, Wyoming, Idaho, and the
greater part of Montana. The reason for its absence in that region is
not understood, but its ability to withstand extreme cold is proved by
the fact that it flourished in latitude 78° 37′ north on board Doctor
Kane’s ship _Advance_, in the Second Grinnell Expedition, during the two
winters when that vessel was icebound. It has also adapted itself to the
continuous low temperatures of cold-storage warehouses, in which it
appears to breed freely.


                       HISTORY OF THE BROWN RAT.

We know little of the history of this species. Greek and Roman writers
make no mention of rats of any kind, but possibly knew the animals and
included them in their frequent references to mice. Pallas, in 1778,
described the brown rat under the name _Mus decumanus_, and this was
generally used until it was found that Erxleben had called it _M.
norvegicus_ in 1777. Previously, the common name Norway rat had often
been used for this species.

The brown rat is generally supposed to be of Asiatic origin. Various
modern writers have asserted that it came originally from Persia or
India; but W. T. Blanford states that the species is at present unknown
in Persia, and that in India the black rat is the generally distributed
species, while the brown rat occurs only along the coast and the
navigable rivers.[B] This implies that the latter species is a
comparatively recent immigrant into India.

Footnote B:

  Fauna of British India. Mammals, p. 409, 1891.

As regards the arrival of the brown rat in Europe, two facts are known.
The species reached England from some eastern port about 1728 or 1729,
and according to Pallas, a little earlier, 1727, crossed the Russian
frontier from Asia and soon spread over the greater part of that
country.[C] This statement, taken in connection with that of Blanford,
makes it highly probable that before this migration the Asiatic home of
the species was north, rather than south, of the high mountains of
northern India. This view, which has been adopted by several
naturalists, is further strengthened by the fact that the animal
flourishes better in temperate than in tropical climates.

Footnote C:

  Zoographica, Rosso-Asiatica, vol. 1. p. 165, 1831.

Possibly earlier and unrecorded westward migrations of the brown rat
took place. A few years ago Professor Waile, the archeologist, while
making excavations at Cherchell on the coast of Algeria, dug up the
skull of a rat, which he stated was contemporary with the Roman
occupation of the country under the Cæsars. The skull had but one molar,
much worn, but the cranial bones were intact, and French zoologists
pronounced the remains as undoubtedly those of the “surmulot,” or brown
rat.[D] This shows that we have little more than conjectures for the
early history of this species.

Footnote D:

  Comptes Rendus des Séances de L’Académie des Sciences, Paris, vol.
  116, p. 1031, 1893.

The brown rat is said to have first appeared in Paris in 1750. It was
brought to the United States, probably from England, about the beginning
of the Revolution, 1775. According to Audubon, it was unknown on the
Pacific coast of the United States in 1851; but Dr. J. S. Newberry
thought it must have arrived at San Diego, Monterey, and San Francisco
at a much earlier date.[E] Doctor Cooper recorded its arrival at Fort
Steilacoom, Washington, as occurring about 1855.

Footnote E:

  Pac. R. R. Reports, Vol. 6, Zoological Report, pt. 2, p. 60, 1857.


                          GENERAL DESCRIPTION.

The brown rat differs considerably from the black rat and the roof rat.
It is larger, has a shorter head, a more obtuse muzzle, smaller ears,
and a relatively shorter and stouter tail. The general color is
grayish-brown above and whitish below. The over hairs of the upper parts
have black tips. The tail is usually shorter than the head and body
combined. The average measurements of adult specimens of the brown rat
in the Biological Survey collections are as follows: Total length, 415
millimeters (16.3 inches); tail, 192 millimeters (7.1 inches); hind
foot, 43 millimeters (1.7 inches). This species sometimes attains a
total length of 19 to 20 inches, and has been known to weigh 24 to 28
ounces and even more. The average weight of an adult brown rat is
considerably less than a pound.

The black rat is less robust than the brown rat. It has a longer head, a
sharper muzzle, and larger and broader ears (fig. 3). The tail is longer
than the head and body combined. The fur is of a sooty, or plumbeous
black, color, paler on the underparts. It is much softer and denser than
that of the brown rat, and the mixture of very dark and lighter over
hairs gives it a peculiar shining appearance. The average measurements
of 20 apparently adult specimens in the collection of the Biological
Survey are as follows: Total length, 379 millimeters (14.9 inches);
tail, 207.4 millimeters (8.1 inches); hind foot, 35.8 millimeters (1.4
inches).

The roof rat in general resembles the black rat, except as to color and
texture of fur. Above it does not greatly differ in color from the brown
rat, but its underparts are usually more yellowish. The fur is commonly
shorter and harsher in texture than that of the black rat, but this
difference might not always be apparent in specimens of the two forms
from the same latitude. The average measurements of 50 adult specimens
of the roof rat in the collections of the Biological Survey are as
follows: Total length, 393.3 millimeters (15.5 inches); tail, 212.8
millimeters (8.4 inches); hind foot, 36.2 millimeters (1.4 inches).

[Illustration:

  FIG. 3A, FIG. 3B.—Ears of brown rat and black rat, showing relative
    size.
]

Both albinism and melanism are frequent among rats, and pied forms also
are common. It has been claimed that all the white rats (albinos) of the
bird stores are _Mus rattus_, but albinism is by no means confined to
this species. Doctor Hatai found that all the colonies of white rats
maintained at the neurological laboratories of Chicago University and
the Wistar Institute of Anatomy, Philadelphia, were of the _M.
norvegicus_ species.[F] The same is true of all the albino rats in the
collections of the National Museum and the Biological Survey. These
collections contain also several spotted rats (gray and white) and
sooty-black specimens indistinguishable in color from _M. rattus_, all
being undoubtedly of the _M. norvegicus_ species.

Footnote F:

  Biological Bulletin, vol. 12, pp. 266–273, March, 1907.


                 KEY TO THE SPECIES OF MUS IN AMERICA.

 Size small. Total length of adult less than 200
   millimeters                                            _Mus musculus_

 Size large. Total length of adult exceeding 300
   millimeters.

     Ears moderate, when laid forward barely or not
       reaching eye; tail shorter than (rarely equal
       to) the length of head and body, darker above
       than below; color of body normally gray-brown
       above, white below; hind foot 38–46 millimeters  _Mus norvegicus_

     Ears larger, when laid forward reaching at least
       to middle of eye; tail longer than head and
       body, dusky all around; hind foot 33–37
       millimeters.

         Color grayish-brown above, white or yellowish        _M. rattus
           white below.                                    alexandrinus_

         Color blue-black above, slaty below                 _M. rattus_


                            HABITS OF RATS.


                            BREEDING HABITS.

Both climate and food supply affect the rate of multiplication of most
rodents. The rat probably increases more rapidly in a temperate and
equable climate than in one of great variability. Extremes of heat and
cold retard multiplication, decreasing both the number of litters in a
year and the number of young at a time. In northern latitudes,
apparently, more or less interruption of breeding occurs in the winter
months.

Where the country is well settled the food supply of rats is not likely
to be deficient; and when the animals have access to stores of grain,
the young mature very quickly and probably reproduce earlier than when
grain is absent.

The brown rat is more prolific than either the roof rat or the black
rat. The female brown rat has usually 12 mammæ—3 pairs of pectoral and 3
pairs of inguinal—although these numbers are not constant, one or more
teats frequently being undeveloped. The black rat and the roof rat have
only 10 mammæ—2 pairs of pectoral and 3 pairs of inguinal—with but
little tendency to vary. Records of actual observations on the number of
young confirm the deductions that might be drawn from the above facts.
At Bombay, India, during the recent investigations made by the India
Plague Commission, 12,000 rats were trapped and examined. The average
number of embryos found in pregnant brown rats was 8.1; the highest
number, 14. The average for the black rat was 5.2; the largest number,
9.[G]

Footnote G:

  Etiology and Epidemiology of Plague, p. 9, Calcutta, 1908.

In temperate latitudes the average number of young produced by the brown
rat is undoubtedly greater. Instances of very large litters observed in
England are recorded in The Field (London). In two instances 22 and 23
young, respectively, were found in a single nest, though no evidence is
offered that these were the progeny of a single female; but in two other
cases 17 and 19 embryos were found in gravid females. A dealer in
feedstuffs in Washington, D. C., relates that he found 19 young rats in
a single nest in his store. Within the past few months the writer has
examined four pregnant brown rats taken in traps. The numbers of embryos
they contained were 10, 11, 11, and 13, respectively. While we have not
enough data for definite conclusions, we may safely state that the
average litter for this latitude is not less than 10.

Frank T. Buckland, in Curiosities of Natural History, relates that a
white rat which he kept in captivity gave birth to 11 young when only
eight weeks old. As gestation in rats occupies three weeks, this animal
must have bred when only five weeks old.

The number of times rats breed in a year is not definitely known, and
probably varies considerably with local conditions. Kolazy makes the
almost incredible statement that two female white rats, kept by him in
confinement and well fed, within thirteen months gave birth to 26
litters of young, numbering 180 in all. One of them produced young
regularly at intervals of 25 days.[H]

Footnote H:

  Verh. Zool. Bot. Gesel. Wien., pp. 731–734, 1871.

The writer recently kept two young female brown rats with a male in a
large open cage for several months. One of the females gave birth to
young on April 15; the other on April 17. The number in these litters
was not observed, as some were devoured soon after birth, and all within
three days, presumably by the male rat. On May 23 both females gave
birth to young, 24 in number, all in one nest.

The known facts concerning the breeding of the brown rat may be briefly
summarized as follows: The animals breed from three to five times a
year, each time bringing forth from 6 to 19 young. After a gestation
period of twenty-one days, the females give birth to their young in
nests built in underground burrows or under floors, stacks, lumber,
woodpiles, or other shelter. The young are blind and naked when born,
but grow rapidly, and young females are capable of breeding when less
than three months old.

Early spring and summer are the periods of greatest reproductive
activity among rats. Young, however, are to be found every month of the
year.

The above statements apply in the main also to the black and the roof
rat, but the number of young in a litter is somewhat smaller. The newly
born young of the black rat have not the bright pink color of those of
the brown and the roof rat, but are bluish, especially on the upper
parts. Black-and-white spotted rats are at first bluish-and-red spotted,
the red areas representing the white of the adults.


                           ABUNDANCE OF RATS.

From the foregoing account of the breeding habits of rats, the great
difficulty of ridding cities or large areas of the animals may be
readily understood. Ordinarily, they breed more rapidly than they are
destroyed. Although few are seen in daytime, at night they fairly swarm
along river fronts and wharves, as well as in sewers, stables,
warehouses, markets, and other places where food is abundant. Their real
numbers may sometimes be discovered when any such harbor is demolished.

An ordinary farm sometimes supports an astounding number of rats. In
1901, an estate of 2,000 acres near Chichester, England, was badly
infested with the pests. They were systematically destroyed by traps,
poisons, and ferrets, under the supervision of the proprietor. In this
way 31,981 were killed, while it was estimated that tenants at the
thrashing had destroyed fully 5,000 more. Even then the property was by
no means free from rats.[I]

Footnote I:

  The Field (London), vol. 100, p. 545, 1902.

During a plague of rats on the island of Jamaica in 1833, the number of
rats killed on a single plantation in a year was 38,000. The injury to
sugar cane on the island caused by the animals was at that time
estimated at half a million dollars a year.[J]

Footnote J:

  New England Farmer, vol. 12, p. 315, 1834.

The report of the Indian Famine Commission presented to the English
Parliament in 1881 affords one of the best illustrations of the number
of rats that may infest a country. An extraordinary number of the
animals at that time inhabited the southern Deccan and Mahratta
districts of India. The autumn crop of 1878 and the spring crop of 1879
were both below the average, and a large portion of each was destroyed
by rats. The resulting scarcity of food led to the payment of rewards
for the destruction of the pests, and over 12,000,000 were killed.[K]

Footnote K:

  British Medical Journal, Sept. 16, 1905, p. 623.


                       MIGRATIONS AND INVASIONS.

Migrations of rats have often been recorded. The brown rat is known in
Europe quite generally as the migratory rat. The Germans call it the
Wanderratte. Pallas narrates that in the autumn of 1727 this species
arrived from the east at Astrakhan, southeastern Russia, in such great
numbers and so suddenly that nothing could be done to oppose them. They
crossed the Volga in immense troops. The cause of this general migration
was attributed to an earthquake; but since similar movements of the same
species often occur without earthquakes, it is probable that only the
food supply of the animals was involved in the migration which first
brought the brown rat to Europe.

A seasonal movement of rats from houses and barns to the open fields
takes place in spring when green and succulent plant food is ready for
them. The return movement takes place in the autumn. This seasonal
migration is noticeable even in large cities.

But more general movements of rats frequently occur. In 1903 a multitude
of migrating rats spread over several counties in western Illinois. They
were noticed especially in Rock Island and Mercer counties. For several
years previous no abnormal numbers of the animals were seen, and their
coming was remarkably sudden. An eyewitness to the occurrence informed
me that as he was returning to his home one moonlit night he heard a
general rustling in a nearby field, and soon a great army of rats
crossed the road in front of him, all moving in one direction. The host
stretched away as far as they could be seen in the dim light. These
animals invaded the farms and villages of the surrounding country and
caused heavy losses during the winter and summer of 1904. A local
newspaper stated that between March 20 and April 20, 1904, Mr. F. W.
Montgomery, of Preemption, Mercer County, killed 3,435 rats on his farm.
He caught most of them in traps.[L]

Footnote L:

  Moline (Ill.) Evening Mail, Apr. 25, 1904.

In 1877 a similar migration of rats into parts of Saline and Lafayette
counties, Mo., took place.[M] Also, one came under my own observation in
the Kansas River valley in 1904. This valley, for the most part, was
flooded by the great freshet of June, 1903, and for about ten days was
covered with several feet of water. Probably most of the rats in the
valley at the time perished in the flood. Yet in the fall of 1903 much
of the district was visited by hordes of rats, which remained during the
winter and had so increased by the following spring that serious losses
to grain and poultry resulted.

Footnote M:

  Forest and Stream, vol. 8, p. 380, July 12, 1877.

No doubt most of the so-called migrations of rodents, were all the facts
known, could be accounted for as instances of abnormal reproduction or
of failure of food supply in one place, compelling change of habitat. In
England a general movement of rats inland from the coast occurs every
October. This is known to be closely connected with the closing of the
herring season. During the fishing the rodents swarm to the coast,
attracted by the offal left in cleaning the herring; and when this food
fails, the animals troop back to the farms and villages.

In South America plagues of rats are often periodical, occurring in
Parana, Brazil, at intervals of about thirty years and in Chile at
intervals of from fifteen to twenty-five years. It has been discovered
that these plagues in the cultivated lands follow the ripening and decay
of the dominant species of bamboo in each country. The ripening of the
seed furnishes for two or more years a favorite food for rats in the
forests, where the animals multiply greatly. When this food fails, they
are forced to the cultivated lands for subsistence. In 1878 almost the
whole crops of corn, rice, and mandioca in the State of Parana were
destroyed by rats, causing a serious famine.[N]

Footnote N:

  Nature, vol. 20, p. 65, 1879.

An invasion of rats (_Mus rattus_) in the Bermuda Islands occurred about
the year 1615. Within two years they had increased so alarmingly that
none of the islands was free from them. The rodents “devoured everything
that came in their way—fruits, plants, and even trees”—so that for a
year or two the people were nearly destitute of food. A law was passed
requiring every man in the islands to keep 12 traps set. In spite of all
efforts the animals continued to increase, until finally they
disappeared so suddenly that they must have been victims of a
pestilence.[O]

Footnote O:

  Popular Science Monthly, vol. 12, p. 376, January, 1878.


                             FOOD OF RATS.

Instead of being strictly herbivorous, as might be inferred from their
dentition, rats are practically omnivorous.

The bill of fare of the rat includes grains and seeds of every kind,
flour, meal, and all food products made from them; fruits and garden
vegetables; mushrooms; bark of growing trees; bulbs, roots, stems,
leaves, and flowers of herbaceous plants; eggs, chicks, ducklings,
squabs, and young rabbits; milk, butter, and cheese; fresh meat and
carrion; mice, rats, fish, frogs, mollusks, and crustaceans. This great
variety of food explains the ease with which rats maintain themselves in
almost any environment.


                            FEEDING HABITS.

Rats resemble squirrels in the manner of holding food while eating. As
soon as they have separated a small portion of food from a larger mass,
they sit up, arching the back and holding the morsel in the paws and
turning it as a squirrel does. After eating, they brush the mouth and
fore parts, including the whiskers (vibrissæ), with the paws until all
are clean. Rats drink much water, a habit often taken advantage of in
placing traps or poisons for them.

Rats generally feed after sunset, but in places where they are not often
disturbed they come out and feed in broad day and even in the sunshine.

The roof rat and the black rat are more expert climbers than the brown
rat, which is larger and clumsier. In buildings, the brown rat keeps
mainly to the cellar and lower parts, where it commonly lives in
burrows. From these retreats it makes nightly excursions to the upper
parts of the house in search of food. The roof rat and the black rat
live in the walls or in the space between ceilings and roofs. They nest
in any of these places.

Rats readily climb trees to obtain fruit. In the Tropics the roof rat
and the black rat habitually nest in trees and spend much of their time
in these arboreal retreats, while the brown rat makes only occasional
excursions into the branches in search of food.

In the open, rats seem to have defective vision by daylight. They move
slowly and uncertainly. On the contrary, at the side of a room and in
contact with the wall they run with great celerity. This fact suggests
that the vibrissæ serve as feelers and that the sense of touch in them
is extremely delicate. The animals always prefer narrow spaces as
highways—another circumstance which may be made use of in placing traps.


                           FEROCITY OF RATS.

The ferocity of rats has been grossly exaggerated. The stories of their
attacks upon human beings, sleeping infants especially, have but slight
foundation. If attacked, nearly all rats defend themselves with the
teeth; and no doubt a horde of rats, if hungry, would be formidable.
Ordinarily the probability of being bitten by rats is remote, and the
bite is not poisonous.

The ferocity of rats is mainly exercised against members of their own
order. The brown rat is undoubtedly the most formidable of the genus in
America, and possibly in the world; yet when captured it adapts itself
readily to confinement, and in a few days will take food and water
whenever offered. The enmity of this species toward other rats and mice
is well known. It is supposed to have destroyed the black rat over the
greater part of Europe and America, although it is possible that disease
carried by the brown rat was a factor in the disappearance of the other
species. That the black and the roof rat in tropical countries have not
been displaced by the brown rat is probably owing largely to their more
arboreal habits. It is not uncommon in the Far East to find two species
of rats living side by side in the same locality. An example is _M.
imperator_ and _M. rex_ living on one of the Solomon Islands. The first
is a burrowing species; the other arboreal. In 1877 two native species
of rats, _M. macleari_ and _M. nativitatis_, were found living together
in amity on Christmas Island, in the Indian Ocean.[P] About ten years
ago the brown rat was accidentally introduced, and it is now thought
that both the native species are extinct.

Footnote P:

  Proc. Zool. Soc. 1888, pp. 517, 534.

When pressed by hunger rats become cannibals and destroy their weaker
fellows. However, when ordinary food is abundant, cannibalism among rats
is rare.




                       PLAGUE INFECTION IN RATS.

                          By GEORGE W. MCCOY,

       _Passed Assistant Surgeon United States Public Health and
                       Marine-Hospital Service._


The rat is a known or a suspected factor in the transmission of several
diseases, yet at present, and perhaps for many years to come, the most
immediate and pressing question that concerns us is its relation to the
origin and spread of plague among human beings. For this reason a
discussion of the reaction of these animals to natural and to artificial
infection with _B. pestis_ becomes of prime importance.

Not only are rats believed to be more or less directly responsible for
cases of human plague in a community, but in addition, they are believed
to be the most frequent medium through which plague is carried from one
locality to another, for these animals are good travelers, can live on a
very meager ration, and can do without water for a long time if food is
available. We have found that on a diet of dry grain alone a rat may
live for over a month.

In this connection it may not be amiss to call attention to the
importance of the rat as an agent in conveying plague infection to other
rodents and especially to ground squirrels. There is every reason for
believing that the infection among the squirrels in California was
derived originally from rats. Wherry[16] states that more rats than
ground squirrels have been trapped in the squirrel burrows in the
vicinity of Berkeley, Cal. This shows how easy it might be for rats to
infect squirrels and vice versa.

The clinical manifestations of plague in rats are of little importance.
It is generally said that the plague-infected rat staggers about with a
drunken gait, loses fear of its natural enemies, and is readily
captured. Our experience with artificially infected rats indicates that
the animals show no marked manifestations of illness until shortly
before death when they become quiet, crouch in the corner of the cage,
and try to hide.

It is rather surprising to observe that comparatively few plague rats
are found dead. In the San Francisco campaign, while no accurate figures
are obtainable, certainly not more than 20 per cent of the infected
rodents were found dead, the remainder being trapped. This is probably
due to the fact that the disease is one of several days’ duration, from
two to six most frequently, and during this period there are more
chances of catching the sick rodent in a trap than there are of finding
the body after death, unless the immediate surroundings are known to
harbor infected animals and an especially careful search is made for
cadavers in the places, often difficult of access, where rats have their
burrows and nests.

As plague is a disease that gives rise to such characteristic gross
pathological lesions in man and in laboratory animals, it is but
reasonable to expect that equally distinctive lesions would be found in
the rat, and this we find to be the case.

Skschivan[1], Kister and Schumacher[2], and other writers have observed
and recorded the gross lesions of plague in rats. It remained, however,
for the Indian Plague Commission[3], which had the opportunity of
examining an enormous number of plague rats in Bombay and elsewhere in
India, to crystallize our knowledge of this subject and to point out its
field of usefulness.

As to the comparative value of microscopical and macroscopical methods
of diagnosis, the Indian Plague Commission[3] states that: “The results
of tests carried out for the purpose of comparison make it manifest that
the naked eye is markedly superior to the microscopical method as an aid
in diagnosis, and as the result of our experience we are prepared to
make a diagnosis of plague on the strength of the macroscopical
appearances alone, even though the other results of cutaneous
inoculation and culture are negative and the animal shows signs of
putrefaction.”

Our experience with rat plague, though limited, leads us to the same
conclusion as that arrived at by the Indian Commission in regard to the
value of the gross lesions of plague in making the diagnosis. To one who
is acquainted with them, these lesions are as characteristic as those of
any infectious disease in man. It is quite true that occasionally
atypical cases are encountered where the majority of the gross lesions
are wanting, and in such cases it becomes necessary to resort to the
inoculation of animals or to cultural investigations in order to make a
diagnosis. Such cases are, however, if anything, rarer than are atypical
post-mortem findings in pneumonia or in typhoid fever in man.


                          MODE OF EXAMINATION.

A brief description of the actual manner of examining rats for plague
infection will be given here.

The rats are immersed in any convenient solution for the purpose of
killing fleas and other ectoparasites that might be capable of carrying
infection from a plague-infected rat.

The following plan of handling rats has been found satisfactory in the
federal laboratory at San Francisco. The rats are nailed to a shingle by
an attendant. Another attendant reads off the address on the tag
attached to the rat, puts a check number on the shingle, and records the
address from which the rat was taken and the check number on the card
shown on page 48. This card is arranged so as to give the data as to the
address from which the rat came, its size, sex, and species. After being
checked the rats are dissected and finally, after examination by the
medical officer, they are removed from the shingle; any plague-infected
rats are burned as soon as the necessary investigation has been made.
The dissection is made by reflecting the skin from the whole front of
the body and neck so as to expose the cervical, axillary, and inguinal
regions. The thoracic and abdominal cavities are then opened with
scissors.

In the inspection, careful search for buboes must be made in the regions
of the various peripheral lymph glands. The abdominal and thoracic
organs must be subjected to a careful scrutiny. It is needless to say
that this work should be done in a rat-proof, well-lighted building that
is provided with water, gas, and sewer connections. The utmost care
should be taken to avoid any undue risk of infection. The wearing of
rubber gloves is not necessary. Everyone who has to handle infected
animals must be sufficiently alive to the danger of infection.

In the extensive work conducted by the Indian Plague Commission[3],
attendants were protected with Haffkine’s prophylactic. This is
undoubtedly a wise precaution and should be taken if possible.

For a worktable on which to dissect the rats we use in San Francisco a
table which slopes gently from the sides and ends toward the center,
where a drain pipe is attached which leads to a vessel containing a
disinfectant. The table is covered with sheet lead.

The layman of average intelligence readily learns to recognize the gross
lesions of rat plague and it is wise to train the laboratory attendants
to do this. Every rat should, however, be subjected to a careful
scrutiny by the physician responsible for the work. The great majority
of rats may be put aside after a cursory examination as entirely beyond
suspicion of infection. Probably 8 or 10 per cent of them will require a
very careful examination for the gross lesions of plague. A card which
we have found very useful for keeping records of suspected and infected
animals is shown on page 34. Probably all of the species of the genus
_Mus_ are susceptible to plague infection. I shall, however, confine
myself to a consideration of plague in the rats found the world over
(_M. norvegicus_, _M. rattus_, _M. alexandrinus_).

In Bombay[18] it has been found that the epizootic among _Mus
norvegicus_ appears first and is probably responsible for the diffusion
of plague among _Mus rattus_. It precedes the infection among _Mus
rattus_ by about ten days, and the opinion is expressed by the Indian
Plague Commission that the usual course of the infection is from the
_Mus norvegicus_ to the _Mus rattus_, and as the latter rodent is a
house dweller in India it is the most frequent source of human
infection.

In San Francisco the _Mus rattus_ population is comparatively small,
contributing perhaps 2 per cent of the total rat population of the city;
but in the section of the city where the large warehouses are found,
especially those where oriental goods are stored, about 15 per cent of
the rats taken are _Mus rattus_. So far as concerns plague infection
about 5 per cent of the rat cases were in _Mus rattus_. It may be of
interest to note that the last infection found among rats in San
Francisco was among the _Mus rattus_ in a large warehouse near the water
front. Two plague-infected rats were found in this building, one October
21, 1908, and the other October 23, 1908. A large number of mummified
carcasses, all _Mus rattus_, were found in the building, and it seems
not unlikely that a somewhat extensive epizootic had occurred among
them. No previous case of rat plague had been found in the city for
eighty-five days, though about 25,000 rats had been examined during that
period, and none have been found in the six months since, although over
30,000 rats have been examined. Our records show that of 84 infected
rats, 79 were _Mus norvegicus_, and the remainder were _Mus rattus_.
Some of the latter may have been _Mus alexandrinus_, as the two species
(_Mus rattus_ and _Mus alexandrinus_) were not clearly differentiated in
the earlier examinations.


         THE GROSS LESIONS OF NATURAL RAT PLAGUE—ACUTE PLAGUE.


                        SUBCUTANEOUS INJECTION.

This is the sign which usually first attracts attention. White[4], in
discussing plague in rats, states that “the most noticeable post-mortem
appearance of the plague rat is the engorgement of the subcutaneous
blood vessels, together with a diffuse pink color of the subcutaneous
muscles, which have a peculiar dry, waxy translucency.” It has been our
experience frequently to have an attendant who is dissecting rats remark
that he had found an infected rat after the first incision was made in
reflecting the skin. The injection is dark red, and upon close
inspection one sees that the small vessels are uniformly distended with
blood. It is usually distributed over the whole surface of the body, but
on two occasions we have seen it confined to the side of the body on
which the primary bubo was found. A bright pink injection is a rather
common finding among rats in San Francisco. It is not likely to be
mistaken for the injection of plague infection. Subcutaneous œdema,
confined to the vicinity of the bubo, is occasionally encountered.

In our experience in San Francisco an injection identical in appearance
with that found in plague infection was found only twice, and in each
case there was associated with it a small discharging subcutaneous
abscess. There were no other lesions in either case and the pus from
these abscesses failed to produce plague in guinea pigs.

In a series of 61 consecutive plague rats in San Francisco, injection
was present fifty-two times, it was confined to the region of the bubo
twice, it was unilateral twice, and was general in distribution
forty-eight times. It was slight thirteen times, moderate fifteen times,
marked sixteen times, intense eight times.


                               THE BUBO.

This is the most reliable single sign of plague infection, and when
present in typical form is enough on which to base a diagnosis which
rarely proves erroneous.

The gland involved is usually surrounded by a more marked injection than
is present elsewhere, and an infiltration which at times is hemorrhagic.
This surrounding hemorrhage which was common in the plague rats
described by the Indian Plague Commission was met with very rarely in
San Francisco. The gland proper is usually caseous. The contents may be
shelled out very readily, though prior to section the gland feels very
firm. In the cases seen at the federal laboratory in San Francisco, the
contents of the buboes were recorded as being hemorrhagic four times and
as caseous twenty-nine times. Pest-like bacilli were noted as present in
18 cases, in 6 of which the “coccoid” form predominated. They were
recorded as absent five times.

Indolent enlargement of the lymph glands is very commonly encountered in
rats that are not infected with plague. Among old rats probably 15 per
cent will show this. Such glands, however, are tough, elastic, and not
surrounded by infiltration. They are not likely to be mistaken for the
plague buboes. In the leprosy-like disease of rats, the glands may reach
an enormous size.

Observers differ as to the location of the primary bubo. Skschivan[1]
states definitely the location of five primary buboes in plague rats
seen in Odessa in 1901. Two were in the axilla, two in the inguinal
region, and one in the neck. Kitasato[5] says: “To judge from the
experience of the past it can be suggested that in examining rats
particular attention should be paid to their submaxillary and cervical
glands and to the spleen. These organs in most cases show the evidence
of infection, if there be any.” From this it would appear that he
regarded the neck glands as the most frequent seat of the bubo. It may
be remarked here that his experience was derived from plague rats seen
in Asia.

We find a marked difference between the experience in San Francisco and
that in Bombay. This is demonstrated in the following table, which shows
the location in percentage of single buboes in each situation:

 ───────────────────────────────────────┬───────┬───────┬───────┬───────
                                        │  Neck.│Axilla.│ Groin.│Pelvis.
 ───────────────────────────────────────┼───────┼───────┼───────┼───────
                                        │   _Per│   _Per│   _Per│   _Per
                                        │ cent._│ cent._│ cent._│ cent._
 Indian Plague Commission, Bombay—2,923 │     75│     15│      6│      4
   rats[3]                              │       │       │       │
 Wherry, Walker, and Howell, San        │     12│     12│     75│
   Francisco[6]—8 rats                  │       │       │       │
 Federal laboratory, San Francisco—32   │       │     22│     72│      6
   rats                                 │       │       │       │
 ───────────────────────────────────────┴───────┴───────┴───────┴───────

The American figures are too small to be of much significance, but one
is struck with the fact that in Bombay three-fourths of the buboes are
in the neck, while in San Francisco three-fourths of all found are in
the inguinal region. We have records of only three multiple buboes found
in rats in San Francisco, and in no case was either of the buboes in the
neck; while in Bombay, to quote from the report[3], “Of the rats with
multiple buboes 54.5 per cent had a bubo in the neck.” Striking as these
figures are, we have collected further evidence that the inguinal region
is the commonest location of the bubo in plague rats in this vicinity.

Passed Asst. Surg. J. D. Long, Public Health and Marine-Hospital
Service, who has had an extensive experience with rat plague in Oakland,
Cal., tells me that the majority of the buboes were found in the groin,
very few in the neck. Acting Assistant Surgeon Wherry, Public Health and
Marine-Hospital Service, informs me that in a series of plague rats
examined after the report made in association with Walker and Howell[6],
the cervical bubo was very rarely encountered.

Particular care was taken to look for cervical buboes, as it seemed
rather inconsistent to find the other lesions so fully in accord with
those found in India, yet to have the location of the bubo to differ so
radically. We have not encountered a mesenteric bubo in our work in San
Francisco. The Indian Plague Commission found none in over 5,000
naturally infected plague rats. As mesenteric buboes are very commonly
encountered in plague infection brought about by feeding, they conclude
that the absence of these buboes in naturally infected rats is strong
evidence that the infection does not enter by the alimentary canal.


                          THE GRANULAR LIVER.

Two lesions of the liver are encountered in plague rats. The one most
frequently observed is spoken of by the Indian Plague Commission as
“fatty” change, though it is explained that this term refers to the
naked eye appearance as, microscopically, the lesion is found to be due
to a necrosis of the liver tissue. When this change is present the organ
is found to be rather yellowish in color and is studded with an enormous
number of yellowish white granules which are about the size of a pin
head. This lesion, which was very common in the San Francisco cases, is
very readily recognized.

The other lesion is a marking of the organ with grayish white spots;
“they are typically of the size of a pin’s point, and give the surface
of the organ a stippled appearance as if dusted over with gray
pepper”[3] (p. 331). This appearance, which is less frequently
encountered than is the preceding one, is more difficult to recognize;
indeed the most careful scrutiny is necessary to avoid overlooking it.

Rats that have been fed with certain biological preparations used to
destroy rodents (Danysz’s virus and similar preparations) often present
lesions in the liver resembling those due to plague infection. The
granules are, however, larger and more distinct. In these cases the
spleen is enlarged and generally granular, but rarely dark and friable
as in plague infection.


                              THE SPLEEN.

The size of the spleen of healthy rats of the same weight varies so
greatly that often one can not be sure as to what constitutes an
enlargement of this organ.

In plague rats this organ is markedly enlarged, firm, friable, rather
dark in color, and occasionally presents small granules under the
capsule. As Skschivan[1] pointed out, these granules are not encountered
as often as are granules in the liver. At times the organ presents a
very distinctly mottled appearance. This latter appearance is much more
frequently seen in artificially inoculated rats than in those found
infected in nature. We have seen the organ distinctly slate-colored on
several occasions.


                           PLEURAL EFFUSION.

The last sign of rat plague is one of great importance when associated
with other suspicious lesions. The effusion is bilateral, and is serous
in character, usually clear, though it is occasionally blood stained.
Pleural effusion is rarely found in rats other than those that are
plague infected. The following table shows in percentage the frequency
of the various macroscopical lesions of acute natural rat plague, as
observed in Bombay and in San Francisco:

 ────────────────────────┬────────────┬──────┬────────┬───────┬─────────
                         │Subcutaneous│Bubo. │Granular│ Large │ Pleural
                         │ injection. │      │ liver. │ dark  │effusion.
                         │            │      │        │spleen.│
 ────────────────────────┼────────────┼──────┼────────┼───────┼─────────
                         │_Per cent._ │ _Per │  _Per  │ _Per  │  _Per
                         │            │cent._│ cent._ │cent._ │ cent._
 Indian Plague           │     69     │  85  │   58   │       │   72
   Commission,           │            │      │        │       │
   Bombay—4,000 rats     │            │      │        │       │
 Wherry, Walker, and     │     59     │  14  │   14   │  68   │   71
   Howell, San           │            │      │        │       │
   Francisco—88 rats     │            │      │        │       │
 Federal laboratory, San │     85     │  57  │   87   │  74   │   59
   Francisco—62 rats     │            │      │        │       │
 ────────────────────────┴────────────┴──────┴────────┴───────┴─────────

It is recognized that the data from the San Francisco records is so much
smaller than that from the Indian report that perhaps no just comparison
is to be made. However, the figures are quite similar, except for the
small percentage of buboes and of liver lesions in the work of Wherry,
Walker, and Howell. The work of these observers was done in the early
part of the epizootic in San Francisco while the other figures from that
city are drawn from records later in the campaign.

No single sign is pathognomonic, though only once have we been deceived
by what was regarded as a typical plague bubo. This was in a rat that
presented no other suspicious lesions and the inoculation test resulted
negatively.

It is a combination of two or more of the signs that is of moment. The
subcutaneous injection with a typical liver or these signs associated
with a typical spleen afford good grounds for a diagnosis. A rat showing
a typical liver associated with a pleural effusion will usually prove to
be plague infected, and if a large, dark, firm spleen is also found a
diagnosis may be considered as practically established.

As has been pointed out by several writers gross lesions of plague may
be distinguished even in rats that are badly decomposed.


                            CHRONIC PLAGUE.

No case of natural chronic plague has been encountered in San Francisco.
Only one case was found among the many hundreds of plague rats examined
by the Indian Plague Commission[3] (p. 457) in Bombay. However, this
commission encountered a considerable number of cases among _Mus rattus_
in the Punjab villages of Kasel and Dhand. The lesions were purulent, or
caseous foci. They classify these cases as follows: Chronic plague of
the visceral type, which is further subdivided into splenic nodules and
abscesses, and mesenteric abscesses; chronic plague of the peripheral
type in which abscesses are situated in the regions of the peripheral
lymph glands.

Plague bacilli were either absent or very scanty upon microscopical
examination. They were, however, quite frequently recovered by cultural
methods, and in the great majority of the cases the organisms were fully
virulent. No evidence was forthcoming to show that this chronic rat
plague had anything to do with the recurrence of acute plague among the
rats.

We have diligently sought for chronic plague among the rats in San
Francisco, but, as we said above, without success, although a
considerable number of lesions that correspond perfectly to the
description of chronic plague have been submitted to the guinea-pig
inoculation test, but invariably with a negative result. An account of
the lesions of chronic plague as observed among inoculated rats is given
in another part of this paper.

Pound[7] believes that recovery from plague in rats is shown by the
presence of pigmented lymphatic glands. Kister and Schumacher[2] mention
pigment deposits in the inguinal region, but remarked that they are not
characteristic of plague, a view which I believe is correct, as we have
frequently seen them in San Francisco among the older rats, in which
there was no reason to suspect previous plague infection, and they have
been almost uniformly absent in the case of rats that have been
experimentally infected with plague but have recovered.


                   RAT PLAGUE WITHOUT GROSS LESIONS.

Plague infection may be present in a rat without bringing about any
recognizable gross lesions. For example: Dunbar and Kister[8] mention a
rat, which came from a ship on which plague rats had been found, that
had no lesions, and cultures were negative; but a guinea pig cutaneously
inoculated died of plague.

Among a considerable number of inoculated rats we have very rarely,
perhaps once or twice in a hundred cases, found nothing at the
post-mortem examination that would suggest plague infection, yet
cultures or inoculation of guinea pigs would demonstrate the presence of
_B. pestis_. Such cases are very infrequent, but it should be kept in
mind that they do occur. When a large number of rats are to be examined
it would be impracticable to inoculate a guinea pig from each rat; and
even if one did this the occasionally resistent guinea pig would
introduce a larger error than exists by placing dependence upon the
gross lesions for a diagnosis.


                       MICROSCOPICAL EXAMINATION.

The exact weight to be given to the morphology of the organisms found in
smears from the organs of a rat suspected of being plague infected is a
matter of individual judgment. Smears from a bubo and from the spleen
may show no organisms at all, or none even remotely resembling _B.
pestis_, and yet by culture and inoculation methods we may be able to
demonstrate that the animal is plague infected. Attention has been
called to this point by several observers, and every worker in this
field has the experience sooner or later.

In other cases the smears will show such numbers of perfectly typical
bipolar bacilli and “involution” (coccoid) forms as to leave scarcely
any doubt as to the nature of the organism. But even here cases that are
not plague are encountered that will deceive even the most experienced.
We have been accustomed to put great dependence on the “coccoid” forms
of the organism, but late in the San Francisco experience, smears from a
splenic nodule that was not regarded as due to plague showed perfectly
typical “involution” (“coccoid”) forms. Animal inoculations and cultures
showed that the tissues contained no plague bacilli.

In addition to these two classes of cases we have a third, where smears
show a few typically shaped bacilli, or where a considerable number of
typical-looking bacilli are found along with many other bacterial forms.
There is no safe rule for reaching a conclusion in these cases, and one
must resort to culture or to inoculation methods, or both. In any such
case it is always a good plan to let the macroscopical findings have
more weight than the microscopical.

The bipolar appearance of _B. pestis_ is so largely dependent upon the
technique of staining, fixing, length of time the stain is allowed to
act, and the length of the washing, that it should never be given great
weight. Here, as elsewhere in bacteriology, many errors are to be
avoided by not depending too much upon the morphology of the organism
under investigation.


                BACTERIOLOGICAL DIAGNOSIS OF RAT PLAGUE.

While the gross lesions of rat plague are often sufficiently
characteristic to justify a positive diagnosis, and the gross lesions in
conjunction with the microscopical examination will in other cases
enable us to say definitely that a rat is plague infected, still a
certain number of cases occur in which it is necessary to resort to
other methods, and there are circumstances, such as the first case in a
community, that make a complete bacteriological confirmation of a
diagnosis necessary.

This is not the proper place in which to discuss fully the bacteriology
of plague. However, a brief outline of what is necessary to establish
beyond question the existence of plague infection in an animal will be
given.

_B. pestis_ may often be isolated in culture from the tissues (bubo,
liver, spleen, or heart’s blood) of an infected rat. Unless the tissues
are badly contaminated with other organisms, plate or stroke culture
will yield a growth of _B. pestis_ in pure culture, or isolated
pest-like colonies may be transferred to other media.

It is unwise, however, to trust to cultural methods alone. In the
majority of doubtful cases it is advisable to inoculate guinea pigs or
white rats. The lesions of plague in these animals are quite
characteristic, and _B. pestis_ may readily be recovered from their
tissues if cultures are made at once after death.

A pure culture of the organism under suspicion is obtained from the
naturally infected animal or from a laboratory animal inoculated from
the one under suspicion. This culture is studied in regard to its
morphology; first, on agar, where it grows as a short rod, or often in
the shape of a coccus; second, in broth, where it often grows in
streptococcus-like chains; third, on agar containing 3 per cent sodium
chloride, where most extraordinary alterations in morphology occur,
giving large balloon-shaped bodies, objects resembling gigantic cocci
and enormous trypanosome-shaped forms, the so-called “involution” forms.
These involution forms must not be confused with the so-called
“involution” (coccoid) forms of the organism found in smears from animal
tissues.

We think it worth while to call special attention to the great
diagnostic value of involution forms developed when _Bacillus pestis_ is
grown on salt agar. No other organism that we have had the opportunity
of working with gives forms that are at all likely to be mistaken for
those of _Bacillus pestis_, except _B. mallei_, and of course the other
points of difference would at once serve to distinguish the latter
organism.

_B. pestis_ is Gram negative, though this point is of no great value
except to distinguish the “coccoid” forms from pus cocci.

The appearance and character of the culture should be as follows:

_Agar._—Smooth, glistening, round whitish colonies which are found to be
sticky when touched with an inoculating needle.

_Broth._—A scanty surface growth which falls, often in globular masses,
when the tube is gently agitated; and a fine flocculent precipitate.

_Litmus milk._—Generally rendered slightly acid.

_Glucose broth._—Rendered slightly acid. Gas is not formed.

_Lactose broth._—Unchanged in reaction. Gas is not formed.

The other cultural reactions are of no material assistance in the
identification of the organism. Indeed, in routine work the appearance
of the growth on agar and in broth, together with the involution forms
on salt agar, are sufficient for identifying the organism.

The plague bacillus is a nonmotile organism, a point worth bearing in
mind.

A culture answering the above description when rubbed into the shaven
skin of a guinea pig or a white rat should cause the death of either of
these animals of plague within ten days, and an organism must be
isolated from their tissues after death corresponding to the one
inoculated.

If one wishes to be doubly certain, one may inoculate a series of
laboratory animals, giving to half of them a sufficient dose of antipest
serum. The protected animals should recover, or markedly outlive the
controls, which should die in the usual time.

As to the virulence of cultures of the bacillus from cases of rat plague
Klein[17] states “that _B. pestis_ bred in the rat is of decidedly less
virulence than that bred in the human subject; moreover, the former is
liable, outside the animal body, to a much greater extent to rapidly
lose its virulence.” It is evident that in any given epidemic it will be
very difficult to say just which strain, rat or human, one is dealing
with.

In the case of the strains of _B. pestis_ recovered from rats in San
Francisco we have seen nothing to justify such an opinion as Klein
expresses. The cultures are all highly virulent and retain their
virulence under artificial cultivation.

The value of inoculation by the cutaneous method to demonstrate the
presence of plague infection in putrefying tissue is well known. We have
had one example in which the value of inoculation by this method was
proven in the case of a rat that was so badly decomposed as not to admit
of any opinion being formed as to whether the animal was infected or
not. A rat was brought from a warehouse where a typical plague rat had
been taken a few days previously. The specimen was so badly decomposed
that the abdominal organs could not be distinguished with any degree of
certainty. Smears from tissue that was thought to represent spleen were
negative so far as pest-like organisms were concerned. A guinea pig
vaccinated from this splenic material died in seven days of typical
plague, and a pure culture of _B. pestis_ was obtained from its organs.

Kolle and Martini [9] compare the cutaneous method of inoculation to the
use of an agar plate in separating plague bacilli from other organisms,
and so regularly does _B. pestis_ penetrate the skin and infect the
animal, and so rarely do other organisms do this, that it offers a
certain and accurate method of “filtering out” _B. pestis_ from any
badly decomposed tissue.

The technique of the cutaneous method of inoculation, or “vaccination”
as it is sometimes called, is very simple. An area about an inch square
is shaven on an animal’s belly, taking care to abrade the epithelium
slightly. The culture or suspected tissue is rubbed on this shaven area
with a platinum loop or a dressing forceps. Guinea pigs when inoculated
in this manner generally die before the seventh day; white rats die a
day or two earlier.

Kister [10] uses a drop of juice from an organ rich in bacilli for
agglutination experiments with antipest serum. This would appear in many
cases to be of very material assistance, and the objection that it is
difficult to form a uniform emulsion of the bacteria would be avoided.
The well-known tendency of _B. pestis_ to grow in clumps in culture is
the main reason why agglutination reactions have not been more
extensively used in plague work.

Skschivan [1] makes use of Pfeiffer’s phenomenon in establishing the
identity of a given organism as _B. pestis_.

To assist in the early diagnosis of plague, Dunbar and Kister [8]
practiced intraperitoneal inoculation of laboratory animals and used a
parallel series of immunized animals. As is well known, intraperitoneal
inoculation with plague cultures or infected material leads to the early
death of the inoculated animal, and it is evident that the survival of
the immunized animal would afford considerable evidence that the
material used for inoculation contains _B. pestis_.


                   PEST-LIKE BACTERIA FOUND IN RATS.

The somewhat general impression that there are a considerable number of
organisms that are readily mistaken for _Bacillus pestis_ is not
justified, provided one gives attention to cultural and inoculation
investigations. It is quite true that there are a considerable number of
organisms which in smears from tissues are scarcely to be distinguished
_morphologically_ from _B. pestis_. The similarity, however, usually
ends there. A few resemble plague somewhat closely in cultural
reactions, and especially _B. pseudo-tuberculosis rodentium_ (Pfeiffer)
should be mentioned here; but these differ in pathogenicity. For
example, the above-named organism is not pathogenic for rats.

Neumans[11] reviews the subject of pest-like organisms pathogenic for
rats, and describes an organism belonging to this group which he
isolated from the body of a rat. His work clearly shows that none of the
organisms that have been described should cause any serious difficulty
in the hands of a careful investigator.

Kister and Schmidt[12] describe an organism closely resembling _B.
pestis_ in many respects, and with which guinea pigs could be
successfully infected by the cutaneous method. This organism, which was
also pathogenic for rats and mice, belongs to the hemorrhagic septicæmic
group. It differed from _B. pestis_ in that it gave no involution forms
when grown upon salt agar and was much more rapidly fatal to laboratory
animals.

Augeszky[13] observed an epidemic among gray rats in his laboratory
which was due to a pest-like organism belonging to the Friedlander
group. The animals died after a couple of days of illness. At the
post-mortem examination the spleen was found large, soft, and congested.
There was a hyperæmia of the intestines, lungs, and liver. In the spleen
were found many, and in the heart’s blood few, capsulated bacilli, some
of which resembled _B. pestis_. The cultural reactions were in nowise
similar to those of _B. pestis_. He found that inoculation of rats with
a pure culture of this organism sometimes killed in as short a time as
twenty-four hours, sometimes as late as two or three weeks, and in some
cases the lesions were not very unlike those sometimes produced by _B.
pestis_. However, this organism by its different cultural reactions, and
the fact that the capsule is usually easily demonstrated, would probably
never be a source of any confusion.


               ARTIFICIAL INFECTION OF RATS WITH PLAGUE.

For laboratory purposes in general it is customary to use tame white
rats, and in plague work they are especially satisfactory, as they are
easily handled, rarely harbor fleas, are very susceptible to the
infection, and finally and most important, they frequently die a day or
two earlier than guinea pigs. At times it may be necessary to use wild
rats on account of a failure in the supply of white rats, or for the
sake of economy. This may be done very satisfactorily, if one bears in
mind the fact that a considerable number of wild rats are more or less
immune to plague infection, especially when the infectious material is
introduced by Kölle’s (cutaneous) method. Therefore, it is always
advisable to use three or four wild rats where one white rat would be
sufficient. They should be kept in a container of such design that there
is no possibility of their escaping. The inoculation is best conducted
with the animal under the influence of ether.


                          MODES OF INFECTION.

Rats may be infected experimentally by the ingestion of contaminated
material, and by the application of virulent plague bacilli to a mucous
or a cutaneous surface, or by subcutaneous injection of the organism.

Practically we may confine our study to inoculation by the cutaneous
method, and to subcutaneous inoculation, when the material is injected
in the ordinary manner. A useful modification of the latter method is to
make a small pocket under the skin of the abdomen and thrust the
suspected material into this pocket. This avoids the necessity of making
an emulsion of infectious matter, such as the organs of an animal. The
time that elapses between the inoculation of a rat with virulent culture
of plague bacilli and its death varies somewhat with the size of the
dose and with the mode of inoculation. The following table, compiled
from work in San Francisco, shows the day of death of a few white rats
and a considerable number of wild rats using the strain of _B. pestis_
that was found in the recent epidemic here. Some were inoculated by the
cutaneous and some by the subcutaneous method:

 ───────────────────────────────────┬─────────────────┬─────────────────
            Day of death.           │   White rats.   │   Wild rats.
 ───────────────────────────────────┼─────────────────┼─────────────────
 Second                             │                 │                3
 Third                              │                5│               27
 Fourth                             │                7│               41
 Fifth                              │                1│               30
 Sixth                              │                1│                9
 Seventh                            │                 │                8
 ───────────────────────────────────┼─────────────────┼─────────────────
                Total               │               14│              118
 ───────────────────────────────────┴─────────────────┴─────────────────

The wild rats were all _Mus norvegicus_.

The _lesions_ found, when an artificially inoculated rat is examined
after death, are in a general way similar to those found in naturally
infected rats with certain differences to be mentioned later.

In order to obtain accurate figures as to the frequency of the various
lesions in inoculated rats, I have compiled the data from the records of
the federal laboratory in San Francisco of a considerable number of wild
rats that have been inoculated in the course of various investigations
and have died of acute plague. The rats were practically all of the
species _Mus norvegicus_.

_Artificially inoculated (subcutaneously) plague rats._

 ──────────────┬─────────┬────────────┬─────┬────────┬────────┬─────────
               │    Local│Subcutaneous│Bubo.│Granular│Enlarged│  Pleural
               │reaction.│  injection.│     │  liver.│    dark│effusion.
               │         │            │     │        │ spleen.│
 ──────────────┼─────────┼────────────┼─────┼────────┼────────┼─────────
 Present       │       36│          48│   19│      47│      56│       18
 Very extensive│        1│        [Q]2│     │        │        │        8
 Slight        │        2│           6│     │        │        │        8
 ──────────────┼─────────┼────────────┼─────┼────────┼────────┼─────────
 Total present │       39│          56│   19│      47│      56│       34
 Absent        │       10│           4│   39│      15│       3│       21
 Not recorded  │       13│           2│    4│        │       3│        7
 ──────────────┼─────────┼────────────┼─────┼────────┼────────┼─────────
 Total         │       62│          62│   62│      62│      62│       62
 ──────────────┴─────────┴────────────┴─────┴────────┴────────┴─────────

Footnote Q:

  Intense.

All of the lesions aside from the local reaction were present and well
marked in six cases.

_Artificially inoculated (cutaneously) plague rats._

 ──────────────┬─────────┬────────────┬─────┬────────┬────────┬─────────
               │    Local│Subcutaneous│Bubo.│Granular│Enlarged│  Pleural
               │reaction.│  injection.│     │  liver.│    dark│effusion.
               │         │            │     │        │ spleen.│
 ──────────────┼─────────┼────────────┼─────┼────────┼────────┼─────────
 Present       │       16│          34│   42│      58│      58│       22
 Very extensive│        1│       [R]15│     │        │        │        6
 Slight        │        6│          13│     │        │        │
 ──────────────┼─────────┼────────────┼─────┼────────┼────────┼─────────
 Total present │       23│          62│   42│      58│      58│       28
 Absent        │       37│           6│   26│      11│       8│       37
 Not recorded  │        9│           1│    1│        │       3│        4
 ──────────────┼─────────┼────────────┼─────┼────────┼────────┼─────────
 Total         │       69│          69│   69│      69│      69│       69
 ──────────────┴─────────┴────────────┴─────┴────────┴────────┴─────────

Footnote R:

  Intense.

All of the lesions aside from the local reaction were present and well
marked in five cases.


                            LOCAL REACTION.

The most striking difference between natural and artificial plague in
rats is the presence of a reaction at the site of inoculation in the
majority of cases where the organism is introduced subcutaneously, and
in about a third of the cases where the infectious material is rubbed on
the shaven skin (cutaneous inoculation). The local reaction may exist
only as a yellowish-brown crust, overlying a granulating surface, and
associated with a trifling thickening of the skin and subcutaneous
tissue. It may appear as one or more firm papules 3 or 4 millimeters in
diameter. The most frequent appearance is a brawny œdematous and
blood-stained reaction which extends over an area perhaps an inch in
diameter; at times purulent change may be well advanced. Very rarely one
finds so extensive an œdema as to cause the lesion to somewhat resemble
the widespread gelatinous reaction seen so commonly in the guinea pig.
On one or two occasions we have seen an extensive slough at the site of
inoculation.


                                 BUBO.

It is very exceptional that one finds in cases of induced plague the
typical, firm, caseous bubo surrounded by an infiltrated area, as is so
commonly seen in natural infection in rats. The glands are sometimes
enlarged and injected without other changes. The commonest lesion,
however, is a markedly enlarged gland which upon close inspection is
seen to have a number of yellowish points just under the capsule. These
points are especially well seen when a section is made through the
gland. The gland may be squeezed out of the capsule and it breaks down
readily enough when pressure is made upon it; but the uniform necrotic
process that one sees so often in natural rat plague is absent.


                                 LIVER.

Granular lesions precisely like those found in natural infections are
very common. If the rat has died on the sixth day or later, the ordinary
lesions are apt to be replaced by necrotic foci that may be as much as 2
millimeters in diameter.


                                SPLEEN.

This organ is found mottled more frequently than in natural plague
infection, and large granules are much more common.

The subcutaneous injection is rarely so well marked as it is in natural
infections.

Pleural effusion of the same nature as that found in natural plague is
common. Hemorrhagic foci are not rare in the lungs, and occasionally the
organs are partly consolidated.


             CHRONIC PLAGUE DUE TO ARTIFICIAL INOCULATION.

Occasionally a rat that has been inoculated but has survived a week or
longer, will show, when killed, only an abscess at the site of the
injection. Stained smear preparations may show a large variety of
bacterial forms. We have not been able to demonstrate the presence of
_B. pestis_ in these lesions, yet there is no doubt but that the lesion
is the result of the inoculation.

A lesion more frequently found is a caseous or a purulent lymphatic
gland. If the inoculated rat has been killed about ten days after the
inoculation, in some cases one or more of the peripheral lymph glands
will be found to be surrounded by an infiltration, and the gland itself
will be purulent or less frequently caseous. Such lesions are
occasionally met with in rats in which there is no suspicion of plague
infection; but they are seen so frequently among rats that have survived
artificial inoculation with _B. pestis_, there is no doubt but that in
these cases they are the result of the inoculation. In several such
cases pest-like organisms have been demonstrated in smears, and acute
plague has been produced in guinea pigs by inoculation with the pus
found in these lesions. Not infrequently in these cases the spleen will
be found enlarged and looking very much like the organ in acute plague,
but cultures from this organ in such cases have in my experience
remained sterile.

In other cases the only lesions will be found in the spleen. The organ
is enlarged and contains a number of caseous nodules. These nodules vary
in number from four or five to thirty or forty and in size from the head
of a pin to a lesion 0.3 centimeter in diameter. In a number of such
cases the nature of the lesion has been demonstrated by animal
inoculation. For example, in a series of experiments carried out to
determine the susceptibility of San Francisco rats to plague infection a
large _Mus rattus_ died on the eleventh day after inoculation. The
post-mortem examination showed nothing except an enlarged spleen which
contained about a dozen caseous nodules, the largest of which was not
over 2 millimeters in diameter. The nodules were very firm and the
capsule smooth, so that they were held with difficulty with dressing
forceps. Cultures from the liver and the spleen remained sterile, but a
piece of the spleen was placed beneath the skin of a guinea pig. This
animal died of acute plague, and a pure culture of _B. pestis_ was
isolated from its liver. In some of these cases the liver will show
large, distinct, whitish caseous foci. In another case a small _Mus
norvegicus_ was killed on the twelfth day after a cutaneous inoculation
from an artificially infected squirrel. No lesion was found except in
the spleen which was not materially enlarged, but which presented two
small whitish caseous granules on the surface, neither being over 1
millimeter in diameter. A piece of the spleen containing one of these
granules was put under the skin of the belly of a guinea pig. The guinea
pig died on the fourth day with the usual lesions of acute plague.
Occasionally in these cases of chronic plague punctate hemorrhages or
even areas of consolidation are found in the lungs.


                      THE HISTOLOGY OF RAT PLAGUE.

The most recent and satisfactory work on this subject is that of
Ledingham [14], who has studied the lesions of both natural and induced
plague in rats. The following is a very brief abstract of his work. The
reader is referred to the original for a full study of the subject.


                          NATURAL RAT PLAGUE.

Two groups of cases are distinguished, first, those in which a large
number of _B. pestis_ are found in the liver and in the spleen. In the
spleen this is accompanied by hemorrhages and congestion of the pulp
sinuses and in the liver with congestion of the capillaries. These are
early cases.

In the second group, or the later cases, there are extensive reaction
changes in the tissues. In the spleen this leads at times to distinct
abscess formation, but more frequently to a walling off of the foci of
necrosis. In the liver more or less focal necrosis is found; sometimes
the areas of “necrosis” may be so extensive that little healthy liver
tissue remains. Bacilli are usually to be demonstrated in these areas of
necrosis. Giant cells of the Langhans type may be found in the
neighborhood of these foci.

The granular appearance of the liver is attributed to “hemorrhages and
the focal necroses, together with the fatty changes in the liver cells.
It must be understood, however, that a peculiar honeycomb-like vacuolar
degeneration of the liver cell protoplasm was far more frequent than any
actual, coarse, fatty infiltration. The granular appearance of the
spleen is due partly to endothelial catarrh and partly to subcapsular
changes.”

In experimental rat plague Ledingham found the lesions to resemble those
of the first group of cases referred to above. There is usually marked
bacteraemia; focal necroses of the liver are scanty.

In a chronic case, minute abscesses were found scattered through the
spleen. In the center of the abscesses were found clumps of degenerated
bacilli. The areas were walled off by epithelioid and spindle cells and
numerous giant cells of the tubercular type.


                           IMMUNITY OF RATS.

Contrary to the general impression the wild rat is not an animal
especially susceptible to plague infection. The Indian Plague Commission
[19] found that when rats are inoculated by the cutaneous method from
the spleen of infected rats 59 per cent are immune to infection. A
series of experiments conducted in the federal laboratory in San
Francisco showed that when inoculated with highly virulent cultures of
_B. pestis_ there is an immunity which is, however, more frequent among
the large rats. When inoculated cutaneously with tissue containing large
numbers of _B. pestis_ from plague infected human beings, rats, or
squirrels, about 15 per cent of small rats and about 50 per cent of
large ones were found to be immune. There is no good reason for
believing that this immunity of San Francisco rats was due to a previous
attack of the disease. Indeed, it was known beyond a doubt that some of
the immune rats had never had an opportunity of becoming infected with
plague in nature and thereby establishing an acquired immunity. We may
mention here the fact that has been observed by many workers, and which
we have amply confirmed, that rats are readily immunized by antiplague
serum.

The subject of the transfer of infection directly from rat to rat by
cutaneous or subcutaneous inoculation through a series of the animals is
one that is evidently intimately associated with the preceding subject,
as it is quite evident that an immune rat or several of them might
terminate a series without any actual diminution in the virulence of the
organism transferred. It is quite plain that the success of such an
experiment would depend largely upon the number of rats used in each
transfer. The Indian Plague Commission [19] had no difficulty in
carrying infection through twenty-six transfers, using from six to fifty
rats in each transfer.

Pound [7] in a series of eight experiments, was never able to convey the
infection successfully beyond the sixth rat, using but one rat for each
transfer. There was no apparent lessening of the virulence of the
organism and each series appears to have been terminated abruptly by
encountering an immune rat.

Baxter-Tyrie [15] says:


  It is probable that under certain natural circumstances a reduction in
  the virulence of the organism is effected and a comparative immunity
  is conferred on the rats. The infection of immigrant rats is, however,
  severe, and their arrival is heralded by a heavy mortality. In the
  same manner an infected rat imported into a fresh locality produces a
  similar result. This attenuation of virulence is responsible for the
  condition known as chronic rat plague.


Several experiments conducted in San Francisco to determine this point
have given results that I regard as showing merely the presence of a
considerable percentage of immunity among the rats. It was observed that
in each case certain of the rats died of acute plague even in the last
transfer. It was very evident that had certain combinations of immune
rats been encountered the experiment might have terminated at any point.
On the other hand, by being especially fortunate in using nonimmune
rats, the experiments might have given a much higher percentage of cases
of acute plague. Unfortunately it was necessary to terminate these
experiments in each instance before they could be regarded as completed.

The reason for the natural subsidence of plague among rats in any
community is a point about which much more evidence must be obtained
before we can speak with any degree of certainty. It may be due to the
lack of susceptible material, possibly to a loss of virulence of the
organism; but it seems more probable that it is due to a change in the
number or relations of the ectoparasites of the rat.

Adequate measures of rat extermination, while they may never bring about
the ideal condition of a community that is free from rats, are, as is
shown by the recent experience in San Francisco, of the utmost value in
shortening the epizootic.


                              REFERENCES.

Endnote 1:

  Skschivan (Centralblatt für Bacter., etc., 1903, Vol. XXXIII, No. 4,
  p. 260).

Endnote 2:

  Kister & Schumacher (Zeit. für Hyg. u. inf. Krank., Vol. LI, 1905).

Endnote 3:

  Indian Plague Commission (Journal of Hygiene, 1907, Vol. VII, No. 3).

Endnote 4:

  White (Medical Record, vol. 67, No. 4, Jan. 28, 1905).

Endnote 5:

  Kitasato (Philippine Journal of Science, Vol. I, No. 5, 1906).

Endnote 6:

  Wherry, Walker & Howell (Journal Am. Med. Assn., April 11, 1908, Vol.
  L, No. 15).

Endnote 7:

  Pound (1907, Report on Plague in Queensland, B. B. Ham, p. 134).

Endnote 8:

  Dunbar & Kister (1904, Centralblatt für Bact., etc., Vol. XXXVI, No.
  1, p. 127).

Endnote 9:

  Kolle & Martini (Deut. Med. Woch., Jan. 2, 1902, Vol. XXVIII).

Endnote 10:

  Kister (Centralblatt für Bact., etc., July 24, 1906, Vol. XLI, No. 7).

Endnote 11:

  Neumans (1903, Zeit. f. Hyg. u. inf. Krank., Vol. XLV, No. 3, p. 451).

Endnote 12:

  Kister & Schmidt (1904, Centralblatt für Bact., etc., Vol. XXXVI, No.
  3, p. 454).

Endnote 13:

  Aujeszky (1904, Centralblatt für Bact., etc., Vol. XXXVI, No. 5, p.
  603).

Endnote 14:

  Ledingham (Journal of Hygiene, 1907, Vol. VII, No. 3).

Endnote 15:

  Baxter-Tyrie (Journ. of Hygiene, Vol. V, 1905, p. 315).

Endnote 16:

  Wherry (The Journal of Infect. Diseases, Dec. 18, 1908, Vol. V, No.
  5).

Endnote 17:

  Klein (The Bacteriology and Etiology of Oriental Plague, MacMillan and
  Co., London, 1906).

Endnote 18:

  Indian Plague Commission (Journal of Hygiene, 1907, Vol. VII, No. 6,
  p. 761).

Endnote 19:

  Indian Plague Commission (Journal of Hygiene, 1906, Vol. VI, No. 4).


                            RAT RECORD CARD.

 [Legend: O = Ordinary; W = White belly; R = Red; Go. = Gopher rat; S =
     Small; M = Medium; L = Large; M. R. = Mus rattus; M. N. = Mus
                              norvegicus.]

 ───┬────────┬───────────────┬─────┬────────┬────────────┬─────┬─────────
 No.│ Date.  │District No. 6.│Sex. │ Size.  │   M. N.    │M. R.│Pregnant.
 ───┼────────┼───────────────┼──┬──┼──┬──┬──┼──┬──┬──┬───┼──┬──┼─────────
  „ │   „    │       „       │M.│F.│S.│M.│L.│O.│W.│R.│Go.│O.│W.│    „
 ───┼────────┼───────────────┼──┼──┼──┼──┼──┼──┼──┼──┼───┼──┼──┼─────────
 19 │Dec. 10,│ 401 Fillmore  │1 │  │  │1 │  │  │  │1 │   │  │  │
    │  1908  │    street     │  │  │  │  │  │  │  │  │   │  │  │
 20 │   do   │      do       │  │1 │  │  │1 │1 │  │  │   │  │  │  [S]7
 ───┴────────┴───────────────┴──┴──┴──┴──┴──┴──┴──┴──┴───┴──┴──┴─────────

Footnote S:

  Number of fœtuses.


                            PLAGUE RAT CARD.

                           PLAGUE RAT NO. 50.

 Date: June 20, 1908.
 Species: _M. norvegicus_.
 From District No. 6, sewer, Haight and Steiner Streets.
 Condition: Badly injured by trap; thorax crushed.
 Subcutaneous injection: General, marked.
 Lymphatic glands, bubo or other lesions: Right inguinal bubo, caseous.
 Liver: Typical whitish granules.
 Spleen: Large, dark, firm.
 Pleural effusion: Unable to say.
 Purulent or caseous foci:
 Diagnosis from gross lesions: Plague.
 Diagnosis from smears: Plague (spleen and bubo).
 Cultures: _B. pestis_ recovered from liver culture.
 Inoculation, guinea pig No. 50 A, +6.25.08.
 Vaccination, guinea pig No. 50 B, +6.26.08.
 Date suspicious:
 Date positive: June 20, 1908.
 Date negative:

[Illustration:

  A HOEN & CO BALTIMORE.

  NECROPSY APPEARANCE OF PLAGUE-INFECTED RAT
]

[Illustration:

  A HOEN & CO BALTIMORE

  NECROPSY APPEARANCE OF NORMAL RAT
]




                              RAT LEPROSY.

                 By WALTER R. BRINCKERHOFF, S. B., M. D.,

 _Assistant Director Leprosy Investigation Station, United States Public
                                Health and
               Marine-Hospital Service, Honolulu, Hawaii_.


                             INTRODUCTION.

The leprosy-like disease of the rat is of great interest to leprologists
because of its close similarity to the disease leprosy in man. Its
practical importance to those engaged in the study of the human disease
is increased by the fact that it can be artificially propagated under
laboratory conditions from animal to animal and, still more important,
can be transferred from the species in which it occurs naturally (_Mus
norvegicus_) to a more tractable laboratory animal (_Mus albus_). The
brief description of the affection which follows is intended to assist
in its recognition and to stimulate the interest of investigators in the
disease, which presents problems replete with interest to the study of
pathology or bacteriology and of great promise to those engaged in the
investigation of human leprosy. It is earnestly hoped that the
investigation of this disease will be undertaken in general medical
research laboratories, as it is extremely probable that certain of the
most difficult problems presented by leprosy in man can be studied in
this disease of the rat, and if solved there the information gained can
be directly applied to the solution of the analogous problems in the
human disease.


                         REVIEW OF LITERATURE.

The first publication on rat leprosy was made by Stefansky (1903), who
observed the disease in Odessa during an antiplague campaign against
rats.

Rabinowitch (1903) found the disease among rats in Berlin and confirmed
the work of Stefansky.

Dean (1903) discovered the disease independently in London, and in a
later publication (1905) reports success in transferring the disease by
artificial inoculation.

Tidswell (1906) reports a case of the disease in a rat caught in Sydney,
New South Wales, Australia.

The English Plague Commission observed the disease in India in 1907
(Wherry).

Wherry (1908) and McCoy (1908) report upon the finding of the disease in
rats caught in San Francisco, Cal.

Mezincescu (1908) has studied the disease and attempted to determine its
relationship to known human lepra by complement fixation tests.


                        DESCRIPTION OF DISEASE.

_Geographical occurrence._—It would be premature at present to make
didactic statements as to the geographical distribution of the disease,
for its discovery has usually depended upon antiplague measures, which
are not world-wide in their scope. In spite of this it seems profitable
to briefly review the known occurrence of the disease in relation to
that of human leprosy. When such a comparison is made we note that the
disease is present among the rats of Berlin, a city which is practically
free from human lepra. On the other hand in Honolulu, which is an
endemic focus of human leprosy, in the examination of 16,000 rats,
during an antiplague campaign, no case of rat leprosy was encountered.
In addition to the scrutiny of the rats examined for plague in Honolulu,
an attempt was made to obtain leper rats by offering a reward for a rat,
dead or alive, infected with the disease. This offer was given wide
publicity in the Territory, but brought no results.

_Occurrence of the disease._—The proportion of rats infected with the
disease in different localities varies greatly, as will be seen in the
following table:

TABLE 1.—_Proportion of leper rats to the total rats examined._

 ───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────
           Place.           │         Observer.         │  Proportion.
 ───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────
                            │                           │  _Per cent._
 Odessa                     │Stefansky [301]            │        4–5.000
 Sydney                     │Tidswell [305]             │           .001
 San Francisco              │Wherry [308]               │           .210
 Do                         │McCoy [310]                │           .160
 Honolulu                   │Currie[T]                  │           .000
 ───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────

Footnote T:

  Personal communication.

Rats in the late stage of the disease are easily recognized by the
presence of a patchy alopecia associated with cutaneous and subcutaneous
nodules, which may or may not be the site of open ulcers. The diagnosis
can be readily confirmed by a microscopic examination of a smear from an
ulcer or a nodule, which will show the specific bacillus of the disease
in enormous numbers.

Stefansky[301] describes two clinical types of the disease, the one
localized particularly in the lymph nodes, the other in the skin and
muscles. The glandular type was the more common. Dean[304] thinks that
no line of demarcation can be drawn between these clinical types.

Dean[304] and Wherry[307] both mention that attention was attracted to
the diseased animals by the fact that they were seen abroad during
daylight in an obviously sick condition.

The skin, in a well-developed case of the disease, presents a patchy
alopecia coincident with thickening and nodule formation, which is
situated in the subcutaneous tissue. The cut surface of the nodules or
thickenings is light yellow in color, is clean, dry, and cheese-like. In
the region of the nodules the skin is atrophic, and ulcers often form on
the prominent parts of the affected area. The subcutaneous fat tissue is
diminished in amount. Histologically the process is seen to be
practically confined to the subcutaneous tissue and to consist
essentially in the presence of cells rich in protoplasm, with vesicular
nuclei, whose cell body is more or less completely filled with slender
acid-fast bacilli. The subcutaneous fat is replaced by such a tissue.
All investigators who have studied the disease agree in emphasizing the
similarity of the histology of the lesion to that in leprosy in man.

When the musculature is involved the muscle fibers atrophy and the
fibers are infiltrated with the specific bacilli. The affected muscle is
friable, and macroscopically grayish white in color.

The peripheral lymph nodes are commonly involved, though McCoy[310]
reports a case in which only the pelvic and mesenteric nodes were
diseased, and in the Tidswell case[305] the peripheral nodes were not
enlarged. The typically affected nodes are enlarged, sometimes measuring
as much as 3 centimeters in the greatest extent, firm, and, on section,
opaque pale yellow-white in color. In the experimental disease the
writer has frequently found the characteristic bacilli of the disease in
peripheral lymph nodes which were very slightly enlarged and presented
no macroscopic lesion. Dean[304] has observed invasion of the
submaxillary or salivary glands by extension from infected cervical
lymph nodes. Wherry[308] notes that in his cases he did not find the
submaxillary or cervical glands involved, which fact he contrasts with
two early cases in which the skin and adjacent axillary or inguinal
nodes were involved.

Microscopically the lymph nodes show large numbers of cells in the
sinuses similar to those in the skin lesions. Multinuclear giant cells
are frequently observed which may measure as much as 70 to 80
microns[304]. The protoplasm of the cells is loaded with the specific
bacilli of the disease. The lymph follicles, trabeculæ, and capsule of
the glands are also invaded by the bacilli.

The internal organs are relatively slightly affected in the natural
disease. Small foci have been found in the liver by Dean[304] and in the
liver and spleen by McCoy[310]. Wherry[307] reports finding the bacilli
in smears from both the liver and spleen. The writer has found
microscopic lesions containing the characteristic bacilli in the liver
in a case of the experimental disease.

Lesions have been observed in the bone marrow by Dean[304], and the same
author states that the nerves are invaded by the bacilli of the disease.
McCoy[310] found the bacilli in the urinary bladder in one case.

With a disease showing such a striking similarity to human leprosy,
attention has naturally been directed to the bacteriological examination
of the nasal mucus. Dean[304] and Wherry[307] have both found the
characteristic bacilli in the nasal mucus, while McCoy[310] has failed
to do so. The writer’s experience has been confined to the experimental
disease, and in his animals the nasal examinations have been negative.


                               ETIOLOGY.

The accepted etiological factor in the disease is an acid-fast bacillus
3 to 5 microns in length and 0.5 micron wide. The bacilli resemble very
closely the lepra bacillus of man, but seem to have somewhat greater
power to hold carbol-fuchsin stain against mineral acids. The bacilli
often have rounded ends and may be curved. The beaded appearance so
often seen in lepra bacilli is common. The bacilli show the same
tendency to form bundles that is such a marked characteristic of
_Bacillus lepræ_. To one familiar with the microscopic appearance of
smears from the discharges and lesions of human leprosy the picture
presented by similar preparations from the disease of the rat is most
striking.

The organism does not grow on the usual culture media—Stefansky [301],
Rabinowitch[302], Dean[304], Tidswell[305]—or on certain special
media—Dean[304].

The organism is not pathogenic for the guinea pigs—Dean[304],
Tidswell[305]—rabbit, mouse, monkey—Dean[304]. The disease can be
transmitted to black and white rats—Dean[304], Wherry.


                                SUMMARY.

In the leprosy-like disease of rats we have an affection which closely
resembles, both in its etiological factor and in its pathology, the
disease leprosy in man. The fact that the disease is readily propagated
in a laboratory animal permits of its investigation in any laboratory.
It is earnestly hoped that the study of this disease will be taken up by
bacteriologists and pathologists, as in this way valuable information
may be gained which will be applicable to the problems presented by
leprosy in man.




                             BIBLIOGRAPHY.


Endnote 301:

  Stefansky, W. K., ’03. Eine lepraähnliche Erkrankung bei Wanderratten.
  Cent. f. Bact., Bd. 33, Orig. S. 481. Baum. Jahres., Bd. 19, S. 496.

Endnote 302:

  Rabinowitch, L., ’03. Ueber eine Hauterkrankung der Ratten. Cent. f.
  Bact., Bd. 33, Orig. S. 577. Baum. Jahres., Bd. 19, S. 496.

Endnote 303:

  Dean, G., ’03. A Disease of Rats caused by an acid-fast Bacillus.
  Cent. f. Bact., Orig. Bd. 34, S. 222. Baum. Jahres., Bd. 19, S. 494.

Endnote 304:

  Dean, G., ’05. Further Observations on a Leprosy-like Disease of the
  Rat. Jour. Hyg., vol. 5, p. 99.

Endnote 305:

  Tidswell, F., ’06. Note of Leprosy-like Disease of Rats. Lepra, vol.
  6, p. 197.

Endnote 306:

  English Plague Commission. Jour. Hyg., vol. 7, p. 337. Cited by
  Wherry.

Endnote 307:

  Wherry, W. B., ’08. The Leprosy-like Disease among Rats on the Pacific
  Coast. Jour. Am. Med. Asso., vol. 50, No. 23. Cent. f. Bact., Ref. Bd.
  42, S. 664.

Endnote 308:

  Wherry, W. B., ’08. Notes on Rat Leprosy and on the Fate of Human and
  Rat Lepra Bacilli in Flies. Public Health Reports, U. S. P. H. and M.
  H. S., vol. 23, p. 1841. Jour. Infec. Dis., vol. 5, p. 507.

Endnote 309:

  Mezincescu, D., ’08. Maladie Lépreuse des Rats et ses Relations avec
  la Lèpre Humaine. Compt. Rend. Soc. Biol., T. 64, p. 514. Cent. f.
  Bact., Ref. Bd. 42, p. 664.

Endnote 310:

  McCoy, G. W., ’08. Rat Leprosy. Public Health Reports, U. S. P. H. and
  M. H. S., vol. 23, p. 981. Jour. Am. Med. Asso., vol. 51, p. 690.

The writer wishes to express his gratitude to Dr. George Dean for
histological material from the natural and experimental disease, and to
Doctors Wherry and McCoy for rats inoculated with the disease and normal
animals for its propagation.




   BACTERIAL DISEASES OF THE RAT, OTHER THAN PLAGUE AND RAT LEPROSY.

                          By DONALD H. CURRIE,

       _Passed Assistant Surgeon, United States Public Health and
                       Marine-Hospital Service_.


So far as is known, the several species of rats that are found about the
habitations of man—_Mus norvegicus_, _Mus rattus_, _Mus alexandrinus_,
and _Mus musculus_—are naturally subject to but few bacterial diseases
as compared to some other animals. Interest in this matter has only
recently been aroused, owing to the rôle played by the rat in the spread
of bubonic plague. When we consider the immense number of rats that have
been examined in connection with antiplague work by trained
investigators in recent years, and that to many investigators the
thought must have come that the discovery of some rat destroying
bacterium would be of the greatest utility, it appears more than
probable that few such natural diseases exist.

Plague is the one natural bacterial disease that has demonstrated its
power to destroy these rodents in numbers sufficiently large to attract
general attention; scientific investigation has only been able to add a
few other bacterial diseases, and these are probably for the most part
rare ones, causing the death of a very small percentage of the total rat
population.

Of the “natural” diseases (i. e., spontaneous, in distinction to
diseases that can only be produced artificially, under laboratory
conditions) the following are the more important ones:

Rat plague and rat leprosy, which are made the subject of special
chapters in this publication, must be mentioned as the most important
diseases observed among rat populations.


        DANYSZ’S BACILLUS OR BACILLUS TYPHI MURIUM OF LOEFFLER.

These are probably identical organisms, differing only in their degree
of virulence, at least their pathogenicity alone distinguishes them in
the laboratory. They are both members of the paracolon group. They
produce a diffuse cloudiness in broth, ferment glucose but not lactose
or saccharose, do not liquefy gelatin nor coagulate milk.

_B. typhi murium_ (Loeffler) is fatal to mice (_Mus musculus_), but not
to rats. M. Danysz isolated a bacillus during an epidemic of field mice
which was indistinguishable from the above, except that its virulence
was capable of being raised to a point where it would destroy a
relatively large percentage of rats inoculated with it by feeding. We
see from this that, strictly speaking, it is not a natural disease among
rats, still there are cases where its virulence has for a time remained
high enough to infect a considerable per cent of rats exposed to those
that have sickened of it. Not only is this true in cage experiments, but
probably it sometimes occurs in nature after the virus is once
thoroughly introduced (an article by M. Danysz; also experience of this
service in plague in San Francisco, 1903 to 1905), and may therefore be
grouped under the list of “natural” infections. This bacillus is
unfortunately of a very unstable nature, in so far as its virulence is
concerned; some cultures appearing to be avirulent, while others cause
an all but absolute mortality among the rodents eating it.

The duration of the disease is variable and appears to depend somewhat
on the size of the dose received, as well as virulence of the culture.
We have seen death in thirty-six hours or less following ingestion. On
the other hand, it may occur in two weeks. Usually it occurs in from six
to twelve days. In a typical case when the animal has lived ten or
twelve days it is much emaciated, its tissues are dry, and intestinal
hemorrhages are sometimes met with. When the disease is much prolonged a
pustular eruption may be present over the skin. The organism can often
be isolated from the heart blood by plating, such isolation alone
affording means of diagnosis. The only present interest this organism
has is as a means of destroying the rat. It was believed to be harmless
to man, but more recently cases of human illness have been reported that
were believed to have been caused by infection with this bacillus.


                               PNEUMONIA.

We have recently seen a case of lobar pneumonia in a rat in which a
diplococcus was present in pure culture. Possibly connected with this is
a condition of abscess of lung, which is not very uncommon. The cavity
is filled with a creamy or cheesy matter composed of broken-down cells.
Often these cavities break into the pleura. Several morphological types
of organisms are found, but from their variation this laboratory has
regarded them as secondary or accidental, especially as we have failed
to demonstrate that this material was infectious.


                        STAPHLOCOCCUS ABSCESSES.

These are rather common and may occur subcutaneously or in the
superficial muscles of any part of the body.


           BACILLUS PSEUDO-TUBERCULOSIS RODENTIUM (PFEIFFER).

This organism that infects rats is of interest from its close
resemblance to the plague bacillus. It is difficult to distinguish the
two organisms by ordinary cultural or animal tests. The earlier writers
claimed that _B. pseudo-tuberculosis rodentium_ could be differentiated
by its power of coagulating milk, but more recently this difference has
been found to be an inconstant one.


                           TOYAMA’S BACILLUS.

Toyama has described an organism which he states is pathogenic for _Mus
rattus_, field and house mice (_Mus musculus_), but not pathogenic for
_Mus norvegicus_.

It causes congestion of lungs, enlargement of lymph nodes, especially in
the neck, and enlargement of the spleen. It was isolated from a natural
epizootic among _Mus rattus_. It is a nonspore-bearing bacillus, without
capsule, stains without showing bipolarity, and grows upon ordinary
media.

Among other bacteria that have been described as causing diseases in
rats may be mentioned:

_Von Schilling’s bacillus_, allied to Danysz’s organism.

_Bacillus “Eris,”_ a member of the colon group.

_Bacillus muris_, a member of the _B. diphtheria_ group.

Of the bacteria that show virulence for rats under laboratory
conditions, but, so far as is known, cause no spontaneous outbreaks, the
following are the best-known examples:

_Bacillus bovisepticus_ produces a fatal disease bacillus of swine
erysipelas (especially for albino rats), and the bacillus of tetanus.

Of the higher fungi (not strictly bacterial) we have:

_Streptothrix maduræ_ produces local swellings when inoculated
artificially.

It has been stated that rats occasionally suffer from a disease similar
or identical to the affliction in man known as favus (_Achorion
Schönleinii_).


                   INFECTIONS OF MICE (MUS MUSCULUS).

This species of _Mus_ is very susceptible to a large number of bacterial
diseases when inoculated under laboratory conditions. The following are
some of the best-known examples:

_B. murisepticus_, _Staphlococcus pyogenes_, _Streptococci_,
_Diplococcus pneumoniæ_, _B. pneumoniæ_ (Friedlander), Diplococcus of
pleuro-pneumonia of horses, _B. Typhi murium_, _B. anthracis_, B. of
malignant edema, _B. tetani_, _B. mallei_, _B. diphtheriæ vitulorum_,
_B. bovisepticus_, _B. suisepticus_, the bacillus of Mereshkowsky, and
many others. The last-named organism has been utilized to a limited
extent for the destruction of mice about dwellings.




             ORGANIC DISEASES OF THE RAT, INCLUDING TUMORS.

                          By GEORGE W. MCCOY,

       _Passed Assistant Surgeon, United States Public Health and
                       Marine-Hospital Service_.


The lesions described here are those that have been found in the routine
examination of rats for plague infection in the federal laboratory at
San Francisco during the past year, in which time approximately 120,000
rats have been examined.

As the subject had no special bearing upon the plague investigations,
but little time was spent in examining and recording the nature of
organic lesions that were observed. Notes, however, were made of many of
the conditions which were encountered, and these notes have been used as
the basis of this paper.

It is well known that various lower animals are subject to some of the
so-called organic diseases from which man suffers, and not a little
experimental work has been done in endeavoring to establish in animals
certain of the lesions commonly found in human pathology.

_Usefulness of wild rats for laboratory purposes._

We would call special attention to the fact that wild rats suffer
spontaneously from cirrhosis of the liver, fatty degeneration of the
liver, nephritis, and calculi of the urinary tract, and would,
therefore, probably furnish excellent subjects for the experimental
investigation of these diseases.

The objection may be made that the very fact that these animals do
suffer from these diseases spontaneously makes them unsuitable for
experimental purposes, as one could not be certain that any lesions
found were not spontaneously developed rather than that they were due to
the conditions imposed in an experiment. In reply to this objection we
would say that the most of these organic lesions occur so rarely in rats
in nature that one could almost ignore them.

The ease with which wild rats are obtained and the readiness with which
they adapt themselves to the conditions of life in captivity are factors
which should make them more extensively used for laboratory purposes
than is the case at present. We have described (New York Medical
Journal, Feb. 6, 1909) the methods that have been found useful in
keeping and handling these rodents. Without going into details here we
may say that if rats of approximately the same size are kept together in
a cage there will be practically no mortality from fighting. Of course,
there should be no overcrowding. Rats should be fed meat or cheese and
plenty of green food such as carrots or cabbage. In our experience in
San Francisco it has been found practicable to keep for a year one
series of ten inoculated wild rats without any loss. Judging from my
experience I have no hesitancy in saying that the natural mortality in
the laboratory is higher among both guinea pigs and white rats than it
is among wild rats.

It is almost certain that some of the lesions described below are due to
animal parasites, or to bacteria, but no such causative agent has been
identified.


                         CIRCULATORY APPARATUS.

We have seen no lesion of the circulatory system with the exception of a
few cases of pericardial effusion. The most extreme example was one in
which the pericardial sac was dilated to such an extent that it filled
almost the entire cavity of the thorax. The fluid in the sac was blood
stained and there were a number of recent adhesions between the visceral
and the parietal surfaces of the pericardium.


                          PULMONARY APPARATUS.

Pleural effusion, as is stated in another place, is an important sign of
plague infection. A clear, watery effusion has been found in a few cases
in rats that were not plague infected.

One example has come under observation of a large _Mus norvegicus_ that
had both pleural cavities almost entirely filled with a milky fluid. The
lungs were compressed and congested. Microscopical examination for
animal parasites and for bacteria was negative.

A condition of consolidation of the lungs which closely resembles the
stage of gray hepatization in lobar pneumonia in man is seen
occasionally. The area may involve half of a lung. Upon microscopical
examination one finds the air spaces and the small bronchi filled with
leucocytes. There was no cavity formation in any of the cases that have
come under observation.

Two relatively common purulent conditions of the lungs are encountered.
In the first of these, large and more or less distinctly loculated sacs
are found, which are filled with yellow semifluid caseous matter; in the
second, the lesion is of much the same nature, but the material in the
sac has the consistency of tough, ropy mucus. Aside from the main focus
of this sort, numerous smaller areas of the same nature are seen
scattered through the otherwise normal parts of the lungs. The extent of
some of these purulent processes is remarkable. We have seen cases in
which the chest cavity was almost filled by the lesions described.


                            DIGESTIVE TRACT.


                        CIRRHOSIS OF THE LIVER.

It was a matter of surprise to find well-marked cases of hepatic
cirrhosis in rats, as this disease in man has been pretty generally
regarded as very largely due to intemperance in the use of alcoholic
beverages. Such an etiology hardly accounts for the condition in the
rat. The lesion is by no means rare; well-marked cases are encountered
probably as often as once in a thousand rats. We have never seen it in a
young rat, probably because the condition develops slowly and the rat
reaches adult life before the process is complete. The organ is usually
somewhat yellowish, very firm, often, but not always, somewhat shrunken
in size. The surface of the whole organ is covered with small, rounded
elevations; a typical “hobnail-liver” in miniature.

Microscopically we find various degrees of increase of connective
tissue. In a well-marked case the capsule is much thickened, and heavy
bands of connective tissue run through the organ in every direction.
This increase of connective tissue is most marked in the vicinity of the
portal vein and its companion vessels. The microscope will show that in
some fields over half of the structure is made up of fibrous tissue. The
liver cells that remain appear to be normal. The presence of animal
parasites in the liver is frequently associated with a considerable
hypertrophy of the connective tissue of the organ. In a majority of
cases of hepatic cirrhosis, however, no parasites are to be found. One
case has come under observation in which the surface of the liver was
covered with a number of flattened, wart-like elevations. Upon section
nothing was to be found to account for this except an enormous
overgrowth of connective tissue.


                    FATTY DEGENERATION OF THE LIVER.

A considerable number of cases of well-marked fatty degeneration of the
liver have been seen. At times the fatty change is so extensive that the
organ floats when placed in water. Microscopically the liver cells are
found to be extensively infiltrated with fat granules.


                                HERNIÆ.

A few ventral herniæ have been observed. In the majority of the cases
the sac contained intestine only and this was easily reduced. On two
occasions other viscera have been found in the sac; the spleen on one
occasion and in another case along with several loops of intestine which
were easily reduced there was found the upper extremity of the right
division of the uterus which carried a cyst about 1 centimeter in
diameter. The cyst was partly adherent to the sac of the hernia. The
other division of the uterus was dilated and full of pus. The hernial
sac is rarely situated in the median line. One inguinal hernia has been
seen.


                         GENITO-URINARY TRACT.


                               NEPHRITIS.

Nephritis is a rather common condition in rats. Among the large (old)
ones it will be found probably once in every fifteen or twenty examined.
It has been found to be especially frequent in rats that are suffering
from the leprosy-like disease, as probably two-thirds of those having
that interesting infection will show marked evidence of nephritis. The
kidney is usually brownish or grayish, mottled, friable and often shows
cysts upon the surface and in the substance of the organ. Some of these
cysts may be as large as a pea, or indeed even much larger. The capsule
strips very readily.

Microscopically the lesions are found to be due partly to epithelial and
partly to interstitial change. There is a marked increase of connective
tissue rather irregularly distributed throughout the organ. The
epithelial cells show various degrees of degeneration; the nuclei are
stained very lightly, or not at all; granular change of the protoplasm
is well marked. Some tubules are encountered in which the epithelial
cells are entirely wanting.

Cyst formation is a conspicuous feature in many of the cases. These
cysts vary considerably in size, are often filled with granular débris,
and are more or less completely lined with epithelial cells which are
sometimes flattened. At times the epithelial lining is entirely wanting.
The glomeruli, on the whole, appear to be better preserved than are the
tubules. Occasionally areas are found in which there is a very marked
round cell infiltration between the epithelial structure. One of the
most marked cases of nephritis we have observed was in a large female
_Mus alexandrinus_, in which both kidneys were almost entirely replaced
by cystic formation, the largest cyst being perhaps 3 centimeters in
diameter by 4 centimeters in length, and full of a clear, watery fluid.
So extensive was the cystic formation that only a few remnants of kidney
tissue remained. Microscopical examination showed a marked increase in
the capsular and interstitial connective tissue, a shrinking of the
glomeruli, which were surrounded by well-marked fibrous capsules, and
extensive cyst formations. The lining of some of these cysts was made up
of epithelial cells. Others were quite bare. This rat had, in addition,
a large, rough calculus in the urinary bladder.


                         ABSCESS OF THE KIDNEY.

A female _Mus norvegicus_ had on one side of the neck a large cavity
full of caseous matter. In each kidney there were five or six
circumscribed collections of pus, the largest of which was about the
size of a pea. Microscopical sections through these abscesses showed
that they were walled off from the kidney structure proper by beginning
connective tissue formation. The abscess cavity was filled with
polynuclear leucocytes, some of them very markedly disintegrated. The
epithelial structure of the kidney proper showed some parenchymatous
degeneration.


                          ATROPHY OF A KIDNEY.

On one occasion we have seen a kidney represented by a very small
flattened mass of tissue, the nature of which was not quite clear until
microscopical examination showed a few fairly well-defined glomeruli and
a few cell groupings suggestive of tubules. Whether the condition was
congenital or acquired is not known. The other kidney appeared to be
normal in every respect. There was no evidence of compensatory
hypertrophy.


                            VESICAL CALCULI.

The bladder of rats very frequently contains very irregularly shaped,
rough, somewhat branching concretions. These concretions are rather soft
and tough and are dirty white in color.

In addition to these concretions we have seen several cases of
well-marked vesical calculi. In one case 21 smooth round stones which
completely filled the bladder were found. The total weight of the stones
was 3.8 grams. In another case 6 calculi were found, the total weight of
which was 7.8; the largest one weighing 5 grams. In a third case 8
smooth, round stones weighing 1.7 grams were found, the largest of which
weighed 0.6 gram. The last two cases were female rats; the sex of the
first was not recorded.

In each of these cases the bladder showed to the naked eye very marked
evidence of inflammation. The mucous membrane was reddened, villous, and
covered with tenacious mucus. In one case in which microscopical
examination was made the mucous membrane was found to be covered with
pus cells, the surface layers of which were undergoing degeneration.

Diseases of the genital tract in the human race analogous to those
mentioned below are so generally regarded as due for the most part to
infections from impure sexual relations that it was a distinct surprise
to find such lesions in rodents.

In the male abscesses are occasionally met with in connection with the
seminal vesicles. We have seen them varying in size from a pea to a sac
whose contents would have measured 3 or 4 cubic centimeters. In the
female purulent collections in the horns of the bifid uterus are
encountered, but they are rare. We have seen cases that were
anatomically exactly like the purulent lesions so commonly found in the
fallopian tubes of women. In one case one horn of the uterus was closed
at both ends and distended by a thin, watery pus into a large
sausage-shaped mass about the size of an index finger. The opposite horn
of the uterus contained six fœtuses. A very curious case was one in
which four fœtuses, each one a little less than an inch in length, were
found lying in the midst of a large, yellowish, puttylike mass that
distended one horn of the uterus into a balloon-shaped mass about 3
centimeters in diameter. The fœtuses were partly dried, and had
evidently been dead for a long time.


                                TUMORS.

Tumors among rats and mice are not infrequent when these animals are
kept in captivity, and the tumors of mice especially have been made the
subject of very extensive experiments for the purpose of determining the
mode of transmission, the question of immunity, and other subjects that
might throw light upon malignant growths in the human family. White or
tame rats have been much less used than mice. However, it is interesting
to note that the earliest observations on the successful transplantation
of a malignant growth from one animal to another was that of Hanau[101],
who reported a carcinoma of the external genitals of a white rat and he
succeeded in transplanting this tumor into other white rats.

I shall not make any attempt to review the enormous literature on tumors
in tame rats and mice, but shall merely mention some of the more
important points that have been learned in an experimental way in regard
to this subject. The histological nature of the tumors found in white
rats was of particular interest, as we wished to compare them with the
tumors that have come under observation among the wild rats in San
Francisco.

In addition to Hanau’s case of carcinoma cited above the following
tumors of white rats are mentioned. Herzog[102] observed a cystic
sarcoma of the neck of a white rat. Loeb[103] mentions three tumors of
white rats; an adenoma in the mammary gland, an adenocarcinoma of the
pancreas, and a carcinoma of the thyroid. Flexner and Jobling[104]
report a mixed cell sarcoma of the seminal vesicles of a white rat. This
tumor upon transplantation showed a marked tendency to produce
metastases. Gaylord and Clowes[105] report cases of fibrocarcinoma of
white rats arising apparently from infected cages, and they present
evidence that in certain breeding establishments carcinoma is endemic
among the white mice. Spontaneous tumors are much more frequently met
with in mice than in rats, and a number of epidemics of malignant
growths have been observed among mice in captivity.

Tyzzer[106] found in a mouse a primary adenocarcinoma of the lung and an
adenoma of the kidney. Loeb[107] found that upon the transplantation of
a pure gland-like tumor (carcinoma) which originated in the submaxillary
gland of a Japanese mouse both carcinoma and spindle cell sarcoma were
developed, and this observation, that transplanted tumors may give rise
to a different histological growth from that which was transplanted, has
been made by others. Tyzzer[108] reports 20 spontaneous tumors in mice.
Of these tumors 12 were papillary cyst-adenomas of the lung and were
mostly very minute, some of them microscopic; 2 were cyst-adenomas of
the kidney; 2 lymphosarcoma, 1 of the groin and 1 of the mediastinum,
and 4 were adenocarcinoma. These 20 spontaneous tumors occurred in 16
mice, 4 of them having tumors of 2 different types. Ehrlich and
Apolant[109] record the occurrence in a white mouse of a mixed tumor
(carcinoma sarcomatodes). Saul[110] mentions spontaneous papillary
adenocarcinoma and teleangiectatic carcinoma both in the mammary glands
of mice.

Saul showed that by planting the common liver worm of the rat
(_Cysticercus fasciolaris_) subcutaneously in a mouse he was able to
develop a tumor which partook of the nature of a malignant
(carcinomatous) growth. It will be seen by an examination of the data
presented below relating to spontaneous tumors in wild rats that a
considerable number of them have been associated with the presence of
the parasite Saul used in his experiments. He also states[111] that
Borrel found worms or their remnants in malignant tumors of mice.

When metastases occur in mouse tumors the most usual seat of the
secondary growths is in the lungs, thus Tyzzer[112] observed metastases
in 4 cases out of 73 mice inoculated with the Jensen tumor. He
demonstrated that the metastases took place by the blood vessels, not by
the lymphatic channels, although the tumors were of a carcinomatous
nature.

Simon[113], who reviews the subject of mouse tumors with special
reference to the subject of immunity, remarks that mouse carcinomata,
although found most frequently in old females, when transplanted grows
equally well in males, and better in young than in old animals. It has
been found by some observers that a rat or a mouse unsuccessfully
inoculated with a strain is thereafter immune, to even the most virulent
strain.

Haaland[114] and other writers have found a marked variation in the
susceptibility of different races of mice to mouse carcinoma.

Ehrlich[115] and his co-workers Apolant and Haaland have recorded many
experiments in transplantation of tumors of mice. They have demonstrated
that moderate heating of a mouse tumor lengthens the incubation period,
diminishes the number of successful transplantations, and brings about
certain changes in the histology of the tumors reproduced.

Gay[116] found a difference in the susceptibility of white rats from
different sources. In his work with carcinoma in rats he found
metastases regularly in the lungs and rarely in the lymph nodes. He was
able to raise the virulence of the tumor by transplantation of the lung
metastases. This increase of virulence was shown by increase in the
rapidity in growth, increase in metastases, and the increase of the
epithelial elements over the stroma.

Brooks[117] in considering the subject of tumors in animals concludes
that true neoplasms are very rare in wild animals living under natural
conditions. It should be stated, however, that Brooks refers especially
to higher mammals such as are found in zoological collections.


                          TUMORS OF WILD RATS.

A new growth is found approximately once in every thousand rats examined
in San Francisco. Ninety-two tumors have been examined microscopically.
Time has been available for the study of but one or at the most two
sections from each tumor and while in some cases the diagnosis was
easily made in others there was room for considerable difference of
opinion as to the nature of the growth. It is obvious that it is hardly
fair to expect to make a final diagnosis in every case from one or two
sections taken from one part of the growth, and it is possible that
further study will throw more light upon the histological nature of some
of them.

_Location._—The largest number of the tumors have been found in the
subcutaneous tissue of either the thorax or of the abdomen, and as the
majority of these have been found in female rats we have assumed that
they were probably of mammary origin. The growths were occasionally
located directly under the nipple, but in such cases the nipple was not
retracted, and it was exceptional to find any ulceration. The tumors
were very rarely adherent to the surrounding tissue. After the
subcutaneous tissue tumors were found most frequently in the liver.
Histologically, the most of these growths were sarcomas and the majority
of them had a parasite, the _Cysticercus fasciolaris_, in some part of
the tumor. This parasite, as is well known, is the larval stage of a
tapeworm found in the cat. These tumors of the liver were frequently
associated with an enormous number of secondary growths varying in size
from a millet seed to 1 centimeter in diameter scattered through the
omentum, mesentery, and other abdominal structures.

Several growths have been found in the kidney, mostly of an epithelial
nature, one being a particularly well-marked example of a cystic
papilloma. A few have been found in connection with other parts of the
genito-urinary tract. A large bloody tumor, which upon microscopical
examination was found to be an angiosarcoma, replaced a testicle. A
large growth, apparently an endothelioma, was found near the end of one
horn of the bicornuate uterus.


                              METASTASES.

Metastases have been found in a number of cases of sarcoma and a smaller
number of cases of the epithelial growths. Most frequently the secondary
tumors were in the liver, the mesentery or the kidney.

_Size._—In proportion to the size of the rat the tumors were quite
large, scarcely any under 1 centimeter in diameter having been observed,
and they varied from this to a growth several centimeters in diameter.


                        HISTOLOGICAL STRUCTURE.

The following tumors may be regarded as of the connective tissue type:


                               LIPOMATA.

One typical lipoma has been found. It was located in the subcutaneous
tissue of the thorax and was similar in gross and microscopical
appearance to the tumors of the same nature in man.


                               FIBROMATA.

A considerable number of subcutaneous tumors have been typical hard
fibromas, others were fibromas in which there were a few cell nests that
led to the suspicion that perhaps a malignant change was taking place in
the tumor, or that a malignant growth was being converted into one of a
benign nature.


                               SARCOMATA.

Typical spindle cell sarcomas have been encountered a number of times. A
few round cell sarcomas were found in which there were usually a number
of giant cells, but hardly enough to justify one in designating the
growths as giant cell sarcomas. Several other growths have been seen
which gave the impression of being sarcomas but left one in some doubt
as to whether the tissue might not be of the nature of a granuloma.

Many tumors of the epithelial type were encountered which may be classed
together.


                       ADENOMATA AND CARCINOMATA.

Several very typical adenomas and cystic adenomas have been found. A few
tumors were observed that presented the appearance of carcinomas. A
large number of growths were observed that apparently stood between the
adenoma and the carcinoma and there was room for legitimate difference
of opinion about any one of these, and in fact, different pathologists
who have examined sections of these tumors have expressed different
opinions as to the nature of the growths.


                              REFERENCES.

Endnote 101:

  Hanau (Fortsch. der Med., vol. 7, 1889, May 1, p. 321).

Endnote 102:

  Herzog (Journal Med. Research, 1902, vol. 8, old series, p. 74).

Endnote 103:

  Loeb (Journal Med. Research, 1901, vol. 6, p. 28; also vol. 3, p. 44,
  and vol. 17, p. 299).

Endnote 104:

  Flexner and Jobling (Journal Am. Med. Assn., 1907, vol. 48, p. 420).

Endnote 105:

  Gaylord and Clowes (Journal Am. Med. Assn., 1907, vol. 48, p. 15).

Endnote 106:

  Tyzzer (Journal Am. Med. Assn., 1906, vol. 47, p. 1237).

Endnote 107:

  Loeb (Univ. of Pa. Med. Bull., 1907, vol. 19, No. 5).

Endnote 108:

  Tyzzer (Journal Med. Research, vol. 17, No. 2, p. 155).

Endnote 109:

  Ehrlich and Apolant (Berl. klin. Woch., 1907, vol. 44, pp. 399 and
  1401).

Endnote 110:

  Saul (Centralblatt für Bact., etc., Aug. 27, 1907, vol. 47).

Endnote 111:

  Saul (Centralblatt für Bact., etc., 1909, vol. 49, p. 4).

Endnote 112:

  Tyzzer (Journal Med. Research, vol. 17, No. 2, p. 137).

Endnote 113:

  Simon (International Clinic, vol. 2, 18th series).

Endnote 114:

  Haaland (Berlin, klin. Woch., 1907, vol. 44, p. 73).

Endnote 115:

  Ehrlich, Apolant and Haaland (1906, Berlin, klin. Woch., vol. 43, No.
  2).

Endnote 116:

  Gay (1909, Journal Med. Research, Vol. XX, No. 2).

Endnote 117:

  Brooks (1907, Am. Jour. of Med. Sciences, Vol. CXXXIII).




                     THE ECTOPARASITES OF THE RAT.

                            By NATHAN BANKS,

            _Assistant Entomologist, Bureau of Entomology_.


The ectoparasites of the rat fall naturally into three groups, the
fleas, the lice, and the mites. These three groups are widely separated
from each other, the mites belonging to the class Arachnida, having four
pairs of legs, no segmentation to the body, no antennæ, and no compound
eyes. The fleas and lice belong to the class Insecta. The lice are near
the order Hemiptera, sucking insects without a complete metamorphosis,
while the fleas are related to the Diptera and pass through a complete
metamorphosis. All of these three groups, however, agree in one
character—they are wingless. The mites and lice have flattened or
depressed bodies, while the fleas have compressed bodies. All three
groups have many other species which infest various other animals. Few,
if any, of these parasites confine themselves to the rat, and all can
walk or jump in the adult condition, so that they can easily transfer
their attentions from one rat to another or to some other host. The
majority of them are known to occur on mice, and several of the fleas
and mites will readily attack man.


                          FLEAS—SIPHONAPTERA.

These wingless, compressed insects are known to all, but few have taken
the trouble to look at them with much care. The adult female flea
deposits her eggs among the hairs or fur of the host animal, but, unlike
the eggs of many parasites, these are not fastened to the hairs and fall
freely to the ground. These eggs are oval, whitish, and smooth, and
about one-half millimeter long. The larvæ escape from the eggs in two to
five days. They are enabled to break the eggshell by a slender process
on the top of the head which disappears after the first molt. This larva
is a slender, legless, cylindrical creature, whitish or yellowish in
color, with a head and 13 segments. There are a few scattered hairs or
bristles on the body and at the tip is a pair of corneous processes. On
the upper part of the head is a pair of short, slender appendages, the
antennæ or feelers. At the front of the head is a pair of biting jaws or
mandibles. These larvæ feed on almost any kind of refuse; some have been
reared on the sweepings from rooms. There is always some organic matter
in this refuse, and this is doubtless their nourishment. The larvæ in
houses usually crawl into cracks or under carpets and feed on the dust
that occurs in such places. Those that infest wild animals probably feed
on the refuse in the nests or retreats of these animals. They remain in
the larval stage from a week to ten days, sometimes two weeks, molting
the skin three times in this interval. Then they spin flat, white,
silken cocoons, in which they transform to the pupal stage. Sometimes
the cocoon is covered with particles of dust. In from five to eight days
the adult flea emerges from the cocoon. The period of their
transformation is affected by the temperature and moisture. In warm,
damp weather a generation may develop in ten days or two weeks, but
usually about eighteen days to three weeks elapse from the egg to adult.
Although some moisture seems necessary to their development, an excess
is apt to destroy the larvæ.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 6.—Flea, showing the various parts.
]

The leaping ability of adult fleas is familiar to all. No part of the
leg is particularly enlarged, so that the jump is made by the entire leg
as in the leaf-hopper insects, and not by the hind part of the leg as in
grasshoppers and flea-beetles. The size of fleas is not as variable as
in many insects. Most are about 2 to 3 millimeters long, while the range
is about 1.5 to 6 millimeters. The adult flea has a hard, strongly
chitinized body. The head is small, and on each side bears a short
jointed antenna, which may repose in a groove or depression. Most
species have a small, simple eye, but several forms are normally without
eyes. The sides of the head below the antennæ are called the genæ. At
the lower front end of the head is the mouth and mouth parts. The latter
consist of a pair of triangular maxillæ with jointed maxillary palpi and
a beak or proboscis made up of one median and four lateral pieces. The
outer pair of lateral pieces is the labrum with the imperfectly jointed
labial palpi. They serve as a sheath for the other organs, which are
more slender. The inner pair of pieces are considered to be the
mandibles and the median piece a labrum or hypopharynx. Others call this
piece the unpaired piercing organ, the lingua, or the syringostome.
There are other interpretations of the homologies of the mouth parts,
but the above is the most generally adopted one. The labrum and the
mandibles are roughened and constitute the piercing organs which the
flea inserts into the host to tap a blood vessel. On the lower part of
the head there is frequently a series or comb of stout spines. Similar
spines sometimes occur on the posterior border of the pronotum. These
series of spines are called “ctenidia,” and they are of great value in
classification. Behind the head are three segments, or zoonites, each
bearing a pair of legs. These together form the thorax. The upper
surface is called the notum (pronotum, mesonotum, etc.). The sides are
the pleura—sometimes “epimera” is used; and the ventral part is the
sternum. Each of the thoracic segments has a spiracle, or a breathing
pore, on each side. The first segment of the thorax, called the
“prothorax,” is shorter than the others, and, as above stated,
frequently has a row of ctenidia, or spines, on its posterior border.
The next segment is the mesothorax, and the third the metathorax. The
metathorax usually has some stout bristles in rows on its pleura, which
are enlarged and called “epiphyses,” formerly called “squama aliforme.”
The basal one or two segments are sometimes partly covered by the
epiphyses or the metathorax. These segments consist of a dorsal plate,
or tergite, and a ventral plate, or sternite. Behind the thorax is the
abdomen of 9 apparent segments. Seven of these segments have a spiracle
or breathing pore on the sides. The last segment, or pygidium, bears the
genital organs; in the male certain processes called “claspers” at each
side of the genital opening. The anal aperture is at the end of the
ninth segment between the dorsal and ventral plates. The claspers have a
main curved part, and a slender backward projection called the
“manubrium,” and at the apex an articulated clawlike process called “the
movable finger.” At the tip of the abdomen of the female there is a
short median piece called the “style.” The legs consist of five parts:
The coxa, a large basal piece; the trochanter, a minute piece at the end
of the coxa; the femur, which is usually slightly swollen in the middle;
the tibia, which usually has stout bristles or spines on its posterior
side; and the tarsus, which consists of five parts or joints. The basal
joint is often the longest, and the comparative lengths of these joints
is expressed by a formula, as 60–45–32–18–30. The last, or fifth, joint
has been called the “metatarsus,” but this name is better applied to the
basal joint. At the tip of the last tarsal joint is a pair of stout
claws. The coxæ of legs II and III show a longitudinal suture.

Fleas as a rule prefer certain hosts, but are not as particular in this
regard as are many parasites. Those species which are best known are
found to attack several hosts, including man. This catholicity of taste
is what makes them dangerous parasites, the possible transmitters not
only of plague, but also of consumption, leprosy, etc. The fleas are
treated by various writers under other names, such as _Aphaniptera_, and
_Suctoria_. About 300 species are described, and perhaps as many more
will be gathered by collectors. Formerly all fleas were kept in the
genus _Pulex_; now they are arranged in many genera, and these genera
grouped into families. No less than eight such families are recognized
by some authorities on this group. The species that occur on rats belong
to three families, which may be separated as follows:

 1. Thoracic segments much shortened and constricted;
      labial palpi apparently not jointed; third joint
      of antennæ without subjoints; no ctenidia;
      abdomen of female becomes more or less swollen     _Sarcopsyllidæ_

    Thoracic segments not shortened nor constricted;
      labial palpi with joints; third joint of antennæ
      with several more or less distinct subjoints;
      ctenidia often present; abdomen of female never
      distinctly swollen                                               2

 2. Posterior tibial spines in pairs                          _Pulicidæ_

    Posterior tibial spines mostly single and more
      numerous                                           _Ctenopsyllidæ_


                             CTENOPSYLLIDÆ.

To this family belongs the _Ctenopsylla musculi_ Dugès.

This was formerly placed in the genus _Typhlopsylla_. The head is rather
acute in front and has four ctenidia each side; the eyes are very small;
the pronotal comb has 22 spines; each dorsal segment of the body has two
rows of hairs; the basal row of smaller hairs. The proportions of joints
in the hind tarsus are: 45–25–17–8–14. Length 1.8 to 2.5 millimeters.
This species is abundant on rats and mice in Europe and other countries;
recently it has been taken in California and Florida on rats and mice.


                               PULICIDÆ.

This family includes the greater number of fleas. They have been
arranged in many genera, six of which have been taken from rats. These
are separable as follows:

 1. Head without ctenidia; eyes distinct                               2

    Head and pronotum with ctenidia; last tarsal joint
      with four pairs of lateral spines                                5

 2. Pronotum with ctenidia; female with one
      antepygidial bristle on each side                  _Hoplopsyllus_.

    Pronotum without ctenidia                                          3

 3. Last tarsal joint with four pairs of lateral
      spines; female with one antepygidial bristle each
      side                                                             4

    Last tarsal joint with five pairs of lateral
      spines; female with two to five antepygidial
      bristles each side                                _Ceratophyllus_.

 4. Mesosternite very narrow, without internal rod-like
      incrassation from the insertion of coxa upward            _Pulex_.

    Mesosternite with a rod-like internal incrassation
      from the insertion of coxa upward                    _Xenopsylla_.

 5. Eyes rudimentary; female with two to five
      antepygidial bristles each side                       _Neopsylla_.

    Eyes distinct; female with but one antepygidial
      bristle each side                                 _Ctenocephalus_.

_Hoplopsyllus_, one species, described as a _Pulex_.

_Hoplopsyllus anomalus_ Baker.

The mandibles scarcely reach halfway down on the anterior coxæ; upon
each are two large spines; the pronotal comb has about nine spines each
side; and each abdominal segment has but a single row of bristles. The
hind femora have six to eight bristles on the side; the proportions of
the joints in the hind tarsus are: 26–16–8–5–13. Color, dark reddish
brown. Female, 2.5 millimeters; male, 1.5 millimeters.

Described from a spermophile from Colorado and recorded by Doctor Fox
and Professor Doane from _Mus norvegicus_ from California.

_Pulex._—Of this, the typical genus of the family, but one species has
been recorded from rats.

_Pulex irritans_ Linn.

The mandibles reach about halfway down on the anterior coxæ; the head is
regularly rounded in front; there are no transverse rows of bristles on
the vertex, and but one row of bristles on each abdominal tergite. The
proportions of the joints in the hind tarsus are, 50–30–18–12–32. Color,
usually yellow brown. Male, 1.6 to 2 millimeters; female, 2 to 3.5
millimeters.

This, the human flea, is quite cosmopolitan, but more abundant in warm
countries than elsewhere. It occurs on many domestic animals and has
frequently been taken from rats in California and elsewhere; it also
occurs on skunks.

_Xenopsylla._—This genus includes the following species, formerly placed
in the genus _Lœmopsylla_.

_Xenopsylla cheopis_ Rothschild.

The mandibles reach nearly to the end of the anterior coxæ; there are no
ctenidia on the head or pronotum; the eyes are distinct; each abdominal
tergite has but one row of bristles; the hind femur has a row of about
eight bristles; the proportions of the joints in the hind tarsus are as
follows: 46–30–16–10–20. Color, light brown. Male, 2.5 to 3.5
millimeters; female, 4 to 5.5 millimeters.

This is a true rat flea, but will readily bite man, and is the species
chiefly concerned in transmitting the bubonic plague. It is widely
distributed, especially in seaport towns.

_Ceratophyllus._—Fleas of this genus are abundant on many kinds of small
mammals, especially rodents. There are a great many species and some are
so closely related that it is not easy to identify them. Of the eight
species recorded from rats, four have been taken in this country. It is
not practicable to tabulate these eight species, but the four that occur
in our country may be arranged as follows:

 1. Hind tarsal joint II with an apical spine much
      longer than joint III                                    _acutus_.

    Hind tarsal joint II with spines not longer than
      joint III                                                        2

 2. Pronotal comb of about 26 spines                            _niger_.

    Pronotal comb of about 18 or 20 spines               _fasciatus_ and
                                                         _londiniensis_.

_Ceratophyllus niger_ Fox.

This species has the pronotal ctenidia of about 26 spines; there are a
few hairs on the inner surface of hind femur; apical spines of second
joint of hind tarsus not longer than third joint; three hairs in front
of the eye and three in front of these; movable finger of claspers with
five slender bristles on the outer edge. Color, very dark brown. Length
3.5 millimeters.

Taken in California from _Mus decumans_ and from man.

_Ceratophyllus acutus_ Baker.

This species is readily known by having a spine at tip of the second
joint of hind tarsus longer than the third joint and reaching over onto
the fourth joint; the abdominal tergites have each two rows of bristles;
the male claspers are very large and long, sickle shaped. Color, pale
brown. Length, 3 to 3.5 millimeters.

It was described from a spermophile, but Doctor Fox has taken it once
from a rat in California.

_Ceratophyllus fasciatus_ Bosc.

There are 18 or 20 spines in the pronotal comb; there are three bristles
in front of eye and in female two, and in male four in front of these;
there are three or four hairs on the inner surface of the hind femur;
the proportions of joints in the hind tarsus are 50–33–20–11–21. The
manubrium of the male claspers is very long and slender, and some of the
bristles on the movable finger are as long as the joint. Length, male,
1.8 millimeters; female, 2.5 millimeters.

It has been recorded from California on rats, mice, skunks, and man. It
is also common in Europe and elsewhere on rats, mice, and other small
animals.

_Ceratophyllus londiniensis_ Rothschild.

This is allied closely to _C. fasciatus_, and is best separated from
that species by the shape and armature of the genital parts; the
manubrium is not as long as in that species, and the bristles on the
movable finger are shorter; the third joint of the maxillary palpi is
proportionally longer than in _C. fasciatus_. There are three bristles
in front of the eyes and four or five in front of these; there are a few
hairs on the inner surface of the hind femur; the proportions of the
joints in the hind tarsus are 46–30–18–11–18.

It has been recorded by Doctor Fox from _Mus rattus_ in California, and
is known from rats and mice from several parts of Europe; the _C.
italicus_ Tiraboschi is the same species.

The four other species of this genus found on rats and not yet found in
our country are closely related to _C. fasciatus_, and distinguished
chiefly by the shape of the male genitalia.

_Ceratophyllus mustelæ_ Wagner.

This species has no series of hairs on the inner surface of the hind
femur; there are three bristles in front of the eye and six in front of
these; the pronotal comb has 18 or 20 spines; the proportions of the
joints in the hind tarsus are 47–37–20–13–20; the movable finger of the
male clasper has a long process below not seen in other forms. Occurs
(according to Rothschild) on rats in Europe.

_Ceratophyllus pencilliger_ Grube.

This species also has no hairs on the inner surface of the hind femora.
The pronotal comb has 18 spines; there are three bristles in front of
the eye and four in front of these; the proportions of the joints in the
hind tarsus are 52–36–23–14–24; the outer corner of the movable finger
of the male clasper has two little rounded processes. It was described
from Siberia, but according to Rothschild occurs on rats in Europe.

_Ceratophyllus consimilis_ Wagner.

This species is very close to _C. fasciatus_, and has some fine hairs on
the inner surface of the hind femur; there are but two bristles in front
of the eye and in front of these a few finer hairs; the proportions of
the joints in the hind tarsus are 42–30–20–11–19; pronotal spines 18.
Occurs on rats in Russia.

_Ceratophyllus lagomys_ Wagner.

This species also has a few fine hairs on the inner surface of the hind
femur; 18 spines in pronotal comb; there are three bristles in front of
eye and one in front of these; the proportions of the joints in the hind
tarsus are 53–32–20–11–22; the outer corner of the movable finger of the
male clasper has two little processes, similar to those on _C.
pencilliger_. Occurs on rats in Europe.

_Ctenocephalus._—The common fleas on cats and dogs, as well as on man,
belong to two species long kept under one name (_C. canis_ or _C.
serraticeps_), but lately shown by Rothschild to be distinct. Both have
a comb of 8 spines on the head and 16 spines in pronotal comb; the
proportions of joints in the hind tarsus are 40–24–15–10–24. Both are
occasionally taken on rats in this country. They may be separated as
follows:

 1. In the female the head is fully twice as long as
      high (seen from side); the first spine of genal
      comb is two-thirds the length of the second; in
      male the manubrium of claspers is barely enlarged
      at tip; and with two rows of hairs on disc of           _C. felis_
      movable finger                                             Bouché.

    In the female the head is less than twice as long
      as high (seen from side); the first genal spine
      in the head comb is only about one-half the
      length of the second; in the male the manubrium
      of clasper is very distinctly enlarged at tip;
      but one row of hairs on the disc of the movable         _C. canis_
      finger                                                     Curtis.

_Neopsylla._—One species of this genus has been described from the brown
rat in Europe.

_Neopsylla bidentatiformis_ Wagner.

The eyes are very small; there are 4 pairs of lateral spines beneath the
last joint of the hind tarsus; the comb on head consists of but 2 stout
spines, below the middle of the antennæ; the pronotal comb has 18
spines; the proportions of the joints in the hind tarsus are
43–33–21–12–21.

Length: Male, 2 to 2.3 millimeters; female, 2.3 to 2.5 millimeters.

Not yet found in the United States; described from Russia.


                             SARCOPSYLLIDÆ.

The fleas of this family are commonly called “chigoes,” “jiggers,” or
sand fleas. The head is usually larger proportionally than in the other
fleas; there are no ctenidia on head or pronotum; the thoracic segments
are extremely short, and in the female the abdomen enlarges with the
development of the eggs. They do not hop about as other fleas, but
remain on the spot to which they have attached until they die.
Frequently the adjacent skin grows over them, forming a swelling of
considerable size.

Three species belonging to two genera have been recorded from rats.

 1. Angle of head acutely produced; fifth tarsal joint
      of hind legs without heavy spines; few spines on
      the legs                                            _Sarcopsylla_.

    Angle of head not produced, obtuse; fifth tarsal
      joint with heavy lateral spines, and other spines
      on other parts of the legs                         _Echidnophaga_.

_Echidnophaga._—Two species of this genus are known from rats; one,
however (_E. gallinacea_), can hardly be called a normal parasite, but
rather of accidental occurrence. The genus has also been called
_Argiopsylla_ and _Xestopsylla_.

 1. Bristles at end of second joint of hind tarsus
      about as long as next three joints; palpi about                _E.
      one-half the length of mandibles                   rhynchopsylla_.

    Bristles at end of second joint of hind tarsus
      about as long as next two joints; palpi about
      two-thirds the length of the mandibles            _E. gallinacea_.

_Echidnophaga rhynchopsylla_ Tiraboschi.

The body is about twice as long as broad and shining brown; there is but
one hair in front of eye, and four on each metathoracic pleuron;
mandibles larger than in _E. gallinacea_, and the spiracles are much
higher up on the sides than in that species. Length, 1.4 to 1.8
millimeters.

Taken from _Mus rattus_ in Italy.

_Echidnophaga gallinacea_ Westwood.

This species has the body almost as broad as long, and of a red-brown
color; 1 bristle in front of eye and 6 on each metathoracic pleuron;
each abdominal tergite has on each side near the median line a single
hair; the spiracles are situated well down on the sides. Length: Male,
0.8 to 1.2 millimeters; female, 1 to 1.8 millimeters.

This species is a fairly common pest of poultry and dogs in warm
countries, and is called the “chicken flea.” It has been taken from rats
in Italy.

_Sarcopsylla._—This genus includes the _S. penetrans_, which attacks the
feet of various animals, including man, in the Tropics. This species has
not yet been recorded from rats, but an allied species is described from
Brazilian rats.

_Sarcopsylla cæcata_ Enderlein.

Color, clear yellowish. Eyes rudimentary; lower anterior corner of coxæ
prolonged in a tooth; tarsal joints very short; claws long, but little
curved, and almost hair like. The body of a swollen female is about 5
millimeters long.

Taken from _Mus rattus_ in Brazil.


                             LICE—ANOPLURA.

The insects known as Pediculi, or lice, are parasitic during their
entire life on various mammals, including man. They are flat, rather
elongate, wingless insects, with a small head and stout legs, which end
in a strong claw, opposable to a projection at the tip of the
penultimate joint. The simple antennæ, three to five jointed, are
inserted in a concavity on the side of the head. The mouth parts are of
a very peculiar nature, and not yet homologized with the cibaria of
other insects. There is a short beak or proboscis in front, with
recurved spines or hooks on its dorsal and lateral surfaces. Through
this beak extends a slender stylet, that is formed of three parts; a
ventral channeled piece, perhaps a labium; a dorsal piece, consisting of
two pieces fused together, perhaps the maxillæ; and a median tube,
possibly the hypopharynx. The stylet is used to pierce the skin of the
host, and the blood is sucked up through it. There are no palpi. On each
side of the head there is a small, simple eye. The thorax shows only
incompletely the division into the three parts; there is a large
spiracle above on each side. The abdomen shows eight segments, six of
them have a spiracle, or breathing pore, on each side, the basal and
apical segments being without them. All of the segments bear a few
simple hairs or bristles; the longest are on the posterior segments. The
legs are stout and prominent; they consist of a broad coxa, a small
trochanter, a longer femur, a tibia with an apical process, and a tarsus
of one joint and a very large terminal claw. At the apex of the tibia,
just within the projection, is a sucking disc. This, the projection, and
the claw form the apparatus to hold fast to the hair of the host.

Lice usually walk sideways, but do not travel much, and they keep close
to one host. The eggs are slightly elongate and fastened to the hair of
the host. They hatch in about ten to fifteen days, the young coming out
of the top of the egg. These young do not differ much in structure from
the adults, but are paler in color. They molt their skin a few times,
probably four, before they reach the mature condition. The males are
less numerous than the females, and ordinarily smaller. There are
several generations each year, dependent doubtless on the temperature;
but the life history is not thoroughly known for any species. After
sucking the blood the abdomen of the louse becomes somewhat distended,
very noticeably so in some species.

The sucking habits of the lice render them dangerous parasites and
capable of transmitting a disease from one host to another. Fortunately
they do not readily change hosts so that they can not be considered
quite as dangerous as some more active parasites. However, several
species have already been shown to carry diseases in laboratory
experiments. Therefore it is probable that some of them will be
connected with the origin and diffusion of certain diseases of animals.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 7.—Louse (_Polyplax spinulosa_).
]

The Anoplura, or lice, have often been treated in connection with the
Mallophaga, or biting lice. This is doubtless because they frequently
occur on the same animal, and have a general resemblance to them.
However, they have no real affinity to these insects, and the general
opinion is that they are more or less related to the Hemiptera.
Sometimes they are treated as a group or section of the Hemiptera, but
also as a separate order, under various names as Siphunculata,
Lipognatha, Pseudorhynchota, and Ellipoptera.

There are about 50 or 60 known species which are arranged in 15 genera
and 4 families. Four species belonging to three different genera have
been recorded from rats; a number of others are known from mice and
other rodents, and some of these will probably yet be taken upon rats.

These four forms are separated, as follows:

 1. Eyes large and distinct; beak very short; thorax          _Pediculus
      plainly longer than broad                                capitis_.

    Eyes small, beak longer; thorax about as broad as
      long                                                             2

 2. In male the pleura of abdominal segments 3 to 6
      above and below have a prominent tooth-like           _Hoplopleura
      projection; a tooth on the hind femur of female       acanthopus_.

    In male the pleura of abdominal segments without
      such projections; no tooth on hind femur of
      female                                                           3

 3. Last joint of antennæ much more slender than those
      before; an acute tooth at sides of segments 4 to
      7; head much narrower in front; antennæ                  _Polyplax
      two-thirds as long as head                             miacantha_.

    Last joint of antennæ not much more slender than
      others; head quite broad in front; antennæ as            _Polyplax
      long as head                                          spinulosus_.

_Pediculus capitis_ De Geer.

It is pale grayish in color, with faint dark markings at the sides of
the thorax and abdomen; the last segment of the abdomen in female is
bilobed. The head is longer than broad and tapers in front. Length, 2
millimeters. This is the head louse of man, and is said to have been
taken from rats, and is claimed to be able to transfer plague from rats
to man. Its occurrence on rats, however, appears to be very uncommon.

_Hopopleura acanthopus_ Burmeister.

In the male the pleura of the abdominal segments 3 to 6, which reach up
on the dorsum and over on the venter, have at their inner ends a
prominent projection, toothed in all except the third on dorsum and the
sixth on venter, which are spine-like. The head is but little longer
than broad, broad in front; and in the female there is a recurved tooth
on each hind femur. The last segment of the female abdomen is bilobed
behind. Length, 1.3 millimeters. It has been taken from rats in Europe,
but is more common on species of _Microtus_.

_Polyplax spinulosus_ Burmeister.

The sides of the abdominal segments are acute, but the males do not have
the large tooth-like projection of _Hoplopleura_. The last segment of
the female is truncate; the head is about as broad in front as behind,
and the legs are very short and stout; the antennæ are as long as head,
and the last joint is but little smaller than the others. Color, pale
yellowish. Length, 1.4 millimeters.

This is the common rat louse, and is probably as widely distributed as
its host. Specimens have been taken in both the eastern and western
parts of the United States.

_Polyplax miacantha_ Speiser.

This differs from _P. spinulosus_ in having a longer and narrower
anterior part of head, in that the last joint of the antennæ is more
slender, and the antennæ are only two-thirds as long as the head. The
abdominal segments 4 to 7 show an acute process at the sides. Length,
1.5 to 1.75 millimeters.

Taken from rats in Abyssinia.


                             MITES—ACARINA.

The mites (order Acarina, class Arachnida) are readily known from the
insects (fleas and lice) by having four pairs of legs, no antennæ, and
the abdomen does not show any segmentation, nor is there usually any
distinction between head and thorax. In some groups there is a small
head-like part, called the capitulum. The mouth parts consist of a pair
of mandibles (often styliform or needle-like), a lip, and a pair of
palpi. In some forms there is a central piece, called the hypopharynx,
and in other groups is a plate above the mouth parts, known as the
epistome. The body usually shows more or less distinctly a division into
two parts—the anterior, called the cephalothorax, and the posterior the
abdomen. However, in many mites it is not possible to separate these
parts, except that it is considered that the legs are borne by the
cephalothorax. In many forms there is a small, simple eye each side on
the cephalothorax, but many other forms are blind. Some species have a
tracheal system, which opens in a pair of spiracles near the hind legs
or near the anterior end of the body; other species have no definite
respiratory system. The genital aperture is on the venter, usually
between the legs. The legs consist of the usual joints—coxa, trochanter,
femur, tibia, sometimes a metatarsus, and a tarsus. The tarsus
terminates in a pair of claws, sometimes three or only one, and often a
sucker or caroncle. Most mites are not parasitic; those species that are
parasitic are often free in one stage. The parasitic mites suck the
blood of their host, feed on the hair or dermal scales, or burrow in the
skin. Some predaceous species inhabit animals to hunt and eat the
parasitic mites that infest that animal.

The mites that occur parasitically on rats belong to four families:
Sarcoptidæ, Cheyletidæ, Ixodidæ, and Gamasidæ.

 1. A distinct spiracle or breathing pore on each side
      of body near coxæ III or IV                                      2

    No such spiracle or pore visible                                   3

 2. A small, distinct head part in front of the body;
      palpi three jointed; a granulate area around the
      spiracle; no sternal plate                              _Ixodidæ_.

    No such head part; palpi five jointed; no granulate
      space around spiracle, but a long, chitinized
      piece reaching forward from it; a more or less
      distinct sternal plate                                 _Gamasidæ_.

 3. All legs simple, unmodified, ending in a stalked
      sucker                                               _Sarcoptidæ_.

    Front legs short, enlarged, and modified for
      clasping; all legs end in one or two stout claws     _Cheyletidæ_.


                                IXODIDÆ.

The Ixodidæ, or ticks, are rather large, flat, leathery-skinned mites,
which suck the blood of various animals. In the male the dorsum of the
body is nearly covered by a corneous shield, while in the female this
shield occupies only the anterior part of the body. In the female the
body swells to enormous proportions as she engorges herself on the blood
of the host. At the posterior margin of the body there are in many forms
a series of lobes or festoons. There is no species of tick that is
commonly found on rats, but four species that normally infest other
animals have been taken from them.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 8.—Mite (_Lælaps echidninus_).
]

 1. On the venter is a groove in front of the anus and
      extending back each side; no festoons to                   _Ixodes
      posterior margin of body; palpi rather long              ricinus_.

    On the venter there is no groove in front of the
      anus, but usually one behind; festoons distinct
      in males and unengorged females                                  2

 2. Palpi very short with transverse ridges; shield of
      female narrowed behind eyes; stigmal plate nearly      _Margaropus
      round                                                  annulatus_.

    Palpi short, without transverse ridges; shield of
      female not narrowed behind eyes; stigmal plate      _Rhipicephalus
      comma shaped                                          sanguineus_.

    Palpi elongate, without ridges; shield of female           _Hyalomma
      broad; stigmal plate oval,                            aegypticum_.

_Ixodes ricinus_ Linné.

The shield of the female is elliptical, plainly longer than broad, sides
not suddenly narrowed behind, and there is no eye-spot at each lateral
corner. The coxa I has a long sharp spine.

This is a common European tick found on sheep, cattle, dogs, etc., and
it has been taken a few times in this country. Neumann has recorded its
capture from _Mus decumans_.

_Margaropus annulatus_ Say.

The shield is plainly longer than broad, with a distinct eye-spot at
each lateral corner, and behind the eye the shield is suddenly narrowed;
the coxæ of the female are without spines, but the male has 2 on coxæ I.
This is the common cattle tick of the United States, and disseminates
the Texas fever. Mr. Hunter has taken it once from a rat in a barn at
Dallas, Tex.

_Rhipicephalus sanguineus_ Latreille.

The shield of the female is oval, and longer than broad, with an
eye-spot at each outer corner. Coxa I with 2 teeth; a smaller tooth on
each of the other coxæ. Stigmal plate long, comma shaped. In the male
there is a corneous plate each side of the anus, and on middle of
posterior margin a projection, or short tail.

This species is common in tropical countries, and Nuttall has recorded
specimens from the black rat in India.

_Hyalomma aegypticum_ Linné.

The shield of the female is as broad as long, and the eye-spot is
slightly above each outer corner. Coxa I has 2 large teeth, and a small
tooth on each of the other coxæ. In the male there are 2 corneous plates
each side of anus, and behind is a pair of small tubercles.

This is a common tick in the warmer parts of the Old World; and Nuttall
has recorded young specimens on the black rat.


                               GAMASIDÆ.

The Gamasid mites, although much smaller than the ticks, are large
enough to be seen by the naked eye. They are active, and most are not
parasitic, at least for part of their time. The palpi are simple, of 5
joints; the mandibles are elongate, retractile, and usually chelate at
tip. There are no eyes. The dorsum and often the venter shows one or
more corneous shields or plates, frequently a number of them; one or two
on the dorsum, and on the venter one between the coxæ, called the
sternal plate; one behind this, the genital plate; one behind the
latter, the ventral plate; and one surrounding the anus, the anal plate.
Frequently some of these are absent or united to one of the others.

The legs are slender, usually of 6 joints, with a long tarsus that
terminates in 2 claws, and often a sucker, or caroncle. The stigmata, or
spiracles, are lateral above and between coxæ II and IV, and usually
provided with a slender peritreme reaching forward toward the head.
Nearly all the Gamasidæ deposit eggs, and the young often differ
considerably from the adult in structure. There are two, and perhaps
sometimes three, nymphal stages. In one of these nymphal stages the mite
is apt to attach itself to an insect for the purpose of being carried to
a similar locality, where it may feed and mature. The coprophagous and
xylophagous insects are especially concerned in the diffusion of these
mites.

There are, however, quite a number of species that are genuine parasites
of insects and other animals. Those occurring on rats belong to two
genera, Myonyssus and Lælaps. They can be separated as follows:

 1. Anal plate small, much smaller than the ventral
      plate                                                    _Lælaps_.

    Anal plate large, larger than the ventral plate         _Myonyssus_.

_Myonyssus._—This genus is made by Tiraboschi for one species:
_Myonyssus decumani_ Tiraboschi.

Body oval; legs short and stout, all tarsi with a large caroncle with
two short claws; coxæ II have a large tooth on the anterior border, none
of coxæ with spines; sternal plate much broader than long, with three
bristles each side; ventro-genital plate much longer than broad,
broadest behind, bordered with bristles; anal plate very large, nearly
one and a half times as broad as long; three large spines each side on
venter. Length, 0.95 millimeter.

Found in Italy on _Mus decumans_.

_Lælaps._—This genus embraces a large number of species, several of
which occur on small animals, such as the muskrat, ground hog, and
chipmunk. Three have been recorded from rats, one of these from
California. The dorsal plate is covered with hairs or bristles, and
there are usually stout bristles on the margins of the plates on the
venter. There is also a bristle, or a spine, at the tip of the anal
plate. The legs are short and stout, with a distinct caroncle, and two
claws.

 1. Dorsum with numerous fine hairs; no stout spines on
      coxæ                                              _L. stabularis_.

    Dorsum with fewer, but stouter spine-like bristles;
      each coxa has a stout spine                                      2

 2. Body but little longer than broad; ventral plate
      longer than broad                                     _L. agilis_.

    Body much longer than broad; ventral plate about as
      broad as long                                     _L. echidninus_.

_Lælaps echidninus_ Berlese.

Dorsum of body almost wholly covered with a shield, with rows (six in
front, eight behind) of stout, curved bristles, a longer pair near front
margin, and some around lateral and posterior margins. Legs short and
stout, tarsi about twice as long as preceding joint; each coxa bears a
stout spine near middle. Palpi very short; sternum with three stout
bristles or spines each side; ventral plate with four stout bristles
each side; anal plate with a stout apical bristle, and a small one each
side. Length, 1 millimeter.

Occurs commonly on rats in warm countries, and known from California. It
may possibly aid in the transmission of disease.

_Lælaps agilis_ Koch.

Similar in many respects to _L. echidninus_ but differ in the shorter
and proportionately broader body, barely longer than broad, and in the
weaker and shorter spines on dorsum and on the ventral plates; there are
also some small short spines on the general surface of the venter.
Length, 0.7 millimeter.

Recorded from rats from Europe and Africa.

_Lælaps stabularis_ Koch.

The body is of the same general shape as in _L. echidninus_, but the
dorsum is clothed with 12 to 18 rows of fine short hairs. The first pair
of legs is more slender than in the other species, and the hind legs are
also more elongate; the coxæ do not have the stout spines seen in the
other species, and the bristles on the sternal and ventral plates are
much less stout; the general surface of the venter has many hairs, the
anal plate has a short apical bristle. Length, 1.2 millimeters.

Taken on the brown rat in Italy; also found in manure.


                              CHEYLETIDÆ.

This family consists of small, soft-bodied mites, that are parasitic or
predaceous in habits. The palpi are small, three or four jointed; the
mandibles are styliform and retractile; and the breathing spiracles open
near the mouth parts. The species that occur on rats belong to the genus
_Myobia_.

_Myobia._—The body is elongate, fully twice as long as broad, tipped by
a pair of long, stout bristles. The first pair of legs is enlarged and
shortened, with a terminal hook to grasp hairs; the other legs are
short, simple, and far apart. The palpi and mouth parts are very small,
and the dorsum bears stout bristles. They are supposed to feed on the
exudations of the skin, but it would seem more probable, from the nature
of the mandibles, that they pierced the skin to secure food. All are
very small, not one-half a millimeter long. Of the several species two
have been recorded from rats.

 1. Dorsum of female with spines all acute and sharp       _M. musculi_.

    Dorsum of female with some of the posterior spines
      flattened and rather scale like                     _M. ensifera_.

_Myobia musculi_ Schrank.

This occurs on various mice and moles, and once recorded from the brown
rat. It has been taken in this country on mice. It lives at the base of
the hairs.

_Myobia ensifera_ Poppe.

This was described from the brown rat in Europe. The female is separated
from _M. musculi_ by having about six of the posterior dorsal spines
flattened and scale like; in the male the six dorsal spines are longer,
and the small spines much smaller than in _M. musculi_.


                              SARCOPTIDÆ.

These are the itch and scab mites. The body is soft, rounded, and
whitish in color. The legs are very short, of five joints, and end in
one or two claws, and often a pediceled sucker. The palpi are small and
short, of three joints, but the basal is usually united to the rostrum.
There are no spiracles, and respiration is therefore through the general
surface of the skin. The sexes are often quite different in structure.
The females usually deposit eggs, the larvæ are hexopod, and there are
two nymphal stages. They are all parasites, mostly on mammals and birds,
and often burrow in the skin, causing mange, or scabies.

Only one species has been taken on rats; this belongs to the genus
_Notoedres_.

_Notoedres._—In this genus the third pair of legs of the male and the
third and fourth of the female have no sucker at the tip. The anal
opening is on the posterior part of the dorsum. The three known species
are parasitic on mammals—one on the cat, one on the rabbit, and the
third on rats.

_Notoedres muris_ Mègnin.

This is a rounded mite, with finely striate skin, a small triangular
rostrum; in front the four anterior legs project a little beyond the
body, and each ends in a long pedicellate sucker; the third and fourth
pairs of legs are not visible from above, and each ends in a long
bristle. There are a few short hairs around the anal aperture and about
ten others in front of these. The species measures about 0.3 to 0.4
millimeter long.

It usually occurs about the ears and the genital organs of the host, and
has been taken from both the brown and black rat in Europe. The
_Sarcoptes alepis_ Railliet and Lucet is the same species.


                              DEMODECIDÆ.

Besides the mites above described, a form of _Demodex_ has been recorded
from rats, but the species is not given. These mites are very tiny, with
elongate body, the posterior part annulate, the front part with eight
very short legs. They inhabit the hair follicles of various mammals.
That on the rat may have been only an accidental occurrence of some
species normally on another animal.




THE INTERNAL PARASITES OF RATS AND MICE IN THEIR RELATION TO DISEASES OF
                                  MAN.

 By CH. WARDELL STILES, _Chief_, and CHARLES G. CRANE, B. S., _Assistant,
  Division of Zoology, Hygienic Laboratory, United States Public Health
                      and Marine-Hospital Service_.


                                SUMMARY.


  Rats and mice may harbor 11 species of internal parasites which come
  into consideration as possible or established parasites of man. From
  this point of view, 7 of the parasites are of more academic interest
  than practical importance. The rat may, however, be viewed as the
  practical, theoretical, and permanent reservoir for one zooparasitic
  disease (trichinosis) of considerable importance, and of at least one,
  perhaps two, other zooparasitic infections (“_Lamblia duodenalis_” and
  _Hymenolepis diminuta_) of much less importance. Its possible future
  rôle in connection with sleeping sickness should not be entirely
  ignored.

  From the standpoint of internal zooparasitism, therefore, the present
  public health interest in rats and mice centers in trichinosis. This
  disease will probably never be eradicated from man until rats and mice
  are practically eradicated, and any rational public health campaign
  directed against trichinosis must take the rat into serious
  consideration.

  The eradication of rats and mice would be a very substantial
  contribution toward a reduction and eradication of trichinosis.


                             INTRODUCTION.

From the habits of rats, it is to be expected that they harbor many
species of parasites, and on account of their presence in our houses the
question naturally arises as to whether any of these parasites are
transmissible, either directly or indirectly, to man.

The species of internal parasites which come especially into
consideration in this connection are the following:


  PROTOZOA: _Chlamydophrys enchelys_ (p. 88), _Lamblia duodenalis_ (p.
  89), _Trypanosoma gambiense_ (p. 94).

  TREMATODA: None.

  CESTODA: _Cysticercus cellulosæ_ (p. 95), _C. fasciolaris_ (p. 96),
  _C. pisiformis_ (p. 95), _H. murina_ Duj. [= _fraterna_] (p. 96),
  _Hymenolepis diminuta_ (p. 98).

  NEMATODA: _Trichinella spiralis_ (p. 101).

  ACANTHOCEPHALA: _Gigantorhynchus moniliformis_ (p. 108).

  ARACHNOIDEA: _Linguatula denticulata_ (p. 110).


Of these 11 species, the trichina worm (sometimes called the flesh worm)
exceeds all the others combined, both in frequency and importance, as a
cause of disease in man.


                               PROTOZOA.


                Genus CHLAMYDOPHRYS[U] Cienkowski, 1876.

Footnote U:

  SYNONYM.—_Leydenia_ Schaudinn, 1896.


             Species CHLAMYDOPHRYS ENCHELYS[V] (Ehrenberg.)

Footnote V:

  SYNONYMS.—_Difflugia enchelys_ Ehrenberg; _Chlamydophrys stercorea_
  Cienkowski; _Leydenia gemmipara_ Schaudinn, 1896; _Chl. enchelys_
  (Ehrenberg) Braun.

A very peculiar organism has been described under the name of _Leydenia
gemmipara_ Schaudinn, 1896. This was found in fluid, obtained by
puncture, from two ascites patients in Berlin, Germany. More recently
Schaudinn has concluded that _Leydenia gemmipara_ represents an abnormal
condition of a protozoon known as _Chlamydophrys_. The latter passes
through the intestinal tract of various animals (as man, mice,
squirrels, rabbits, cattle), and thus is occasionally found in fresh
human stools. According to Schaudinn, if pathological conditions in the
colon cause an alkaline reaction of its entire content, the usual shell
formation in _Chlamydophrys_ fails to take place, the organisms then
multiply in an atypical manner by division and budding, and the result
is the structure described as _Leydenia gemmipara_.


                  Genus LAMBLIA[W] R. Blanchard, 1888.

Footnote W:

  SYNONYMS.—_Dimorphus_ Grassi, 1879 (not Haller, 1878, arachnoid);
  _Megastoma_ Grassi, 1881 (not de Blainville, mollusk; not Swains.,
  1837, bird; not Costa, 1850, fish; not Megerle, mollusk); “_Dimorpha_
  Grassi” of Senn, 1901 (not _Dimorpha_ Jur., 1807, hymenopteron; not
  Gray, 1840, mollusk; not Hodgs., 1841, bird); _Megastroma_
  Schneidemuehl, 1898, misprint.


  GENERIC DIAGNOSIS.—_Polymastigidæ_: Body bilaterally symmetrical,
  pyriform, excavate antero-ventrally to form a sucker; flagella
  directed posteriorly; 3 pairs inserted on margin of the sucker, 1 pair
  at posterior end of body. Parasitic in intestine of mammals.

  TYPE SPECIES.—_Lamblia duodenalis_ s. l. (“_L. intestinalis_” of man).


Flagellate protozoa belonging to this genus are reported as parasitic in
the intestinal canal of various species of mammals. At present the forms
in question are usually looked upon as belonging to the species _L.
duodenalis_. Evidence is, however, accumulating (p. 92) to the effect
that there are at least three distinct species of _Lamblia_ (“_L.
intestinalis_” of man, _L. muris_ of mice, and _L. cuniculi_ (or
_duodenalis_?) of rabbits). Admitting that there may be three species,
the intertransmissibility of these forms from one host to another
remains to be investigated to some extent. It seems thus far definitely
proved that the form which occurs in man is transmissible to mice,
rabbits, and guinea pigs, hence mice still remain a source of danger in
respect to the infection in man. To exactly what extent this fact is of
academic interest or of practical significance is at present _sub
judice_.


   Species LAMBLIA DUODENALIS[X] (Davaine, 1875) Stiles, 1902, s. l.

Footnote X:

  SYNONYMS.—_Cercomonas intestinalis_ Lambl, 1859, in man (not _Bodo_
  (_Cercomonas_) _intestinalis_ (Ehrenberg, 1838) Diesing, 1850, in
  frogs; not _Cercomonas intestinalis_ (Ehrenberg, 1838) Perty, 1852);
  _Hexamita duodenalis_ Davaine, 1875, in rabbits; _Dimorphus muris_
  Grassi, 1879, in _Mus_; _Megastoma entericum_ Grassi, 1881 (=
  _Dimorphus muris_ renamed); _Megastoma intestinale_ (Lambl, 1859) R.
  Blanchard, 1885; _Lamblia intestinalis_ (Lambl, 1859) R. Blanchard,
  1888; “_Megastoma intestinalis_” of Leclerq, 1890; “_Cercomonas
  intistinalis_ Lambl” of L. Pfeiffer; “_Megastroma entericum_ Grassi,
  1881” of Schneidemuehl, 1898; “_Dimorpha muris_ Grassi” of Senn, 1900.

                            [Figs. 9 to 15.]


  SPECIFIC DIAGNOSIS.—_Lamblia_ (p. 88): Body pyriform, 5 to 16μ (21μ
  Lambl) long, 4 to 12.5μ (8.6 to 11μ Lambl) broad; flagella 9 to 14μ
  long; anterior end bluntly rounded, posterior end sharply pointed,
  dorsum convex, antero-ventrally concave, venter flat to convex;
  antero-ventral concavity forms a sucker, the margins of which project
  from the surface and are contractile. Four pairs of ventral
  posteriorly directed flagella, arranged as follows: 1 pair insert on
  anterior margin of sucker; 2 pairs on posterior margin of sucker, near
  median line; 1 pair on posterior extremity. Body membrane (“cuticula”)
  very delicate, permitting some change of body form; protoplasm finely
  granular; nucleus dumb-bell shaped, pre-equatorial. Vacuoles not
  observed. Copulation sucker-to-sucker, followed by an encystation, in
  which stage complicated nuclear changes occur; cysts 10 by 7μ.

  HABITAT.—Upper portion of small intestine of man (_Homo_); also of the
  common house mouse (_Mus musculus_), the brown rat (_M. decumanus_),
  the black rat (_M. rattus_), “_Mus sylvestris_” [=? _M. decumanus_],
  field mouse (_Microtus arvalis_), water mole (_Arvicola amphibius_),
  rabbits, guinea pigs, domesticated cats, dogs, and sheep.

  GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.—Europe, Egypt, and United States.


This parasite is very common in animals in certain parts of Europe, and
cases of its presence in man have been reported by a number of authors
(Lambl, 1859; Grassi, 1881; Perroncito, 1888; Moritz, 1891; Moritz &
Holzl, 1892; Roos, 1893; Kruse & Pasquale, 1894; Piccardi, 1895;
Sievers; Mueller; Frshezjesski & Ucke; Stiles, 1902; Braun, 1908; etc.).
The indications are that it is more common in man than is generally
assumed.

Possibly man becomes infected through eating food (as bread, etc.) which
has been soiled by the excrements (containing the encysted stage) of
mice and rats. Grassi infected himself, Perroncito infected mice and
rabbits, and Stiles infected guinea pigs by feeding to them human feces
containing the encysted stage.

The parasite may be present in large numbers. Moritz estimated a
discharge of 18 milliards within twenty-four hours from one of his
patients. It has been observed in healthy persons and also in cases of
various diseases, but especially in children and in cases of
tuberculosis. It is an inhabitant chiefly of the duodenum and jejunum,
where it attaches itself (fig. 13) by means of the sucker to the
epithelial cells. It is rarer in the ileum. In case the stomach is
alkaline (carcinoma) the parasite may occur in this organ (Cohnheim,
Zabel). In P. Schmidt’s case the hydrochloric acid was 1 per cent. In
case the intestinal peristalsis is normal the parasite becomes encysted
in the colon, so that usually only the encysted stage is found in the
feces; but in case of increased peristalsis and diarrhea the organisms
have not time to encyst, so that the free stages are observed in the
stools. As the parasites become cool motion decreases; when raised to
high temperature, as 50° C., motion becomes slow, and the organisms die
at 52° C. or below 0° C.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 9.—Lateral view of encysted _Lamblia duodenalis_.

  FIG. 10.—Cyst from large intestine.

  FIG. 11.—Ventral view of _Lamblia_.

  FIG. 12.—Lateral view.

  FIG. 13.—Epithelial cells of the villous coating of the small
    intestine infested with _Lamblia_. (After
  Grassi & Schewiakoff, 1888, pl. 15, figs. 1, 2, 5, 11, 12.)
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 14.—An epithelial cell with parasitic _Lamblia_. Greatly
    enlarged. (After Grassi & Schewiakoff, 1888, pl. 15, fig. 6.)
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 15.—An individual in the act of joining an epithelial cell.
    (After Grassi & Schewiakoff, 1888, pl. 15, fig. 7.)
]

PATHOGENICITY.—Opinion differs as to the pathogenicity of this organism.
Perroncito (1902b) reports it as causing a fatal disease in rabbits.
Braun (1908) is inclined to consider it harmless. From conversation with
Doctor Hemmeter, we are persuaded that in his case in a child in
Baltimore the parasite was not without effect. Possibly the question as
to its pathogenicity is a relative one in that light infections may
produce no recognizable disturbance, while heavy infections may produce
recognizable effects. Doctor Hemmeter’s original letter regarding his
case contained the following notes:


  Patient, male, white child, 3 years old, born in Maryland. Had
  recurrent attacks of colitis all its life; three acute attacks within
  the last three weeks, accompanied by fever, distended abdomen,
  sensitive, etc. Stools have always been like putty, containing large
  amount of mucus, and some blood streaks; fever lasting three days, no
  pronounced diarrhea, 2 to 3 passages per day; intervals between
  attacks variable, stools at such times like putty, also with mucus.


Later information from Doctor Hemmeter states that the disappearance of
the parasites from the stools coincided with improvement in the child’s
condition.

CLINICAL DIAGNOSIS.—The fresh unstained stools should be examined
microscopically; or the diluted stool may be stained with methylene
blue, by which nearly all objects become promptly stained, except
_Lamblia_, which remains grayish white (Roos, 1893) for several hours.

TREATMENT.—Attempts to expel _Lamblia_ have not always met with marked
success. Among the drugs used are male fern, sulphate of quinine,
naphthol, calomel, hydrochloric acid, and arsenic. Grassi appears to
have had success with calcined magnesia.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 16.—“_Lamblia intestinalis_” of man. (After Bensen, 1908, fig.
    5.)
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 17.—Copulation cyst of “_Lamblia intestinalis_” of man. (After
    Bensen, 1908, fig. 5.)
]

THE DIVISION OF _Lamblia duodenalis_ INTO SEPARATE SPECIES.—Bensen
(1908) has recently divided _Lamblia duodenalis_ s. l. into three
species: _L. “intestinalis,”_ _L. muris_, and _L. cuniculi_. His
preliminary paper seems to offer fairly convincing data for the
correctness of his interpretation, but it may be well to await the
publication of his more complete paper, in which he promises fuller
details, before the species are definitely accepted. Several
nomenclatural points will come up for consideration in this connection.

_Lamblia intestinalis_, which Bensen accepts as name for the species
(fig. 16) occurring in man, can not be accepted, as this name is based
on _Cercomonas intestinalis_ Lambl, 1859, which is invalidated by
_Cercomonas intestinalis_ (Ehrenberg, 1838) Perty, 1852, found in frogs.

_Lamblia muris_ (fig. 18) will probably stand, based on _Dimorphus
muris_ Grassi, 1879.

_Lamblia cuniculi._—There is some doubt as to the status of this name.
Davaine (1875a, 128–129) has described from rabbits a protozoon, which
he designated as _Hexamita duodenalis_ and which Railliet (1893a, 169)
identifies as a synonym of _Lamblia intestinalis_ (Lambl). On basis of
the principle that identifications are to be accepted as correct until
shown to be incorrect, Stiles has accepted _duodenalis_ as name (1902)
for the form in question. The question now arises as to the relation of
_cuniculi_ to _duodenalis_. If they are accepted as identical,
_duodenalis_ will supplant _cuniculi_, and a new name must be given to
the form found in man. If _duodenalis_ is taken as identical with
_intestinalis_ Lambl, _duodenalis_ remains as name for the form in man,
and _cuniculi_ Bensen will stand for the species in rabbits. If
Railliet’s interpretation of synonymy be shown to be incorrect by
proving that _duodenalis_ Davaine is not to be considered in connection
with either form, a new name must be given to _intestinalis_ Lambl.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 18.—_Lamblia muris_ of mice. (After Bensen, 1908, fig. 1.)
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 19.—Autogametocyte of _Lamblia muris_. (After Bensen, 1908, fig.
    6.)
]


                        Genus TRYPANOSOMA s. l.

An extensive group of parasitic protozoa, known as “trypanosomes,” has
recently been the basis of considerable literature. The genus
_Trypanosoma_ was originally based upon a species (_T. rotatorium_)
found in frogs, and while most trypanosomes have been described as
members of this genus several authors have separated out certain forms
into separate genera.

Luehe (1906) has recently placed the trypanosomes of mammals in the


                     Genus TRYPANOZOON Luehe, 1906.

One of these species (_Trypanozoon gambiense_, usually known as
_Trypanosoma gambiense_) is the cause of “sleeping sickness” in man, and
has been transmitted in laboratory experiments to rats and mice.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 20.—An isolated pork-measle bladder worm (_Cysticercus
    cellulosæ_), with extended head. Greatly enlarged. (After Stiles,
    1898a, 90, fig. 76.)
]

Just what practical importance there may be in the ability of the
parasite to live in rats and mice remains to be seen, but theoretically
this biological factor may possibly become one of considerable
magnitude. At present the least conclusion to be drawn is that it adds
one more to the many arguments in favor of a world-wide destruction of
rats and mice.

Several trypanosomes, other than _Trypanozoon gambiense_, are
transmissible by experiment to rats and mice, while one species
(_Trypanozoon lewisi_) has rats for its normal host, and two other
species (_Trypanozoon duttoni_ and _Trypanosoma musculi_ Kendall, 1896)
are reported originally from the mouse.


                           CESTODA—TAPEWORMS.

Of the five cestodes mentioned as coming into consideration in the
subject under discussion, only one (_Hymenolepis diminuta_) need be
considered seriously.


                  CYSTICERCUS CELLULOSÆ—TÆNIA SOLIUM.

                               [Fig. 20.]

The larval cestode known as _Cysticercus cellulosæ_ (which causes
“measles” in swine) develops (when eaten by man) into a tapeworm which
is known as _Tænia solium_. This larva is also reported as encysted in
the peritoneum of _Mus rattus_.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 21.—Portion of mesentery of rabbit infected with _Cysticercus
    pisiformis_. Natural size. (After Railliet, 1893a, 216, fig. 114.)
]

Even if it be granted that the specific determination of the specimen in
question as _Cysticercus cellulosæ_ is correct, the occasional infection
of rats with this parasite would be of very little practical
significance in this country from a public health point of view, as we
do not use rats for food for man. Theoretically it is possible to
conceive of combinations of circumstances in which such infection in the
rat might under certain conditions eventually affect man, but the
chances are so remote as to be negligible, especially when compared with
the much greater questions which demand attention.


                CYSTICERCUS PISIFORMIS—TÆNIA PISIFORMIS.

                               [Fig. 21.]

The larval stage of this parasite occurs in rabbits, the adult stage in
canines. Parona (1901) reports the occurrence of the larval stage in
_Mus brasiliensis_, and Vital has recorded the presence of the adult
stage in man.

In view of the fact that Galli-Valerio was unable to infect himself
experimentally with this species, the specific determination made by
Vital is open to some question. Even assuming that this tapeworm may
develop in man, the presence of the larval stage in rats is of such
little importance as to be negligible.


               CYSTICERCUS FASCIOLARIS—TÆNIA TENIÆFORMIS.

                               [Fig. 22.]

This encysted larval tapeworm is exceedingly common in the liver of rats
and mice, and when swallowed by cats it develops into an adult tapeworm.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 22.—Larval stage of _Tænia teniæformis_. Natural size. (After
    Leuckart, 1880, 450, fig. 202.)
]

There are two possible points of view in connection with which this
parasite is of indirect interest in public health matters: (1)
Occasionally these encysted parasites are mistaken for lesions of
tuberculosis; (2) Krabbe (1880) relates that in Jutland there exists a
folk custom of eating chopped raw mice in case of retention of urine,
and in this connection the point has been raised that the possibility is
not excluded that such action might eventually give rise to infection of
man by the parasite in question. No case of such infection in man is as
yet established.


 HYMENOLEPIS MURINA[Y] (Dujardin, 1845) = HYMENOLEPIS NANA FRATERNA[Y]
                             Stiles, 1906.

Footnote Y:

  SYNONYM.—_Tænia murina_ Dujardin, 1845 (not Gmelin, 1790).

                           [Figs. 23 and 24.]

Under the name _Tænia murina_, Dujardin (1845) described for rats a
tapeworm which has been identified by a number of authors (including
Stiles) as identical with the dwarf tapeworm (_Hymenolepis nana_) of
man. If this identification be correct, the rats must be considered as
the great disseminators of this tapeworm. Serious doubts have been
raised, however, as to whether the tapeworm in man is not in reality
distinct from that of the rat, and the evidence in favor of such
conclusion is accumulating. Some slight differences between the two
forms have been noticed, but by some authors these differences have been
considered insufficient to hold the two worms apart. Looss has tried to
infect rats with the dwarf tapeworm found in man in Egypt, but his
results have been negative. Here in Washington Stiles has repeatedly
attempted to infect rats with the dwarf tapeworm found in man in the
United States, but thus far no positive infection has occurred in the
rodents. In Italy, Grassi attempted to transmit the rat form to six
persons, and in one case he found tapeworms, but in view of the
frequency of _H. nana_ in Italy the significance of this one instance
has been questioned; Grassi was not successful in trying to infect rats
with _H. nana_ of man.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 23.—Longitudinal section of the intestinal villus of a rat,
    containing cystic stage of dwarf tapeworm. Enlarged. (After Grassi &
    Rovelli, 1892a, pl. 3, fig. 25.)
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 24.—Adult dwarf tapeworm (_Hymenolepis nana_) of man. Enlarged.
    (After Leuckart, 1863, p. 393, fig. 112.)
]

Thus at present the evidence is to the effect that rats and mice are not
to be viewed as the source or reservoir for the dwarf tapeworm (_H.
nana_) of man.


      HYMENOLEPIS DIMINUTA[Z] (Rudolphi, 1819) R. Blanchard, 1891.

Footnote Z:

  SYNONYMS.—_Tænia diminuta_ Rudolphi, 1819; _T. leptocephala_ Creplin,
  1825; _Hymenolepis flavopunctata_ Weinland, 1858; _Tænia (Hymenolepis)
  flavopunctata_ Weinland, 1859; _H. (Lepidotrias) flavopunctata_
  Weinland, 1861; _T. flavomaculata_ Leuckart, 1863; _T. “flavopuncta”_
  Cobbold, 1864 (misprint); _T. “flaviopunctata”_ Vogt, 1878 (misprint);
  _T. “flavopunktata”_ Stein, 1882; _T. varesina_ E. Parona, 1884; _T.
  minima_ Grassi, 1886; _T. “septocephala”_ Perroncito and Airoldi, 1888
  (misprint); _Hymenolepis diminuta_ (Rudolphi, 1819) Blanchard, 1891;
  _“Hymenolepsis” flavopunctata_ of Osler, 1895, and other authors
  (misprint); _T. “varerina”_ Huber, 1896 (misprint for _T. varesina_);
  _T. “flavapunctata”_ Simon, 1896 (misprint); _T. “leptocefala”_
  Previtera, 1900; _T. “ceptocephala”_ Lussana and Romaro [? date]
  (misprint); _Tenia flavopunctata_ (Weinland, 1858) Packard, 1900.

                           [Figs. 25 to 30.]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 25.—Strobila of _Hymenolepis diminuta_. Natural size. (After
    Grassi, 1881, pl. 11, fig. 1.)
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 26.—Head and anterior portion of _H. diminuta_ from the rat.
    Enlarged. (After Zschokke, 1889, pl. 1, fig. 21.)
]


  SPECIFIC DIAGNOSIS.—_Hymenolepis_: Strobila 10 to 60 millimeters in
  length, 2.5 to 4 millimeters in maximum breadth; composed of 800 to
  1,300 segments. Head small, almost globular; 200 to 600μ in width;
  rostellum rudimentary, pyriform, only slightly protractile; hooks
  absent; suckers globular, near the apical portion of the head, 80 to
  160μ in diameter. Neck usually short. Segments throughout strobila
  broader than long. Genital pores on left margin, near the junction of
  the anterior and middle thirds of each segment. Three testes in each
  segment; vas deferens dilates into a prominent seminal vesicle before
  entering the cirrus pouch, within which also is a vesicle. Gravid
  uterus occupies most of the proglottids; its cavity is subdivided into
  a large number of incompletely separated compartments filled with
  eggs. Eggs round or slightly oval; outer membrane 54 to 86μ in
  diameter, yellowish in color, may be radially striated; inner membrane
  24 by 20μ to 40 by 35μ in diameter, with mammillate projection at each
  pole often not apparent; between outer and inner membranes a prominent
  third layer of albuminous substance, often appearing as two delicate
  smooth membranes, with intervening space filled by a granular
  coagulum; embryonal hooks 11 to 16μ in length.


[Illustration:

  FIG. 27.—Male and female organs of _H. diminuta_: _c. p._, cirrus
    pouch; _g. p._, genital pore; _ov._, ovary; _rec. sem._,
    receptaculum seminis; _s. g._, shell gland; _t._, testiculæ; _ut._,
    uterus; _vag._, vagina; _v. def._, vas deferens; _v. ef._, vas
    efferens; _ves. sem._, vesicula seminalis; _y. g._, yolk gland.
    Enlarged. (After Zschokke, 1889, pl. 2, fig. 22.)
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 28.—Gravid segment of _H. diminuta_. Enlarged. (After Grassi,
    1881, pl. 11, fig. 15.)
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 29.—Egg of _H. diminuta_ from man. Greatly enlarged. (After
    Bizzozero, 1889a, pl. 4, fig. g″.)
]


  HABITAT.—Adults in small intestine of brown or Norway rat (_Mus
  decumanus_), black rat (_M. rattus_), house mouse (_M. musculus_),
  Egyptian or roof rat (_M. rattus alexandrinus_), wood or field mouse
  (_M. sylvaticus_), _Rhipidomys pyrrhorhinus_ [according to Linstow,
  1878a, 23], and man (_Homo sapiens_).

  DEVELOPMENT.—The larval stage (_Cercocystis H. diminutæ_) occurs in
  larval and adult meal moths (_Asopia farinalis_); in young and adult
  earwigs (_Anisolabis annulipes_); and in adult beetles (_Acis spinosa_
  and _Scaurus striatus_).

  GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTION.—Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, Nebraska, Iowa,
  District of Columbia, Maryland, Brazil, Italy, Germany, France,
  Austria.


This parasite is certainly more common in man in this country than has
heretofore been assumed, but fortunately it seems to be one of the most
harmless and most easily expelled tapeworms occurring in man.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 30.—Encysted cystic stage of _H. diminuta_: _caud._, caudal
    appendage; _cyst._, adventitious capsule inclosing the cercocystis.
    Enlarged. (After Grassi & Rovelli, 1892a, pl. 4, fig. 1.)
]

From present evidence, the rats and mice are looked upon as the regular
hosts for this worm, and hence as the natural reservoir of the
infection. The intermediate host becomes infected from the rodents and
then transmits the infection to man.

It might be mentioned that as yet no extensive study has been conducted
in the United States to differentiate clearly the various species of
_Hymenolepis_ found in our rats and mice. The possibility is therefore
not entirely excluded that some of our cases of _Hymenolepis diminuta_
may eventually be shown to be referable to other species of the same
genus.


                       NEMATODA—TRUE ROUND WORMS.


                       Family TRICHINELLIDÆ.[AA]

Footnote AA:

  SYNONYM.—_Trichotrachelidæ._ It becomes necessary under the
  international code to change the family name; the family name
  _Trichinellidæ_ is chosen as less likely to lead to confusion than a
  family name based upon _Trichuris_.


  FAMILY DIAGNOSIS.—_Nematoda_: Elongate cylindrical worms; cephalic
  portion long and very slender, caudal portion more or less swollen.
  Mouth rounded, without lips. Esophagus relatively very long, composed
  of a single row of large cells, forming the so-called “cell body” and
  supporting a narrow esophageal tube; anus terminal or nearly so.

  Male: With a single spicule or without spicule.

  Female: With one ovary; vulva near caudal end of cell body, close to
  point where body increases in diameter; oviparous or viviparous.

  Eggs: Oviparous species, with thick shell, with opening at each pole,
  closed by a transparent plug.

  TYPE GENUS.—_Trichinella_ Railliet, 1895.


This family furnishes two parasites to man: The whipworm (_Trichuris
trichiura_) of the colon, and the trichina or flesh worm (_Trichinella
spiralis_, see p. 101).


                 Genus TRICHINELLA[AB] Railliet, 1895.

Footnote AB:

  SYNONYMS.—_Trichina_ Owen, 1835 [not Meig., 1830, insect.];
  _Trichinus_ Fraser, 1881a, for _Trichina_.


  GENERIC DIAGNOSIS.—_Trichinellidæ_: Very minute worms, of nearly
  uniform diameter. Adults in intestine of mammals, larvæ encysted in
  muscles.

  Male: Without spicules, but with 2 conical appendages on the tail, at
  side of terminal cloacal opening.

  Female: Vulva about one-fifth the length from anterior end;
  viviparous.

  TYPE SPECIES.—_Trichinella spiralis_ (Owen, 1835) Railliet, 1895.


           TRICHINELLA SPIRALIS (Owen, 1835) Railliet, 1895.

                           [Figs. 31 to 51.]


  SPECIFIC DIAGNOSIS.—_Trichinella_: Body thread-like, visible to naked
  eye.

  Male: Length, 1.4 to 1.6 millimeters; diameter, 40μ; distal of cloacal
  opening, 2 pairs of papillæ, the anterior pair hemispherical,
  posterior pair conical.

  Female: Length, 3 to 4 millimeters; diameter, 60μ; anus terminal;
  vulva one-fifth of length of body from the mouth; viviparous.

  HABITAT.—Adults in lumen and wall of small intestine, encysted larvæ
  in muscles of various mammals, particularly in rats, mice, swine, and
  man.

  GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTION.—More or less cosmopolitan.


SOURCE OF INFECTION.—From the life cycle of this parasite it is clear
that the permanent reservoir of infection must be some animal with
cannibalistic tendencies. Of the three most important hosts (man, swine,
and rats), the rats present ideal conditions in this respect. It is true
that there are some tribes of man which are cannibalistic, but their
distribution is restricted. Likewise swine are in so far cannibalistic
that they eat uncooked swine offal and swill, but this is due to the
shortsightedness of man rather than to the habits of the swine.
Accordingly, neither man nor the hog presents the proper theoretical
conditions for the perpetuation of the parasites and hence to serve as
reservoir for the disease it causes.

Rats, on the contrary, are cannibalistic, and trichinosis is a common
disease among them. Hence they may be viewed as the natural reservoir
for the parasites and for the disease it causes; hence, also, any
well-directed public health campaign against trichinosis should consider
the eradication of rats.

Rats become infected by eating each other; by eating scraps of pork
found on the offal pile of slaughterhouses, or in swill; and by eating
scraps of human flesh in dissecting rooms of medical schools.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 31.—Female trichina from the intestine; 24 hours after infection.
    Enlarged. (After Leuckart, 1866a, pl. 1, fig. 1.)
]

Swine become infected by eating rats, and by eating scraps of pork on
the offal pile of slaughterhouses, or in swill.

Man becomes infected almost exclusively by eating pork and boar meat.
The rare infections which occur from eating other meat are almost
negligible.

MEDICAL SIGNIFICANCE.—_Trichiniasis_ or _trichinosis_ refers to
infection with the trichina or flesh worm. Normally it occurs only in
mammals, chiefly carnivorous and omnivorous species, and it is
transmissible from any infected mammal to any other mammal susceptible
to it, in case the latter eats the uncooked flesh of the former.

_Symptoms._—In heavy infections there may be three more or less distinct
periods of the disease, corresponding to the three stages in the life
cycle of the parasite; but these stages are obscure in light or in
repeated infections. Profuse sweating may last during the entire attack.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 32.—Gravid adult female trichina. Enlarged. (After Leuckart,
    1866a, pl. 1, fig. 2.)

  FIG. 33.—Adult male trichina from the intestine. Enlarged. (After
    Leuckart, 1866a, pl. 1, fig. 5.)

  FIG. 34.—External genitalia of same. Enlarged. (After Leuckart, 1866a,
    pl. 1, fig. 7.)

  FIG. 35.—The same with extruded cloaca. Enlarged. (After Leuckart,
    1866a, pl. 1, fig. 8.)

  FIG. 36.—Cephalic portion of a trichina showing central nervous system
    and anterior portion of intestinal canal. Greatly enlarged. (After
    Leuckart, 1866a, pl. 1, fig. 13.)

  FIG. 37.—Transverse section of a female trichina. Greatly enlarged.
    (After Leuckart, 1866a, pl. 1, fig. 16.)

  FIG. 38.—Young trichina embryo in a muscle fibre. Greatly enlarged.
    (After Leuckart, 1866a, pl. 2, fig. 1.)
]

Period of ingression: The adult parasites are in the intestine, hence
gastro-intestinal symptoms develop; irregular appetite, nausea, diarrhea
or constipation, colicky pains; a temporary edema around eyes about the
eighth day; muscular pains begin.

Period of digression: This begins about the eighth to the fifteenth day,
sometimes later; young embryos are wandering to and attacking the
muscles, hence muscular symptoms (myositis) develop; painful tension of
muscles, especially biceps; members assume semiflexed position;
movements, chewing, swallowing, breathing, and speech become difficult;
eyes become fixed; fever.

[Illustration:

  FIGS. 39–42.—Later stages of same; the muscular structure is
    undergoing changes. (After Leuckart, 1866a, pl. 2, figs. 3, 6, 7,
    8.)

  FIGS. 43–45.—Muscle trichinæ, 0.3 mm., 0.4 mm., and 0.6 mm. long.
    (After Leuckart, 1866a, pl. 2, figs. 10–12.)
]

Period of regression: The parasites become encysted in muscles. All
symptoms may increase, then gradually decrease; cachexia and anemia
resulting from malnutrition; pruritis, miliary cutaneous eruptions;
desquamation; about twenty-fourth day, a “second” edema develops,
especially about the face; lungs may become edematous; bronchial
catarrh, pneumonia, or pleurisy may appear; gradual recovery.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 46.—A female trichina from the muscle. Greatly enlarged. (After
    Leuckart, 1866a, pl. 1, fig. 12.)
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 47.—A piece of pork with encysted trichinæ. Enlarged. (After
    Braun, 1903, p. 251, fig. 195.)
]

_Lethality._—The lethality varies from 0 to 100 per cent; it averaged
5.6 per cent in 14,820 cases collected from literature; it is dependent
upon amount of infection which remains in the body; low before second
and after seventh week, highest from fourth to sixth week.

_Prognosis._—Better in cases having severe diarrhea in first stage.

_Complications and sequelæ._—Abortion, menstrual disturbances,
pneumonia, pleurisy, peritonitis.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 48.—Section through a rat’s muscle; the infected muscle fiber has
    lost its striation, its nuclei are enlarged and increased in number.
    Greatly enlarged. (After Hertwig-Graham, see Braun, 1903, p. 284,
    fig. 212B.)

  FIG. 49.—Portion of an isolated trichina cyst, at the pole of which
    connective tissue cells have wandered into the thickened sarcolemma.
    Greatly enlarged. (After Hertwig-Graham, see Braun, 1903, p. 284,
    fig. 212C.)
]

_Clinical diagnosis._—Make microscopic examination:

(1) Of pork, if any has been left, to find encysted larvæ; if larvæ are
found, feed pork immediately to two or three guinea pigs or _white_
rats, to determine if the encysted larvæ are alive; kill one rat after
three days and examine intestinal content for adult; kill the second rat
after two weeks, the third rat after three weeks, and hunt for larvæ in
muscular portion of diaphragm. Even if live trichinæ are found in
intestine, an examination of the muscles may show that the worms were
too weak to reproduce, hence prognosis is favorable.

(2) Of patient’s blood, for increased proportion of eosinophiles.

(3) Of patient’s stools, for discharged adult worms, especially if
diarrhea is severe; dilute the fecal matter with warm water and pour off
whatever floats; place remainder in a shallow glass dish so that it will
not be over one-twelfth of an inch deep; move the dish gently around
over a dark background (such as dark paper), and hunt for small
hair-like objects; place these, if found, in a drop of water on a slide,
cover with a cover slip, and examine under low power. Or, if necessary,
make a microscopic examination.

(4) Of small excised portion of patient’s deltoid, about three to four
weeks after infection, for encysted larvæ; cut a small piece parallel to
muscle fibers, tease this on a slide, add a drop of pure water, or water
and glycerine, cover with another slide, flatten gently by pressure
while examining under low power.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 50.—Calcified trichinæ in uncalcified cysts, from pork. Enlarged.
    (After Ostertag, see Braun, 1903, p. 285, fig. 213.)
]

Suspect trichinosis especially under following circumstances: Several
patients in same family or in same neighborhood, usually of North German
descent, show typhoid-like symptoms shortly after a celebration
(wedding, birthday party, etc.) at which pork was served.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 51.—Three phases of calcification of trichinæ and their cysts,
    the changes starting from the poles of the cysts. Enlarged. (After
    Ostertag, see Braun, 1903, p. 285, fig. 214.)
]

_Differential diagnosis._—Consider especially typhoid fever and
rheumatism.

_Treatment._—Purge in early stage to carry away the adult worms and thus
eventually decrease the amount of muscular infection. No treatment is
known which can be relied upon to kill the larvæ in the muscles; benzine
has been suggested. Stimulants may be given to carry patients through
until the larvæ encyst.

PROPHYLAXIS.—_Kill off rats and mice._—Educate public to eat pork only
when thoroughly cooked or thoroughly cured. A practical test of cooking
is the white color of the meat on being cut; if the cut surface is
reddish and serous, the pork is not sufficiently cooked to kill
trichinæ.

As a matter of practical experience, the microscopic inspection of pork
has not given the protection it is generally supposed to give. Of 6,329
cases with 318 deaths reported for Germany during the years 1881–1898,
3,388 cases with 132 deaths are directly attributable to faults in the
inspection. This system directly increases the tendency to eat raw pork,
gives the public a false sense of security, and does not give practical
results commensurate with its expense.


                   ACANTHOCEPHALA—THORN-HEADED WORMS.


                  Genus GIGANTORHYNCHUS Hamann, 1892.


  GENERIC DIAGNOSIS.—_Acanthocephala, Gigantorhynchidæ_: Large worms
  with annulate round to flat, tape-like body. Hooks with 2 roots and
  completely covered with transparent chitin. Proboscis sheath a
  muscular apparatus, without cavity. Central nervous system caudad of
  equator of proboscis sheath and eccentric. Lemnisci long, cylindrical,
  with central canal.

  TYPE SPECIES.—_Gigantorhynchus echinodiscus_ (Diesing, 1851).


     The Moniliform Thorn-headed Worm—GIGANTORHYNCHUS MONILIFORMIS

                            (Bremser, 1819).

                           [Figs. 52 to 58.]


  SPECIFIC DIAGNOSIS.—_Gigantorhynchus_ (p. 108): Body attenuated
  anteriorly, with fine transverse striæ or rings, or even constrictions
  which give the appearance of a series of beads, except in the caudal
  fourth of body, which is nearly smooth and cylindrical. Proboscis 425
  to 450μ long, 176 to 190μ in diameter, armed with feeble, very curved,
  26μ long, hooks arranged more or less in quincunx and forming at most
  15 transverse and about 12 longitudinal rows. Lemnisci more than a
  centimeter in length, cylindrical, undulated posteriorly.

  Male: Length 4 to 4.5 centimeters long; bursa campaniform.

  Female: Length 7 to 8 centimeters (to 27 centimeters after Westrumb).

  Eggs: Ellipsoidal, 85 by 45μ; external envelope thin, yellowish;
  middle envelope very thick, colorless, homogeneous; inner envelope
  less thick, colorless, and quite pliant. Embryo striated transversely
  in posterior two-thirds, and covered with spines which increase in
  size toward anterior end of embryo, the anterior spines being
  transformed into hooklets with prong and base.

  Development: With beetles (_Blaps mucronata_) as intermediate host.

  HABITAT.—Small intestine of various small mammals; brown rat (_Mus
  decumanus_); white rat (_Mus norvegicus albus_); _M. fuscirostris_;
  hamster (_Cricetus frumentarius_); dormice (_Myoxus quercinus_ or
  _glis_); field mole (_Arvicola arvalis_ or _agrestris_?); _Lemnus
  arvalis_; and _Mustela putorius_. It can also develop in man, as has
  been shown experimentally by Grassi and Calandruccio (1888, 521–525).


MEDICAL SIGNIFICANCE.—Grassi and Calandruccio report a doubtful case of
infection in a girl near Catania. Calandruccio infected himself
experimentally by swallowing the young worms taken from a Blaps. Twenty
days later he was seized with severe pains which increased on pressure;
diarrhea followed, with ringing in the ears, fatigue, and somnolence.
Seventeen days later the characteristic eggs were found in his stools,
and twelve days later the symptoms became so severe that he took 8 grams
of extract of male fern; one to two hours later he passed 53 of the
parasites. For two days the symptoms continued, on the second day fever
developed, but all symptoms disappeared on the third day.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 52.—_Gigantorhynchus moniliformis_, female. ×2. (After Grassi &
    Calandruccio, 1888, p. 523, fig. 1.)

  FIG. 53.—_G. moniliformis_, male. ×2. (After Grassi & Calandruccio,
    1888, p. 523, fig. 2.)

  FIG. 54.—Rostellum of _G. moniliformis_. Greatly enlarged. (After
    Grassi & Calandruccio, 1888,
  p. 523, fig. 3.)

  FIG. 55.—Hooks from same. Greatly enlarged. (After Grassi &
    Calandruccio, 1888, p. 523, fig. 4.)

  FIG. 56.—Eggs of _G. moniliformis_, with embryo. Greatly enlarged.
    (After Grassi & Calandruccio,
  1888, p. 523, fig. 5.)

  FIG. 57.—Egg very greatly enlarged. (After Grassi & Calandruccio,
    1888, p. 524, fig. 6.)

  FIG. 58.—A young larva of _G. moniliformis_ in a _Blaps_; the
    rostellum is invaginated and the larva is
  surrounded by a thick inner jelly-like and thin outer cuticular
    covering. Enlarged. (After Grassi &
  Calandruccio, 1888, p. 524, fig. 7.)
]


                              ARACHNOIDEA.


             Genus LINGUATULA Frœhlich, 1789.—Tongue worms.


               Species LINGUATULA SERRATA Frœhlich, 1789.

The larva of this parasite is found encysted in the entrails of rabbits,
cattle, and certain other animals, and it becomes mature in the nasal
cavities of canines.

Both the larva and the adult have been reported for man, and the larva
has been reported as occurring in _Mus decumanus_.

As canines are not fond of eating rats, the presence of the larval
tongue worm in the latter is of more academic interest than practical
importance, and although the theoretical possibility must be admitted
that a dog by eating rats might become infected with tongue worms and
eventually might transmit the infection to man, these possibilities seem
somewhat remote. Remote possibilities must also be admitted to the
effect that if a person ate a rat infected with tongue worms this person
might become infected.




 COMPENDIUM OF ANIMAL PARASITES REPORTED FOR RATS AND MICE (GENUS MUS).

    By CH. WARDELL STILES, Ph. D., _Public Health and Marine-Hospital
                                Service_,

                                   and

 ALBERT HASSALL, M. R. C. V. S., _Assistant, Division of Zoology, United
                    States Bureau of Animal Industry_.


The following list of parasites is prepared from the detailed host
catalogues of the zoological divisions of the Public Health and
Marine-Hospital Service and the Bureau of Animal Industry.

The species of hosts and parasites are taken as given by the various
authors. It is needless to say that no list of this kind can ever lay
claim to being complete.


                       Genus MUS Linneaus, 1758.

              [_Mus musculus_ should be the type species.]


                      MUS AGRARIUS.—Harvest Mouse.


  CESTODA:

  _murina_ Dujardin: Hymenolepis.—Small intestine. [See fraterna.]

  NEMATODA:

  _obvelata_: Oxyuris.—Intestine.

  ARACHNOIDEA:

  _acuminatus_ Neumann: Ixodes.—External.

  INSECTA:

  _fasciatus_ Bosc: Ceratophyllus.—External.
  _musculi_ Dugès: Ctenopsyllus, Ctenopsylla.—External.


                              MUS ALBIPES.


  INSECTA:

  _pallidus_ Taschenberg: Pulex.—External.


                      MUS ALEXANDRINUS.—Roof Rat.

                 [See also _Mus rattus alexandrinus_.]


  CESTODA:

  _diminuta_ Rudolphi, 1819: Tænia, Hymenolepis.—Small intestine.
  _fasciolaris_ Rudolphi: Cysticercus.—Liver.
  _leptocephala_: Tænia.—Small intestine.
  _murina_ Dujardin: Hymenolepis.—Small intestine. [See fraterna.]


                     MUS ALEXANDRINUS ALBIVENTRIS.


  CESTODA:

  _diminuta_ Rudolphi: Hymenolepis.—Small intestine.


                             MUS AMPHIBIUS.


  _Dubium_ Rudolphi.—Inguinal gland.

  CESTODA:

  _fasciolaris_ Rudolphi: Cysticercus.—Liver.
  _omphalodes_ Hermann: Tænia, Anoplocephala.—Intestine.

  NEMATODA:

  _nodosus_: Trichocephalus.—Cecum.
  _obvelata_: Ascaris.


                              MUS ARVALIS.


  CESTODA:

  _fasciolaris_ Rudolphi: Cysticercus.—Liver.
  _longicollis_: Cysticercus.
  _omphalodes_ Hermann: Tænia, Anoplocephala.—Intestine.

  NEMATODA:

  _nodosus_: Trichocephalus.
  _obvelata_: Ascaris.

  ACANTHOCEPHALA:

  _moniliformis_: Echinorhynchus.


                             MUS BARBARUS.

                     [See also  _barbatus_ Enderl.]


  INSECTA:

  _spiculifer_ Gerv.: Hæmatopinus, Polyplax.—External.


                        MUS BRASILIENSIS Geoffr.

                 [See also  _Holochilus brasiliensis_.]


  CESTODA:

  _pisiformis_ Zeder: Cysticercus.

  NEMATODA:

  _muris brasiliensis_ Diesing: Physaloptera.
  _obvelata_ Bremser: Oxyuris.


                             MUS CAPENSIS.


  CESTODA:

  _muris capensis_: Tænia.—Intestine.

  NEMATODA:

  _contortus_ Rudolphi: Trichocephalus.—Cecum.


                             MUS CRICETUS.


  CESTODA:

  _straminea_ Gœze: Tænia.—Intestine.


     MUS DECUMANUS Pallas.—Brown or Norway Rat; German Wanderratte.


  PROTOZOA:

  ? _balfouri_: Hæmogregarina.—Blood.
  _intestinalis_ Lambl, 1859: Lamblia.—Intestine. [See duodenalis.]
  _lewisi_ Saville-Kent: Herpetomonas, Trichomonas, Trypanosoma.—Blood.
  species Siebold: Sarcocystis.—Muscles.

  TREMATODA:

  _armata_: Cercaria.
  _muris_: Distomum.
  _spiculator_ Dujardin, 1845: Distoma, Echinostoma, Distomum,
     Echinostomum.—Small intestine.

  CESTODA:

  _brachydera_ Diesing: Tænia.—Small intestine.
  _contracta_ Janicki: Hymenolepis.—Intestine.
  _crassa_ Janicki: Hymenolepis.—Intestine.
  _diminuta_ Rudolphi: Tænia, Hymenolepis.—Small intestine.
  _fasciolaris_ Rudolphi: Cysticercus.—Liver.
  _horrida_ Linstow, 1901: Tænia, Hymenolepis.—Intestine.
  _microstoma_ Dujardin: Tænia, Hymenolepis.—Small intestine.
  _murina_ Dujardin, 1845: Tænia, Hymenolepis.—Small intestine. [See
     fraterna.]
  _nana_ Siebold: Hymenolepis.—Small intestine. [See fraterna, murina.]
  _pusilla_ Gœze: Tænia, Catenotænia.—Small intestine.
  _ratti_: Tænia.—Intestine.
  _relicta_ Zschokke, 1888: Tænia, Hymenolepis.—Small intestine.
  species Janicki: Hymenolepis.
  species: Hymenolepis.—Small intestine.

  NEMATODA:

  _annulosum_ Dujardin: Trichosoma, Trichosomum, Calodium.—Duodenum,
     small intestine.
  _anulosum_ see annulosum Dujardin: Trichosoma.
  _circumflexa_ Polonio: Trichina.—Encysted in peritoneum.
  _crassicauda_ Bellingham, 1840: Trichodes, Trichosoma.—Urinary
     bladder, ureter, kidneys, intestine.
  _hepaticum_ Bauer: Trichosoma.—Liver.
  _hepaticum_ Railliet, 1891: Trichosoma.—Liver.
  _hepaticus_ Bancroft: Trichocephalus.—Liver.
  _longus_ Grassi & Segrè: Strongyloides, Rhabdonema.—Intestine.
  _minimum_ Molin: Gongylonema.
  _murina_ Leuckart: Spiroptera.—Stomach. [See obtusa.]
  _muris_ Gmelin: Filaria.—Stomach.
  _obtusa_ Rudolphi: Filaria, Spiroptera.—Stomach. [See murina.]
  _obvelata_ Bremser: Oxyuris.—Large intestine.
  _papillosum_ Polonio: Trichosoma.—Urinary bladder.
  _rhytipleuritis_ Deslongchamps: Filaria.—Stomach.
  _schmidtii_ Linstow: Trichosoma.—Urinary bladder.
  species Davaine: Filaria [embryo].—Blood.
  species: Heterakis.—Large intestine.
  species undetermined: Oxyuris.
  species Gerstæcker: Spiroptera.—Encapsuled in wall of stomach and
     intestine.
  species Bakody: Spiroptera.—Encapsuled in walls of alimentary canal
     and muscles.
  species: Spiroptera.—Encapsuled in wall of stomach and intestine.
  species Parona: Strongyloides.
  species Lutz, 1894: Strongylus.—Small intestine.
  ? species Railliet: Trichosoma.
  _spiralis_ Owen, 1835: Trichina, Trichinella.—Adult in intestine,
     larva in muscles.
  _spumosa_ Schneider: Heterakis.—Cœcum and large intestine.
  ? _tenuissimum_ Leidy, 1891: Trichosomum.—Liver. [See hepaticum.]

  ACANTHOCEPHALA:

  _moniliformis_ Bremser: Echinorhynchus, Gigantorhynchus.

  ARACHNOIDEA:

  _agilis_ Koch: Lælaps.—External [See echidninus, musculi.]
  _alepis_ Railliet & Lucet, 1893: Sarcoptes, Notoedres.—External, ears,
     genitalia.
  _complanatus_ Kramer: Gamasus.—External. [See stabularis, fenilis.]

  _decumani_ Tiraboschi: Myonyssus.
  _echidninus_ Berlese: Lælaps.—External.
  _ensifera_ Poppe: Myobia.—External.
  _fenilis_ Mègnin: Gamasus.—[See stabularis, complanatus.]
  _musculi_ Schrank: Pediculus, Myobia.—External, head.
  _musculi_ Mègnin: Hæmomyson.—External. [See echidninus, agilis.]
  _musculi_ Schrank: Myobia.—External.
  _ricinus_ Linné: Acarus, Ixodes.—External. [See rufus, sulcatus,
     sciuri.]
  _rufus_ Koch: Ixodes.—External. [See ricinus.]
  _sciuri_ Koch: Ixodes.—External. [See ricinus.]
  sp. n. Banks: Lælaps.—External.
  _stabularis_ Koch: Gamasus, Hypoaspis, Lælaps.—External. [See
     complanatus, fenilis.]
  _sulcatus_ Koch: Ixodes.—External. [See ricinus.]
  _tænioides_ Lamark (larva): Linguatula. [See serrata.]

  INSECTA:

  _acanthopus_ Denny: Hæmatopinus, Hoplopleura.—External.
  _bidentatiformis_ Wagner: Neopsylla.—External.
  _brasiliensis_ Baker: Pulex.—External.
  _canis_ Curtis: Ctenocephalus, Ceratophyllus.—External.
  _cheopis_ Roth.: Pulex, Læmopsylla.—External.
  _consimilis_ Wagner: Ceratophyllus.—External.
  _fasciatus_ Bosc: Pulex, Ceratophyllus. External.
  _felis_ Bouché: Ctenocephalus.—External.
  _irritans_ Linné: Pulex.—External.
  _lagomys_ Wagner: Ceratophyllus.—External.
  _londiniensis_ Roth.: Ceratophyllus.—External.
  _musculi_ Dugès: Ctenopsylla.—External.
  _mustelæ_ Wagner: Ceratophyllus.—External.
  _penicilliger_ Grube: Ceratophyllus.—External.
  _philippinensis_ Herzog: Pulex.—External.
  _serraticeps_ Gervais: Pulex.—External.
  _spinulosus_ Burmeister: Hæmatopinus, Polyplax.—External.


                 MUS DECUMANUS × MUS NORVEGICUS ALBUS.


  PROTOZOA:

  undetermined.—Small intestine.

  CESTODA:

  _fasciolaris_: Cysticercus.—Liver.
  species: Hymenolepis.—Intestine.

  NEMATODA:

  _spiralis_ Owen: Trichinella.—Artificial infection.


                  MUS DOMESTICUS = MUS MUSCULUS ALBUS.


  ARACHNOIDEA:

  _crotali_ Humboldt (larva): Porocephalus.—Encysted in various organs,
     experimental.


                            MUS FERCULINUS.


  INSECTA:

  _thomasi_ Rothschild: Stephanocircus.—External.


                             MUS FLAVIDUS.


  CESTODA:

  ? _gracilis_ Janicki: Davainea.—Intestine.


                            MUS FULIGINOSUS.


  ARACHNOIDEA:

  _crotali_ Humboldt: Porocephalus.—Encysted in various organs.


                        MUS FURCIROSTRIS Wagner.


  ACANTHOCEPHALA:

  _moniliformis_ Bremser: Echinorhynchus.—Intestine.


                             MUS GENTILIS.


  INSECTA:

  _cheopis_ Rothschild: Pulex.—External.


                              MUS LEMMUS.


  CESTODA:

  _lemmi_: Tænia.—Intestine. [See muris lemmi.]
  _muris lemmi_: Tænia.—Intestine. [See lemmi.]


                              MUS MEYERI.


  CESTODA:

  _celebensis_ Janicki, 1902: Davainea.—Intestine.


                           MUS MINIMUS Ptrs.


  NEMATODA:

  species Linstow, 1901: Spiroptera.—Stomach.


                 MUS MINUTUS Pallas.—German Zwergmaus.


  NEMATODA:

  _obvelata_ Bremser: Oxyuris.—Cecum.
  _oxyura_ Nitzsch, 1821: Ascaris.—[See obvelata.]


                           MUS MUSCHENBROCKI.


  CESTODA:

  _polycalceola_ Janicki: Davainea.—Intestine.


               MUS MUSCULUS[AC] Linné, 1758.—House Mouse.

Footnote AC:

  In laboratory experiments the white mouse is used more than the
  ordinary form, but the host is frequently reported simply as “the
  mouse.”


  ——:

  _Dubium_ Rudolphi, 1819.—Inguinal gland.

  PROTOZOA:

  _brucei_: Trypanosoma, Trypanozoon.—Blood, artificial infection.
  _dimorphon_: Trypanosoma, Trypanozoon.—Blood.
  _duttoni_ Thiroux, 1905: Trypanosoma, Trypanozoon.—Blood.
  _equinum_: Trypanosoma, Trypanozoon.—Blood, artificial infection.
  _equiperdum_: Trypanosoma, Trypanozoon.—Blood, artificial infection.
  _evansi_: Trypansoma, Trypanozoon.—Blood, artificial infection.
  _falciforme_ Schneider: Coccidium, Eimeria.—Intestine.
  flagellate, something like Herpetomonas bütschlii.
  _gambiense_: Trypanosoma, Trypanozoon.—Blood, artificial infection.
  _intestinalis_ Lambl, 1859: Lamblia, Megastoma.—Intestine. [See
     duodenalis, muris.]
  _muris_ Grassi: Amœba.
  _muris_ Bensen, 1908: Lamblia.—Intestine. [See intestinalis.]
  _muris_ Schuberg: Coccidium.—Intestine.
  _muris_ Smith & Johnson, 1902a: Klossiella.—Renal epithelium.

  _muris_ Balfour: Leucocytozoon.—Blood.
  _muris_ R. Blanchard: Miescheria, Sarcocystis.—Striated muscle.
  _musculi_ Kendall: Trypanosoma.—Blood.
  _schubergi_ Labbé: Pfeifferella.—Intestine.
  species Th. Smith: Eimeria.—Kidney.
  species J. J. Clarke: Pfeifferella.—Intestine.
  species Miescher: Sarcocystis.—Muscles.
  _stercorea_ Cienkowski: Chlamydophrys.—Intestine.

  TREMATODA:

  _armata_: Cercaria.
  _muris_ Ercolani, 1882: Distomum.
  _musculi_ Rudolphi, 1819: Distoma, Distomum.—Intestine.
  _recurvum_ Dujardin, 1845: Distoma, Distomum.—Intestine.

  CESTODA:

  _canis lagopodis_ Viborg: Tænia.—Intestine. [See lineata.]
  _contracta_ Janicki: Hymenolepis.—Intestine.
  _crassa_ Janicki, 1904: Hymenolepis.—Intestine.
  _diminuta_ Rudolphi: Tænia, Hymenolepis.—Intestine.
  _echinococcus._ [See Devé, 1904, October 28; 264.]
  _fasciolaris_ Rudolphi, 1819: Cysticercus.—Liver.
  _imbricata_ Diesing: Tænia.—Small intestine.
  _leptocephala_ Creplin, 1849: Tænia.—Small intestine.
  _lineata_ Gœze: Tænia, Mesocestoides, Ptychophysa. [See canis
     lagopodis.]
  _microstoma_ Dujardin, 1845: Tænia.—Intestine.
  _murina_ Dujardin, 1845: Tænia, Hymenolepis.—Intestine. [See
     fraterna.]
  _muris capensis_: Tænia.
  _muris hepatica_ Rœderer, 1762: Fasciola.—Liver. [See fasciolaris.]
  _musculi_ Rudolphi, 1810: Tænia.—Abdominal cavity.
  _pisiformis_ Zeder: Cysticercus.—Liver.
  _pusilla_ Gœze, 1782: Tænia.—Intestine.
  species Janicki: Hymenolepis.—Intestine.
  species Merrem, 1781: Fasciola.—Liver. [See fasciolaris.]
  _tenella_ Pallas, 1781 pars: Tænia.—Abdominal cavity. [See musculi.]
  _umbonata_ Molin, 1858: Tænia.—Intestine.

  NEMATODA:

  _bacillatum_ Eberth: Trichosoma.—Esophagus.
  _hepaticum_ Railliet, 1889: Trichosoma.—Liver.
  _minimum_ Molin: Gongylonema.—On stomach, liver.
  _muris_ Gmelin: Filaria.
  _muris_ Werner: Lumbricus, Ascaris, Fusaria. [See obtusa Frœlich.]
  _muris musculi_ Creplin, 1849: Trichosoma.—Large intestine.
  _musculi_ Rudolphi: Filaria, Gongylonema.—Abdomen.
  _nodosus_ Rudolphi: Trichocephalus.—Intestine, cecum.
  _oxyura_ Nitzsch, 1821: Ascaris.—[See obvelata.]
  _obvelata_ Rudolphi: Oxyuris.—Cecum.
  _obtusa_ Rudolphi: Filaria, Spiroptera.—Stomach.
  _obtusa_ Frœlich, 1791: Ascaris.—Stomach. [See muris Werner.]
  _quadrialata_ Molin: Spiroptera.—Stomach.
  _semilanceolata_ Molin, 1858: Oxyuris.—Cecum. [See tetraptera.]
  _spiralis_ Owen, 1835: Trichina, Trichinella.—Adult in intestine,
     larva in muscles.
  _tetraptera_ Nitzsch: Oxyuris.—Cecum. [See semilanceolata.]
  _tricuspis_ Leuckart: Ollulanus.—Muscles.

  ACANTHOCEPHALA:

  _muris_ Zeder: Echinorhynchus.—Stomach.

  ARACHNOIDEA:

  _coarctata_ Heyden: Myobia.—External. [See musculi Schrank.]
  _musculi_ Oudemans: Demodex.—Hair follicles. [See folliculorum
     musculi.]
  _musculi_ Schrank: Pediculus, Myobia.—External, head.
  _musculinus_ Galli-Valerio: Myocoptes.—External.
  _simplex_ Tyrrell: Psorergates.—External.

  INSECTA:

  _acanthopus_ Burmeister, 1838: Hoplopleura, Hæmatopinus.—External.
  _agyrtes_ Heller: Typhlopsylla.—External.
  _assimilis_ Taschenberg: Typhlopsylla.—External.
  _charlottensis_ Baker: Odontopsyllus.—External.
  _fasciatus_ Bosc: Ceratophyllus.—External.
  _italicus_ Tiraboschi: Ceratophyllus.—External.
  _londiniensis_ Roth.: Ceratophyllus.—External.
  _musculi_ Dugès: Ctenopsyllus, Ctenopsylla, Typhlopsylla.—External.
  _serratus_ Burm., 1838: Hæmatopinus.—External.
  _serraticeps_ Taschenberg: Ctenocephalus.—External.
  larva of a dipteron, gen. sp.?
  _taschenbergi_ Wagner: Ctenopsyllus.—External.
  _tripectinata_ Tiraboschi: Hystrichopsylla.—External.
  _walkeri_ Roth.: Ceratophyllus.—External.


                    MUS MUSCULUS ALBUS.—White Mice.


  CESTODA:

  _fasciolaris_ Rudolphi: Cysticercus.—Liver.

  ARACHNOIDEA:

  _crotali_ Humboldt (larva): Porocephalus.—Encysted in various organs.
  _proboscideum_: Pentastomum. [See crotali.]


                              MUS NAVALIS.


  NEMATODA:

  _labiodentata_ Linstow: Spiroptera.—Intestine.


                    MUS NORVEGICUS Erxl.—Norway Rat.

                      [See also  _Mus decumanus_.]


  PROTOZOA:

  _lewisi_: Trypanosoma, Trypanozoon.—Blood.

  INSECTA:

  _bidentatiformis_ Wagner: Ctenophthalmus.—External.
  _brasiliensis_ Baker: Pulex.—External.
  _fasciatus_ Bosc: Ceratophyllus.—External.
  _italicus_ Tiraboschi: Ceratophyllus.—External.
  _murinus_ Tiraboschi: Pulex.—External.
  _musculi_ Dugès: Ctenopsyllus.—External.


                   MUS [NORVEGICUS] ALBUS.—White Rat.


  PROTOZOA:

  _muris_ Fantham: Piroplasma.—Blood.
  _perniciosum_ Miller: Hepatozoon.—Liver, blood.

  CESTODA:

  _fasciolaris_ Rudolphi: Cysticercus.—Liver.

  NEMATODA:

  _hepaticum_: Trichosoma.—Liver.
  _spiralis_ Owen, 1835: Trichinella.—Adult in intestine, larva in
     muscle.

  ARACHNOIDEA:

  _ensifera_ Poppe: Myobia.


                  MUS PUMILIS Dujardin.—Little Mouse.


  CESTODA:

  _murina_ Dujardin, 1845: Tænia, Hymenolepis.—Intestine. [See
     fraterna.]


                       MUS PYRRHORHINUS Neuwied.

                 [See also  _Hesperomys pyrrhorhinus_.]


  CESTODA:

  _diminuta_: Tænia.—Intestine.

  ARACHNOIDEA:

  _crotali_ Humboldt: Porocephalus.—Encysted in various organs.
  _subcylindricum_: Pentastomum.—Liver.


                               MUS RAJAH.


  CESTODA:

  _blanchardi_ Parona: Davainea.


                  MUS RATTUS Linné.—German Hausratte.


  PROTOZOA:

  “amibes.”
  _intestinalis_ Lambl, 1859: Lamblia.—Intestine. [See duodenalis,
     muris.]
  _lewisi_ Saville-Kent, 1880: Trypanosoma.—Blood.
  species Siebold: Sarcocystis.—Muscles.

  TREMATODA:

  _spiculator_: Distomum.

  CESTODA:

  _cellulosæ_ Rudolphi: Cysticercus.—Peritoneum.
  _diminuta_ Rudolphi, 1819: Tænia, Hymenolepis.—Small intestine.
  _fasciolaris_ Rudolphi: Cysticercus.—Liver.
  _microstoma_ Dujardin: Tænia, Hymenolepis.—Small intestine.
  _minima_: Tænia. [See diminuta.]
  _murina_ Dujardin, 1845: Tænia, Hymenolepis.—Small intestine. [See
     fraterna.]
  _pusilla_ Gœze, 1782: Tænia, Catenotænia.—Small intestine.
  _ratti_ Rudolphi: Tænia.—Small intestine.
  _ratticola_ Linstow: Bothriocephalus.—Liver.
  species Eber: Tænia.—Intestine.
  _umbonata_ Molin: Tænia.—Intestine.
  _varesina_ Parona: Tænia.—[See diminuta.]

  NEMATODA:

  _annulosum_ Dujardin: Trichosoma, Calodium.—Intestine.
  _anulosum_: Trichosoma. [See annulosum.]
  _brauni_ Linstow: Spiroptera.
  _circularis_ Linstow: Physaloptera.—Stomach.
  _circumflexa_ Polonio: Trichina.—Encysted in peritoneum.
  _nodosus_ Rudolphi: Trichocephalus.—Cecum.
  _obvelata_ Bremser: Oxyuris.—Cecum.
  _oxyura_ Nitzsch, 1821: Ascaris. [See obvelata.]
  _ratti_ Diesing: Spiroptera.—Urinary bladder.
  _rhytipleuritis_ Deslongchamps: Filaria.—Stomach.
  species Gerstæcker: Spiroptera.—Wall of stomach and intestine.
  species Bakody: Spiroptera.—Encapsuled in wall of intestine, muscles.
  _spumosa_ Schneider: Heterakis.—Cecum, colon.

  ACANTHOCEPHALA:

  _moniliformis_ Bremser: Echinorhynchus, Gigantorhynchus.—Intestine.

  ARACHNOIDEA:

  _ægyptium_ Linné: Acarus, Ixodes, Hyalomma.—External. [See
     marginatum.]
  _agilis_ Koch: Lælaps.—External. [See echidninus, musculi.]
  _alepis_ Railliet & Lucet, 1893; Sarcoptes, Notoedres.—External, ears,
     genitalia.
  _echidninus_ Berlese: Lælaps.—External. [See agilis, musculi.]
  _marginatum_ Koch: Hyalomma.—External. [See ægyptium.]
  _muris_ Can., 1894: Notoedres.—External. [See alepis.]
  _musculi_ Mègnin: Hæmomyson.—External. [See agilis, echidninus.]
  _serratum_: Pentastomum.—Thoracic cavity.

  INSECTA:

  _brasiliensis_ Baker: Pulex.—External. [See cheopis.]
  _cæcata_ Enderlein: Dermatophilus, Rhynchoprion.—External.
  _cheopis_ Rothschild, 1903: Lœmopsylla.—External. [See brasiliensis,
     murinus, pallidus, philippinensis.]
  _fasciatus_: Ceratophyllus.—External.
  _gallinacea_ Westwood: Echidnophaga, Argopsylla.—External.
  _irritans_ Linné: Pulex.—External.
  _italicus_ Tiraboschi: Ceratophyllus. External.
  _londiniensis_ Rothschild: Ceratophyllus.—External.
  _mexicanus_ Baker: Ctenopsyllus.—External.
  _murinus_ Tirab.: Pulex.—External. [See cheopis, pallidus,
     brasiliensis, philippinensis.]
  _musculi_ Dugès: Ctenopysllus.—External.
  _pallidus_ Taschenberg: Pulex.—External. [See brasiliensis, cheopis,
     murinus, philippinensis.]
  _philippinensis_ Herzog: Pulex.—External. [See brasiliensis, cheopis,
     murinus, pallidus.]
  _rhynchopsylla_ Tiraboschi: Echidnophaga.—External.


                        MUS RATTUS ALEXANDRINUS.

                    [See also  _Mus Alexandrinus_.]


  INSECTA:

  _brasiliensis_ Baker: Pulex.—External.
  _cæcata_ End: Dermatophilus.—External.
  _canis_ Curtis: Ctenocephalus.—External.
  _cheopis_ Roth.: Pulex.—External.
  _fasciatus_ Bosc: Ceratophyllus.—External.
  _felis_ Bouché: Ctenocephalus.—External.
  _gallinacea_ Westwood: Echidnophaga.—External.
  _irritans_ Linné: Pulex.—External.
  _londiniensis_ Roth.: Ceratophyllus.—External.
  _murinus_ Tiraboschi: Pulex.—External.
  _musculi_ Dugès: Ctenopsylla.—External.
  _philippinensis_ Herzog: Pulex.—External.
  _rhynchopsylla_ Tiraboschi: Echidnophaga, Argopsylla.—External.


                          MUS RUFESCENS Gray.


  PROTOZOA:

  _lewisi_ Saville-Kent, 1880: Trypanosoma, Trypanozoon.—Blood.


                             MUS SIPORANUS.


  CESTODA:

  _blanchardi_ Parona: Davainea.—Intestine.


                              MUS SURIFER.


  NEMATODA:

  _muricola_: Spiroptera.—Subcutaneous.


                 MUS SYLVATICUS Linné.—German Waldmaus.


  TREMATODA:

  _recurvum_ Dujardin, 1845: Distoma, Distomum, D.
     (Brachylaimus).—Intestine.
  _vitta_ Dujardin, 1845: Distoma, Distomum, D.
     (Brachylaimus).—Intestine.

  CESTODA:

  _muris sylvatici_ Rudolphi: Tænia.—Intestine.
  _pusilla_ Gœze: Tænia.—Intestine.

  NEMATODA:

  _cristatum_ Rudolphi: Ophiostomum, Rictularia.—Intestine.
  _lævis_ Dujardin: Strongylus, Metastrongylus.—Intestine.
  _minutus_ Dujardin: Strongylus, Metastrongylus.—Intestine.
  _muris sylvatici_ Dujardin: Trichosoma.—Intestine.
  _nodosus_ Rudolphi: Trichocephalus.—Intestine, cecum.
  _obtusa_ Rudolphi: Spiroptera.
  _obvelata_ Bremser: Oxyuris.—Cecum.
  _oxyura_ Nitzsch, 1821: Ascaris. [See obvelata.]
  _polygyrus_ Dujardin: Strongylus, Metastrongylus.—Intestine.
  _spirogyrus_ Leuckart: Strongylus.—Intestine.
  _stroma_ Linstow, 1884: Oxyuris.—Intestine.
  _tetraptera_ Nitzsch: Oxyuris.—Intestine.

  ARACHNOIDEA:

  _simplex_ Tyrell: Psorergates.—Skin.

  INSECTA:

  _agyrtes_ Heller: Ctenophthalmus, Typhlopsylla.—External.
  _assimilis_ Taschenberg: Typhlopsylla.—External.
  _fasciatus_ Bosc: Ceratophyllus.—External.
  _gallinæ_ Schrank: Ceratophyllus.—External.
  _italicus_ Tiraboschi: Ceratophyllus.—External.
  _londiniensis_ Rothschild: Ceratophyllus.—External.
  _musculi_ Dugès: Ctenopsyllus, Ctenopsylla.—External.
  _obtusiceps_ Ritsema: Hystrichopsylla.—External.
  _pentacanthus_ Rothschild: Neopsylla, Ctenophthalmus.—External.
  _poppei_ Wagner: Typhloceras, Typhlocerus.—External.
  _proxima_ Wagner: Typhlopsylla, Ctenopthalmus.—External.
  _talpæ_ Curtis: Hystrichopsylla.—External.
  _taschenbergi_ Wagner: Ctenopsylla.—External.


                            MUS SYLVESTRIS.


  PROTOZOA:

  _intestinalis_ Lambl, 1859: Lamblia.—Intestine. [See muris.]


                           MUS TECTORUM Sari.


  CESTODA:

  _fasciolaris_: Cysticercus.—Liver.


                            MUS VARIEGATUS.


  CESTODA:

  _muris variegati_ Janicki: Hymenolepis.—Intestine.
  _trapezoides_ Janicki: Davainea.—Intestine.


                      MUS VELUTINUS Balser, 1905.


  INSECTA:

  _dasyuri_ Skuse: Stephanocircus.—External.
  _hercules_ Roth.: Macropsylla.—External.
  _simpsoni_ Rothschild: Stephanocircus.—External.
  _simsoni_. [See simpsoni.]


                      MUS in the sense of “rats.”

The following parasites are reported either from “rats” or from “_Mus_”
in the sense of “rats:”


  PROTOZOA:

  _brucei_: Trypanosoma, Trypanozoon.—Blood.
  _dimorphon_: Trypanosoma, Trypanozoon.—Blood.
  _equiperdum_: Trypanosoma, Trypanozoon.—Blood.
  _evansi_: Trypanosoma, Trypanozoon.—Blood.
  _evansii_: Trypanosoma. [See evansi.]
  _gambiense_: Trypanosoma, Trypanozoon.—Blood, artificial infection.
  _intestinale_ R. Blanchard, 1885: Megastoma.—Intestine. [See muris.]
  _muris_ Grassi: Amœba.

  CESTODA:

  _fasciolaris_: Cysticercus.

  NEMATODA:

  _hepaticum_ Railliet, 1889: Trichosoma.—Liver.
  _hepaticus_: Trichocephalus.
  species Davaine: Filaria.—Blood.

  GORDIACEA:

  _Gordius._ By error Cerruti & Camerano (1888b, 6) have interpreted a
     title by
  Leidy (1879) as meaning that he found _Gordius_ in a rat.

  ARACHNOIDEA:

  _sanguineus_ Latreille: Rhipicephalus.—External.

  INSECTA:

  _capitis_ Nitzsch: Pediculus.—External.
  _canis_ Curtis: Ctenocephalus.—External.
  _præcisus_: Hæmatopinus.—External.


                              MUS species.

  Under various “_Mus_ sp.” entries, the following parasites are
  reported:


    PROTOZOA:

    _gambiense_: Trypanosoma.—Blood, artificial injection.

    INSECTA:

    _aganippes_ Roth.: Ctenopsylla.—External.
    _agyrtes_ Heller: Typhlopsylla.—External.
    _colossus_ Roth.: Pygiopsylla.—External.
    _ellobius_ Roth.: Ctenopsylla.—External.
    _hercules_ Roth.: Macropsylla.—External.
    _miacantha_: Polyplax.—Hair.
    _pinnatus_ Wagn.: Ceratophyllus.—External.
    _præcisus_ Neum., 1902: Hæmatopinus.—External.


                               WATER RAT.

                       [See also _Mus amphibius_.]


    CESTODA:

    _longicollis_: Cysticercus.—Axillary space.

    INSECTA:

    _spiniger_ Burm., 1838: Hæmatopinus.


                                  MUS.

  The following parasites are recorded under “_Mus._:”


    PROTOZOA:

    _falciformis_: Eimeria.—Intestine.

    TREMATODA:

    _migrans_: Dist.

    CESTODA:

    _blanchardi_ Parona: Davainea.
    _celebensis_ Janicki: Davainea.
    _gracilis_ Janicki: Davainea.
    _muris variegati_ Janicki: Hymenolepis.
    _nana_ Siebold: Hymenolepis. [See fraterna.]
    _polycalceola_ Janicki: Davainea.
    _relicta_ Zschokke: Hymenolepis.
    _trapezoides_ Janicki: Davainea.

    NEMATODA:

    _hepaticum_ Railliet: Trichosoma.
    _obvelata_ Bremser: Oxyuris.—Intestine.

    ARACHNOIDEA:

    _musculi_ Oudemans: Demodex.

    INSECTA:

    _cheopis_ Roth.: Lœmopsylla.—External.
    _felis_ Bouché: Ctenocephalus.


                          MUS.—A Field Mouse.


    CESTODA:

    _longicollis_: Cysticercus.—Thoracic cavity.




                  THE FLEA AND ITS RELATION TO PLAGUE.

                 By Passed Assistant Surgeon CARROLL FOX,

        _United States Public Health and Marine-Hospital Service_.


                 THEORIES AS TO TRANSMISSION OF PLAGUE.

  1. Direct contagion from man to man.

  2. Through slight abrasions of the skin, mucous membranes of mouth,
  tonsils, nose, and conjunctiva receiving contaminated material.

  3. Through the respiratory tract, from air contaminated with dried
  infectious sputum or dejecta. (Possibly the cause of primary pneumonic
  plague.)

  4. Through the alimentary tract from food contaminated with saliva or
  excretions from plague patients, or dejecta or the feet of insects
  that have fed on plague material. In the case of rats, from eating the
  carcasses of infected rats.

  5. Infected clothes, soil, or houses.

  6. Through the bites of insects, especially the flea.

  It has been noticed for many years that an epidemic of plague in man
  was associated with an epizootic of high mortality among rats, but it
  was not until Yersin discovered the _Bacillus pestis_ in 1894 that the
  disease in man and rats was shown to be identical. The first five
  theories are not satisfactory in explaining the epidemiology of
  plague, and in 1897 Simond advanced the theory that plague was carried
  by means of fleas. Hankin in 1898 also suggested an insect as an
  intermediate host. This theory has been developed by Ashburton
  Thompson, Gauthier and Raybaud, Liston, Verjbitski, and others, and
  finally by the last Indian Plague Commission, whose work makes a
  distinct advance in our knowledge of this subject. The reader is
  referred to the work of this commission for a review of the subject,
  which has been liberally used in the preparation of this paper.[AD]

Footnote AD:

    Journal of Hygiene (Vol. VI, No. 4; Vol. VII, No. 3; Vol. VII, No.
    6; Vol. VIII, No. 2).


    INSECTS THAT HAVE BEEN SUSPECTED IN THE TRANSMISSION OF PLAGUE.

  It is probable that all insects capable of sucking blood will take the
  _Bacillus pestis_ into their alimentary canal if they feed on a
  septicæmic plague animal. Ogata suggested that not only the flea but
  the mosquito also may be responsible for the transmission of plague.
  Yersin, Hankin, and Nuttall have each demonstrated the presence of
  _Bacillus pestis_ in the dejecta of flies and ants; and Nuttall and
  Verjbitski in the stomach and dejecta of the bedbug. Hertzog found the
  bacilli in the _Pediculus capitis_ taken from a child which died of
  plague, and McCoy[201] has found the organism in lice, _Hæmatopinus
  columbianus_, taken from a plague-infected squirrel. The plague
  bacilli have been frequently demonstrated in rat fleas taken from
  plague rats, and McCoy has shown its presence in the flea
  (_Ceratophyllus acutus_) of the California ground squirrel (_Citellus
  beecheyi_). The cockroach has also been thought to be instrumental in
  spreading the infection by contaminating food. The presence of bacilli
  in the stomach and dejecta of insects has not only been proven
  microscopically but by animal inoculation as well.

  Assuming that the relation between rat plague and human plague has
  been proven without a doubt—that is, that an outbreak of human plague
  is associated with an infection in rats, or, in other words, that
  plague is primarily a disease of rats and secondarily a disease of
  man—the theory that it is conveyed through an intermediate parasitic
  host is the only one which will fulfill all the requirements, and
  after a study of their habits we are able to exclude all of the
  parasites but the flea as the active agent in its transmission.

  Plague is rarely or never contracted either in rat or in man by eating
  contaminated food. Therefore those insects like flies and cockroaches,
  which are supposed to spread the infection by contaminating food with
  their dejecta, need not be considered.

  The habits of the domestic mosquitoes are such that while they
  occasionally do bite animals they usually feed on the blood of man,
  and are not known to feed where there is much hair, as there is on the
  rat. This also applies to the bedbug. Verjbitski has shown
  experimentally that bedbugs would not feed on rats until the animals
  were shaved.

  Pediculi are degenerate insects, their powers of locomotion being
  limited. Their eggs are laid on and are attached to the hair of the
  host. They are born, live, and die on the same host, and rarely pass
  from one animal to another of a different species. It can not be
  denied, however, that this parasite occasionally may be instrumental
  in spreading plague from rat to rat. The _Pediculus capitis_, if
  placed on a rat, will feed with avidity, but these insects are rarely
  found upon rats in nature.

  We have no record of plague bacilli having been demonstrated in mites
  commonly found on rats, but no doubt if search be made they could be
  found after feeding on a septicæmic plague rat. These mites, however,
  always confine themselves closely to their particular host and are not
  known to bite man. The tiny itch mite (_Notoedres alepis_, Railliet
  and Lucet) producing rat scabies has, according to Schumann,[202] been
  known to cause a cutaneous lesion in man, but this mite need not be
  considered from a plague standpoint.

  The flea, on the other hand, lives but part of the time on its host,
  its eggs developing in the nests or runs of the animal. Again, this
  insect does not confine itself to one particular species of host only,
  as frequently the flea of one animal is found on an animal of an
  entirely different species. Unlike the lice, they are very active and
  can readily move from place to place. Not only that, but it has been
  frequently demonstrated that the fleas of rats and of other animals
  would readily take to man, especially if their natural host was
  scarce. That rat fleas will bite man has been demonstrated by Gauthier
  and Raybaud, working with the _Leomopsylla cheopis_; Tidswell,
  _Lœmopsylla cheopis_ and _Ceratophyllus fasciatus_; Liston,
  _Lœmopsylla cheopis_; Tiraboschi, _Lœmopsylla cheopis_; Indian Plague
  Commission, _Lœmopsylla cheopis_; and McCoy and Mitzmain[203],
  _Lœmopsylla cheopis_, _Ceratophyllus fasciatus_, and _Ctenopsyllus
  musculi_. It has generally been considered that the _Ctenopsyllus
  musculi_, above all others, would not bite man, but the last-named
  observers showed that it would occasionally feed, although it would
  not live long, in captivity. One of the fleas, a _Ceratophyllus
  fasciatus_, was kept alive by Mitzmain for over four months on man’s
  blood alone.


          EXPERIMENTS PROVING THAT FLEAS CAN TRANSMIT PLAGUE.

  By a series of experiments carried out in specially constructed cages
  and go-downs where healthy rats in the absence of fleas were brought
  in contact with plague-infected rats, the Indian Plague Commission
  showed that the healthy rats would not contract the disease,
  notwithstanding the fact that they were not only in intimate contact
  with the sick rats, but also with the contaminated food and excreta of
  the sick rats. They then showed that if fleas were introduced the
  healthy rats would contract plague, the rate of progress of the
  epizootic being in direct proportion to the number of fleas present.
  By hanging cages containing healthy rats in cages holding infected
  rats, but above the jumping distance of a flea, it was shown that the
  healthy rats would remain well, while those in cages hung within 2
  inches from the ground would contract plague. Thus they excluded
  aerial infection. They also found that if fleas were excluded young
  rats could suckle a plague-infected mother without contracting the
  disease.

  Guinea pigs were allowed to run in houses where cases of human and of
  rat plague were known to have occurred and where many fleas were
  present. These rodents served as good traps for the fleas and 29 per
  cent of them contracted plague.

  Most of the experiments of the Indian Plague Commission were done with
  the Indian rat flea, the _Lœmopsylla cheopis_, but they also performed
  27 experiments with the cat flea, _Ctenocephalus felis_, with negative
  results; 35 experiments with the human flea, _Pulex irritans_, 3 of
  which were successful; and 2 experiments with the _Ceratophyllus
  fasciatus_, the common rat flea of Europe and North America, both of
  which were successful.

  In San Francisco a few experiments under purely experimental
  conditions have been carried on by McCoy to determine the ability of
  the squirrel flea, the _Ceratophyllus acutus_, to transmit plague.
  Fleas that had been previously fed on the blood of a septicæmic
  plague-infected squirrel were then allowed to feed from test tubes on
  healthy guinea pigs. While the feces of some of these fleas up to four
  days, when inoculated into guinea pigs, were proven to be infective,
  none of those guinea pigs on which the fleas were allowed to feed
  contracted plague. It might be said, however, that in no case were
  they seen to eject feces while feeding, the significance of which will
  be apparent later.


                       THE BACILLUS IN THE FLEA.

  The Indian Plague Commission found that the average capacity of the
  rat flea’s stomach (_Leomopsylla cheopis_) was 0.5 cubic millimeter,
  and that it might receive as many as 5,000 germs while imbibing blood
  from a plague rat. They further found that the bacillus would multiply
  in the stomach of a flea and that the percentage of fleas with bacilli
  in the stomach varied with the season of the year. In the epidemic
  season the percentage was greatest for the first four days, and on one
  occasion the stomach was found filled with _Bacillus pestis_ on the
  twentieth day. In the nonepidemic season no plague bacilli were found
  in the stomach after the seventh day. They also found that in the
  epidemic season fleas might remain infective up to fifteen days, while
  in the nonepidemic season but seven days, and in the latter case the
  percentage of infection in animals was much less than in the epidemic
  season. They showed that while one flea was occasionally able to carry
  the infection this was not usual. It was found that both the males and
  the females were capable of transmitting the disease.

  After a number of dissections they were unable to demonstrate the
  presence of bacilli anywhere but in the stomach and rectum. At no time
  was anything found in the body cavity or salivary glands and but
  rarely in the œsophagus, and then only when the flea was killed
  immediately after feeding.

  We have in San Francisco examined quite a number of serial sections of
  plague-infected fleas with the same result as obtained by the Indian
  Plague Commission. The bacilli are readily demonstrated, sometimes in
  enormous numbers, in the gizzard, stomach, and in the rectum, but at
  no time have they been found in the body cavity, the salivary glands,
  or the ovary. In fact, as we are dealing with a vegetable organism and
  not an animal organism, like the _Plasmodium malariæ_, we could hardly
  expect to find any biologic change, except simple multiplication,
  occurring in the intermediate host.


                 HOW THE FLEA CLEARS ITSELF OF BACILLI.

  Some explanation is necessary as to why the bacilli eventually
  disappear from the flea, although they seem to multiply during the
  first few days. It is evident that the peristaltic action of the
  stomach during the course of digestion forcing the blood at the proper
  time into the rectum, finally to be ejected from the body, would in
  itself cause many bacilli to be discharged, but naturally a few would
  remain to multiply indefinitely. The bacteriacidal action of the blood
  is soon lost after entering the flea’s stomach, but it has been shown
  by proper staining that the leucocytes after the first feeding with
  healthy blood contain numbers of _Bacillus pestis_, and it seems
  probable that this phagocytic action is important in the cleansing
  process. It has been shown that after successive feedings on the blood
  of noninfected animals the power of phagocytosis is increased, and
  that successive feedings on the fresh blood of animals that have been
  immunized against plague still further assists and hastens the
  process. When there is a frequent introduction of fresh normal or
  immunized blood its bactericidal action is also instrumental in the
  cleansing process.


                REGIONAL DISTRIBUTION OF FLEAS ON RATS.

  The location of the primary bubo in a case of plague, human or rodent,
  depends upon the site of inoculation, for that group of glands will
  first enlarge which has direct lymphatic connection with the area
  through which the _Bacillus pestis_ enters the animal organism. The
  British Indian Plague Commission found that 72 per cent of their
  naturally infected rats and 61 per cent of the rats experimentally
  infected by fleas had cervical buboes, while in no instance in over
  5,000 plague rats was a mesenteric bubo encountered. On the other
  hand, where plague was induced through feeding healthy rats with the
  carcasses of plague rats a mesenteric bubo was found in 74.5 per cent
  of those infected and a cervical bubo in 36 per cent. In San Francisco
  in naturally infected rats a primary mesenteric bubo has never been
  seen, and a cervical bubo has been seen but once. These figures show
  conclusively that naturally infected rats are not infected by feeding.
  It is curious, as has been pointed out by McCoy[204], that such a
  large percentage of cervical buboes should be found in India, while a
  cervical bubo has been seen but once in naturally infected animals in
  San Francisco. Here the axillary and inguinal buboes are the rule. The
  Indian Commission found that the commonest situation to find fleas on
  guinea pigs was the head and neck. They combed 53 guinea pigs to
  determine the regional distribution of fleas, and found that 65.3 per
  cent were taken from the neck and head. This would account for the
  preponderance of cervical buboes in guinea pigs observed in their
  work, and inferentially for the preponderance of cervical buboes found
  in naturally infected rats. Thinking that the predominating rat flea
  in San Francisco, the _Ceratophyllus fasciatus_, might be the carrier
  of the infection and that it might prefer a different part of the body
  than the _Lœmopsylla cheopis_, McCoy and Mitzmain carried on a series
  of investigations to determine the regional distribution of fleas on
  the rat’s body, but this has shown that while the _Ctenopsyllus
  musculi_ seems to be generally confined to the head and neck, the
  _Ceratophyllus fasciatus_ and _Lœmopsylla cheopis_ are almost
  invariably taken from the body, especially from the pelvic region.


       ANATOMY OF THE MOUTH PARTS OF THE CERATOPHYLLUS FASCIATUS.

  The following description differs somewhat from that given by
  Wagner[205] and the description found in the Journal of Hygiene, both
  of which, however, refer to different species of Siphonaptera.

  The mouth parts may be divided into those inside and those outside of
  the head.


                           OUTSIDE THE HEAD.

  The epipharynx, or pricker, is a long, slender, hollow organ. Its
  cavity is closed distally, and proximally connects with the hoemocoel.
  It is made up of a dorsal and a ventral portion. Its dorsal portion
  ends just within the head. Its ventral portion is grooved and is
  continuous with the posterior wall of the aspiratory pharynx. Its
  distal extremity is slightly expanded, forming a stylet for piercing,
  while the little papillæ seen along the anterior surface in many
  species are absent in this one. Laterally there is a membranous
  expansion which interlocks with a similar expansion on the mandibles,
  forming a tube, through which the blood is sucked.

  The mandibles are two in number, articulating just within the head, so
  that they are capable, of independent movement. They are serrated at
  their distal extremities. Above, within the head, the anterior portion
  of the mandibles ends just behind the beginning of the hypopharynx, to
  which it is connected, becoming practically continuous with that
  organ. The posterior portion is attached to its basal element. Each
  mandible contains a groove, forming practically a closed canal, which
  becomes continuous with the exit duct of the salivary pump.

  The rostrum (labial palpi) forms a protection and guide to the
  mandibles and epipharynx. Its first portion is unpaired and
  articulates within the head, with its basal element. At the apex of
  its first portion it bifurcates, forming a paired organ, which is
  divided into a varying number of pseudojoints, depending on the
  species of the flea. As it is a chitinous structure, these
  pseudojoints, areas in which there is little chitin, enable it to
  double up as the mandibles and epipharynx are inserted into the skin.
  At the apex of the rostrum are some tactile hairs.

  The maxillæ are triangular chitinous plates situated on either side of
  that portion of the head where the biting organs emerge. These
  structures serve to protect the origin of the epipharynx and
  mandibles, rest upon the cutaneous surface in the act of biting,
  thereby steadying the head and serving as a fulcrum when the flea
  withdraws its biting apparatus when through feeding. The maxillæ have
  their palpi, which are four jointed, paired organs coming out at the
  anterior lower angle of the head. Their function is sensory.


                            INSIDE THE HEAD.

  The hypopharynx is a chitinous plate forming part of the floor of the
  aspiratory canal. To its under surface are attached the muscles which
  operate the salivary pump. Its lower portion is connected to the
  mandibles, while its upper portion is connected to the posterior
  portion of the floor of the aspiratory pharynx by a membranous
  ligament.

  The aspiratory pharynx extends from the connection of the hypopharynx
  with the mandibles to the œsophageal commissure. In a general way it
  first passes upward and then turns, passing backward. Its roof is
  formed by the continuation of the ventral surface of the epipharynx,
  while its floor is formed by the hypopharynx below and above by the
  chitinous layer which is continuous with the œsophagus. The anterior
  end of this particular portion curves strongly downward, where it is
  attached to the upper portion of the hypopharynx by a membranous
  ligament. In a general way it may be divided into a vertical and
  longitudinal portion. The longitudinal portion expands laterally, so
  that its capacity is greatly increased when dilated. Into the floor of
  this longitudinal portion empties the vertical part of the aspiratory
  pharynx, and at the junction of the two there seems to be a valvular
  arrangement, preventing blood from escaping after it has entered the
  upper part of the aspiratory canal. The œsophagus starts at the
  œsophageal commissure and ends in the gizzard. It is not expanded as
  in some insects, forming a gullet, but is practically the same
  diameter throughout its entire extent. It is lined with chitin,
  surrounded by a delicate basement membrane.

  The gizzard is a mushroom-shaped organ, opening into the stomach and
  receiving the contents of the œsophagus and the aspiratory pharynx.
  From its anterior concave inner surface project a number of
  finger-like processes that arise from a basement membrane. They are
  lined with chitin, and each one near its base contains an elongated
  nucleus. These processes reach to the center of the gizzard and in a
  general way point towards the opening into the stomach. The gizzard is
  surrounded by circular bands of muscle fibers. Its function is not
  entirely understood. Wagner[205] has pointed out that these processes
  may act as whips to defibrinate the blood. It is more probable that
  their action is mainly valvular, preventing regurgitation of blood
  from the stomach.

  The stomach of a flea is large and is capable of great distention. It
  is composed of a layer of secretory cells, resting on a basement
  membrane, the organ being surrounded by muscle fibers passing in
  different directions. The epithelial surface is thrown into little
  projections like villi. As absorption occurs in the stomach, these
  villi, or projections of the epithelial cells, may serve to increase
  the absorptive surface as well as serving a glandular function. At the
  anterior end of the stomach are the cecal glands.

  The intestine is short, receives the excretion from the Malpighian
  tubules, and ends in the rectum. In the rectum may be seen the
  so-called “rectal glands.” All of the alimentary canal, with the
  exception of the stomach, is lined with chitin. The stomach and the
  rectum are capable of peristaltic movement.

  The salivary glands, four in number, two on each side of the anterior
  part of the stomach, are simple acinous glands, lined with a single
  layer of secreting cells. The lumen of the glands is large and acts as
  a reservoir for the salivary secretion. The ducts from these glands
  unite to form a single duct which passes beneath the subœsophagal
  ganglion and empties into the salivary pump. This duct is lined on its
  inner surface by a spiral arrangement of chitin, giving it a very
  characteristic appearance.


               DESCRIPTION OF FIGURE SHOWING MOUTH PARTS.

   1. Epipharynx.

   2. Mandibles.

   3. Rostrum, paired portion.

   4. Rostrum, unpaired portion.

   5. Maxilla.

   6. Maxillary palpus.

   7. Salivary grooves.

   8. Basal element of rostrum.

   9. Basal element of mandibles.

  10. Salivary pump.

  11. Salivary duct.

  12. Vertical portion, aspiratory canal.

  13. Longitudinal portion, aspiratory canal.

  14. Œsophagus.

  15. Œsophageal ganglia.

  16. Muscles operating aspiratory canal.

  17. Hypopharynx.

  18. Muscles operating salivary pump.

  19. Ligament connecting hypopharynx with floor of aspiratory canal.

[Illustration:

  PLATE I.

  MOUTH PARTS OF CERATOPHYLLUS FASCIATUS.
]


                           THE ACT OF BITING.

  The epipharynx, or pricker, makes an opening into the skin, through
  which the mandibles are inserted. These organs, by means of their
  serrations and independent movement, then enlarge the opening as with
  a saw, permitting them, with the epipharynx, to pass deeper and deeper
  until the points of the maxilla rest upon the cutaneous surface. The
  labial palpi serve as a protective case when the organs are not in
  action. When in action they serve as a guide to the piercing organs,
  but are not inserted into the skin. They double up like a bow, on each
  side, the bend of the bow becoming greater and greater as the biting
  apparatus passes deeper and deeper. Mitzmain[206] has pointed out that
  the spring-like action of this bow may assist the flea to withdraw the
  mandibles and epipharynx.

  During the process of penetration the salivary pump receives saliva
  from the salivary glands and pumps it down, through the channel in the
  mandibles, into the wound. It will be seen that the hypopharynx, being
  attached above by a membranous ligament and connected intimately with
  the mandibles below, moves downward with these organs as they pass
  through the skin. At the same time the muscles attached to its under
  surface and the salivary pump contract, enlarging the lumen of the
  pump. When the mandibles are retracted the salivary pump collapses,
  thereby forcing the saliva out with the movement upward of the
  mandibles. At the proper time the muscles operating the aspiratory
  pharynx contract, drawing the canal open and aspirating blood through
  the canal made by the approximation of the epipharynx and mandibles
  and into the aspiratory pharynx. When full, the muscles relax from
  before backward and the pharynx, by means of the elastic reaction of
  its chitinous lining, contracts and forces the blood backward through
  the gizzard and into the stomach. It has already been pointed out that
  the finger-like processes in the gizzard probably act as valves to
  prevent regurgitation from the stomach.


                     HOW THE FLEA INFECTS ITS HOST.

  The exact method by which the flea can transmit plague from animal to
  animal has, in our opinion, never been satisfactorily explained. There
  have been several explanations offered: First, that the rat may eat
  the flea. Miller[207] has found that the _Hepatazoon perniciosum_ is
  transmitted from rat to rat through the rat eating the mite, _Lelaps
  echidninus_, which acts as the intermediate host. We know, however,
  that when a rat is fed on plague material a mesenteric bubo is the
  rule, while in naturally infected rats a mesenteric bubo is a rare
  condition. This, then, negatives the possibility of plague being
  contracted through eating the flea.

  Another explanation is that the infection comes from the saliva
  injected at the time of biting. We have already stated that after
  repeated examinations, both by dissecting out the salivary glands and
  by serial sections of the entire flea, plague bacilli have never been
  demonstrated in these glands or anywhere outside of the alimentary
  tract.

  Another explanation has been advanced, that the bacillus is introduced
  by the contaminated mandibles. It is not possible to exclude this as a
  means of infection, although the Indian Plague Commission made
  numerous investigations and was unable to demonstrate the bacillus on
  the mandibles.

  The possibility of infection taking place by regurgitation from the
  stomach has also been considered. As the stomach is guarded by the
  finger-like processes in the gizzard which seem to act as competent
  valves, and as the movement of the blood aspirated by reason of the
  mechanism already explained is in a backward direction, it would seem
  improbable that there is any regurgitation from the stomach.

  The most plausible explanation that has been advanced has been based
  on an observation that blood-sucking insects at the time of biting
  frequently eject a drop of blood from the rectum. We know that the
  rectum may contain numerous plague bacilli, and it is supposed that
  this blood ejected in the vicinity of the bite is either brought in
  contact with the slight wound by the feet or mandibles of the flea
  itself or is rubbed in as a result of scratching. Verjbitski has shown
  that an emulsion of the feces of fleas or any plague material when
  placed upon the bitten part before the expiration of twenty-four hours
  is sufficient to give the animal plague. After twenty-four hours the
  animals did not develop plague, it being supposed that the slight
  wound in the skin made by the biting apparatus had healed. It is
  probable that this ejection of blood is purely accidental and does not
  necessarily occur at the time of biting, but it is likely that the
  insect had just previously had a full meal, which had been digested
  and passed into the rectum. In the many biting experiments done by
  McCoy and Mitzmain they report never having seen this ejection of
  rectal contents taking place. It might also be stated that where they
  used plague-infected fleas none of the animals developed plague after
  being bitten.


           ENUMERATION OF FLEAS THAT HAVE BEEN FOUND ON RATS.

  Various writers have reported the following fleas taken off rats:


                   Family SARCOPSYLLIDÆ Taschenberg.

  Genus DERMATOPHILUS.

  1. _Dermatophilus cæcata_ Enderlein.—Seventeen specimens (females)
  were found by Doctor Enderlein on the skin behind the ears of a
  specimen of _Mus rattus_ from Saopaulo, Brazil.


                       Genus ECHIDNOPHAGA Olliff.

  2. _Echidnophaga gallinacea_ Westwood.—Tiraboschi has found this flea
  on the _Mus rattus_ in Italy.

  3. _Echidnophaga rhynchopsylla_ Tiraboschi.—This flea has been taken
  in Italy from _Mus rattus_ and _Mus alexandrinus_. It has been
  described by Rothschild under the name of _Echidnophaga murina_.


                      Family PULICIDÆ Taschenberg.

  Genus CERATOPHYLLUS Curtis.

  4. _Ceratophyllus fasciatus_ Bosc.—This is the common rat flea of
  Europe and the United States. It has also been found in Cape Town,
  Australia, and is occasionally found on rats in India.

  5. _Ceratophyllus londiniensis_ Rothschild.—This flea has been taken
  off mice in England; off rats in Italy (_Ceratophyllus italicus_
  Tiraboschi) and has been found once on _Mus rattus_ in San Francisco,
  Cal.

  6. _Ceratophyllus acutus_ Baker.—This is the common flea of the
  California ground squirrel; and has been taken off _Mus norvegicus_ in
  San Francisco, Cal.

  7. _Ceratophyllus anisus_ Rothschild.—This flea has been described by
  Rothschild from Yokohama, Japan, taken off _Felis_ sp. One specimen
  was found in San Francisco, Cal., taken off _Mus norvegicus_.

  8. _Ceratophyllus niger_ Fox.—This flea is commonly found in San
  Francisco, Cal., in chicken yards and sparrows’ nests and has also
  been found on rats, _Mus norvegicus_, and on man.

  9. _Ceratophyllus consimilis_ Wagner.

  10. _Ceratophyllus lagomys_ Wagner.

  11. _Ceratophyllus mustelæ_ Wagner.

  12. _Ceratophyllus penicilliger_ Grube.

  These fleas have been taken off _Mus norvegicus_ in Europe.


                           Genus PULEX Linn.

  13. _Pulex irritans_ Linn.—This flea is widely distributed throughout
  the world, and while essentially the human flea has been found on many
  different species of animals and has frequently been encountered on
  rats. A very large number of specimens have been taken off rats in San
  Francisco, Cal.


                      Genus LŒMOPSYLLA Rothschild.

  14. _Lœmopsylla cheopis_ Rothschild.—This is the common rat flea in
  tropical and subtropical countries. It has also been found in seaports
  of the temperate zone, where it has been brought by ship rats.
  Ninety-eight per cent of the rat fleas in India are of this species.
  It has been found in Australia, where it was described by Tidswell
  under the name of _Pulex pallidus_. In the Philippine Islands, where
  it was described by Hertzog as the _Pulex philippinensis_. It has been
  found in Brazil, where it was described by Baker as _Pulex
  brasiliensis_, and Tiraboschi has found it in Italy, where it has been
  described as the _Pulex murinus_. This flea has been frequently found
  on man in India.


                     Genus CTENOCEPHALUS Kolenati.

  15. _Ctenocephalus canis_ Curtis.—This is the common dog flea found in
  many parts of the world and is frequently taken off rats.

  16. _Ctenocephalus felis_ Bouché.—This is the common cat flea and is
  also a widely distributed species. Frequently taken off rats.


                      Genus CTENOPSYLLUS Kolenati.

  17. _Ctenopsyllus musculi_ Dugés.—In England this flea is commonly
  found on the domestic mouse. It has a wide distribution and has been
  found on rats and mice in Europe, South Africa, India, Australia,
  Mexico, and other places, and has been taken off _Mus norvegicus_,
  _Mus rattus_, and _Mus musculus_ in San Francisco, Cal.


                        Genus NEOPSYLLA Wagner.

  18. _Neopsylla bidentatiformis_ Wagner.—This flea has been taken off
  _Mus norvegicus_ in the Crimea.


                       Genus HOPLOPSYLLUS Baker.

  19. _Hoplopsyllus anomalus_ Baker.—This is one of the common
  groundsquirrel fleas of California and has been found on _Mus
  norvegicus_ in San Francisco and Palo Alto, Cal. That these squirrel
  fleas are occasionally found on rats is interesting from the fact that
  plague has been demonstrated both in rats and the ground squirrel in
  California.


                   Genus HYSTRICHOPSYLLA Taschenberg.

  20. _Hystrichopsylla tripectinata_ Tiraboschi.—Reported by Tiraboschi
  from _Mus musculus_ in Italy.


                     Genus CTENOPTHALMUS Kolenati.

  21. _Ctenopthalmus agyrtes_ Heller.—Taken off _Mus Norvegicus_ in
  England.

  _The results of the identification of 19,768 fleas in San Francisco
  and Oakland, Cal._

                          SAN FRANCISCO, 1908.
                          Host: MUS NORVEGICUS.
 ───────────┬───────────┬───────────┬───────────┬───────────┬───────────
   Month.   │    C.     │L. cheopis.│    P.     │   Cten.   │   Cten.
            │fasciatus. │           │ irritans. │ musculi.  │  felis,
            │           │           │           │           │   Cten.
            │           │           │           │           │  canis.
 ───────────┼─────┬─────┼─────┬─────┼─────┬─────┼─────┬─────┼─────┬─────
 „          │Male.│ Fe- │Male.│ Fe- │Male.│ Fe- │Male.│ Fe- │Male.│ Fe-
            │     │male.│     │male.│     │male.│     │male.│     │male.
 ───────────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────
 April to   │1,343│2,510│  485│  837│   31│   76│   78│  211│   16│   31
   July 31  │     │     │     │     │     │     │     │     │     │
 August     │  489│  883│  145│  228│  156│  206│   27│   90│   17│   22
 September  │  543│1,180│  655│  930│  339│  387│   33│  109│   46│  119
 October    │  254│  435│  509│  652│   59│   64│    9│   45│    6│   18
 November   │  129│  252│  256│  288│   52│   69│   20│   54│    6│    6
 ───────────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────
            │2,758│5,260│2,050│2,935│  637│  802│  167│  509│   91│  196
 ───────────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────
                            Host: MUS RATTUS.
 ───────────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────
            │   23│   43│    3│    3│    0│    0│   17│   16│    1│    0
            │    4│    7│    1│    0│    9│   16│    3│    3│    0│    0
 ───────────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────
            │   27│   50│    4│    3│    9│   16│   20│   19│    1│    0
 ───────────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────
                           Host: MUS MUSCULUS.
 ───────────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────
            │    4│   10│    1│    0│    0│    0│    2│   10│    0│    0
            │   11│   10│    1│    6│    4│    4│    0│    3│    1│    1
 ───────────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────
            │   15│   20│    2│    6│    4│    4│    2│   13│    1│    1
 ───────────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────
                          OAKLAND, CAL., 1909.
                          Host: MUS NORVEGICUS.
 ───────────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────
 February   │  135│  304│  166│  178│    1│    1│  229│  506│    1│    3
 March      │  253│  456│  167│  215│    2│    5│  125│  243│    1│    2
 April      │  227│  479│  105│  129│    0│    1│   62│  143│    0│    1
 ───────────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────
            │  615│1,239│  438│  522│    3│    7│  416│  892│    2│    6
 ───────────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────
                         Host: MUS ALEXANDRINUS.
 ───────────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────
 April      │    1│    5│    0│    0│    0│    0│    0│    0│    0│    0
 ───────────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────

  This does not include a few other specimens of different species taken
  from _Mus rattus_ and _Mus norvegicus_, which have been included under
  the heading of “Enumeration of fleas which have been found on rats.”


               SYNOPSIS OF FLEAS COMMONLY FOUND ON RATS.

        A. WITHOUT A COMB OF SPINES ON THE PROTHORAX OR THE HEAD.
 1. Two bristles on the gena, an ocular bristle placed
      below the eye, an oral bristle placed just above
      root of maxilla. Mesothorax not divided by an
      internal incrassation. Claspers in male forming
      prominent hump, claw like and covered by hairy
      flap. An irregular row of about 10 teeth on inner           _Pulex
      side of hind coxa                                       irritans_.

 2. Two bristles on gena, an ocular placed in front of
      and just above middle of eye, an oral bristle
      placed just above root of maxilla. Mesothorax
      divided by internal incrassation, claspers not
      forming prominent hump, not claw like, not
      covered by hairy flap. A regular row of about six      _Lœmopsylla
      teeth on inner side of hind coxa,                        cheopis_.

         AA. WITH A COMB OF SPINES ON PROTHORAX BUT NOT ON HEAD.
 3. Three bristles on lower genal row, upper genal row
      represented by three or four small bristles
      running along anterior margin of antennal groove.
      Eye present, about five hairs on second joint of
      antenna, not as long as third joint. Maxillary
      palpi not as long as labial palpi. Labial palpi
      reach to apex of fore coxa. Spines on posterior
      tibia in pairs of about five groups. Head of male   _Ceratophyllus
      flattened on top,                                      fasciatus_.

      AAA. WITH A COMB OF SPINES ON THE PROTHORAX AND ON THE HEAD.
 4. Eye present, seven spines on lower margin of gena.    _Ctenocephalus
      Spines on posterior border of tibia in pairs             canis_ or
                                                                _felis_.

 5. Eye absent, four spines on hind margin of gena.
      Spines on posterior tibia single and in a close      _Ctenopsyllus
      set row                                                  musculi_.

                       DESCRIPTION OF PLATE II.
  ────────────────────────────────────────────┬──────────────────────
  Fig. 1. Clasping organs of male.            │P     Process.
  „                                           │F     Finger.
  „                                           │M     Manubrium.
  „                                           │IX St Ninth Sternite.
  ────────────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────
  Fig. 2. Head of female.                     │
  ────────────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────
  Fig. 3. Terminal abdominal segments, female.│8 T   Eighth Tergite.
  „                                           │8 St  Eighth Sternite.
  „                                           │10 T  Tenth Tergite.
  „                                           │10 St Tenth Sternite.
  „                                           │Sp    Spermatheca.
  „                                           │Sty   Stylet.
  ────────────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────
  Fig. 4. Hind tibia.                         │


                     CERATOPHYLLUS FASCIATUS Bosc.

                               [Plate II.]

  _Head._—Evenly and gently rounded in the female, flattened on top in
  the male. Frontal notch distinct. Eye present, placed low down in
  head. Gena acutely pointed posteriorly. Maxilla triangular. Maxillary
  palpi not as long as the labial palpi. Labial palpi reach to apex of
  anterior coxa, 5-jointed. Antennal groove in the male reaches to top
  of head, in the female to within one-third. There are 3 bristles on
  the lower genal row, the middle of which is the smallest, while the
  upper genal row is represented by 3 small bristles, extending along
  the edge of the antennal groove. In the male the lowermost bristle is
  frequently paired. There are several fine hairs above the eye. The
  occiput contains the normal row of apical bristles, the lowest of
  which is the largest. There is one bristle back of the middle of the
  antennal groove and a number of fine hairs along the posterior margin
  of the antennal groove. The antenna is 3-jointed, the first joint
  contains a row of about 5 very short fine hairs, while the second
  joint contains about 5 not as long as the third joint.

[Illustration:

  PLATE II.

  CERATOPHVLLUS FASCIATUS, BOSC.
]

  _Thorax._—The pronotum has one row of about 10 bristles, and a
  ctenidium composed of about 16 or 18 spines. The mesonotum has a
  posterior row of about 10 long bristles and there is an anterior row
  of more numerous smaller ones. The metanotum has also a posterior row
  of about 10 large bristles, with an anterior row of more numerous
  smaller ones, while still anterior to this there are 5 or 6 still
  smaller bristles. The metathorax contains 8 or 10 bristles which are
  small anteriorly, larger posteriorly. On the sternum of the metathorax
  there are 2 large bristles, while the episternum has 3 smaller ones.
  On the epimerum are 2 bristles placed anteriorly and 3 or 4
  posteriorly, one of which is on the apical margin.

  _Abdomen._—The first stigma is nearly in line with those of the other
  abdominal segments. There are two rows of bristles on the abdominal
  tergites, a posterior of about 12 or 14 and an anterior of smaller,
  less numerous bristles. The antipygidial bristles in the female are 3
  in number on each side, of which the middle is the longest, and the
  inner one the smallest. The male has but 2 antipygidial bristles on
  each side. The sternites from the third to the sixth have a single row
  of about 10 bristles, while the seventh has about 12. The metanotum
  has 2 teeth on each side, as have the first and second abdominal
  tergites. The third and fourth abdominal tergites have 1 tooth on each
  side.

  _Legs._—The fore coxæ are normally clothed. The fore femur has on the
  outer side 11 or 12 fine bristles irregularly disposed, while on the
  mid femur there is a row of about 3 to 5 bristles on the inner
  surface. The hind coxa has no patch of spines on the inner side, while
  on the inner surface of the hind femur there is a row of about 5 to 7
  bristles. The spines on the posterior tibia are in pairs of six
  groups, while on the outer surface there is a row of about 7 bristles.
  None of the apical bristles of the tarsi are as long as the next
  succeeding joint. The fifth tarsal joints on all the legs have 5
  lateral spines.

  Length of joints of tarsi:

                      Mid tarsi (♂)  8  7 4½  3 7
                      Hind tarsi    18 11  7  4 8
                      Mid tarsi (♀)  8  7  5 3½ 7
                      Hind tarsi    21 13  8  5 8

  _Modified segments._—(♂). The manubrium of the claspers is straight
  and narrow, while the process extends upward as a short, blunt cone,
  where at the tip there are several fine hairs. The lower margin is
  evenly and gently rounded. The finger is short, extending but a little
  above the process. It is concave on its anterior surface and convex on
  its posterior, and from the posterior margin there are 2 large and 2
  small bristles alternating. Two long heavy bristles arise from the
  process below the insertion of the finger. The ninth sternite is
  broad, with a deep sinus in its posterior border. Its lateral surface
  contains numerous fine hairs, these hairs being somewhat larger just
  beneath the sinus. Along the dorsal border of the tenth sternite there
  are 3 heavy bristles in line. At the tip of the tenth tergite there is
  one heavy bristle. Besides these heavy bristles in this segment there
  are numerous fine hairs.

  (♀) The eighth tergite contains just anterior to the sensory plate
  about 12 small hairs while just beneath the sensory plate there are 2
  long bristles. Lower down there is a patch of about 6 bristles and on
  the apical margin 4 to 6. The stylet is short, cylindrical, slightly
  larger at the base than at the tip, where there is a long bristle. On
  the under surface arises a fine hair. Substylar flap (tenth sternite)
  has along its margin numerous hairs.

                       DESCRIPTION OF PLATE III.
  ────────────────────────────────────────────┬──────────────────────
  Fig. 1. Clasping organs of male.            │P     Process.
  „                                           │M     Manubrium.
  „                                           │F     Finger.
  „                                           │IX St Ninth Sternite.
  ────────────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────
  Fig. 2. Head of female.                     │
  ────────────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────
  Fig. 3. Terminal abdominal segments, female.│8 T   Eighth Tergite.
  „                                           │8 St  Eighth Sternite.
  „                                           │10 T  Tenth Tergite.
  „                                           │10 St Tenth Sternite.
  „                                           │Sp    Spermatheca.
  ────────────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────
  Fig. 4. Hind coxa inner surface.            │


                     LŒMOPSYLLA CHEOPIS Rothschild.

                               [Plate III.]

  _Head._—Abruptly rounded. Flattened on top in ♂. Eye present. No
  ctenidia on head. Antennal groove in the ♀ reaches to within one-third
  of the top of the head. In ♂ reaches to top of head. Gena obtusely
  pointed posteriorly. Maxilla triangular. Maxillary palpi are not as
  long as labial palpi. Labial palpi reach to apex of fore coxæ,
  4-jointed. Anterior edge of antennal groove overlapped by chitinous
  flap. On posterior edge of antennal groove are a number of small
  bristles, these being most distinct in the male. The first antennal
  joint in the male contains 4 or 5 hairs at its outer edge, while
  transversely there is a row of several fine hairs. The second joint
  has a row of fine hairs not as long as the third joint. Divisions
  marking separations of third joint most pronounced on dorsal edge. Two
  bristles on gena. The oral bristle placed low down just above the base
  of the maxilla; the ocular bristle in front and just above the middle
  of the eye. Six bristles on the posterior margin of the occiput on
  each side with 2 back of the antennal groove.

[Illustration:

  PLATE III.

  LŒMOPSYLLA CHEOPIS, ROTHSCHILD.
]

  _Thorax._—The pronotum is without a ctenidial comb, and has one row of
  about 14 bristles. The mesonotum, the broadest of the three thoracic
  nota, also has a single row of about 12 bristles. The metanotum has a
  single row of about the same number. The mesosternite contains about 5
  bristles. The pleura of the metathorax is normally divided. The
  sternum contains 2 bristles, 1 anterior and 1 posterior. The
  episternum contains 1 bristle, and the epimerum contains 2 rows of
  bristles, an anterior row of 7 and an apical row of the same number.

  _Abdomen._—The first abdominal tergite contains 2 rows of bristles, an
  anterior and a posterior of about 6 bristles each, while the next 6
  contains but a single row of about 14 bristles each, the lowest placed
  just below the stigma. From the seventh tergite springs a single
  antipygidial bristle. The sternites contain a single row of 8 or 10
  bristles.

  _Legs._—The fore coxa is normally clothed. The fore femur has on its
  outer surface about 8 fine bristles. The mid femur has a single row of
  about 6 bristles, while the hind femur has a row of the same number.
  The hind coxa has on its inner surface a regular row of about 6 teeth.
  The hind tibia has on its posterior border 5 groups of spines in
  pairs, while on its outer surface there are about 8 small bristles in
  a row. The apical bristle on the second tarsal joint of the hind leg
  reaches to about the middle of the fifth tarsal article. The fifth
  tarsal article on all of the legs has 4 lateral spines and a subapical
  pair of hairs.

  _Modified segments._—(♂) The manubrium of the claspers is short and
  narrow. There are two free processes, the upper one, the finger, being
  broadest and wider at the tip than at the base, its upper border being
  more convex than the lower border and containing a number of bristles.
  The ninth sternite is club-shaped, is nearly straight on its dorsal
  margin, and the ventral margin contains a row of fine bristles from
  base to apex.

  (♀) No bristles in front of the sensory plate. Along its apical margin
  externally there is a row of about 12 long bristles, and internally a
  row of less numerous, shorter bristles. Laterally there is a more or
  less regular row of about 8 bristles, and between this row and the
  apical row 3 or 4 more.

                       DESCRIPTION OF PLATE IV.
  ────────────────────────────────────────────┬──────────────────────
  Fig. 1. Clasping organs, male.              │10 T  Tenth Tergite.
  „                                           │10 St Tenth Sternite.
  „                                           │P     Process.
  „                                           │F     Finger.
  „                                           │M     Manubrium.
  „                                           │IX St Ninth Sternite.
  ────────────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────
  Fig. 2. Head of female.                     │
  Fig. 3. Last tarsal joint of hind leg.      │
  ────────────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────
  Fig. 4. Terminal abdominal segments, female.│8 T   Eighth Tergite.
  „                                           │8 St  Eighth Sternite.
  „                                           │10 T  Tenth Tergite.
  „                                           │10 St Tenth Sternite.
  „                                           │Sp    Spermatheca.
  ────────────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────
  Fig. 5. Hind tibia.                         │


                      CTENOPSYLLUS MUSCULI Dugés.

                               [Plate IV.]

  _Head._—The frons is prominent anteriorly, giving the head somewhat
  the shape of a fez. There are 4 spines on the posterior border of the
  gena. The antennal groove reaches to the top of the head. The
  maxillary palpi are shorter than the labial palpi, which reach to
  about two-thirds of the fore coxa and are 5-jointed. Maxilla
  triangular. Eyes absent. At the most prominent part of the frons
  anteriorly there are two short thick spines, while below these,
  running along the anterior margin, there are 5 bristles. Above there
  is an oblique row of 4 bristles, with 1 more placed near the top of
  the antennal groove. Between this oblique row and lower bristles there
  are numerous fine hairs. On the occiput there is a subapical row of
  about 7 bristles on each side, while in front of this are 3 oblique
  rows of bristles, the first containing 3, the second 4, and the third
  5. On the posterior margin of the antennal groove there are several
  small hairs. On the first joint of the antenna there are about 3
  hairs, while on the second joint there are 4 or 5, the longest
  somewhat longer than the third joint.

  _Thorax._—The pronotum has an anterior row of about 10 bristles, and a
  ctenidium of about 24 spines. The mesonotum contains about 4 rows of
  bristles, more or less regularly disposed, each row consisting of
  about 8 or 9 bristles. The metanotum has 2 rows of bristles, a
  posterior row of about 10 bristles, and an anterior of the same
  number, while there are several smaller bristles in front of this. The
  mesothorax contains about 10 bristles. The episternum of the
  metathorax has 2 bristles, and on the sternum there is 1 large one.
  The epimerum has 2 rows of 4 bristles each, with 1 large one at the
  apical margin.

[Illustration:

  PLATE IV.

  CTENOPSYLLUS MUSCULI, DUGES.
]

  _Abdomen._—The first abdominal tergite has 2 rows of 10 bristles each,
  the posterior being comprised of the larger bristles. The next 6
  tergites have 2 rows of bristles each, a posterior of large bristles,
  about 12 in number, and an anterior of smaller bristles, also 12 in
  number. On the apical edge of the metanotum there are 2 small teeth on
  each side. The first abdominal tergite contains 3 such teeth while the
  second and third have 1 each on each side. At the apex of the seventh
  tergite in the female there are 4 antipygidial bristles, sometimes 5.
  The male has but 3 antipygidial bristles. The abdominal sternites from
  the third to the sixth have a single row of 6 bristles. The seventh
  has a row of about 16 bristles.

  _Legs._—The fore coxa has about 32 large bristles more or less
  regularly disposed in 6 oblique rows. The hind coxa is without teeth
  on the inner surface. The mid femur is without bristles on its lateral
  surfaces. The hind femur is also without a row of bristles on its
  lateral surfaces. The spines on the posterior border of the tibia are
  single and in a close set row. The apical spines of the second tarsal
  joint of the hind legs are shorter than the third joint. The last
  tarsal joint on all the legs contains 4 lateral spines and a subbasal
  pair situated between the first lateral pair.

  _Modified segments._—(♀) Just beneath the pygidium is 1 long bristle.
  On the eighth tergite there is a patch of hairs, 6 of which are on the
  apical margin and about 5 or 7 anterior to these. The stylet is short,
  almost as wide at the base as at the tip, where there is a long hair.
  Posteriorly to this bristle there springs another one from the under
  surface.

  (♂) Manubrium of the claspers is narrow, curved at the tip. The finger
  reaches to the level of the process, has a stout pedicle, is flat on
  its anterior border, and is decidedly convex on its posterior border,
  where there are 4 bristles. The shape of the ninth sternite is shown
  in the figure.

                        DESCRIPTION OF PLATE V.
  ────────────────────────────────────────────┬──────────────────────
  Fig. 1. Clasping organs of male             │P     Process.
  „                                           │F     Finger.
  „                                           │M     Manubrium.
  „                                           │IX St Ninth Sternite.
  ────────────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────
  Fig. 2. Head of female.                     │
  ────────────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────
  Fig. 3. Terminal abdominal segments, females│8 T   Eighth Tergite.
  „                                           │8 St  Eighth Sternite.
  „                                           │10 T  Tenth Tergite.
  „                                           │10 St Tenth Sternite.
  „                                           │Sty   Stylet.
  „                                           │Sp    Spermatheca.
  ────────────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────
  Fig. 4. Hind coxa, inner surface.           │


                        PULEX IRRITANS Linnæus.

                                [Plate V.]

  _Head._—Evenly and abruptly rounded in both sexes. Frontal notch
  absent. Eye large. Maxillary palpi longer than the labial palpi.
  Labial palpi reach to about half the length of the anterior coxa and
  are 4-jointed. The mandibles are broad and markedly serrate. Maxillæ
  triangular. Antennal groove short and wide, closed behind, thickened
  on edges, and reaches to top of head in both sexes by chitinous
  thickening. Second joint contains 8 or 9 fine hairs, shorter than the
  third joint. Division of the third joint only to be seen on dorsal
  surface. Two bristles on the gena, one placed low down just above the
  maxilla, the other below the eye. From the lower margin of the gena
  occasionally may be seen a small tooth. One bristle on the occiput
  near the posterior lower angle. A few fine hairs on the posterior edge
  of the antennal groove.

  _Thorax._—The thoracic nota each contain a single row of about 10 or
  12 bristles. There is no ctenidium on the pronotum. The mesosternite
  is narrow and is not divided by an internal incrassation. The
  episternum of the metathorax is large and contains about 2 or 3
  bristles and is not quite separated from the sternum anteriorly. The
  epimerum has an anterior row of about 7 or 8 bristles and an apical
  row of about 6.

  _Abdomen._—Each of the abdominal tergites, with the exception of the
  first, has a single row of 8 or 10 bristles. The first has 2 rows of
  about 4 each. The sternites from third to seventh have a single row of
  about 6 bristles. There is one short antipygidial bristle on each
  side.

  _Legs._—The hind coxa has on its inner surface posteriorly a number of
  fine hairs, while anteriorly there are 10 or 12 teeth in an irregular
  line. The hind femur has on its inner surface a row of about 8 or 9
  bristles. The spines on the posterior tibia are in pairs, and there
  are about 7 bristles in a line on its outer lateral surface. The
  apical bristle of the second tarsal joint of the hind leg reaches to
  about the middle of the fifth joint. The last tarsal joints of all the
  legs contain 4 lateral spines and a subapical pair, and between the
  third and last lateral spine there is a hair.

  _Modified segments._—(♀) The eighth tergite has no bristles above the
  pygidium but has numerous short stout bristles laterally and on and
  close to the apical margin. The stylet is short and stout and has at
  its tip a long hair. The tenth sternite and tergite contain numerous
  fine hairs, those on the sternite confined to the apical edge.

  (♂) The male claspers are quite characteristic. The manubrium is large
  and curved and points ventrally. The claspers have two processes, the
  lower of which, with the finger, form together a kind of claw which is
  covered by the other process forming a flap, quite hairy on its upper
  margin. The ninth sternite is described very well by Rothschild[208]
  as “boomerang” shaped. The eighth tergite has a small manubrium.

[Illustration:

  PLATE V.

  PULEX IRRITANS, LINNÆUS.
]

                       DESCRIPTION OF PLATE VI.
  ────────────────────────────────────────────┬──────────────────────
  Fig. 1. Clasping organs of male             │F     Finger.
  „                                           │M     Manubrium.
  „                                           │IX St Ninth Sternite.
  ────────────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────
  Fig. 2. Head of male.                       │
  ────────────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────
  Fig. 3. Terminal abdominal segments, female │8 T   Eighth Tergite.
  „                                           │8 St  Eighth Sternite.
  ────────────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────
  Fig. 4. Hind coxa and femur, inner surface. │


                      CTENOCEPHALUS CANIS Curtis.

                               [Plate VI.]

  _Head._—Strongly and evenly rounded in both sexes. Eye large. Maxilla
  triangular. Maxillary palpi about as long as labial palpi. Labial
  palpi reach to two-thirds of anterior coxæ, 4-jointed. Seven spines
  along the lower margin of the gena. The posterior angle of the gena
  ends in a small tooth. Occasionally this may be absent. Antennal
  groove in the female reaches to within one-third of the top of head
  and is prolonged upwards by a chitinous thickening and in the male
  reaches almost to top of head. Two bristles on the gena, one placed
  well toward the anterior lower angle and the other in front of the
  eye. Usual number of bristles on posterior margin of the head, with 2
  large ones back of the antennal groove. About 8 hairs on the second
  joint of the antenna nearly as long as the third joint.

  _Thorax._—A row of about 10 bristles on the pronotum, with a ctenidium
  of about 14 to 16 spines. Two rows of bristles on the mesonotum, a
  posterior of about 12, another of more numerous smaller bristles
  placed well anteriorly. The metanotum contains a single row of about
  10 or 12 bristles. The episternum of the metathorax has 3 or 4 stout
  bristles, while the epimerum contains an anterior row of about 10
  bristles and a posterior row of about 9.

  _Abdomen._—The first abdominal tergite contains 2 rows of about 4
  bristles each, while the other tergites to the seventh contain a
  single row of from 12 to 16 bristles. The stigmata are large. There is
  a single antipygidial bristle on each side. The sternites from third
  to seventh have a single row of 4 bristles each.

  _Legs._—The hind coxa has on its inner side a patch of from 6 to 12
  spines, while the hind femur has a row of 10 or 12 bristles on its
  inner surface. The spines on the posterior border of the hind tibia,
  with the exception of the apical, are in pairs, while in the apical
  group are about 3 stout bristles. The apical spine of the second joint
  of the hind leg reaches to nearly the middle of the fifth joint. On
  the fifth joint of all the legs there are 4 lateral spines and a
  subapical pair, and between the third and fourth lateral spines there
  is a hair.

  _Modified segments._—(♀) The eighth tergite has no hairs back of the
  stigma. The apical margin is rounded at the apex and contains 8 or 10
  bristles. The stylet is short and wide and contains at its tip a long
  and a short bristle.

  (♂) The manubrium is short and narrow. The movable finger of the
  clasper is short, thick, swollen at its middle, bluntly rounded at its
  extremity, and contains on its upper border numerous hairs and a few
  on its lower border.

  Rothschild[209] has pointed out certain differences between the
  _Ctenocephalus canis_ and _Ctenocephalus felis_. The differences are
  that in the female of the felis the head is longer and more pointed.
  This difference is not so pronounced in the male. Also certain
  differences in the shape of the claspers and the number of bristles in
  the episternum and epimerum of the metathorax and the hind femur,
  those in the _C. canis_ being more numerous. Also that group of
  bristles on the posterior border of the hind tibia between the fifth
  pair and the apical bristles consists of two in the _Ctenocephalus
  canis_, while there is but a single bristle with a small hair in the
  _Ctenocephalus felis_.


                              REFERENCES.

Endnote 201:

    1909, McCoy.—“Plague Bacilli in Ectoparasites of Squirrels.” Public
    Health Reports, Vol. XXIV, No. 16.

Endnote 202:

    1908, Schumann.—“A Disease of Rats Caused by Mites.” Centralblatt f.
    Bact., Oct. 30th.

Endnote 203:

    1909, McCoy and Mitzmain.—“An Experimental Investigation of the
    Biting of Man by Fleas Taken from Rats and Squirrels.” Public Health
    Reports, Vol. XXIV, No. 8.

Endnote 204:

    1908, McCoy.—“A Report on Laboratory Work in Relation to the
    Examination of Rats for Plague at San Francisco, California.” Public
    Health Reports, Vol. XXIII, No. 30.

Endnote 205:

    Wagner.—Aphanipterologische Studien aus dem zootomischen
    laboratorium der Universität zu St. Petersburg.

Endnote 206:

    1908, Mitzmain.—“How a Hungry Flea Feeds.” Entomological News,
    December.

Endnote 207:

    1908, Miller.—“Hepatazoon Perniciosum (N. G. N. SP.). A
    Hæmogregarine Pathogenic for White Rats; With a Description of the
    Sexual Cycle in the Intermediate Host; A Mite (Lælaps Echidninus).”
    Bull. No. 46, Hyg. Lab. U. S. Pub. Health and Mar. Hosp. Serv.,
    Wash.

Endnote 208:

    1908, Jordan and Rothschild.—“Revision of Non-Combed Eyed
    Siphonaptera.” Parasitology, Vol. I, No. 1.

Endnote 209:

    1901, Rothschild.—“Notes on Pulex canis, Curtis, and Pulex felis,
    Bouché.” Entomologist’s Record, Vol. XIII, No. 4.

    1905, Rothschild.—“Some Further Notes on Pulex canis, Curtis, and
    Pulex felis, Bouché.” Novitates Zoologicae, Vol. XII.

[Illustration:

  PLATE VI.

  CTENOCEPHALUS CANIS, CURTIS.
]




       RODENTS IN RELATION TO THE TRANSMISSION OF BUBONIC PLAGUE.

                         By Surgeon RUPERT BLUE,

        _United States Public Health and Marine-Hospital Service_.


  Man has associated the rat with bubonic plague since the dawn of
  history. The monuments and coins of the earliest times yield abundant
  evidence of this association. Æsculapius, the god of the healing art,
  is represented by the Greeks with a rat at his feet. An early
  scriptural reference may be found in the first Book of Samuel in the
  fifth and sixth chapters. The historian records therein the occurrence
  of a fatal epidemic of “emerods” in the land of the Philistines
  coincident with an invasion of “mice.”

  The inhabitants of southern China in recent times have learned to look
  upon the finding of sick and dead rats in their homes as a harbinger
  of evil, in fact, as a forerunner of that dread scourge—“wan-yick,” or
  plague. In the villages and cities of the Kwantung and Kwangsi
  provinces, as recorded by medical missionaries, epizootic plague
  almost invariably precedes an outbreak among human beings. So well is
  this fact known to the common people that many seek safety in flight,
  feeling assured that in a short time “yang-tzu” or “wan-yick” will
  claim a harvest of victims among those who remain.

  Doctor Mahē, sanitary officer for the port of Constantinople, in 1889,
  called attention to the fact that epidemics of plague were always
  announced by a great mortality among rats and mice. In 1894 Yersin
  reported the fatal epizootic among rats then prevailing in Canton and
  Hongkong coincident with the outbreak of plague among the Chinese.
  Recent researches have confirmed these observations and a great deal
  has been added to the literature of plague, especially in relation to
  its mode of transmission. Indeed, it should be said that wherever the
  disease has prevailed in recent years the relation of rats to its
  spread has been observed, and that since the discovery of the specific
  bacillus by Yersin and Kitasato, in 1894, bacteriological
  investigations have shown that there is no difference morphologically
  or culturally between the bacilli of human and rat plague. Moreover,
  the gross and microscopic lesions in the lymph nodes are practically
  the same, and the _B. pestis_ recovered in both fulfills the
  postulates of Koch.

  Nothing was definitely known, however, of the mode of transmission of
  the disease from rat to rat or from rat to man until the completion of
  the experimental work of the Indian Plague Commission. Simond, Ogata,
  Thompson, and Koch each expressed the belief that the infection was
  transferred by the rat flea. Nuttall (1897) and Simond (1898)
  demonstrated the presence of _B. pestis_ in the bodies of bugs
  (_Cimex_) and fleas which had been taken from plague-sick rats, and
  the latter observer, in the same year, succeeded in transmitting the
  disease from rat to rat without contact.

  The work of the Indian Plague Commission was undertaken (1905) with a
  view to establishing the exact relationship between epizootics among
  rats and epidemics among men, and included both field and laboratory
  observations. The experiments of Gauthier and Raybaud (1903) and of
  Simond were repeated on a larger scale and greatly improved in that
  all rats and fleas used were first identified as to species. The
  findings of the commission may be briefly summarized as follows: That
  fleas and bugs taken from plague-sick rats contain _B. pestis_, and
  that some of them remain alive in the bodies of the insects from five
  to sixteen days; that plague is conveyed by the bites of fleas which
  have previously fed on the blood of animals suffering with the
  disease; that rat fleas bite man; that under experimental conditions
  the infection is not transferred from rat to rat in the absence of
  fleas.

  A careful study of the findings of the workers in India justifies the
  assumption that plague is a disease of the rodent primarily and
  accidentally, and secondarily a disease of man. An analysis of the
  epidemiological facts collected in San Francisco leads to the same
  conclusion. As a result our practice with regard to suppressive
  measures and quarantine procedure has undergone a radical change in
  the last decade. If the infection is flea-borne from rat to man in the
  majority of cases, then the extermination of the rat should be the
  first principle upon which to base a campaign. In the former
  contribution on the subject (1907) I stated that “if we destroy the
  host there is no longer danger of infecting the parasite.” This basic
  principle has been recognized and successfully applied in two
  campaigns against plague in San Francisco. First in the outbreak in
  Chinatown in 1903–4, and again in the larger epidemic of 1907.

  The outbreak of 1907 began May 27, a little over a year after the
  great fire and earthquake, but no cases were discovered between that
  time and mid-August when the disease began to appear in various parts
  of the city. The source of infection was, in all probability, a
  recrudescence from a focus which was not destroyed in the campaign of
  1903–4. There occurred 160 cases with 77 deaths, the last case
  appearing January 30, 1908. The following table shows the incidence of
  human plague:

                 ─────────────────────┬───────┬───────
                         Year.        │Cases. │Deaths.
                 ─────────────────────┼───────┼───────
                         1907.        │       │
                 May                  │      1│      1
                 August               │     13│      6
                 September            │     56│     25
                 October              │     34│     25
                 November             │     41│     12
                 December             │     13│      7
                         1908.        │       │
                 January              │      2│      1
                 ─────────────────────┼───────┼───────
                         Total        │    160│     77
                 ─────────────────────┴───────┴───────


             EPIDEMIOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS IN SAN FRANCISCO.

  Abundant epidemiological data associating the rat[AE] with plague have
  been collected in San Francisco. For the purpose of illustration a
  detailed reference to a few cases will be made. Two small boys
  (October, 1907) while playing in an unused cellar found the body of a
  dead rat. The corpse was buried with unusual funeral honors. In
  forty-eight hours both were ill with bubonic plague. A laborer finding
  a sick rat on the wharf picked it up with the naked hand and threw it
  into the bay. He was seized three days later with plague. Doctor C.
  and family lived in a second-story flat over a grocery store in the
  residence section. Being annoyed for some days by a foul odor the
  doctor caused the wainscoting around the plumbing to be removed. One
  or two rat cadavers were found in the hollow wall. In two or three
  days the two members of the family who used the room sickened, one
  dying on the fifth day of cervical bubonic plague. It is probable that
  infected rat fleas were set free by the removal of the wainscoting.

Footnote AE:

    _M. norvegicus_ and _M. rattus_.

  Dead rats were frequently found in or near houses where plague had
  occurred. Immediately upon the discovery of a case of plague trained
  men were sent into the neighborhood and a thorough search made for
  rats. This work consisted in the removal of defective wooden floors
  and walls of insanitary buildings and other harboring places.
  Extensive rat catacombs were frequently found in these operations. In
  the yard of a house in which 4 cases had occurred 20 cadavers were
  found under the board covering. In the walls of a Chinese restaurant
  87 dead rats were uncovered.

  Very little can be said of the relation of mice (_M. musculus_) to the
  epidemic. While many thousands were trapped, only a few hundred were
  examined microscopically and in these no infection was found. They are
  nonmigratory in habit and for this reason are not considered of much
  importance from an epizoological standpoint.

  Transmission from man to man was observed in but a small percentage of
  cases, 3 per cent to be exact. In these the probability of
  transference by fleas (_P. irritans_) or by bugs (_Cimex_) must be
  admitted. When more than one case occurred in a house a common source
  of infection was indicated, such cases occurring simultaneously or
  within from forty-eight to seventy-two hours after the first.
  Deratization was the measure mainly relied upon. After an infected
  house was rat proofed, and the harboring places in the block
  destroyed, no further cases occurred.

  The course of epizootic plague was not interrupted at any time by
  climatic conditions, there being as many cases in proportion to the
  rat population in the winter of 1908 as there were at the height of
  the epidemic. The last case of human plague occurred January 30, 1908,
  but the infection remained active among rats for eight months longer,
  or until October 21, 1908. (See following table.)

 ─────────┬─────────┬─────────┬─────┬────────────┬────────┬─────────────
  Month.  │ Number  │ Number  │ Per │  Average   │Rainfall│Character of
          │examined.│infected.│cent.│temperature.│   in   │    days.
          │         │         │     │            │inches. │
 ─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────┼────────────┼────────┼─────────────
   1907.  │         │         │     │    °F.     │        │{Clear, 13.
 September│    1,002│       27│ 2.69│        60.6│    0.11│{Part cloudy,
          │         │         │     │            │        │15.
          │         │         │     │            │        │{Cloudy, 2.
 ─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────┼────────────┼────────┼─────────────
          │         │         │     │            │        │{Clear, 10.
 October  │    2,679│       23│  .86│        60.6│    1.36│{Part cloudy,
          │         │         │     │            │        │10.
          │         │         │     │            │        │{Cloudy, 11.
 ─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────┼────────────┼────────┼─────────────
          │         │         │     │            │        │{Clear, 14.
 November │    3,954│       36│  .88│        57.8│     .04│{Part cloudy,
          │         │         │     │            │        │13.
          │         │         │     │            │        │{Cloudy, 3.
 ─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────┼────────────┼────────┼─────────────
          │         │         │     │            │        │{Clear, 6.
 December │    4,308│       48│ 1.11│        52.4│    3.66│{Part cloudy,
          │         │         │     │            │        │11.
          │         │         │     │            │        │{Cloudy, 14.
 ─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────┼────────────┼────────┼─────────────
   1908.  │         │         │     │            │        │{Clear, 5.
 January  │    6,622│       70│ 1.05│        50.8│    4.88│{Part cloudy,
          │         │         │     │            │        │11.
          │         │         │     │            │        │{Cloudy, 15.
 ─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────┼────────────┼────────┼─────────────
          │         │         │     │            │        │{Clear, 11.
 February │   11,700│       45│  .38│        51.0│    5.39│{Part cloudy,
          │         │         │     │            │        │12.
          │         │         │     │            │        │{Cloudy, 6.
 ─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────┼────────────┼────────┼─────────────
          │         │         │     │            │        │{Clear, 20.
 March    │   19,263│       52│  .26│        54.8│     .90│{Part cloudy,
          │         │         │     │            │        │10.
          │         │         │     │            │        │{Cloudy, 1.
 ─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────┼────────────┼────────┼─────────────
          │         │         │     │            │        │{Clear, 17.
 April    │   15,524│       34│  .21│        56.3│     .22│{Part cloudy,
          │         │         │     │            │        │10.
          │         │         │     │            │        │{Cloudy, 3.
 ─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────┼────────────┼────────┼─────────────
          │         │         │     │            │        │{Clear, 17.
 May      │   11,311│       20│  .13│        55.4│     .76│{Part cloudy,
          │         │         │     │            │        │12.
          │         │         │     │            │        │{Cloudy, 2.
 ─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────┼────────────┼────────┼─────────────
          │         │         │     │            │        │{Clear, 16.
 June     │   13,624│        4│ 0.02│        55.3│    0.01│{Part cloudy,
          │         │         │     │            │        │9.
          │         │         │     │            │        │{Cloudy, 5.
 ─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────┼────────────┼────────┼─────────────
          │         │         │     │            │        │{Clear, 11.
 July     │   11,204│        2│ .017│        57.4│     .02│{Part cloudy,
          │         │         │     │            │        │17.
          │         │         │     │            │        │{Cloudy, 3.
 ─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────┼────────────┼────────┼─────────────
          │         │         │     │            │        │{Clear, 11.
 August   │   10,988│        0│   .0│        57.3│     .01│{Part cloudy,
          │         │         │     │            │        │10.
          │         │         │     │            │        │{Cloudy, 10.
 ─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────┼────────────┼────────┼─────────────
          │         │         │     │            │        │{Clear, 16.
 September│   15,902│        0│   .0│        59.3│     .29│{Part cloudy,
          │         │         │     │            │        │9.
          │         │         │     │            │        │{Cloudy, 5.
 ─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────┼────────────┼────────┼─────────────
          │         │         │     │            │        │{Clear, 16.
 October  │   10,178│        2│ .019│        58.8│    .061│{Part cloudy,
          │         │         │     │            │        │7.
          │         │         │     │            │        │{Cloudy, 8.
 ─────────┴─────────┴─────────┴─────┴────────────┴────────┴─────────────

  The rats examined for September, 1907, were very largely collected
  from the badly infected districts; the remaining months give a truer
  picture of the extent of the epizootic in the entire rat population.


            THEORIES AS TO THE CAUSE OF SEASONAL PREVALENCE.

  The marked seasonal prevalence of plague in man in San Francisco may
  be given as additional proof of the association of the rat with its
  spread. In the cold, rainy season, from December to April, the
  epidemic ceases while the epizootic is apparently not influenced. The
  anomaly is accounted for when we remember that the rat and its
  parasites are very susceptible to cold and rain. It is then that the
  animal seeks a warm, comfortable place from which it does not venture
  until driven thence by dire necessity. In other words, the association
  of the rat with man is not so intimate in winter, while the reverse is
  true of the relation of rat with rat. The rains, while interrupting
  the overground migrations and domiciliary visits of rats, drive them
  to overcrowded burrows and harboring places. Another factor should be
  mentioned in this connection. Human fleas (_P. irritans_), and
  probably rat fleas also, are markedly reduced in numbers at that
  season of the year. We must conclude, therefore, that the seasonal
  prevalence of plague in man is due to the effect of climatic
  conditions upon the habits of rats and the life history of the insect
  carriers of the bacilli.

  An examination of the foregoing should convince everyone that all
  former theories as to the prolonged viability of _B. pestis_ in
  contaminated soil or in polluted streams, and of the periodical spread
  of the infection therefrom, are no longer tenable. It may also be
  stated that insanitary conditions, except in so far as they furnish
  food and shelter to rats and other vermin, play no important rôle in
  the continuance of plague. This general revision has also eliminated
  overcrowding as an important factor. In the absence pneumonic cases,
  and of suctorial insects, this _bête noire_ of the sanitarian may be
  disregarded.


 THE OCCURRENCE OF PLAGUE IN THE MARMOT OF ASIA AND THE GROUND SQUIRREL
                             OF CALIFORNIA.

  Rudenko (1900) first pointed out the possibility of contagion by the
  “Tarbagan,” a species of the _arctomyinæ_ found in Siberia. He
  observed a connection in 1894 between this rodent and an outbreak of
  plague in a Cossack family of Soktuewsk. According to Beliatsky and
  Zabolotny, each having been an observer in the same field, the natives
  of Siberia and Mongolia often acquire plague in this manner. Le Dantec
  and other writers have called attention to the probable susceptibility
  of the marmot (_Arctomys bobac_), a hibernating rodent of India and
  China. The marmot of Thibet, in the opinion of this writer, is the
  natural animal host and purveyor of the virus. The literature of the
  subject presents no bacteriological evidence, however, of such a
  relationship, and plague in the _arctomyinæ_ of Asia is merely an
  hypothesis. There is positive evidence though of the susceptibility of
  the tree squirrel (_Sciurinæ_) to plague infection. Dr. Alice Corthorn
  (1898) reported the finding of a plague-infected squirrel in one of
  the outbreaks in the Bombay Presidency.


               PLAGUE INFECTION IN GROUND SQUIRRELS.[AF]

Footnote AF:

    Genus Citellus, Oken; subgenus Otospermophilus. “California
    Mammals,” Frank Stephens.

  The demonstration of natural plague in the California ground squirrel
  (_Otospermophilus beecheyi_) is perhaps the most important observation
  of the antiplague work of the service in 1908. The existence of a
  plague epizootic in Contra Costa County was suspected as early as the
  summer of 1903, and efforts were made at that time to collect sick and
  dead rodents for bacteriological examination. In August (1903) two
  fatal cases of human infection occurred in widely separated sections
  of the county. The investigation which followed failed to connect
  either with a previous case of human plague, but showed an association
  with ground squirrels. These deaths occurred during a fatal epizootic
  among ground squirrels and suggested a connection which unfortunately
  was not confirmed.

  None of the circumstances were forgotten, however, and in the second
  campaign, begun in September, 1907, in San Francisco, inspectors were
  detailed to examine all persons dying in the area under suspicion. No
  plague was reported that autumn and winter. Fatal cases occurred and
  were reported by the inspectors in July, 1908, as follows: A boy (J.
  F.) died July 15, near Concord, and a young woman (M. P.) died July
  28, on a ranch 10 miles from Martinez. The two were not associated. An
  investigation was ordered at once and a force of trappers was hurried
  to the scene with instructions to collect squirrels from the ranches
  in the vicinity. The first plague-infected squirrel was found August 5
  on the ranch where the boy had died July 15. Of 425 squirrels
  collected from August 1 to October 12, 4 showed the gross and
  microscopic lesions of natural plague.

  A lad (F. M.) sickened August 5, 1908, in Los Angeles, Cal., after
  being bitten by a sick ground squirrel. A polyadenitis, which
  afterwards proved to be plague, developed in a few days. A dead
  squirrel was found nearby and pathological specimens taken from it
  were sent to the United States Plague Laboratory in San Francisco.
  McCoy recovered _B. pestis_ from the tissue of the animal. This was
  the only case of plague reported in Los Angeles. In order to complete
  the list of those who contracted plague in the country, two other
  cases should be mentioned. F. S., a pregnant woman, died of
  bubosepticæmic plague near Concord, Cal., February 29, 1904. The _B.
  pestis_ was recovered in pure culture from the axillary glands. In
  April, 1906, a school boy of east Oakland developed a multiple plague
  adenitis. Investigation showed that he had shot and handled ground
  squirrels in the country four or five days before his illness.


                     THE NATURAL HABITAT OF PLAGUE.

  The location of the natural habitat of plague has concerned
  sanitarians for many years. Not a few have settled upon India as the
  endemic center, while others associate China with the epidemics which
  have devastated Europe from remote times. Le Dantec, a recent writer,
  suggests the “lofty mountains” between India, Thibet, and China as the
  exact location, and selects the rodent (marmot) of that region as the
  natural enzootic host.

  A panzootic leaves in its wake enzootics of plague in various
  countries which persist until the rodents upon which they thrive are
  either exterminated or rendered immune. At varying intervals epidemics
  spring from them and finally cease with the exhaustion or destruction
  of the enzootic foci. Plague disappears in time from these temporary
  abodes and retires to its original habitat in India or China.

  Of serious import in this connection is the fact that all the
  conditions necessary for the establishment of a permanent focus of
  plague exist on the Pacific coast of the United States. The broad
  valleys and lofty mountains of this region are rich in the
  _arctomyinæ_, there being no less than 12 species in California alone.
  In the high Sierras the marmot (_Marmota flaviventer_),[AG] a species
  of the natural enzootic host of Le Dantec, is found in great numbers.
  The ground squirrel infests the valleys and foothills in an unbroken
  chain from Oregon to the Mexican border. Once planted in this ideal
  soil, infection may never be uprooted or its growth and extension
  controlled. Small outbreaks will occur here and there, and periodical
  visitations of greater magnitude may be expected in cities where a
  combination of epidemiological factors is permitted.

Footnote AG:

    “California Mammals,” Frank Stephens.

  The facts as set forth in this paper have caused grave apprehension in
  the minds of those who have been at all conversant with the conditions
  in the transbay counties since 1903. At that time the writer
  recognized the probability of the establishment of a permanent focus
  of plague in that locality, and subsequent discoveries have proven the
  correctness of the assumption. This changes the aspect of the problem
  from that of a local infection to one of national importance. Once
  established in such a rural community, plague is dislodged with
  difficulty and only after a campaign covering a considerable length of
  time. Being a national problem it can be best solved by the Federal
  Government.


                              REFERENCES.

  The Croonian Lectures on Plague, W. J. Simpson; Journal of Hygiene,
  Volume VI, No. 4; Volume VII, No. 6; Volume VIII, No. 2; Plague among
  the Ground Squirrels of California, W. B. Wherry, Journal Infectious
  Diseases, Volume V, No. 5; California Mammals, Frank Stephens.




                         RODENT EXTERMINATION.

               By Passed Asst. Surg. WILLIAM COLBY RUCKER,

        _United States Public Health and Marine-Hospital Service_.


  It should be remembered that rodents are extremely wily creatures and
  that any campaign against them is a contest between the wit of man on
  the one hand and acute animal instinct on the other. The rat, by his
  constant association with man, has become extremely wary, and is
  frightened by anything in the least out of the ordinary. They will eat
  the bread on which poison is spread so carefully that they will leave
  behind the poison and take practically all the bread; they will open
  traps by pressing down the pan, and they have been known to repeat
  this operation several times within an hour, entering the trap, eating
  the bait, and then liberating themselves. At other times they will
  enter the trap and stand on the pan with their hind legs, eat the
  cheese, then carefully turn around and back out. This, of course, is
  not possible with snap traps, but they have been known to spring them
  by causing pieces of wood to fall upon them, after which the bait
  would be eaten. Rats are found wherever food exists in abundance or
  where they can find suitable breeding and nesting places.

  Rodent extermination is a problem, with difficulties arising from the
  animal’s highly developed regard for self-preservation. In main, the
  rat requires two conditions for life. He needs plentiful food and
  places suitable for nesting and breeding. Eliminate either of these
  elements and you drive away your rats. Yet the problem remains far
  more difficult than shown in the simple terms of the above equation.
  The fabulous speed at which rats multiply will baffle all but the most
  determined and efficient efforts to exterminate them. Under normal
  conditions each female bears 3 litters a year and each litter produces
  10 young. Under conditions ideally favorable, it has been computed
  that 1 pair of rats will in five years, providing all can live so
  long, increase to 940,369,969,152. Such a result is, of course,
  impossible in nature, for it means that every rat born of the original
  pair survive five years; that every litter of 10 contains 5 males and
  5 females; and that the ideally favorable conditions persist. On the
  other hand, rodent existence is an unending struggle in which an
  enormous percentage succumbs; the ratio of half males and half females
  does not hold; and ordinary conditions of life are hardly even
  favorable. Nevertheless, the above proves emphatically that no rat
  eradication can be effective unless the breeding is curtailed. Any
  campaign against rodents must aim (_a_) to slaughter the greatest
  possible number of those already living and (_b_) to prevent the
  possibility of further breeding.

  The existing rats are best attacked by trapping, by poisoning, and by
  their natural enemies. Traps and poisons alone have been found
  insufficient to keep pace with the rat’s speed of multiplication. The
  surest of the rat’s enemies are his natural ones, and once they have
  been loosed upon him his chance of escape is reduced. The cat, dog,
  skunk, and other rodent foes, given a fair chance, quickly drive out
  rats. But these animals do not eradicate the pest. The rats will
  probably migrate to some other shelter, returning when their natural
  enemies have quieted down. Absolute extermination is reached only when
  conditions make the continuation of species impossible for the rat.

  The size and frequency of rodent litters decreases proportionately
  with every cutting off of food supplies. Separate the rat from his
  pabulum and he will not breed so freely nor so often as when he is
  well fed. Destroy rat habitations and make it impossible for them to
  find new nesting places, and breeding will virtually cease, since the
  unsheltered progeny can no longer survive, and since the starving
  parent rats are driven to cannibalism in the struggle for existence.

  Campaigns against rodents must cover five directions: (1) Trapping,
  (2) poisoning, (3) exposing them to natural enemies, (4) cutting off
  food supply, and (5) destroying existing nests at the same time that
  the making of new ones is prevented.

  Parenthetically, it may be noted that while these principles apply
  equally to the extermination of rats in cities and in country
  districts, their application must vary according to the place.


                               TRAPPING.

  The kind of traps to be used varies with the rodent to be captured and
  the locality which it infests.


                              CAGE TRAPS.

  The large 19-inch French cage trap gives good results where rats are
  plentiful. It should be made of stiff, heavy wire and well reenforced,
  as a large, strong rat will force his head between the wires in a weak
  trap and thus escape. Before setting, the lever on the trap should be
  tested to see that it works properly. The trap should be placed on a
  hard surface, with the rear end a little higher than the entrance, so
  that the trap will close promptly. When setting the trap in the open
  it should be fastened to a board on which about an inch of soft dirt
  has been spread. Place the trap where the rat usually goes for food or
  in a runway and disturb the surroundings as little as possible. It is
  sometimes well to place the trap near where there is dripping water,
  as the rats come there to drink. If the trap is set in hay or straw or
  wood it should be covered (with the exception of the entrance) with
  this material. When this is not possible it should be covered with a
  piece of sacking or placed in a dark corner or beneath the floors.
  When setting the traps in the sewer a dry place should be chosen.

  The rat is more or less of an epicure, therefore the bait should be
  changed at frequent intervals. Also he should be given food which he
  is not in the habit of getting. For example: In a meat market
  vegetables are the best bait, while in a location where vegetables are
  plentiful fresh liver and fish heads, or a little grain, are best. The
  following may be suggested as good bait to be used: Fish, fish heads,
  raw meat, cheese, smoked fish, fresh liver, cooked corn beef, fried
  bacon, pine nuts, apples, carrots, and corn. When trapping in chicken
  yards a small chick or duckling is remarkably good. When a large
  number of rats are caught in one trap, search for the female and leave
  her alive in the trap, as she may call in the young or the males. The
  bait should be fastened to the inner side of the top of the trap with
  a piece of fine wire so that the first rat in can not force the bait
  underneath the pan and thus prevent the entrance of other rats. A few
  grains of barley should be scattered near the entrance of the trap and
  a small piece of cheese or meat fastened to the pan with a piece of
  wire. It is often well to touch the pan with a feather which has been
  dipped in oil of anise or oil of rhodium. Before leaving the trap it
  should be smoked with a piece of burning newspaper to kill the smell
  of the human hands or the rats which have been in it. Do not handle
  the trap after burning it out. When trapping in a neighborhood where
  rats are known to exist the traps should not be moved for three or
  four days unless they have rats in them, as it is well for the rats to
  become accustomed to seeing them and thus careless about entering. It
  is not wise to kill rats where they are caught, as the squealing may
  frighten the other rats away.


                              SNAP TRAPS.

  Snap or spring traps are best for use in houses and stores, with the
  exception of fish and meat markets. Snap traps are best for use in
  runways, beams, and shelves. It is sometimes well to disguise the trap
  by covering its floor with a little sawdust or dirt. They should be
  first tested to see that they work properly and that the staples are
  secure. New traps should be smoked or stained to render them an
  inconspicuous color.

  The bait should consist of some firm material, such as fried bacon or
  tough meat, and should be tied on so that the rat will be obliged to
  pull on it and thus spring the trap. The trap should be placed in a
  corner or close to the wall on a flat, hard surface, so that the rat
  can not spring it with his tail or by walking on it.


                             BARREL TRAPS.

  In warehouses and granaries large numbers of rats may frequently be
  trapped by using a barrel or garbage can having a metal top which is
  carefully balanced. Large pieces of strong cheese are placed in the
  middle of the cover and a plank laid from the floor to the edge of the
  barrel. The rat runs up the plank onto the smooth metallic lid which
  tips and the rat is precipitated into the barrel.

  In cities trapping is one of the most effective of the three methods
  to slaughter rodents. The rat highways are easily discovered and in
  them traps capture great numbers of the unwary. In the country one can
  not so readily determine the rat highway. This difficulty diminishes
  the effectiveness of trapping. To make up for what is thus lost
  shooting has been resorted to with good results. In Honolulu, where a
  vigorous campaign against rodents is being waged, a very large
  proportion of the captured rats (_Mus rattus_ and _M. alexandrinus_)
  have been shot from trees. In Contra Costa County, Cal., where ground
  squirrels are being exterminated, it has been found that rodents
  possess an instinctive suspicion of traps and that during the summer
  months shooting is not only the most practical but also about the only
  effective means of attacking them. Shotguns are the weapons to use. A
  rifle requires the hunter to be a better shot than is ordinarily
  obtainable for such work, and, furthermore, the danger from its longer
  range and from ricocheting bullets menaces cattle and farm hands who
  may be working in the vicinity. As to the shot and the powder charge
  for shells hunters differ. It is a different problem for every
  shotgun, depending upon the gun’s caliber and choke. The principle is
  to put the greatest number of the largest shot the gun will carry into
  the rodent body. Thus in 10 and 12 gauge guns shoot No. 8 shot and in
  16-gauge guns shoot No. 9 shot, but this varies with each individual
  gun. The use of soft lead or chilled shot seems a matter for personal
  preference. The charge must be as much as the gun will carry. In the
  country smokeless powder becomes a necessity during summer months
  since black powder is liable to ignite the dry grass and stubble.


                               POISONING.


                             PLASTER FLOUR.

  Plaster flour is prepared by mixing one part dry plaster of Paris with
  two parts flour or meal. When this is taken in sufficient quantity by
  the rodent it produces death by the formation of enteroliths, death
  occurring in from four to eight days. This is a poison of uncertain
  value and is recommended chiefly on account of its cheapness and small
  danger to children and domestic animals. It can not be used in wet
  weather, and judging from the small number of rats found dead with
  plaster casts in the alimentary canal it is not believed to be very
  efficacious.


                           PHOSPHORUS PASTE.

  Phosphorus paste is prepared by mixing crude phosphorus in the
  proportion of one-half to 10 per cent in a suitable base. The latter
  may consist of cheese, sugar, and oil of anise mixed together and
  heated to the consistency of sirup, the phosphorus being added after
  the fire has been withdrawn and the mixture begun to cool. Other bases
  are cheese, corn meal, and oil of rhodium; cheese, ground fish, or
  meat and oil of valerian, glucose, and a small quantity of flour.
  Glucose makes an exceptionally good base, as when properly mixed the
  poison thus prepared is noninflammable even when heated. The liability
  to spontaneous combustion of phosphorus mixtures eliminates their use
  in hay, grain, or other warehouses or places where there is danger of
  fire or the invalidation of insurance. It should not be forgotten that
  phosphorus deteriorates very rapidly, especially when it is exposed to
  the sun.


                             ARSENIC PASTE.

  This consists of arsenious acid combined with a base of cheese, meal,
  or macerated fish. It may be placed on raisins or prunes and is to be
  recommended on account of its stability, the ease with which it is
  handled, and the absence of danger from fire. It should, however, be
  distributed with great care, every precaution being used to place it
  where it is inaccessible to children and domestic animals.


                           BARIUM CARBONATE.

  This has not proven an effective poison owing to the fact that it is
  easily decomposed by the vegetable acids, especially lactic and oleic
  acid found in cheese and oil. The poisonous effect is not greatly
  altered by this change. A disagreeable metallic taste is produced and
  the rats will not take it.


                              STRYCHNINE.

  Strychnine is prepared as a poison by soaking wheat over night in
  water and subsequently pouring off the excess fluid and placing the
  wheat in a caldron containing hot glucose and strychnia sulphate, the
  latter in the proportion of one-tenth of 1 per cent. After carefully
  stirring so that each grain is thoroughly coated it is dried in
  shallow iron pans over a slow fire with constant agitation of the
  grain, or by exposure on sheets or canvas to the rays of the sun. This
  mixture may be made much more efficient by the addition of cyanide of
  potassium in the proportion one-half of 1 per cent. Poisoned grain has
  not been found efficient in the destruction of rats, as its bitter
  taste causes them to eat little or none of it. It is, however,
  particularly efficient in poisoning squirrels, as it is taken readily
  by them. The chief objections to its use are its cost, difficulties of
  preparation, and liability to its being taken by chickens.


                           CARBON BISULPHIDE.

  Carbon bisulphide is not a poison so much as an asphyxiant. As the
  name indicates, it is a two-to-one mixture of sulphur and carbon. The
  resulting liquid preparation should be kept in air-tight cans, since
  it evaporates quickly. The principle of its efficacy against rodents
  is that the fumes are heavier than air and, sinking into a rat or
  squirrel hole, drive out the necessary oxygen. To use bisulphide
  saturate a small pad of some absorbent cotton, jute, wool, or flannel
  material with the liquid, thrust this into the rodents’ burrow, and
  carefully stop all apertures through which the fumes might escape.
  Animal life of every sort in that burrow is quickly asphyxiated. In
  buildings the use of carbon bisulphide is greatly hampered by the
  difficulty to confine the gas by stopping all cracks and other
  openings. Also the odors of decomposition in animals so killed stand
  against its use anywhere but in the country.

  Against rats and squirrels in country places carbon bisulphide has
  proved one of the best of all weapons. Where it kills, it kills whole
  families at a time, not one by one, as must ever be the case with
  other poisons and with traps or shotguns. Not only does it kill the
  rodent but it also destroys the rodent’s fleas and vermin, which is
  most important. A dead infected rat is still a menace, since its fleas
  may inoculate other rats and human beings with the infection. Destroy
  the fleas and that greatest danger is removed. The recent campaigns
  against rodents in the United States have been waged because rats and
  squirrels were infected with bubonic plague; hence the added value of
  carbon bisulphide. Unfortunately, though this asphyxiant proved so
  effective in the work against squirrels in Contra Costa County, Cal.,
  it proved to be well-nigh useless during the summer season when dry
  heat checks the adobe and makes the ground generally porous.
  Nevertheless, the value of carbon bisulphide, especially for sanitary
  purposes, can not be easily overestimated for work in the country
  during the fall, winter, and spring seasons.

  Fumigants in general are effective. They possess no marked or peculiar
  advantages as special weapons against rodents. Their use is limited
  chiefly to warehouses, elevators, and ship holds. They are deadly to
  rats in the same way that they are fatal to every sort of life. Many
  difficulties and some dangers stand in the way of their use. It is
  safe to advise that no one unacquainted with their action should ever
  employ fumigants.


                            NATURAL ENEMIES.

  The war upon rats carried on in San Francisco has proved the great
  value of cats and dogs as natural enemies of the rat. That city now
  has a law requiring all structures of 800 or less square feet and
  outside certain limits to be raised high enough above the ground to
  allow access to cats and dogs. (All other buildings in the city must
  be rat proof.) An index to the worth of rodent foes in their
  extermination points from what happened during the great London
  plague. At that time the disease was supposed to be air carried; any
  furry material might hold and spread infection. The magistrates
  decreed that all cats and dogs should be killed to prevent plague from
  lodging and traveling in their hair. Rats were thus free to live and
  breed unmolested, and live and breed they did until the plague killed
  them off; then and then only did the disease cease its ravages among
  human beings.


                                 DOGS.

  Slight training will make excellent ratters of Fox, Irish, or Scotch
  terriers. Fox terriers have proved especially valuable as retrievers
  when shooting squirrels, which in one case out of five will escape to
  their burrows unless sharply retrieved.


                                 CATS.

  Cats are little less valuable than dogs against rats, while they are
  useless against squirrels. The ordinary cat is too well fed to attack
  large rats and goes, almost solely, after mice.

  All other animals naturally preying upon rodents class with wild
  life—weazels, ferrets, badgers, skunks, and minks. These can be used
  only in country places, where, however, their raiding of chicken coops
  tends to counterbalance their value as ratters. The skunk alone is an
  infrequent slayer of fowl, whereas he harvests innumerable farm pests
  from worms to crickets. Yet an insurmountable prejudice against skunks
  stands in the way of realizing his full usefulness against rodents. In
  addition, various hawks and most owls kill off rats. Since rats come
  out chiefly in the nighttime, owls have the better chance to be
  serviceable in their destruction. The efficiency of these birds in
  rural districts quite equals that of a dog against rats, while besides
  dogs we have not as yet found a safe natural foe of ground squirrels.

  But all such attacks upon rats fail of absolute eradication. One must
  make it impossible for them to find sustenance and must destroy not
  only all existing rat houses, but also all chance of their digging or
  finding new ones.


                   CUTTING OFF THE RAT’S FOOD SUPPLY.

  This is important not alone for its effect in a campaign upon rodents,
  but equally because it necessitates sanitary care and cleanliness in
  handling foodstuffs intended for humans and garbage coming therefrom.
  Abattoirs and places where cattle and hogs are fattened perhaps
  furnish the greatest number of rats. Stables, food-supply stores,
  groceries, meat, fish and vegetable markets, restaurants, bakeries,
  and the various places where food is prepared for human consumption
  are usually infested. In each of the places the barriers vary
  according to the nature of the premises. Rat-proof receptacles for the
  foodstuffs must be installed wherever practical. In San Francisco an
  ordinance requires every stable to have metal lined feed bins. Markets
  and places where eatables are constantly being shifted about must be
  properly screened against rats. Screening should be of heavy wire and
  sufficient fineness, not larger than halfinch mesh. In all places the
  food has to be raised such a height above floorings as to be beyond
  the rat’s reach. This applies also to corn and grain cribs in the
  country. Yet, no matter how carefully the bulk of the food may be kept
  from rats, negligence in handling it, in spilling or scattering small
  amounts upon floors or the ground, will nullify every precaution.

  No less painstaking must be the disposition of garbage. Ordinance now
  requires that all premises in San Francisco be provided with “sanitary
  garbage cans.” Preferably these should be of zinc or galvanized iron
  and fitted with tight covers. Under no circumstances should the cover
  be allowed to remain off its can. Garbage is to be placed in a can
  without delay and care must prevent the dropping of it upon the
  ground. Rats once served communities as scavengers; wherever the
  scavenger work is laxly done, rats are welcomed. Finally, garbage must
  never be allowed to accumulate and should be removed daily, not less
  often than every other day.

  Special conditions, closely related to the next topic, are encountered
  in large warehouses and grain sheds. Places where large quantities of
  food may be stored for a length of time should be constructed of
  reenforced concrete to be rat proof. Then, again, where vessels are
  changing cargoes, rat-proof compounds should be erected for the
  temporary storage of freights. The water fronts of seaports are
  invariably rat ridden; and in San Francisco a compound for freight
  held in transit was found invaluable. No effort can be spared in
  keeping rats from their food if their extermination is to be
  accomplished.

  With regard to ground squirrels, the use of poisoned wheat very
  properly enters here. With the changing season ground squirrels change
  their habitat and food. During early spring these rodents come down
  from their winter dwellings in the hills and seek burrows in meadow
  lands and cultivated spots. Months have passed since the squirrel
  tasted wheat; his fickle appetite betrays him. From the first spring
  months until harvest time one can kill thousands of ground squirrels
  by tempting them with poisoned wheat. But so soon as harvest time
  comes, they seek new growing green stuffs to eat and thereafter, on
  through winter, poisoned wheat is ineffective.


                   BUILDING THE RAT OUT OF EXISTENCE.

  Most certain of all methods to get rid of rodents is to allow them no
  place in which to live. San Francisco effects this result through its
  ordinance, which requires small houses outside certain city limits to
  be raised so high from the ground that dogs and cats can drive out
  rats from under them, and which requires all other buildings in the
  city to be rat proofed with cement or concrete. The latter
  contemplates foundation walls of concrete or brick sunk at least 1
  foot to 18 inches to 2 feet above that surface; the whole ground area
  inclosed by their foundation walls must be covered with concrete at
  least 1½ inches in thickness. Thus the entrance of burrowing rodents
  is prevented. Even where buildings stand upon rock or hardpan, these
  requirements should be enforced. Rock may crack, gradual weather decay
  may cause crevices to be found in it unseen crannies may be found by
  rodents, and once the rat lodges in rock his nest is virtually
  unassailable. With hardpan it is even worse, for the rats can burrow
  in it, with some difficulty, truly, but when nests are impossible
  elsewhere, necessity will drive rats to find shelter in hardpan, which
  will protect them quite as well as rock. In the main, these two points
  of building rats out of existence, though modified, will apply to any
  structure.

  Yet any negligence will overthrow these safeguards. The principle is
  to allow no opening within which rodents may nest. Plank sidewalks and
  back yards will continue the rat nuisance even though buildings are
  amply protected. Carelessness in throwing old boxes into basements or
  piling old lumber or refuse within reach will supply shelter for rats
  despite concreted ground area. The precaution must be constant and
  consistent.

  Another important phase is to cut off the rodent migrations. Prevent
  rats from moving from place to place. Their time-honored highway is
  through sewers. Modern sewers afford no protection, inviting rodents
  to live in them as formerly. Scarcely less important, access should be
  stopped. Catch-basin feeding sewers should be constructed so that rats
  can not slip through into the mains, or having once gotten in, they
  can not escape, and hence must drown. Farms are frequently protected
  against rodent migrations by tin or zinc sheeting sunk into the ground
  about a foot and a half and standing about the same height above the
  surface along the fence line.

  Finally, as the progress of rodents from place to place within
  communities must be hindered, so must they be stopped from entering
  new communities. Railroads and seagoing vessels carry great numbers of
  rats in freight. The rat-proof compounds above described serve well
  enough so far as railroads are concerned. With vessels it is a
  different matter, and one demanding special attention, since the
  rodent is only too likely to import infection from foreign harbors.
  All hawsers thrown out to make boats fast should be provided with
  traps to catch any rat seeking to land along the hawser. San
  Francisco, about to possess a rat-proof water front, is now building
  concrete wharves to prevent the landing of rodents. Every port should
  be safeguarded by stone, concrete, or iron wharves and piers. As a
  further protection, all ships should have permanent devices, as is now
  proposed for naval construction. Levy’s system of metal conduits built
  into vessels promises much in the present world-wide war upon rodents.
  Rodents must be “built out of existence,” and to eradicate rats for
  all time we must erect wide systems of municipal fortifications.




                      NATURAL ENEMIES OF THE RAT.

                            By DAVID E. LANTZ,

     _Assistant Biologist, United States Department of Agriculture_.


                             INTRODUCTION.

  Undoubtedly the great increase of rodent pests throughout North
  America is in large part due to a general scarcity of the animals that
  habitually prey upon them. Since the early settlement of the country
  persistent warfare has been made on birds and mammals of prey on the
  plea that they are enemies of poultry, game, and insectivorous birds.
  Efforts to destroy the predaceous birds and mammals have been greatly
  stimulated by the payment of municipal, county, and state bounties,
  and the destruction has gone on until in many sections these animals
  have nearly disappeared.

  The effect of killing off the natural enemies of rodents has been to
  disturb natural conditions. Rodents multiply so rapidly that they
  derive an undue advantage in the struggle for existence when their
  natural enemies are destroyed. The result is noticeable in the
  increased depredations of rats, field mice, rabbits, and other pests.

  The destruction of carnivorous wild mammals and birds by the farmer,
  hunter, or game preserver is often due to misapprehension. Because one
  kind of hawk preys on the farmer’s poultry is not sufficient reason
  for exterminating all hawks. Nor does the fact that occasionally an
  owl or a skunk destroys a chicken or a game bird justify warfare on
  all owls and skunks. It is the occasional individual and not the
  species that offends.


                       ANIMALS THAT DESTROY RATS.

  The usefulness of the natural enemies of the rat must not be
  overlooked in plans for its repression. Among the more important are
  the larger hawks and owls, skunks, foxes, coyotes, weasels, minks, and
  a few other wild mammals; as well as cats, dogs, and ferrets among
  domestic animals, and snakes and alligators among reptiles.


                                 HAWKS.

  Most of the larger hawks destroy rats. Feeding only in the daytime,
  they seldom find their quarry near houses and barns, where rats do not
  venture out until after sunset. Besides, owing to persecution by
  farmers, hawks generally keep away from farm buildings. In the open
  fields, however, where rats feed in early morning and late afternoon,
  hawks find many of the rodents.

  The species of hawks that more commonly feed on rats are the buzzard
  hawks, including the red-tailed (_Buteo borealis_ and sub-species),
  the red-shouldered (_B. lineatus_), the broad-winged (_B.
  platypterus_), and the Swainson (_B. swainsoni_); the rough-legged
  hawks (_Archibuteo_), two species; and, to a less extent, the marsh
  harrier (_Circus hudsonius_), and a few other species.

  The writer has several times found the remains of rats about the nest
  of the red-tailed hawk. Of the 562 stomachs of this species examined
  by Dr. A. K. Fisher, of the Biological Survey, less than 10 per cent
  contained poultry or game, while more than 70 per cent contained
  injurious rodents.[AH] Most of the other species of buzzard hawks made
  a better showing even than this, especially the Swainson hawk, which
  had fed entirely on harmful rodents and insects. The stomachs of
  rough-legged hawks examined nearly all contained harmful rodents and
  none of them contained remains of birds of any sort.

Footnote AH:

    Hawks and Owls of the United States, p. 62, 1893.

  A few months ago, while walking on the Potomac flats near Washington,
  the writer met some boys who had just shot a red-tailed hawk. Its crop
  was greatly distended, and later examination showed that the bird had
  recently eaten an enormous brown rat. Although the shooting was
  contrary to law, when it was reported to the nearest policeman, his
  comment was, “Oh, a hawk! Why, it’s a good thing to shoot a hawk.” The
  incident illustrates the general popular prejudice against all hawks.


                                 OWLS.

  Because they hunt by twilight and at night, owls are more efficient
  than hawks in destroying rats. All American owls, except the more
  diminutive species, prey on the common rat. Even the little screech
  owl (_Otus asio_) feeds on young rats.

  Of all our species, the barn owl (_Aluco pratincola_) is preeminent as
  a destroyer of rats. It lives commonly about farm buildings, sometimes
  even making its nest and rearing its young in the pigeon loft without
  molesting the pigeons. In such surroundings its opportunities for
  securing rats are excellent, and no other wild bird is so useful on
  the farm. The late Henry Newman once stated that every barn owl is
  worth £5 a year to the British nation, and the value of the bird to
  the American farmer is not less.

  Owls, hawks, and other birds of prey that swallow their quarry whole
  or in large pieces do not digest the bones, fur, and feathers. They
  eject these indigestible parts in the form of large pellets, in which
  the fur or feathers surround the bones. The contents of these casts
  are an excellent index of the food of owls. Dr. A. K. Fisher, of the
  Biological Survey, has examined 987 pellets of a pair of barn owls
  that live in a tower of the Smithsonian building in Washington, and in
  them found the skulls of no fewer than 192 rats (_Mus norvegicus_),
  together with those of 554 common mice and 1,508 field mice (_Microtus
  pennsylvanicus_).

  Dr. John I. Northrop found a nest of the barn owl on Andros Island,
  Bahamas. It contained two young owls and the remains of a black rat
  (_Mus rattus_). The ground about the nest was covered with pellets
  which contained remains of the black rat and no other species.[AI]

Footnote AI:

    The Auk, vol. 8, p. 75, 1891.

  The great horned owl (_Bubo virginianus_) is the largest of our
  resident owls. It feeds mainly on rodents, though occasionally it
  takes a fowl found roosting in an exposed situation, as on a fence or
  in a tree. While it occasionally destroys game birds, the rats it
  captures would probably destroy ten times as much game as the owl.
  Charles Dury, of Ohio, in 1886 published a letter from O. E. Niles in
  which it was stated that he counted 113 dead rats at one time under a
  nest of this bird.[AJ]

Footnote AJ:

    Jour. Cincinnati Soc. Nat. Hist., vol. 8, p. 63, 1886.

  The snowy owl (_Nyctea nyctea_) is a rather rare winter visitor in the
  northern United States. It usually arrives when the ground is covered
  with snow and ordinary food is scarce. Near barns, outbuildings, and
  stacks it finds its chief subsistence in the common rat; and, if
  undisturbed, will stay for several weeks in the same locality,
  destroying many of the pests. Unfortunately, mounted specimens of this
  beautiful owl are so much in demand that the majority of them fall a
  prey to the specimen hunter and the taxidermist. The destruction of
  this bird should be prohibited under heavy penalties.

  The barred owl (_Strix varia_), the long-eared owl (_Asio
  wilsonianus_), and the short-eared owl (_Asio flammeus_) all destroy
  some rats; but as they do not generally nest or live in the vicinity
  of farm buildings, the rodents they capture are taken chiefly from the
  fields. Occasionally a short-eared or a long-eared owl makes its
  winter home in a group of evergreens near the farm buildings, and does
  excellent service in clearing the premises of rats and mice.
  Evergreens are desirable about a country place, if for no other reason
  than that they attract owls.

  The practice of indiscriminately destroying hawks and owls should be
  discouraged. Game preservers especially should realize that the birds
  of prey they kill would, if allowed to live, destroy rats, which in
  the course of a year do many times as much harm to game as the
  supposed offenders do. Besides, the birds would destroy also large
  numbers of mice and injurious insects.

  The farmer and the poultry grower may easily learn to recognize the
  few harmful species of hawks, and should confine their warfare to
  these. The practice of setting pole traps for hawks and owls is
  exceedingly reprehensible, as it results chiefly in the destruction of
  our beneficial owls when they come about the premises at night in
  search of rats. Furthermore, the beneficial hawks and owls should have
  legal protection. The larger hawks, nearly all of which are
  beneficial, are slow of wing and much more likely to be shot than the
  swifter and more harmful falcons.


                          NATIVE WILD MAMMALS.

  Not many species of wild carnivorous mammals live where the common rat
  is abundant. Coyotes, foxes, and a few others occasionally find a rat
  in the fields, but for the most part they depend for food on native
  wild rodents and other animals. Chief among the mammals that do good
  work in destroying rats are skunks, minks, and weasels.


                                SKUNKS.

  Skunks are excellent ratters, and when they take up their abode on the
  premises of the farmer, they speedily destroy or drive away all rats
  and mice. This statement applies equally to the large skunks
  (_Mephitis_) and the little spotted skunks (_Spilogale_).
  Unfortunately, skunks are seldom allowed to tenant the premises
  without being molested by either dogs or men. When undisturbed, they
  are inoffensive, and will stay about the farm buildings or stacks
  until rats and mice are no longer to be had for food.

  Skunks usually hunt by night, and hence poultry properly housed is
  safe from them. The larger skunks do not climb, and can capture only
  fowls that roost on the ground. Indeed, so few skunks ever learn to
  kill poultry that there is no good reason for warfare on the skunk
  family. Besides destroying mice and rats, the animals are invaluable
  as consumers of noxious insects, especially cutworms, army worms,
  white grubs, May beetles, grasshoppers, crickets, and sphinx moths.


                                WEASELS.

  Weasels are good ratters and mousers. Several of our species come
  about buildings, and often perform excellent service in destroying
  rats and mice. They are more likely than the skunk to attack poultry,
  for they can enter the poultry house through smaller openings. At
  times weasels seem to kill for the mere love of killing, and while
  occasionally this trait makes them formidable in the poultry house, it
  also renders them more efficient as destroyers of rodents. A small
  weasel can follow a rat into all its retreats, and will soon clear a
  stackyard or shed of all rodents.

  Our largest weasel, the black-footed ferret (_Putorius nigripes_),
  occasionally deserts its wild haunts on the plains and comes about
  buildings in search of rats and mice. In 1905, while the writer was at
  Hays, Kans., one of these ferrets took up its quarters under a board
  sidewalk in the business part of the village. The squealing of the
  rats it killed was often heard.

  As regards the destruction of poultry by weasels, the same care
  necessary to exclude the rat from a poultry house will keep out the
  weasel also. When so excluded, a weasel will do no harm about the
  premises, but may be depended upon to drive out or kill all the rats
  and mice.


                                 MINKS.

  Minks are excellent ratters, but as enemies of poultry are worse than
  weasels. They destroy fish also. The great demand for mink fur causes
  close trapping of these animals, and in the future they are not likely
  to influence greatly the numbers of rodent pests.


                           DOMESTIC ANIMALS.

  Among the enemies of rodents often employed as aids to rat destruction
  are the dog, cat, and ferret.


                                 DOGS.

  The value of dogs as ratters can not be appreciated by those who have
  had no experience with trained animals. The ordinary cur and the
  larger breeds of dogs seldom make useful ratters. Small Irish, Scotch,
  and fox terriers, when well trained, are superior to most other breeds
  as ratters, and under favorable circumstances may be depended on to
  keep premises free from rodents. Much, too, may be done by the farmer
  or householder to increase the effectiveness of his dogs by removing
  obstructions to their work. Corncribs and outbuildings, when of wood,
  should not have floors close to the ground, but should have ample room
  below to permit dogs to move about freely.

  With a little preliminary training, most terriers learn to hunt rats
  independently, and they thus become doubly useful on farms and in
  warehouses.


                                 CATS.

  When the black rat was the dominant species in Europe and America,
  cats were the chief dependence of the householder against rats; but
  comparatively few cats will venture to capture a full-grown brown rat.
  Then, too, the ordinary house cat is too well fed and consequently too
  lazy to be an efficient ratter.

  Occasionally, however, one meets with rat-killing cats whose work in
  destroying the brown rat has decided value. These cats are rarely of
  the fine breeds, but generally of the common “tabby” variety, kept in
  barns or warehouses, fed on milk, and left to forage for their own
  meat. Managed in this way, cats are far less objectionable on sanitary
  grounds than when kept in the house as pets. In the country, on the
  other hand, barn cats are far more likely than the house-kept ones to
  run at large and prey upon birds and young poultry. Aside from the rat
  itself, we have no more serious enemy of birds and game than half-wild
  cats, many of which have been abandoned in fields and woods by the
  thoughtless. All things considered, cats do not rank high as
  destroyers of the common brown rat.


                                FERRETS.

  Tame ferrets, like weasels, are inveterate foes of rats, and can
  follow them into their retreats. Under favorable circumstances ferrets
  are useful aids to the rat catcher, but their value is often greatly
  overestimated. They require experienced handling and the additional
  services of a well-trained dog or two to do effective work. Dogs and
  ferrets must be thoroughly accustomed to each other. A noisy or
  excitable dog is useless in ferreting. The ferret should be used only
  to drive out the rats, which are then killed by the dogs. If an
  unmuzzled ferret is sent into rat retreats under floors, it is apt to
  lie up after killing a rat and sucking its blood. Sometimes the ferret
  will remain for hours in a rat burrow or escape by unguarded exits and
  be lost.

  Such experiences often discourage the amateur ferreter. Besides,
  ferrets are subject to diseases and require the greatest of care as to
  their food. For these reasons the use of ferrets to destroy rats,
  except in the hands of the experienced, is generally expensive and
  disappointing.


                             OTHER ANIMALS.


                               MONGOOSE.

  The various species of mongoose (_Herpestes_ and _Mongos_) are
  destroyers of rats, and their importation into this country has often
  been urged. Many years ago they were introduced into Jamaica and
  Hawaii to save the sugar plantations from ravages by rats. The
  mongoose has, however, proved very destructive to native birds and
  poultry in the islands, and its introduction is now generally
  regretted. Its importation into the United States is prohibited by
  law.


                              ALLIGATORS.

  In the South the alligator is said to destroy many rats along levees
  and banks of streams, and its protection has been urged on this
  account.


                                SNAKES.

  Our larger snakes are beneficial in destroying rats, mice, prairie
  squirrels, and pocket gophers. As most of the food of snakes is
  obtained remote from human abodes, only a small percentage consists of
  rats.


                     BOUNTIES ON PREDATORY ANIMALS.

  Whatever may be said in favor of bounties on the larger beasts of
  prey, those on hawks, owls, and the smaller fur-bearing animals can
  not be justified. Payments of this sort should cease, and laws should
  be enacted to protect species which careful investigations have shown
  to be mainly beneficial.

  A few States still pay bounties for the destruction of foxes, weasels,
  skunks, minks, and raccoons. All of these, except the southern
  weasels, have valuable fur, and hence should be protected as a source
  of wealth. In addition they do far more good by destroying rats, mice,
  and other field pests than harm to game and poultry.

  The payment of bounties on hawks of any kind is open to the objection
  that officials hardly ever discriminate between the harmful and the
  useful kinds, even when the statutes do so. Since the beneficial kinds
  are the more easily captured, public money is often paid out to reward
  what really injures the community. The bounty on owls is still more
  reprehensible, since owls are a more decided check to rodent increase.

  The natural enemies of the rat exercise a steady, cumulative effect in
  restricting the numbers of the pest. That the effect is not greater is
  largely our own fault, since instead of protecting the birds and
  mammals that prey on the rat, we destroy them, sometimes even offering
  bounties on their heads. In future our aim should be to increase their
  numbers and to protect them in every way possible.




                 RAT PROOFING AS AN ANTIPLAGUE MEASURE.

                           By RICHARD H. CREEL,

        _Passed Assistant Surgeon, United States Public Health and
                        Marine-Hospital Service_.


  To appreciate the great importance and absolute necessity of rat
  proofing as an antiplague measure, it is only necessary to consider
  the results that have followed its use as compared with other measures
  that have been relied on in recent years in combating this disease.
  These were, briefly, disinfection, evacuation, or destruction of
  buildings in infected areas, preventive inoculations, and destruction
  of rats either by poison or by trapping.

  Plague was formerly believed to be communicable by aerial transmission
  and through the agency of fomites. Sanitarians have, therefore, put
  great faith in disinfection procedures, but the results have never
  been satisfactory, and it is only necessary to consider the method of
  transmission of plague to perceive the fatuity of bactericidal
  measures. Measures intended for the destruction of fleas are also of
  relatively small value. It is well worth while to destroy all fleas
  possible, but if those infesting the rat population escape, the
  efforts will have had little effect in preventing the spread of
  plague. It is only those fleas that infest rats and their habitats
  that are of importance in relation to the transmission of disease, and
  it is only by rat proofing that their destruction in rat burrows and
  runs can be accomplished.

  Rat-proofing of individual buildings is of no recent date, but new
  emphasis was laid on rat-proofing as a separate and distinct
  antiplague measure by Passed Assistant Surgeon Mark J. White in an
  article written in the fall of 1907.[AK]

Footnote AK:

    Journal American Medical Association October 19, 1907.

  Disinfecting procedures must be regarded as of minor importance in
  plague prevention, except in pneumonic cases where its use is
  imperative. It is not intended to depreciate the value of
  disinfection, but rather to estimate its exact value as an antipest
  measure. Time and money should not be wasted nor a feeling of false
  security engendered by using an ineffective measure when others, as
  rat proofing, of much greater value are at hand. As an example of this
  might be cited an outbreak of plague in one of the refugee camps
  during the recent epidemic of the disease in San Francisco. This camp
  covered several blocks and housed between two and three thousand
  people. The camp grounds throughout and the houses were disinfected
  and disinfected well. At the same time, every effort was made to
  poison and trap rats. Notwithstanding these precautions, cases
  continued to occur, but when the houses were elevated there followed
  an immediate cessation of plague cases in the camp.

  Another case of infected premises proved equally refractory to
  disinfection. The place was a large two-story frame dwelling located
  in the center of the city and in a good neighborhood. The yard was
  planked, as was also a part of the basement, the latter being used as
  a storeroom. On November 1 there occurred in this dwelling a fatal
  case of human plague, and plague rats were found at the same time. The
  place was disinfected in the usual manner and thorough measures were
  taken to trap and poison rats with apparent subsidence of infection,
  but on January 22 a plague rat was trapped, followed by another on
  January 31, after which the occupant of the building vacated it in
  great alarm. All planking was then removed from the yard and basement
  and concrete substituted by the owner, the place thereby being
  rendered thoroughly rat proof, and no plague rats were subsequently
  taken from that dwelling or in its immediate neighborhood.

  In 1902 the plague outbreak was almost wholly confined to the Chinese
  colony. Chinatown was made the battle ground, and among other measures
  rat proofing was enforced, with the result that after the fire it was
  by far the most sanitary district in the city of San Francisco from a
  structural point of view. The buildings when erected were made rat
  proof from cellar to garret. The Chinese had had their lesson, and to
  their credit it must be stated that they responded with a greater show
  of intelligence than did some of the residents in surrounding
  districts.

  Adjacent to the Chinese colony is the Latin quarter. In the rebuilding
  of this section, no attention was paid to rat proofing; consequently
  many of the buildings consisted of small shacks set on the ground or
  abutting some insanitary stable, and were therefore ideal rat harbors.
  On account of these conditions the natural results followed.
  Chinatown, on the other hand, which had contributed in the previous
  epidemic almost the entire number of plague cases during the epidemic
  of 1907, did not furnish more than two or three of the plague cases
  reported; that is, less than 2 per cent of the total cases reported,
  while the Italian colony, including North Beach district, probably
  furnished over 50 per cent of the total.

  The evacuation or burning of buildings can hardly be called a
  successful measure any more than a retreat can be styled a victory;
  moreover, there can be no question from an economic standpoint as to
  the value of rat proofing over abandonment except in a few isolated
  cases of dilapidated insanitary property.

  Schemes and plans for demurization, total or partial, have been as
  numerous and varied as they have been unsuccessful. Traps and poisons
  have been the agencies of destruction, but until some highly
  communicable epizootic peculiar to rodents shall have been discovered,
  absolute eradication of the rat can be considered as nothing less than
  impossible.

  A recognized authority on plague, Major Morehead, of the Indian
  Medical Service, states that “rat destruction is of doubtful value,”
  referring, of course, to trapping and poisoning when those measures
  are used solely without auxiliary measures. He agrees with Japanese
  authorities in their arguments that as rat populations decrease, the
  breeding rate among survivors increases, due, obviously, in part at
  least, to increased food supply and harboring facilities. Such a
  result is assured where rat proofing is not accomplished at the same
  time. This latter procedure, by destroying rat harborages and cutting
  off food supplies bring about conditions unfavorable to breeding.

  The total eradication of rats in a locality is not absolutely
  necessary, however, to the eradication of plague. If the rat
  population is kept within fairly low limits, rat centers destroyed,
  and such rat population as does exist well scattered and not
  congested, it is ventured that rat plague will disappear from a
  locality. Plague among rats in San Francisco ceased to appear when the
  number of rodents was reduced some 50 per cent, but such reduction was
  accomplished only after six months of ceaseless endeavor, which
  included also the rat proofing of the bakeries, stables, and markets
  in the city.

  It is a logical supposition that close contact is just as essential
  for the propagation of plague among rats as it is for the spread of
  certain communicable diseases among human beings, the increase of
  cases being in direct proportion to the density of population and
  closeness of contact.


                  RAT PROOFING OF PRIMARY IMPORTANCE.

  Without the general enforcement of rat proofing antiplague measures
  are bound to be more or less temporary and decidedly unsatisfactory.
  This subject is of immense importance to the public, both from a
  sanitary and a commercial standpoint, but the latter aspect of the
  question is more apt to prove of interest to most communities.

  The measures necessary to render buildings rat proof are the same,
  however, whether they be instituted for sanitary or for commercial
  reasons. Rat proofing will, therefore, be considered entirely from a
  sanitary standpoint; but it can be understood that granaries,
  bakeries, butcher shops, packing houses, dwellings, and other places,
  if rat proofed for sanitary reasons, are just as much protected from
  depredation of the rat as though the work had been performed for
  commercial reasons alone.

  Rat proofing has a twofold objective. It serves as a protection to the
  inmates of a building, and excludes rodents from sources of food
  supplies and harboring places. While rat proofing should be enforced
  as a general measure in all plague-infected localities, it is
  imperatively demanded in premises whereon have occurred cases of human
  or rodent plague.

  Plague-infected localities or places that contain food must be
  rendered impervious to rats in order to insure the success of other
  preventive measures. Rats can be trapped or poisoned only when other
  food supply is excluded. A rat will enter a trap for food or will eat
  poisoned preparations not because of their greater attractiveness, but
  because of their greater availability. It therefore follows that rat
  proofing of food supplies is a prerequisite to success in rat
  eradication. The food depots requiring attention in the order of
  importance are stables, meat markets, bakeries, restaurants,
  groceries, warehouses, and private dwellings.

  It is logical to suppose that the most common mode of infection is by
  reason of plague rats dying in the walls, roofs, or floorings of human
  habitations. As soon as the rat’s body is cold the fleas abandon it
  for another rat, some domestic animal, or human being. The risk to
  human inmates in such infected houses, therefore, is evident.

  That rat proofing is a valuable measure is shown by the reports of the
  British Plague Commission where are mentioned the results following
  the use of rat-proof “go-downs” and those not so constructed.
  Additional evidence is presented by the fact that appalling epidemics
  of plague have ravaged India and the China coast, whereas in the
  Philippine Islands but few people die of the disease. It would appear
  that the comparatively few cases in the Philippine Islands were due to
  the fact that most Philippine dwellings are rat proof by reason of
  being elevated from the ground and the fact that the walls are thin
  and offer no refuge whatever to rats.


                       RAT PROOFING IS EXPENSIVE.

  The almost insuperable obstacle that will usually confront the
  sanitary authorities in such work will be either the financial
  inability of the unfortunate community or the sordid unwillingness to
  make any expenditure that does not promise personal gain.

  When the influence of the mosquito in the transmission of yellow fever
  was proven, recourse was had to mosquito proofing of both the sick and
  the well as a preventive measure. Rat proofing in plague is just as
  rational and necessary, but the financial expenditure contemplated
  thereby has been of such proportion as to cause the majority of
  sanitary authorities in different parts of the world to dismiss the
  idea as impossible.

  To properly rat proof a city undeniably requires enormous
  expenditures, but no antiplague campaign was ever waged without an
  immense outlay of both money and labor. If allowed to progress
  unchecked, however, plague, either through ravages of the population
  or through commercial interference, is ruinous. To fight plague,
  therefore, is the only alternative, and a costly campaign should be
  anticipated and prepared for in advance. To merely put out traps and
  poisons without the preliminary rat proofing required can be
  productive of little good and no permanency. Such a plan of campaign
  may be attractive because of its relative cheapness, but any city or
  country that relies wholly on such measures is practicing false
  economy and deferring the day of reckoning.

  It becomes evident, therefore, that rat proofing is of the greatest
  value as an antiplague measure, and that practical results to be
  expected are much greater than with any other method.

  As has already been stated, the individual premises on which plague
  either among rodents or human beings has occurred demand first and
  immediate attention. The work should be extended as rapidly as
  possible from the point of infection so as to include the entire block
  and neighboring blocks.

  While the chief energies should be centered on plague-infected foci,
  similar work should be carried on simultaneously throughout the city.


                        METHODS OF RAT PROOFING.

  If plague occurs in the grounds of dwellings the following course
  should be pursued: All planked-over areas, including sidewalks, that
  might possibly shelter a rat should be removed, leaving either bare
  ground or, at the option of the owner, gravel or concrete used, the
  gravel being preferable. Small sheds should be elevated, or their
  ground floors concreted. Wood sheds should probably be left without
  flooring, wood kindling or other contents being piled on elevated
  platforms provided for the purpose. Stables on the premises should be
  treated as indicated in a subsequent paragraph relating to these
  structures.

  The garbage depository must be given most careful attention. It should
  be a metal receptacle, preferably a galvanized can, water-tight to
  prevent seepage which would attract rats, and there should be a
  closely fitting lid. A can 2 feet in height without cover will not be
  proof against the incursion of rats.

  The rat proofing of chicken yards is a difficult task as most chickens
  in private families are fed on table scraps, thereby attracting and
  supporting a fair quota of rats. The entire inclosure should be
  protected by wire fencing 6 feet high and of a mesh not larger than a
  half inch. Ordinary poultry netting is inadequate, the mesh being too
  large. The edge of the yard should be of concrete construction, the
  concrete extending 1 foot upward and 2 feet inward. If, on any
  subsequent inspection, rats have been found to have burrowed into the
  inclosure, the entire area should be concreted, sand or earth being
  allowed as a top dressing.

  It would seem sufficient to confine these specifications to a feeding
  pen, but in practice this will not suffice, as a mere pretext of such
  a place would be built, and the housewife would continue to throw
  scraps into the unprotected yard.

  The dwelling house itself should receive the most careful attention.
  If it is a small frame structure the cheapest and most effective means
  of rendering it free from rats is by elevating it, the minimum height
  being 1½ feet, measured from the most dependent joist. At the same
  time, all underpinning should be freed of rubbish or other material.
  It is not sufficient to raise the structure a few inches so as to
  permit the entrance of cats and other enemies of the rat. Such height
  and exposure must be secured as to deprive all rodents of cover.

  If the house is of more substantial structure, and always if it has a
  cellar or basement, concrete or some other rat-proof material should
  be adopted. If sound foundation walls of stone or brick exist, then
  only the addition of a concrete floor is necessary. The stopping up of
  rat holes in any substance pervious to rats is at best a poor
  expedient.

  The grounds must be rendered rat proof by piling all loose materials
  at such an elevation as will preclude rat harborage. All rubbish
  should be burned or otherwise destroyed. All basement windows should
  be properly protected against the ingress of rats, and if the _Mus
  rattus_ be present, even second and third story windows should not be
  considered too high to afford them entrance.

  All loose materials on the premises should be properly piled, even
  though they are in a rat-proof cellar. It is not probable that the
  _Mus decumanus_ would remain or breed in any place where it could not
  burrow; but no encouragement should be offered to any rodent let in by
  carelessly left open doors. There have been cases where the black rat
  has lived, increased, and overrun a house which was structurally rat
  proof, but in which there was allowed easy access through open windows
  and doors, and great piles of loose materials and dunnage furnish
  harborage.

  Stables are of twofold importance because they provide a source of
  food supply for rats and furnish harborage. All grain must be kept in
  a metal lined box or granary. A small stable is sufficiently rat proof
  if it has an elevation of 2 feet with clear underpinning, provided the
  floor is rendered impervious to falling grain. Barns of larger extent
  are best made rat proof by concrete flooring tight on the ground, and
  the area walls should be of concrete 1 foot high or of galvanized iron
  of standard thickness. The ingredients of concrete should be specified
  as to quality and quantity.

  The windows of stables should be screened, especially if black rats be
  present. To render a large livery stable rat proof, however, is hardly
  practicable, owing to doors being open almost continuously, but rat
  proofing even in such buildings will destroy rat harborage and limit
  rat invasions to an occasional migratory rodent. With concrete
  flooring and protected feed pens it should be an easy task to keep
  such a building free from rats.

  Finally, manure pens should be rat proof or the manure thrown into the
  corner of the rat-proof stable, provided there is frequent cartage.


              RAT-PROOFING ORDINANCES SHOULD BE SPECIFIC.

  Any law or ordinance providing for rat proofing should specifically
  state the minimum thickness of concrete and cement. Concrete 4 inches
  deep with one-half inch dressing of cement or 1-inch asphalt answers
  very well. Area walls if of concrete should be 6 inches thick, and the
  floors should have sufficient slant to allow drainage.

  Any expedient as galvanized iron sunk into the ground and made flush
  with the flooring will not prove of practical value, as it allows
  rat-harboring space to exist beneath the flooring, and sooner or later
  rats will gain access thereto by burrowing under the iron gratings or
  through the wooden flooring.

  Meat markets should have concrete floors with cement or asphalt
  dressing, the floors to be close on the ground and surrounded by
  properly constructed foundation walls of stone or brick in cement.
  Water-tight metal cans should be provided for all scraps, and
  especially for the sawdust with its admixture of fine pieces of meat.

  Bakeries and restaurant kitchens should be treated in the same way as
  meat markets. Packing houses, slaughter pens, warehouses, and food
  depots in general should be concreted.

  The water front demands the greatest attention. The piers and wharves
  should be of concrete or steel construction. The shipping should be
  shored off from the dock, and all lines properly rat guarded. When not
  in use, gang planks should be lifted. Notwithstanding these
  precautions, rats will be imported from time to time, and the only
  practical way to prevent their getting ashore will be the systematic
  and routine fumigation of ships by the quarantine authorities.

  The rat proofing of sewers is open to argument. Of all places in a
  city the sewer is certainly the one where rats can die with the least
  danger to the human population. For this reason the sewer should be
  the last structure in a municipality to be made rat proof. The
  movements and migrations of rats should be controlled to the extent of
  making corner catch basins their sole means of entrance and exit to
  sewers. The small and large iron-pipe mains require no attention in
  this respect, but where mains are constructed of brick, and especially
  where they are old and in bad repair, they should be repaired, all rat
  runs leading from the sewer walls being stopped up and all blind
  sewers being closed. By this means there will be prevented the
  breeding of rats in these areas.

  The rat proofing of catch basins by any method that would not also
  block the entrance to the basin seems hardly possible. Properly
  trapped basins, however, will be found almost as effective and just as
  desirable.

  To attain efficient rat proofing requires necessary laws or ordinances
  and public sentiment favoring their enforcement. Dead-letter laws that
  form no small part of many city statutes attest the fact that
  favorable public opinion is almost indispensable to their enforcement.
  However, well-drafted laws, clear and specific in requirement and
  impartially and consistently enforced, inevitably lessen and destroy
  opposition.

  In the foregoing are contained general principles necessary to rat
  proofing in the case of an outbreak of plague. Due allowance will have
  to be made, however, for local conditions, and special considerations
  as they arise, as no unvarying plan will be practical of application
  in every instance.


             CHOICE OF ARCHITECTURE AND BUILDING MATERIALS.

  Cities and countries have from time to time wholly revolutionized
  their type of buildings and constructive materials for either
  commercial or æsthetic reasons. It is suggested that ports having
  trade relations with countries where plague prevails should bear in
  mind the advisability of taking advantage of this fact and revise
  their building laws with the view to rendering all new buildings rat
  proof.

  Concrete has been advocated for purposes of rat proofing because of
  its durability and relative cheapness. Concrete flooring or side walls
  can be made more durable, however, by embedding therein steel netting
  of 1 or 2 inch mesh. By this method the cost of construction will
  probably be reduced, as a thinner layer of concrete would be
  sufficient, and the metal would be protected, thereby adding
  stability. Such construction at the same time would be doubly rat
  proof.




  THE INEFFICIENCY OF BACTERIAL VIRUSES IN THE EXTERMINATION OF RATS.

                            By M. J. ROSENAU,

  _Surgeon, U. S. Public Health and Marine-Hospital Service, Washington,
     D. C., now Professor of Preventive Medicine, Harvard University
                             Medical School_.


                             INTRODUCTION.

  Rats are notoriously resistant to bacterial infections. About the only
  exception is the plague bacillus. Plague among rats occurs both in
  endemic and epidemic form. When we recall that this virulent disease,
  which spreads readily from rat to rat, neither eradicates these
  rodents nor, as a rule, makes any appreciable inroads on the number of
  rats, we can hardly expect that an artificially induced bacterial
  disease would be successful. No other known bacterial infection has
  such a virulence for rats as the plague bacillus has maintained.
  Epizootics of bacterial nature, therefore, can not be classed among
  the natural enemies of the rat. Despite this fact persistent efforts
  have been made to create artificial epizootics to combat these
  dangerous and destructive rodents, but with little success.

  The bacterial viruses that have been used for the destruction of rats
  and mice belong to the colon-typhoid group[AL] and excite enteritis of
  different characters and a septicemia.

Footnote AL:

    More particularly the hog-cholera group, which includes the
    para-typhoid organisms.

  In 1889 Loeffler discovered and described a bacillus which he called
  the bacillus of mouse typhoid (_B. typhi murium_). He isolated this
  organism from a spontaneous epidemic which occurred among white mice
  in the Hygienic Institute at Griefswald.[AM] He determined that this
  bacillus not only caused the death of his mice in the laboratory, but
  also that the infection was taken into the system of the mouse by
  ingestion. He found the cultures to be especially virulent for field
  mice (_Arvicola arvalis_). Loeffler gives a complete description of
  the bacillus which, from a biologic standpoint, is the parent stock of
  almost all subsequent work along this line. The bacillus used by
  Danysz and other workers is either identical with or very closely
  allied to Loeffler’s bacillus of mouse typhoid.

Footnote AM:

    Loeffler, F.: Ueber Epidemieen unter den im hygienischen Institute
    zu Griefswald gehalten Mäusen und über die Bekämpfung der
    Feldmausplage. Centblt. f. Bakt., Orig., vol. 11, 1892, pp. 129–141.

  In 1892 Loeffler[AN] personally undertook a campaign against the field
  mice in Thessaly and reported satisfactory results. The depredations
  carried on by the mice were checked within eight to nine days.

Footnote AN:

    Loeffler, F.: Die Feldmausplage in Thessalien und ihre erfolgreiche
    Bekämpfung mittels des _Bacillus typhi murium_. Centblt. f. Bakt.,
    Orig., vol. 12, 1892, p. 1.

  The English commission[AO] threw doubt upon the Thessaly operations
  and concluded that the bacillus as a means of destruction of mice has
  no value. They found the method to be expensive, affecting only one
  species of mice; further, that the epidemic-like spread of the disease
  in the fields was not sufficiently investigated, and that the infected
  material retains its virulence only for eight days and does not permit
  of being used in continued bad weather.

Footnote AO:

    Wien. landw. Zeit. 1894, p. 783.

  Loeffler’s optimistic report, however, stimulated many similar trials
  with varying success. Practically all these efforts were directed
  against mice, until 1900, when Danysz took up the subject from the
  standpoint of the rat and plague.

  Danysz found that Loeffler’s _Bacillus typhi murium_ proved to be
  pathogenic for ordinary mice (_Mus musculus_) and for field or harvest
  mice (_Mus arvicolis_), but not for rats.

  The culture isolated by Laser[AP] in 1892 was pathogenic for field
  mice (_Mus agrarius_); this organism killed 70 of the 76 mice which
  were used as experiment animals at the Hygienic Institute at
  Königsberg.

Footnote AP:

    Laser, Hugo: Ein neuer für Versuchsthiere pathogener Bacillus aus
    der Gruppe der Frettschen-Schweinseuche. Centblt. f. Bakt., Orig.,
    vol. 11, 1892, p. 184.

  Mereshkowsky[AQ] in June, 1893, isolated an organism belonging to this
  group from a ground squirrel known as the Zisel (_Spermophilus
  musicus_). This culture killed domestic and field mice when placed in
  their food, but was not pathogenic for rats.

Footnote AQ:

    Mereshkowsky, S. S.: Ein aus Zieselmäusen ausgeschiedener und zur
    Vertilgung von Feld-resp. Hausmäusen geeigneter Bacillus. Centblt.
    f. Bakt., Orig., vol. 17, 1895, p. 742.

  The Japanese investigator Issatchenko,[AR] in 1898, briefly described
  a bacillus obtained by him from gray [white?] rats, which proved
  virulent for rats and mice.

Footnote AR:

    Issatchenko, B.: Untersuchungen mit dem für Ratten pathogenen
    Bacillus. Centblt. f. Bakt., Orig., vol. 31, 1902, p. 26.

  Each of these various bacilli is of such variable virulence that it
  could not be used for the destruction of all species of these rodents.

  Danysz[AS] therefore conceived the notion that it would be of great
  interest first to extend the field of action of one of these organisms
  by increasing its virulence so that it would attack other species of
  rodents, and then maintain this increased virulence at its highest
  point.

Footnote AS:

    Danysz, J.: Un microbe pathogène pour les rats (_Mus decumanus_ et
    _Mus rattus_) et son application à la destruction de ces animaux.
    Ann. Inst. Pasteur, vol. 14, 1900, p. 193.

  In 1900 Danysz isolated a bacillus from a spontaneous epidemic among
  harvest mice. This organism was a cocco-bacillus presenting the
  general characteristics of the colon-typhoid group and resembling the
  bacillus of Loeffler—_B. typhi murium_. From the first this bacillus
  showed a slight pathogenicity for gray rats (_M. decumanus_). Out of
  10 animals fed with a culture of this microbe 2 or 3 would die;
  several others would sicken and recover; others appeared completely
  refractory. The fact that a certain number of the rats fed with these
  cultures always succumbed led to the hope that it would be possible to
  increase the virulence of this particular microbe by the generally
  accepted methods—that is to say, by a certain number of passages from
  rat to rat.

  Danysz first tried to increase the virulence of the organism by this
  means, but he found that successive passages from rat to rat, whether
  by feeding or by subcutaneous injection, ended by enfeebling rather
  than increasing the virulence of the microbe. He found that it was
  rarely possible to go beyond 10 to 12 passages. Sometimes the series
  was stopped at the fifth passage, or even sooner, by the survival of
  all the animals undergoing experiment. The result was exactly the same
  if, instead of alternating each passage through the animal by a
  culture in bouillon or agar, the bodies of animals dead of a preceding
  passage were fed to others.

  It was therefore plain that in the evolution of an epidemic caused by
  this microbe it was necessary to take account of the indisputable
  diminution of the virulence of the microbe, as well as the natural
  resistance of the survivors.

  Passage of cultures in collodion sacs inclosed in the peritoneal
  cavities of rats was tried, both in interrupted series and by
  alternating each sac culture with a culture in bouillon or on agar,
  but the end was invariably a notable diminution of virulence when
  administered by the digestive tract.

  Finally, after long and painstaking procedures, Danysz obtained a very
  virulent culture that, contained in flasks and kept from the influence
  of light and air, preserved its virulence for several months. Planted
  on agar it preserved its virulence without appreciable diminution for
  two months under laboratory conditions. In bouillon, in flasks, or in
  tubes stoppered with cotton it altered very rapidly.


                      DESCRIPTION OF THE ORGANISM.

  A culture of Danysz’s virus obtained from the Pasteur Institute had
  the following characteristics:

  The organism is a cocco-bacillus showing distinct motility. Stains
  well by the ordinary stains, but does not stain by Gram’s method.

  It grows well at ordinary room temperature, also in the incubator, and
  on all the ordinary media. In bouillon it produces a uniform
  cloudiness in twenty-four hours. A slight scum forms after several
  days’ growth, which falls to the bottom when shaken. In Dunham’s
  solution it grows well, but produces no indol in twenty-four hours’
  growth.

  It does not coagulate milk.

  It grows the whole length of the stab in gelatin, forming small
  whitish colonies in the deeper portions of the tube. It does not grow
  over the entire surface of the gelatin tube; does not liquefy gelatin.

  It grows under anærobic conditions.

  It ferments glucose bouillon, but not lactose bouillon. In glucose
  bouillon it produces 1-CO_{2}, 5-H. It also produces H_{2}S.

  From a general biological standpoint it is plain that this bacillus
  belongs to the para-typhoid group, and is very similar to the bacillus
  of hog cholera as well as the _Bacillus icteroides_, also _B.
  enteritidis_, so far as its morphological and cultural characteristics
  are concerned.

  In the following table the fermentations produced by various members
  of this group upon certain carbohydrates are shown:

 ─────────────┬────────┬───────────┬────────┬────────┬────────┬─────────
   Organism.  │Lactose.│Saccharose.│Maltose.│Mannete.│Glucose.│Levulose.
 ─────────────┼────────┼───────────┼────────┼────────┼────────┼─────────
 B. typhosus  │   −    │     −     │   −    │   −    │   −    │    −
 B. dysenteriæ│   −    │     −     │   −    │   −    │   −    │  [AT]
 Shiga        │        │           │        │        │        │
 B. dysenteriæ│   −    │     −     │   −    │   −    │   −    │  [AT]
 Kruse        │        │           │        │        │        │
 B.           │        │           │        │        │        │
 para-typhosus│   −    │     −     │   +    │   +    │   +    │    +
 A            │        │           │        │        │        │
 B.           │        │           │        │        │        │
 para-typhosus│   −    │     −     │   +    │   +    │   +    │    +
 B            │        │           │        │        │        │
 B. para colon│   −    │     −     │   +    │   +    │   +    │    +
 B. acidi     │   +    │     −     │   +    │   +    │   +    │    +
 lactici      │        │           │        │        │        │
 B. hog       │   −    │     −     │   +    │   +    │   +    │    +
 cholera      │        │           │        │        │        │
 B. typhi     │   −    │     −     │   +    │   +    │   +    │    +
 murium Danysz│        │           │        │        │        │
 B. icteroides│   −    │     −     │   +    │   +    │   +    │    +
 B.           │   −    │     −     │   +    │   +    │   +    │    +
 enteritidis  │        │           │        │        │        │
 B. coli      │   +    │     +     │   +    │   +    │   +    │    +
 communis     │        │           │        │        │        │
 ─────────────┴────────┴───────────┴────────┴────────┴────────┴─────────

Footnote AT:

    Or bubble.


         EXPERIMENTS UPON RAT VIRUS IN THE HYGIENIC LABORATORY.

  In 1901 I made an investigation of this pathogenic microbe (_B. typhi
  murium_) applied to the destruction of rats under laboratory
  conditions.[AU] One hundred and fifteen rats were fed with the
  cultures in various ways during the course of these experiments with
  the virus. Of these, 46 died—less than half.

Footnote AU:

    Rosenau, M. J.: An investigation of a pathogenic microbe (_B. typhi
    murium_ Danysz) applied to the destruction of rats. Bull. No. 5 of
    the Hygienic Laboratory, U. S. Mar. Hosp. Serv., Washington, 1901,
    11 p.

  Most of the rats used were the gray rat (_M. decumanus_ or
  _norvegicus_) and the tame white rat. A few (8) of the wild black or
  house rats (_M. rattus_) were used.

  The virus is in reality pathogenic for these three kinds of rats when
  ingested. No special difference was noted in its effects upon the
  various species.

  As the work progressed it soon became evident to me that the result
  depended largely upon the amount of the culture ingested. By starving
  rats for a day or two and then giving them all they could be induced
  to eat and drink of the cultures, a very positive result was obtained.
  In one instance of 27 rats so fed all died within a week. If the rats
  are given a small amount the effect is uncertain—only a few die. In
  one instance I fed 70 rats with 4 agar tubes and only 7 died. Feeding
  them a second time with very large quantities 9 more died. The
  survivors were then fed with all they could be induced to eat every
  day for a week without effect.

  It seems plain, therefore, that a large primary dose proves fatal, and
  a small dose is not only uncertain, but produces an immunity. This is
  a very important factor, for it is likely that in the wild state rats
  would often partake of an amount too small to cause death. Such rats
  may then subsequently eat large amounts of the culture with impunity.

  It would seem then that, after all, the virus is not so different from
  the laying of a chemical poison, depending as it does for its effect
  upon the amount ingested. A chemical poison, however, does not possess
  the disadvantage of producing an immunity. Another disadvantage
  possessed by the virus is the rapid deterioration in virulence which
  occurs when it is exposed to the action of air and light, or when it
  becomes dry, as is very apt to happen when laid out for rats in the
  wild state.

  Since these early experiments, tests have been made of various rat
  viruses in the Hygienic Laboratory, and the results are given in the
  following pages:


                                 AZOA.

  Series 1. Single feeding of azoa in oatmeal. Rats starved twenty-four
  hours before feeding. Three out of eight animals died in four, five,
  and seven days, respectively. Micro-organisms resembling the
  predominant one of azoa could not be isolated from their hearts’
  blood. The organs of these dead rats were fed to fresh rats with the
  result that one of the three died. It must be mentioned that the
  mortality among our fresh rats was nearly as high as that in the
  experimental animals from a disease probably due to infection with an
  animal parasite.

  Series 2. Daily feedings with azoa in oatmeal. Five white rats fed
  with the mixture, a constant supply being kept in the cage. These
  animals were picked rats freshly obtained from the dealer. One rat
  died after seven days. It was heavily infested with lice. The azoa
  organism could not be found in the blood. The rest remained well after
  twenty-five days.

  Series 3. Black tame mice, daily feedings. One of the five died after
  seven days. The rest remained well after fourteen days.

  These experiments indicate that azoa is not pathogenic for white rats
  and black tame mice to a degree rendering it applicable for vermin
  extermination on a practical scale, provided that its action is no
  more pathogenic for the wild than for the tame species.


                                RATITE.

  The manufacturers recommend a single feeding of this substance rather
  than a continued exhibition of the virus.

  Series 1. Five white rats starved twenty-four hours and then fed with
  a mixture of ratite and oatmeal. Subsequent daily feedings with plain
  oatmeal. Picked animals fresh from the dealer. One animal died after
  twelve days; too much putrefied for further examination; had been
  heavily infested with lice. The remaining rats are well after
  twenty-five days.

  Series 2. Five black tame mice fed as above. Three were found dead
  after eighteen days and the other two after nineteen days. Further
  experiments were not made, as putrefaction was too far advanced when
  they were found. The room in which they were kept had been unusually
  cold just before their death owing to a sudden and unexpected drop in
  the external temperature.

  Ratite does not appear to be very pathogenic for white rats. All the
  five mice fed with ratite died in eighteen to nineteen days (much
  longer than the advertised incubation period of the infection), but
  their death could be reasonably attributed to unusual cold. This part
  of the test is therefore invalidated except that the animals lived
  considerably longer than would be expected from the literature
  furnished by the manufacturers, which says that the effects of laying
  the virus will be apparent in eight to ten days.


                             DANYSZ VIRUS.

  Twelve tubes of Danysz virus were sent to the laboratory for
  examination April 7 by the Independent Chemical Company, agent for
  Danysz Virus Company (Limited). The label stated “Keep in a cool place
  and at above temperature; use before May 15, 1909.”

  The virus was kept at 15° C. until April 13, when it was turned over
  to Passed Asst. Surg. W. H. Frost, who made the following tests:

  One tube opened. Cultures made on two agar tubes were found to
  correspond in cultural characteristics with the bacillus of Danysz
  virus as generally described. The remainder of the tube prepared
  according to directions in accompanying circular, using stale dry
  bread 2 ounces and suspension of the culture in normal salt solution.

  Series 1. Approximately equal parts, then fed to six white rats in
  individual cages, they having not been fed for twenty-four hours
  previously. Rats all ate greater part of infected food.

  Five rats of series 1 died within five to seven days and were partly
  eaten before being removed from the cage. The pathological changes in
  all cases were chiefly enlargement and congestion of spleen and liver,
  and in some cases inflammation of small intestine. In each case an
  organism was obtained, usually in pure culture, from one or more
  organs, corresponding culturally and morphologically with cultures
  taken from original tube.

  Series 2. April 14: Rats all ate greater part of infected food.
  Transferred to large cage containing nine other white rats. Nine other
  white rats exposed to infection by being placed in a large cage with
  the rats of series 1. Four of the nine rats of this series died in
  four to seven days after eating infected rats.

  Pathological changes and results of cultures from internal organs the
  same as with series 1. Autopsy and cultures impossible in one case,
  where body was almost completely devoured.

  Series 3. May 5: Three of the six surviving rats (one from series 1,
  two from series 2) were placed in individual cages, deprived of food
  for twenty-four hours, then fed each with one-third agar tube cultures
  of Danysz virus (the same used in the original feeding). All three ate
  practically all the virus given.

  All three of these rats remain alive and well after two months.

  Summary.—Series 1. Six rats each fed one-twelfth to one-sixteenth agar
  culture Danysz virus. Five died within five to seven days.

  Series 2. Nine rats exposed to infection by being placed in cage with
  series 1. Four died within eight to twelve days after death of first
  rat of series 1.

  Series 3. Three of the surviving rats (1 from series 1 and 2 from
  series 2) fed each with one-third agar tube of original Danysz virus
  as used in series 1. None died.


                          TRANSATLANTIC RATIN.

  A can of this substance labeled “Transatlantic ratin” was furnished by
  the American agents representing the Bacteriological Laboratory,
  Copenhagen, Denmark. The can bore the date January 26, 1909, and was
  stated to be “effective for six months from date of production.”

  On April 13, 1909, this sample was given to Passed Asst. Surg. W. H.
  Frost for examination, and he obtained the following results:

  April 13, 1909: Can of ratin opened with aseptic precautions. Contents
  mixed with about equal bulk of clean fresh lard.

  A portion of this about equal to one tablespoonful fed to each of six
  white rats previously deprived of food for twenty-four hours. All the
  rats ate some of the bait at once. Feeding at 2 p. m.

  April 14: Five rats very sick, having convulsions; partially
  paralyzed. One dead.

  April 15: Three more rats found dead. Remaining 2 recovering.

  The pathological change in all the above cases consisted chiefly of
  intense congestion of intestines, both large and small.

  Cultures from the original case of ratin, on agar, bouillon, and in
  fermentation tubes, negative except staphylococcus in one tube.

  Cultures taken from heart’s blood and other organs of the 4 dead rats
  all negative, except in one case a growth of a staphylococcus
  resembling _S. pyogenes citreus_.

  April 20: Two rats fed on half agar slant culture of the
  staphylococcus obtained from heart’s blood of rat No. 1. Result of
  feeding negative after several weeks.


    NOTE. The absence of a colon-like organism in this virus and the
    rapid death of the animals with convulsions suggested a chemical
    poison, which it is believed this can contained.—M. J. R.


 EXPERIMENTS WITH MICRO-ORGANISMS FOR DESTROYING RATS, CONDUCTED BY THE
                  UNITED STATES BIOLOGICAL SURVEY.[AV]

Footnote AV:

    This report was furnished by Dr. A. Hart Merriam, Director of the
    Biological Survey.


                                 RATIN.

  The Biological Survey, Department of Agriculture, in cooperation with
  the Bureau of Animal Industry, has experimented with “ratin.” The
  material (ratin No. 2—labeled “Transatlantic ratin”) was furnished by
  the American agents in New York. Although the agent claimed that this
  was a bacterial preparation and that “it would kill for six
  generations,” it proved to be a glucoside poison (probably squills)
  and contained no bacteria of any kind. A number of experiments were
  made with it, and it proved to be an effective rat poison. In some
  instances the animals died within two hours after eating it, and in
  two experiments all the animals fed died within twelve hours. In other
  experiments, however, a considerable percentage of the affected rats
  recovered, and subsequent attempts to kill them with ratin No. 2
  failed. Some were immune to its effects and others too wise to eat it
  a second time. More than a hundred rats were used in the experiments;
  but the main object—to test the communicability of the disease caused
  by ratin bacteria in healthy rats—failed, of course, since, as above
  stated, the preparation experimented with contained no bacteria, but
  was merely a vegetable poison. Before its character was fully
  determined, 15 rats killed in the experiments were eaten by 5 healthy
  rats; the latter were unaffected.

  It should be noted that the labels on the tins containing
  transatlantic ratin were misleading. The user was warned to open the
  packages in dim light and to allow no moisture to come in contact with
  the contents, as the bacteria were very sensitive to light and
  moisture. The contents of the can were to be used at once. As a matter
  of fact the contents of one can were exposed to severe drying in heat
  and sunlight for four days and then soaked in water for two days.
  Afterwards the preparation was fed to different rats for a further
  period of four days, and its virulence was retained to the last.

  The transatlantic ratin is in a solid medium, apparently bread and
  molasses. Its keeping qualities are excellent, and it is an effective
  poison for rats, but far too expensive for extensive use. A can
  costing $1.50 is enough for only 15 baits.

  Its harmfulness to domestic animals was not fully tested. Dogs and
  cats refused to eat it and vomited it when it was forced upon them.
  Several animals, including a dog, were killed by injections of the
  poison in concentrated form.

  A shipment of ratin No. 1 (the solid bacterial ratin, said to retain
  its virulence for two months) was received June 4, 1909. This
  preparation was dated May 8 and should have been still virulent. The
  contents of a can mixed with milk was fed to 8 adult rats on June 7.
  All of the baits were eaten, but no result followed. Cultures of the
  bacteria showed strong growths of new colonies.

  On July 6 the contents of another can were fed to 1 adult and 16 young
  rats. One of the young was found dead on the morning of July 14.
  Cultures were made from the dead rat, but the bacillus was not
  recovered. Up to July 28 none of the other rats have been affected.


                                 AZOA.

  Several trials of azoa for the destruction of rats have come under the
  observation of members of the Biological Survey. Experiments made in
  the building occupied by the Interstate Commerce Commission were at
  first promising, but from a second invoice of the virus no results
  were obtained. In the buildings of the National Zoological Park 72
  bottles of azoa were used, but the results were for the most part
  negative. In a store in south Washington where this preparation had
  been used the stench of dead rats was very strong, showing a measure
  of success.


                            DANYSZ BACILLUS.

  Some three years ago the Biological Survey, assisted by the Bureau of
  Animal Industry, tested the efficiency of Danysz virus. In the
  laboratory from 10 to 50 per cent of rats fed on the virus died. In
  the field, however, results obtained were unsatisfactory. Only 1 dead
  rat was found from which the bacillus was recovered. Experiments with
  field mice gave better results. All the mice fed in confinement died,
  and field experiments resulted in many dead mice from which the
  bacillus was recovered.


       EXPERIMENTS DURING THE SAN FRANCISCO PLAGUE OUTBREAK.[AW]

Footnote AW:

    These experiments were made by Passed Asst. Surg. G. W. McCoy,
    United States Public Health and Marine-Hospital Service, in 1907–8
    during the plague campaign in San Francisco and here published for
    the first time.

  Several proprietary biological products sold as rat exterminators were
  made the subject of seven experiments on wild San Francisco rats, for
  the purpose of ascertaining whether they were efficient for the
  purpose for which they were sold. Seventy-six rats were used in these
  experiments. About 10 per cent died within a month and there was
  considerable doubt as to whether all of the deaths that occurred were
  due to the agent used.

  The following is a brief statement of the work done with these agents.
  In each case the rats used were wild _Mus norvegicus_, caught in San
  Francisco.


                              RATIN NO. 1.

  Made by the Bakteriologik Laboratorium, Copenhagen, marked: “Effective
  two months from April 28, 1908.” The preparation comes ready for use
  in the form of a moist, mealy mass. On May 28, about 6 ounces of the
  material was fed to 12 rats. They all remained well until thirty days
  after feeding them when the experiment was regarded as terminated.


                             DANYSZ VIRUS.

  The Danysz Virus Company (Limited), of London, furnished a preparation
  in the form of a culture on a slant of solid medium, said to be
  gelatine. The tube was marked: “To be used before June 1, 1908.” The
  contents of the tube, mixed with bread, according to directions, was
  fed to 6 rats. On the twenty-first day but 4 rats remained, 2 having
  died and been devoured by their companions. The 4 that remained were
  chloroformed, as the cage was needed for other purposes. Post-mortem
  examination showed them to be entirely normal.


                                RATITE.

  Furnished by the Pasteur Vaccine Company, Chicago. This preparation is
  in the form of a culture in a liquid medium, presumably broth. The
  bottle was dated April 10, 1908, and the label stated that it should
  be used within twenty days from date of preparation. On April 29,
  1908, 9 rats were fed with about 6 ounces of the preparation, mixed
  according to directions. The rats all remained alive and well, and
  when chloroformed on June 1, 1908, presented no abnormality on
  post-mortem examination. In another experiment the contents of a
  bottle of ratite was fed to 6 medium-sized _Mus norvegicus_. None of
  the animals died from the effects of the agent, and when they were
  killed on the fifty-fifth day after the feeding were found to present
  no lesions.

  The remaining work was done with rat virus, sometimes called
  “Mouratus.” It is made by the same concern that makes the ratite. The
  rat virus comes in the form of a culture on a solid medium. The
  contents of three tubes was fed to 6 rats on May 26, 1908. Three of
  these rats died within thirty days. Only one was secured for
  examination before it had been mutilated beyond the possibility of
  making a satisfactory examination. This rat had a large yellow liver
  and a very large, dark, firm spleen. These appearances were probably
  due to the agent used and it is not unlikely that these 3 rats died
  from its effect. It will be observed that a very large dose was given.
  On another occasion four tubes of Mouratus were used for feeding 6
  _Mus norvegicus_. One of the rats died on the fifteenth day, showing
  at autopsy an enlarged granular spleen and a granular liver. The other
  rats were alive and well at the end of thirty-four days when the
  experiment was discontinued.

  Subcultures on broth were made from this preparation on three
  occasions, always well within the time limit on the label. The
  cultures were incubated in the dark, at room temperature, for forty
  hours on each occasion. Liberal amounts of the subculture were fed to
  a total of 31 rats. At the end of thirty days, it was found that only
  2 of these rats had died. The others were alive and apparently well.

  One objection to these agents which I have not seen stated is the
  following: The lesions caused by at least some of these members of the
  paracolon group may readily be mistaken for the lesions of plague, or
  it will perhaps be more accurate to say they give rise to lesions that
  create in one’s mind a suspicion of plague infection, and I have had
  to put many a rat to the guinea-pig test in order to make certain that
  a Danysz infection was not associated with the infection of plague, or
  that a Danysz rat was not a plague rat. Of course, this is of no
  consequence except in a community where antiplague measures are being
  taken, and an observer of limited experience who did not put a rat to
  a pretty rigid test would probably call some plague infected when in
  reality such is not the case.

  In addition to the data set forth in this report, I have on several
  occasions fed the tissue of rats dead of Danysz infection to other
  rats, but have never succeeded in reproducing the disease. In other
  words, I have had no success whatever in raising the virulence by
  passage through animals.


                          OPINIONS OF OTHERS.

  Kitasato,[AX] 1906, states that the typhoid bacillus of the rat, which
  has been effectively used for killing field mice, has been found
  useless for house rats (_Mus rattus_) and therefore they no longer
  employ it.

Footnote AX:

    Kitasato, S.: Combating plague in Japan. Philippine Journ. Sci.,
    vol. 1, 1906, p. 465.

  Melvin,[AY] 1908, reports that recently several new rat viruses were
  investigated in the Bureau of Animal Industry, with the result that
  the experiments clearly demonstrated the ineffectiveness and
  unreliability of the preparations tested.

Footnote AY:

    Melvin, A. D.: Report of the Chief of the Bureau of Animal Industry
    for 1908. Washington, 1908.

  Räbiger and Schwinning,[AZ] 1906, tested the culture discovered by G.
  Neumann and prepared by the joint stock company “Ratin” at Copenhagen
  by applying it to rat destruction. Of house rats 90 per cent died;
  black rats 42.9 per cent; while horses, dogs, goats, sheep, fowls, and
  pigeons suffered no harm. Of seven experiments practically carried
  out, six showed very good results; in one favorable results were
  absent, which agrees with the experiments made in Denmark. There it
  was likewise found that in individual locally limited places the rats
  were able absolutely to withstand the infection of ratin.

Footnote AZ:

    Räbiger and Schwinning: Versuche mit Ratin, einem neuen Ratten
    tötenden Bacillus. Mitth. d. deutsch. Landw.-Gesellsch., 1906, No.
    18. Rev. by Ehrenberg in Centblt. f. Bakt., 2. Abt., vol. 18, 1907,
    p. 375.

  Räbiger,[BA] 1905, states that experiments with Loeffler’s mouse
  typhus bacillus and the bacillus of Danysz virus have been carried to
  the conclusion that these bacterial preparations must be characterized
  as practically worthless.

Footnote BA:

    Räbiger, H.: Ueber Versuche zur Vertilgung der Ratten durch
    Bakterien. Landw. Woch. f. d. Prov. Sach., 1905, p. 142. Rev. by
    Stift in Centblt. f. Eakt., 2 Abt., vol. 15, 1905, p. 86.

  In 1903 Neumann discovered in Denmark a rat-killing bacillus, which
  has been placed on the market by a society under scientific control
  under the name of “ratin.” Feeding experiments with this bacillus were
  tried under conditions as nearly natural as possible upon white mice,
  gray house mice, long-tailed field mice, and gray rats. The experiment
  animals were fed with cubes of white bread impregnated with virulent
  cultures. White mice show the least power of resistance, since they
  die within six days; house mice died in six to nine days; the greater
  part of the rats died from the sixth to the sixteenth day after
  feeding; a small percentage lived. The long-tailed field mice, which
  are shown to be insusceptible to Loeffler’s bacillus, also remained
  perfectly healthy after repeated feedings with bread infected with
  ratin.

  Brooks,[BB] 1908, reports the results of tests made with azoa on rats
  and mice, both in captivity and at large, but without any apparent
  discomfort to the animals. One of the tests is described as follows:

Footnote BB:

    Brooks, Fred E.: Notes on the habits of mice, moles, and shrews. A
    preliminary report. Bull. 113, W. Va. Univ. Agric. Exper. Sta.,
    Morgantown, W. Va., Jan., 1908.


    A supply of the azoa was obtained direct from the laboratories of
    the manufacturers. On July 27, 1907, while the material was yet
    fresh, three young Norway rats were caught and kept confined in a
    large wire rat trap. Beginning with the date given, and for a period
    of forty days thereafter, azoa was fed to the rats at intervals of a
    few days until ten 75-cent bottles had been consumed. The rats ate
    the cracked grain with which the virus was mixed very readily, and
    other food was denied them each time the azoa was given until every
    particle was eaten. At the end of the forty days the rats were still
    apparently in a healthy condition, and were removed from the trap
    and killed with a club.


  Thompson,[BC] 1906, states that three laboratory attempts have been
  made to destroy rats with imported strains of Danysz rat virus without
  success. Danysz having arrived at Sydney to study a similar method of
  destroying rabbits, the opportunity was taken of making a further
  attempt under his supervision with virus which had been imported and
  subsequently increased to the requisite degree of virulence, and had
  been placed at Thompson’s disposition. The grounds of the Gladesville
  Asylum, a large institute for the insane, were chosen for the tests,
  which were conducted by Dr. R. J. Millard.

Footnote BC:

    Thompson, J. Ashburton: Report of the Board of Health on plague in
    New South Wales, 1906. On a sixth outbreak of plague at Sydney,
    1906. Legislative assembly, N. S. W., 1907.

  Millard summarized his result by stating that they can not be
  considered a satisfactory demonstration of the efficacy claimed for
  the Danysz virus. The results indicate a rapid loss of virulence,
  which must be obviated if this virus is to be of utility for rat
  destruction.

  Again, in 1907, during the seventh outbreak of plague in Sydney,
  Thompson[BD] had Millard test the preparations known as azoa and
  ratin. The laboratory results with these preparations were similar to
  those made by other investigators. Experiments made upon the ship
  _Hartfield_ with azoa produced no considerable epizootic. The fatality
  among such rats as were infected was small. The practical tests with
  azoa upon several areas along the harbor front also resulted in
  disappointment.

Footnote BD:

    Thompson, J. Ashburton: Report of the board of health on plague in
    New South Wales, 1907. On a seventh outbreak of plague at Sydney,
    1907. Legislative Assembly, N. S. W., 1908.

  The tests made with ratin upon the bark _Quilpe_ produced no epizootic
  among the rats, and of the rats caught none of them showed infection;
  and the field experiment at Gladesville also resulted negatively so
  far as dead or sick rats were concerned. Nevertheless, there was
  apparently considerable diminution in the rat population of this area.

  Foster,[BE] 1908, reports unfavorably upon the results of tests made
  of some of these rat viruses. Laboratories were opened for the use of
  different parties who wished to make tests. The tests were conducted
  under their own supervision. The rats which were not fed on anything
  but grain died as freely as those that had been fed on azoa. So far as
  this preparation is concerned Foster states that it is absolutely
  useless to depend upon it.

Footnote BE:

    Foster, N. K.: The danger of a general plague infection in the
    United States. Proc. Confer. State and Prov. Boards of Health of N.
    America, 1908, p. 15.

  Several reports are found in print in which the rat virus was laid out
  in certain localities and shortly afterwards the rats disappeared—at
  least no more were noticed. Such observations are apt to be
  misleading, for rats are migratory. They come and go, especially when
  disturbed. Further, it is doubtful, as far as plague is concerned,
  whether it is desirable to drive the rats away, for they may thus
  scatter the infection.

  S. S. Mereshkowsky and E. Sarin[BF] have recently studied ratin II,
  put out by a Copenhagen firm—“Bakteriologisches Laboratorium Ratin.”
  The label upon the can of ratin II states that it is a bacterial
  culture, which produces in rats an infectious and fatal disease,
  killing them in two to eight days. The samples used by the authors
  were obtained as needed from the St. Petersburg representative of the
  firm. Feeding experiments carried out with gray rats (_Mus decumanus_)
  showed that the rapidity and severity of the symptoms was proportional
  to the amount ingested. No positive results were obtained from the
  bacteriological examination of the bodies.

Footnote BF:

    Ueber das Ratin II. Centralb. für Bakt. Parstk. u. Infectsk.
    Originale. Bd. 51. Heft 1. July 17, 1909, p. 6.

  The ratin itself was sometimes found to be sterile, sometimes found to
  contain several varieties of bacteria and fungi, but no one variety
  was constantly present.

  The potency of the ratin was not altered by exposure to 100° C. for
  one hour or 120° C. for five minutes. It was destroyed, however, by
  burning to an ash.

  Identical poisonous results were obtained upon rats by feeding them
  with “Scilla maritina cum bulbo rubro.”

  Microscopical examination disclosed a small portion of a lamella,
  identified as belonging to the Liliaciæ, to which family squill
  belongs.

  The authors conclude that ratin II is not a bacterial culture, but a
  poison rendered more dangerous to persons and domestic animals by the
  misleading statements of its makers.


                         PATHOGENICITY FOR MAN.

  Loeffler[BG] rather took it for granted at first that his _Bacillus
  typhi murium_ was harmless for man. In order to remove the fears of
  the peasants in his campaign against the field mice in Thessaly he fed
  pieces of bread impregnated with the cultures to chickens, pigeons,
  dogs, hogs, horses, asses, sheep, and goats. No ill effects resulted.
  Further, some of the men who were distributing the prepared virus ate
  pieces of the infected bread in the presence of all and, it appears,
  suffered no ill effects.

Footnote BG:

    Loeffler, F.: Die Feldmausplage in Thessalien und ihre erfolgreiche
    Bekämpfung mittels des Bacillus typhi murium. Centblt. f. Bakt.,
    vol. 12, 1892, p. 1.

  Up to this time Loeffler had made no human experiments, but thought it
  improbable that his bacillus was harmful to man. He considered this
  view confirmed by the fact that he and his companions and still more
  so the peasants, handled large quantities of the virus without
  thorough disinfection of their hands and suffered no untoward effects.

  Since that time, however, several mishaps have occurred. Instances of
  serious sickness and even death have been attributed to infection with
  the bacterial virus used for the destruction of rats.

  Further, there is practically no difference between the _Bacillus
  typhi murium_ and the para-typhoid bacillus which is the well-known
  cause of meat poisoning, and the _Bacillus enteridion_ of Jarbues,
  which is associated with intestinal disorders.

  It is true that persons have purposely partaken of the rat virus to
  prove that it is harmless to man; but it must be remembered that
  persons have partaken of cultures of cholera, typhoid, and other
  bacteria without apparent injury to themselves. The flora and
  condition of the gastro-intestinal tract, the amount and virulence of
  the infection, and other conditions (“Y” and “Z” of Pettenkofer) play
  an important rôle in the production of these diseases.

  The following references from the literature give the instances in
  which the _B. typhi murium_, or similar rat viruses, have been held
  responsible for the disease in man:

  Trommsdorff[BH] carefully studied 13 suspected cases near Munich in
  early May, 1903. Nine of these came into direct contact with the
  virus, three ate and associated with these, and the remaining one only
  smelled of the virus. One died from vomiting and severe diarrhea. The
  illness, which set in usually two days after contact with the virus,
  was for the most part simple diarrhea of two to seven days’ duration
  (two to eight stools daily); in only three or four cases was there
  vomiting. The one fatal case seemed due to a confusing chain of
  circumstances, gross dietetic and alcoholic excesses in a weak,
  emaciated, presumably phthisical man whose three brothers had died of
  phthisis. One man, case No. 2 in the table, known to have eaten three
  pieces of infected bread, suffered only with a mild diarrhea.

Footnote BH:

    Trommsdorff, R.: Ueber Pathogenität des Löfflerschen
    Mäustyphusbazillus beim Menschen. Münch. med. Woch., vol. 50, 1903,
    p. 2092.

  In all cases errors of diet could be proven, and diarrhea was not
  uncommon at that season. The same physician attended during this
  period ten other cases of similar diarrhea in the vicinity having
  nothing to do with rat virus. The stools, however, did not have the
  same pathogenicity for mice, guinea pigs, or rabbits.

  Trommsdorff specially points out the fact that the bacillus of mouse
  typhoid can multiply vigorously in the human intestine. It demands
  greater caution in the application of the cultures and more careful
  supervision over their use.

  Finally, attention is invited to the fact that, contrary to the usual
  custom, the cultures of rat virus here used had been grown on milk,
  which might account for the increased virulence.

  The following table gives a brief summary of ten cases with the
  results of the agglutination tests:

   _Agglutination tests with serum of recovered cases, May 17, 1908._
 ──────┬─────────────────────────┬────────┬─────────────────────────────
 Case. │ How infected; symptoms. │Strains.│      Serum dilutions.
 „     │„                        │„       │¹⁄₂₀ │¹⁄₄₀ │¹⁄₆₀ │¹⁄₁₀₀│¹⁄₂₀₀
 ──────┼─────────────────────────┼────────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────
 1 B.  │(From this case stool 2.)│A       │  +  │  +  │  +  │  ±  │  0
   K.  │  Laid rat poison        │        │     │     │     │     │
       │  5–2,5–5; some days     │        │     │     │     │     │
       │  later diarrhea; later  │        │     │     │     │     │
       │  vomiting; convalescence│        │     │     │     │     │
       │  and recovery May 10.   │        │     │     │     │     │
 „     │„                        │B       │  +  │  +  │  +  │  ±  │  0
 „     │„                        │C       │  +  │  +  │  +  │  ±  │  0
 „     │„                        │D       │  +  │  +  │  +  │  +  │  ±
 ──────┼─────────────────────────┼────────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────
 2 K.  │Ate three pieces of      │A       │  +  │  0  │  0  │  0  │  0
   E.  │  infected bread May 2;  │        │     │     │     │     │
       │  mild diarrhea several  │        │     │     │     │     │
       │  days.                  │        │     │     │     │     │
 „     │„                        │B       │  +  │  ±  │  0  │  0  │  0
 „     │„                        │C       │  0  │  0  │  0  │  0  │  0
 „     │„                        │D       │  +  │  ±  │  0  │  0  │  0
 ──────┼─────────────────────────┼────────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────
 3 H.  │Brought the virus April  │A       │  +  │  0  │     │     │
   B.  │  28; perhaps touched it;│        │     │     │     │     │
       │  next day diarrhea and  │        │     │     │     │     │
       │  vomiting; recovery     │        │     │     │     │     │
       │  after several days.    │        │     │     │     │     │
 „     │„                        │B       │  +  │  0  │     │     │
 „     │„                        │C       │  +  │  0  │     │     │
 „     │„                        │D       │  −  │  −  │  −  │  −  │  −
 ──────┼─────────────────────────┼────────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────
 4 G.  │Father of man that died; │A       │  +  │  +  │  +  │  +  │  0
   S.  │  laid virus; two days   │        │     │     │     │     │
       │  later mild diarrhea for│        │     │     │     │     │
       │  one or two days.       │        │     │     │     │     │
 „     │„                        │B       │  +  │  +  │  +  │  +  │  0
 „     │„                        │C       │  +  │  +  │  +  │  0  │  0
 „     │„                        │D       │  +  │  +  │  +  │  +  │  ±
 ──────┼─────────────────────────┼────────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────
 5 J.  │On April 27 laid virus; 2│A       │  ±  │  0  │  0  │  0  │  0
   K.  │  days later diarrhea for│        │     │     │     │     │
       │  several days.          │        │     │     │     │     │
 „     │„                        │B       │  ±  │  0  │  0  │  0  │  0
 „     │„                        │C       │  ±  │  0  │  0  │  0  │  0
 „     │„                        │D       │  −  │  0  │  0  │  0  │  0
 ──────┼─────────────────────────┼────────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────
 6 J.  │Laid virus April 27; two │A       │  0  │  0  │  0  │  0  │
   N.  │  days later had diarrhea│        │     │     │     │     │
       │  for several days.      │        │     │     │     │     │
 „     │„                        │B       │  +  │  +  │  +  │  ±  │
 „     │„                        │C       │  0  │  0  │  0  │  0  │
 „     │„                        │D       │  +  │  +  │  +  │  ±  │
 ──────┼─────────────────────────┼────────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────
 7 G.  │“Held” the virus April   │A       │  +  │  +  │  +  │  +  │  ±
   I.  │  28. Next day diarrhea  │        │     │     │     │     │
       │  for four days.         │        │     │     │     │     │
 „     │„                        │B       │  +  │  +  │  +  │  +  │  ±
 „     │„                        │C       │  +  │  +  │  +  │  +  │  ±
 „     │„                        │D       │  −  │  −  │  −  │  −  │  −
 ──────┼─────────────────────────┼────────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────
 8 H.  │Ate and associated with  │A       │  +  │  +  │  0  │     │
   R.  │  persons who handled    │        │     │     │     │     │
       │  virus; diarrhea several│        │     │     │     │     │
       │  days.                  │        │     │     │     │     │
 „     │„                        │B       │  +  │  −  │  0  │     │
 „     │„                        │C       │  +  │  ±  │  0  │     │
 „     │„                        │D       │  −  │  −  │  −  │     │
 ──────┼─────────────────────────┼────────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────
 9 K.  │Associations as case 8;  │A       │  +  │  +  │  +  │  +  │
   S.  │  headache several days  │        │     │     │     │     │
       │  and loss of appetite.  │        │     │     │     │     │
 „     │„                        │B       │  +  │  +  │  +  │  +  │
 „     │„                        │C       │  +  │  ±  │  0  │     │
 „     │„                        │D       │  −  │  −  │  −  │  −  │  −
 ──────┼─────────────────────────┼────────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────┼─────
 10    │Associations as case 8;  │A       │  0  │  0  │  0  │  0  │
       │  diarrhea for eight     │        │     │     │     │     │
       │  days; vomiting several │        │     │     │     │     │
       │  days.                  │        │     │     │     │     │
 „     │„                        │B       │  +  │  +  │  +  │  ±  │
 „     │„                        │C       │  0  │  0  │  0  │  0  │
 „     │„                        │D       │  +  │  +  │  +  │  ±  │
 ──────┴─────────────────────────┴────────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────┴─────
 A = Strain from Loeffler.
 B = Strain from market virus.
 C = Strain from stool 1 (fatal case).
 D = Strain from stool 2 (case 1 of table).
 − = No test made.
 0 = Negative.
 ± = Slight.
 Controls = Serum of five normal persons tested as above; gave in no
 case agglutination higher than 1 : 20.

  The attending physician, noting that most of his patients had come
  into recent contact with rat virus (_B. typhi murium_) and suspecting
  that to be responsible, sent specimens of stools to the Hygienic
  Institute at Munich, where they were carefully examined with reference
  to this subject.

  Organisms identical with Loeffler’s _B. typhi murium_ were isolated
  from the two stools examined and these cultures were compared with and
  conformed with a culture of _B. typhi murium_ obtained from Loeffler
  and also a culture from the virus on the local market.

  Two guinea pigs injected with cultures from the two stools gave, after
  the second injection, serum which agglutinated all the above organisms
  1:200. A mouse typhoid serum obtained from Loeffler agglutinated all
  the above strains distinctly in dilutions 1:640 and slightly in
  1:1280.

  In conclusion, the author considers three possibilities: 1. The mouse
  typhoid bacillus was the cause of the illness. 2. The bacillus was
  accidentally present, having no part in the production of the
  symptoms. 3. The bacillus was able to multiply only in case
  pre-existing intestinal trouble; then, however, causing the
  inflammation.

  The case of Mayer, who became infected during the course of some
  laboratory experiments, is particularly instructive.

  During an epidemic of mouse typhoid among his laboratory mice,
  evidently spread from some inoculated mice by ants, Mayer[BI] who had
  personally handled the infected mice and their cages, became sick July
  15, just seven days after the first appearance of the ants and after
  the observed rise in virulence of the mouse typhoid among the mice.
  His clinical history is as follows:

Footnote BI:

    Mayer, Georg: Ueber die Verschleppung typhöser Krankheiten durch
    Ameisen und die Pathogenität des Loeffler’schen Mäusetyphusbazillus
    für den Menschen. Münch. med. Woch., vol. 52, 1905, p. 2261.

  July 15: Weakness, epigastric pain, obstipation, temperature 37.7,
  pulse 90.

  July 16: Slight diarrhea, increase of pain in region of trans-colon,
  temperature 38.3, pulse 98.

  July 17: Diarrhea continued, pains increased—severe, chill in evening,
  temperature 39.1, pulse 102.

  July 18: Obstipation, symptoms worse, chill again in evening,
  temperature 39.4, pulse 104.

  July 19: Symptoms better, stools from purgative, evening temperature
  36.9, pulse 68.

  July 20: Left bed. Temperature and pulse normal, but weakness and
  slight epigastric pains continued till August 7.

  Patient’s serum agglutinated as follows:

 ──────────────────────────┬──────────────┬──────────────┬──────────────
                           │   Typhoid.   │ Paratyphoid. │Mouse-typhoid.
 ──────────────────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 July 23                   │         1–50+│         1–50+│        1–250+
 August 7                  │         1–50+│         1–50+│    [BJ]1–100+
 August 16                 │         1–50+│         1–50+│        1–50 +
 ──────────────────────────┴──────────────┴──────────────┴──────────────

Footnote BJ:

    Slight

  The bacillus of mouse typhoid was isolated from the patient’s stools
  July 21 and 23. Negative results thereafter. Examinations continued a
  month.

  Same organism isolated from urine July 21. Negative thereafter.

  The author concludes that the _B. typhi murium_ is able to cause in
  man a rather severe acute illness of short duration.

  Shibayama[BK] gives the following report of outbreaks of human
  infection that have come to his knowledge in Japan, where
  mouse-typhoid virus has been used in considerable quantities.

Footnote BK:

    Shibayama, G.: Ueber Pathogenität der Mäusetyphusbazillen für den
    Menschen. Münch. med. Woch., May, 1907, p. 979.

  _Outbreak 1._ In April, 1905, in a village of the Province of Saitama,
  30 people became ill and 2 died with severe gastro-intestinal
  symptoms. Outbreak investigated by Dr. H. Sezuki, district medical
  officer, formerly of the Tokio Institute for Infectious Diseases.

  It was found that all the 30 people had partaken of a dish of cooked
  vegetables served at a meeting of the town council, and that for
  application of sauce to these vegetables (after cooking) a wooden
  vessel had been used which two days before had been used for mixing
  mouse-typhoid virus with meal, without subsequent cleansing or
  sterilization.

  The symptoms came on within twelve to forty-eight hours thereafter
  (usually twenty hours), chill or chilly sensations, rise of
  temperature to 38° or 39° C., or even to 40° C.; face flushed; pulse
  accelerated; great weakness; thirst, nausea, colicky pains in abdomen
  followed by severe diarrhea and vomiting. In general, the fever and
  diarrhea lasted two or three days; but malaise, anorexia, weakness,
  and mucous stools persisted for several days. The more severe cases
  showed choleraic symptoms of collapse. Two persons died in spite of
  medical treatment—a 6-year old boy and a man of 43, on the second and
  third day, respectively.

  From the intestinal contents of these two cases, from the stools of
  several other cases, and from the remnants of the dish of vegetables
  in the wooden bowl an organism was isolated, which was demonstrated to
  be identical with the bacillus of mouse typhoid.

  These results were confirmed at the Tokio Institute for Infectious
  Diseases by Shibayama, by biological and immunizing tests.

  _Outbreak 2._ On December 7, 1905, a peasant of a village in the
  Province of Miyaki brought home some mouse virus mixed with meal in
  cakes. This being mistaken for “mochi” was eaten about 2 p. m. the
  next day by two little girls, 3 and 8 years old, respectively, and
  their grandfather, 61 years old.

  The man and the 8-year-old girl became sick at 9 p. m. the same day
  and the other child at about 3 p. m. on December 9. The symptoms in
  all cases were those of severe gastro-enteritis, as described under
  outbreak 1.

  The man died December 12, the 8-year-old child died on the 10th; the
  3-year-old child recovered after several days’ illness. These three
  alone ate of the virus and no other persons in the house became sick.

  No bacteriological examination was practicable.

  _Outbreak 3._—In a village of the Province of Iskawa, on April 22,
  1906, a lot of rat poison was prepared by mixing agar cultures of the
  mouse-typhoid bacillus with meal and water in a large wooden bowl.

  On April 24 there was a festival in the village at which about 170
  persons were served with 240 pounds of rice, which, after being
  cooked, was kneaded into cakes in a wooden bowl. About 80 pounds of
  this rice was so kneaded in the bowl previously used for preparing the
  rat poison. Twenty to twenty-four hours later 120 people who had eaten
  of the rice became ill with the already described symptoms of
  gastro-enteritis, of mild type among the strong but severe among the
  children and old people. Eighty-nine cases came under medical
  treatment. There were no deaths, but a number of cases were confined
  to bed for a week or more; mild cases recovered in one to three days.

  No bacteriological examination was made, but the physicians and town
  officials were unanimously of the opinion that the rat virus was the
  cause of the outbreak.

  _Outbreak 4._—A peasant of the province of Niigata brought home on May
  14, 1906, some rat virus (cultures of mouse-typhoid bacilli mixed with
  meal) which he laid away. Two of his grandchildren—a boy of 5 and a
  girl of 7—together with the 4-year-old daughter of a neighbor, found
  and ate the rat virus. The next day all three children became ill with
  severe gastro-enteritis, of which the 4-year-old child died on the
  third day. The others recovered after several days of medical
  treatment.

  _Outbreak 5._—On May 16, 1906, a peasant in the province of Jamagata
  brought home some rat virus (6 c. c. cultures of mouse-typhoid
  bacillus mixed with meal), which was accidentally mixed with the feed
  given to a healthy horse next morning. The same evening the horse
  showed loss of appetite and appearance of sickness. Within two days he
  developed a severe enteritis, of which he died on the seventh day. The
  body was buried, but was dug up in the night by a laborer who cut off
  the hind quarters, took them home, and distributed the meat among
  friends and neighbors.

  Within three days 34 persons who had eaten of this meat became ill
  with symptoms of severe gastro-enteritis. A 72-year-old man died after
  five days; the others recovered in three to eleven days.

  This outbreak was investigated by Dr. H. Segawa, a medical officer of
  the province and former member of the institute at Tokyo, who isolated
  from the remains of the horseflesh by plate cultures and animal
  inoculations, an organism identical with the bacillus of mouse
  typhoid. A culture was sent to Shibayama, who carefully verified it
  (details not given).

  Shibayama concludes: In all cases the close relationship between the
  bacillus of mouse typhoid and the illness was established; and he
  thinks this organism must be accepted as the direct cause of the
  outbreaks.

  Referring to Loeffler’s uniformly negative human experiments, he calls
  attention to known cases where men have taken virulent cultures of
  typhoid, diphtheria, etc., without infection. According to many
  bacteriological investigations, _B. typhi murium_ is identical with
  the bacillus of enteritis. If it is proven that the latter is a cause
  of acute gastro-enteritis then the conclusion is likewise justified
  that the _B. typhi murium_ is frequently pathogenic for man, causing
  an acute gastro-enteritis.

  Fleischanderl[BL] a reports six cases of illness—three severe and
  three mild—occurring in his practice in the latter part of April,
  1908, presenting the following symptoms: Onset with rapidly increasing
  body pains, followed in a few hours by diarrhea, rise of temperature,
  and general prostration; in the next two or three days aggravation of
  the symptoms, fever (39° to 40° C.), copious diarrhea, vomiting (in
  one case), severe body pains, vertigo, and considerable prostration.
  Symptoms abated quickly in a few days, leaving considerable
  prostration, convalescence requiring two weeks in one case. In the
  less severe cases there was no fever, and the other symptoms were
  generally milder.

Footnote BL:

    Fleischanderl, Fritz: Mitteilung über einige Krankheitsfälle,
    hervorgerufen durch Mäustyphusbazillen. Munch. med. Woch., vol. 56,
    Feb., 1909, p. 392.

  The simultaneous appearance of these and other similar rumored mild
  cases among the neighbors (about 20 in all) pointed to a common cause.
  It was found that three of the six cases were in people who had
  handled mouse-typhoid cultures the day before their illness, taking no
  precautions to avoid infection.

  The other three occurred in a family which, on the day before the
  onset of the illness, had drunk raw milk obtained from a house where
  the rat virus had been used shortly before, and only three members of
  the family who drank the milk became ill.

  In order to prove the etiology of these cases Fleischanderl, who had
  never suffered any intestinal troubles, had had nothing to do with any
  case of typhoid fever for a year, and was in excellent health, took a
  culture of the mouse-typhoid bacillus as used in the neighborhood,
  rubbed a glass rod over the surface, washed it off in a glass of
  water, and drank this before breakfast on the morning of May 3.

  In twenty-two hours he experienced mild, increasing body pains,
  followed within a few hours by diarrhea, and a few hours later by
  slight chill, rise of temperature to 38.2, pulse 106, severe pains in
  body, and feeling of great weakness.

  May 4, 9 p. m.: Temperature 39.2° C., pulse 120. Height of symptoms.

  May 5: Temperature 38.2° to 38.5° C., pulse 106 to 120. Other symptoms
  continued.

  May 6: Temperature and pulse normal. All symptoms disappeared except
  weakness, which lasted two days.

  Bacteriological investigations conducted by Herbert Berger in the K.
  K. Serotherapeutischen Institut and by Doctor Reichel, assistant in
  the Hygienic Institute of the University of Vienna, follow:

  From the stools of one of the patients infected from milk an organism
  was isolated which, injected into mice (1 c. c. emulsion of
  forty-eight-hour culture), killed them in two to five hours. Mice
  infected by eating these dead mice died in thirty to forty-eight
  hours.

  Control mice inoculated similarly with a culture of the market
  mouse-typhoid virus died in twenty to thirty hours, while the mice
  infected through eating these died after three to four days.

  The following strains were used for cultural agglutination tests:

  A. From stools of patient infected from milk.

  B1. Market virus used in injecting mice.

  B2. Market virus taken by author.

  C25. From stools of author twenty-five hours after infection.

  C55. From stools of author fifty-five hours after infection.

  LL. Stock culture of Loeffler’s mouse-typhoid bacillus.

  LP. Stock culture of para-typhoid bacillus.

  All organisms (A-C55) were demonstrated as motile bacilli, not
  liquefying gelatine, not forming lactic acid, and forming gas from
  dextrose.

  The serum of a rabbit after two injections of LL agglutinated LL and
  LP in dilution of 1:1280, did not agglutinate A, B1, B2, C25, and C55.

  Serum of rabbit after one injection of B2 agglutinated in 1:320
  dilution A, B1, B2, C25, C55, and LL; did not agglutinate LP.

  Serum of rabbit after one injection of C25 gave exactly similar
  results.

  Doctor Reichel considers it proven that the organisms A to C55 are
  undoubtedly identical with Loeffler’s bacillus of mouse typhoid, and
  distinct from para-typhoid bacilli. The author considers it proven
  that this bacillus was the sole cause of the cases of enteritis
  observed.

  Recently Mallory and Ordway[BM], in a paper read before the American
  Association of Pathologists and Bacteriologists held in Boston,
  reported that lesions analogous to the early stages of typhoid lesions
  may be produced in rats by the use of Danysz virus.

Footnote BM:

    Mallory, F. B., & Ordway, T.: Lesions produced in the rat by a
    typhoid-like organism (Danysz virus). Journ. Am. med. assn., vol.
    52, May 1, 1909, p. 1455.

  In view of these facts the statements of some of the advertising
  matter of certain rat viruses call for revision.


                     REFERENCES TO THE LITERATURE.

  Loeffler,[BN] 1889, gives an account of two spontaneous outbreaks
  among the mice kept at the Hygienic Institute at Griefswald. It was
  from these animals that he obtained and described the original _B.
  typhi murium_. He determined that the infection was by ingestion and
  that the organism was especially virulent for field mice. He described
  the organism in detail and also the lesions.

Footnote BN:

    Loeffler, F.: Ueber Epidemieen unter den im hygienischen Institute
    zu Griefswald gehalten Mäusen und über die Bekämpfung der
    Feldmäusplage. Centblt. f. Bakt., Orig., vol. 11, 1898, p. 129.

  Laser,[BO] 1892, reports that on the morning of February 6, 1892, 70
  of the 76 field mice (_Mus agrarius_) used as experiment animals in
  the Hygienic Institut at Königsberg were found dead. A small bacillus
  twice as long as broad, displaying a very lively specific motility,
  was isolated from the spleen. It was tested upon animals and all the
  results compared with Eisenberg’s tables and found to be closely
  allied to the bacillus of ferret plague (Ebert-Schummelbusch), to the
  bacillus of American swine plague (Billings), and to that of French
  swine plague (Chantamesse and Cornil).

Footnote BO:

    Laser, Hugo: Ein neuer für Versuchsthiere pathogener Bacillus aus
    der Gruppe der Frettschen-Schweinseuche. Centblt. f. Bakt., Orig.,
    vol. 11, 1892, p. 184.

  Mereshkowsky,[BP] 1893, isolated an organism at the Royal
  Bacteriological Institute at St. Petersburg from a stock of Zisel
  (_Spermophilus musicus_) among which a spontaneous epizootic had
  occurred. The author found this culture to be virulent for domestic
  and field mice.

Footnote BP:

    Mereshkowsky, S. S.: Ein aus Zieselmäusen ausgeschiedener und zur
    Vertilgung von Feld-resp. Mäusen, geeigneter Bacillus. Centblt. f.
    Bakt., Orig., vol. 17, 1895, p. 742.

  Zupnik,[BQ] 1897, states that Joseph, of the Agricultural Institute of
  Breslau, in 1882 originated the use of favus fungus for the
  destruction of mice. Zupnik tested _B. typhi murium_ and Danysz virus
  upon mice. No experiments with rats.

Footnote BQ:

    Zupnik, Leo: Ueber die pratische Verwendbarkeit der Mäuse bacillen
    inbesondere des Loeffler’schen _Bacillus typhi murium_. Centblt. f.
    Bakt., Orig., vol. 21, 1897, p. 446.

  Issatschenko,[BR] in 1898, described briefly a bacillus obtained by
  him from gray rats. Recent investigation showed this bacillus to be
  very virulent for rats and mice, but harmless for the different
  species of domestic animals. Four hundred and forty-three experiments
  were made upon rats with pure cultures of the bacillus combined with
  dough and fed to the rats. He gives a table showing that the mortality
  occurred in 431 rats at an average of ten and one-half days. The
  greatest mortality occurred during the first fifteen days (84.2 per
  cent), with the greatest number on the seventh day (20.1 per cent).

Footnote BR:

    Issatschenko, B.: Untersuchungen mit dem für Ratten pathogenen
    Bacillus. Centblt. f. Bakt., Orig., vol. 31, 1902, p. 26.

  Danysz,[BS] 1900, isolated a cocco-bacillus during an outbreak of
  spontaneous disease amongst field mice which presented the general
  characteristics of the colon bacillus and to this extent resembled
  Loeffler’s bacillus (_B. typhi murium_), and which from the beginning
  exhibited some pathogenicity for gray rats (_M. decumanus_). Of ten
  such rats fed upon a culture of this organism, two or three died,
  while others that had fallen sick recovered and the same remained
  well. This small mortality offered some hope that it would be possible
  to increase the virulence of the bacillus by ordinary methods; that
  is, passing it from rat to rat. It was found, however, that the
  opposite was true; the virulence was always weakened by this process
  regardless of the method of administration. Thus in every series the
  first culture killed the animals in seven to twelve days; occasionally
  after one or two passages five to seven days; but subsequent passages
  decreased the virulence so that none died.

Footnote BS:

    Danysz, J.: Un microbe pathogène pour les rats (_Mus decumanus_ et
    _Mus rattus_) et son application à la destruction de ces animaux.
    Ann. Inst. Pasteur, 1900, vol. 14, p. 193.

  The general result is that it is difficult to maintain the virulence
  of the cocco-bacillus of the rat or to increase it when it is found to
  be small. It can only be effected by constantly making a large number
  of experiments and frequently testing the virulence of the culture.
  Danysz succeeded in keeping up a supply of cultures of sufficient
  strength for eight years. In 60 per cent of the operations where this
  culture has been used it has been successful in causing the absolute
  disappearance of the rats. In 15 per cent the result was entirely
  negative, and in the remaining 25 per cent there was a large
  diminution.

  Oettinger,[BT] in 1903, increased the virulence of the Danysz bacillus
  by growth in an egg rendered alkaline after the method previously
  introduced by Wiener.

Footnote BT:

    Oettinger, M.: Ueber die Wienersche Methode zur Virulenzsteigerung
    der Danysz Bazillen. Munch. med. Woch., vol. 1, 1903, p. 324.

  Pfreimbtner,[BU] 1904, sees the reason for a partial failure in the
  application of Loeffler’s bacillus to the destruction of field mice.
  In the use of a solid medium (agar-agar), upon which the bacterial
  cultures only grow upon the surface, too few bacteria are transferred
  to the pieces of bread, and consequently too few virulent bacteria are
  consumed by the mice. An active infection depends not upon the
  existence of virulent bacteria, but rather upon the entrance of a
  definite number of virulent bacilli.

Footnote BU:

    Pfreimbtner, J.: Erfahrung über des Loeffler’schen
    Infektionsverfahren zur Bekämpfung der Mäuseplage in einer neuen Art
    der Anwendung. Fühlung’s landw. Zeit., 1904, p. 619. Rev. by
    Schander in Centblt. f. Bakt., 2. Abt., vol. 15, 1905, p. 502.

  The author used skimmed milk as a nutrient medium and describes a
  series of 9 experiments and gives an estimate of the cost of the
  process with the use of milk instead of agar. The advantage of the use
  of milk is in the greater certainty of the results and cheapness as
  compared with other methods. The bread cubes impregnated with skimmed
  milk were well taken by the mice and desiccation of the cultures,
  which not infrequently occurs in the use of more solid media, is
  excluded. Notwithstanding the excessive thinning, the liquid still
  contains many virulent bacilli. The washing out of bacilli after rain
  is slightly less possible as in the use of the more solid media. The
  action of light, where the bread cubes contain many bacilli, is
  insignificant, and hence the carrying out of the process in the
  daytime is made possible. Milk is easily obtained and the thinning and
  application less bothersome. Finally the author expresses himself
  against the view that the _B. typhi murium_ causes serious diseases in
  man.

  Teichert,[BV] 1905, speaks of Loeffler’s mice typhus bacillus and
  Pfreimbtner’s method of growing it upon sterilized skimmed milk. A
  number of experiments carried out at the bacteriological laboratory of
  the Vreschen experiment station shows the utility of Loeffler’s
  bacillus for the destruction of house and field mice. The long-tailed
  field mouse was, on the other hand, not harmed by it.

Footnote BV:

    Teichert: Die mechanischen, chemischen und bacteriellen Kampfmittel
    gegen Ratten und Mäuse. 2. Teil: Die Bekämpfung der Mäuse. Fühlung’s
    landw. Zeit., 1905, No. 16. Rev. by Ehrenberg in Centblt. f. Bakt.,
    2. Abt., vol. 15, 1905, p. 503.

  Bahr,[BW] 1905, gives a complete and satisfactory summary of the
  literature upon the subject of the destruction of rats and mice with
  bacteria, including original work of his own.

Footnote BW:

    Bahr, L.: Ueber die zur Vertilgung von Ratten und Mäusen benutzten
    Bakterien. Centblt. f. Bakt., Orig., vol. 39, 1905, p. 263.

  Zielander,[BX] 1908, obtained fairly good results with Danysz virus in
  the laboratory, also with ratin. No fixed tests were recorded.

Footnote BX:

    Zielander: Der Rattenbacillus als Rattenvertilgungsmittel. Arb. a.
    d. k. Gesndhtsmte., Berl., vol. 28, 1908, p. 145.


                                RÉSUMÉ.

  Rats are notoriously resistant to bacterial infection. Even plague
  usually fails markedly to diminish their prevalence. An epizootic of
  bacterial nature, therefore, can not be classed with the natural
  enemies of the rat. We are not surprised, then, to learn that the
  bacterial viruses have signally failed to accomplish their mission.

  These bacterial viruses belong to the colon-typhoid group of
  organisms. They are either identical with or closely related to the
  original bacillus of mouse typhoid discovered by Loeffler, or the
  para-typhoid bacillus type B, which is frequently the cause of meat
  poisoning, or the _Bacillus enteritidis_ of Gærtner, which has been
  associated with gastro-intestinal disorders.

  The claim that these rat viruses are harmless to man needs revision,
  in view of the instances of sickness and death reported by various
  observers. The pathogenicity for man depends upon the virulence of the
  culture, the amount ingested, the nature of the medium in which it
  grows, and many other factors.

  Danysz virus is pathogenic for rats under laboratory conditions, but
  has feeble powers of propagating itself from rat to rat. It rapidly
  loses its virulence, especially when exposed to light and air. The
  result depends largely upon the amount ingested. The other viruses
  have proven even less satisfactory.

  Under natural conditions these rat viruses may be likened to a
  chemical poison, with the great disadvantage that they rapidly lose
  their virulence and are comparatively expensive. They also have the
  further disadvantage that chemical poisons do not possess of rendering
  animals immune by the ingestion of amounts that are insufficient to
  kill or by the ingestion of cultures that have lost their virulence.




  PLAGUE ERADICATION IN CITIES BY SECTIONAL EXTERMINATION OF RATS AND
                         GENERAL RAT PROOFING.

                           By VICTOR G. HEISER,

    _Passed assistant surgeon, U. S. Public Health and Marine-Hospital
     Service, chief quarantine officer and director of health for the
                           Philippine Islands_.


  The health officials of the city of Manila, P. I., for the five-year
  period from 1900 to 1905 made most valiant efforts to destroy the rats
  of the city; approximately $15,000 were paid in rat bounties and
  $325,000 in salaries and wages and other expenses for rat catching,
  but at the end of that time the rats were apparently as plentiful as
  before and the plague was still present. The experience in Tokio and
  Osaka had been practically the same. Professor Kitasato expressed the
  opinion that a given city could only have up to a certain number
  anyhow, because further increase was limited by the amount of
  available food, and when the limit had been reached the rats commenced
  to eat one another, which prevented more than a certain number ever
  being present, and that the increase by breeding was about as rapid as
  any method of destruction which had yet been tried.

  The following plan was then tried, and the plague among human beings
  soon disappeared, there being no cases since April, 1906; and it has
  been eradicated among rats each time that it has made its appearance.

  A list of the places at which plague-infected rats were found was
  made. Each was regarded as a center of infection. Radiating lines,
  usually five in number, were prolonged from this center, evenly spaced
  like the spokes of a wheel. Rats were caught along these lines and
  examined. Plague rats were seldom found more than a few blocks away.
  The furthermost points at which infected rats were found were then
  connected with a line, as is roughly shown in the diagram on page 206
  (Fig. 59.)

  The space inclosed by the dotted line was regarded as the section of
  infection. The entire rat-catching force, which had heretofore been
  employed throughout the city, was then concentrated along the border
  of the infected section; that is, along the dotted line. They then
  commenced to move toward the center, catching the rats as they closed
  in. Behind them thorough rat proofing was carried out. One section
  after another was treated in this way until they had all been wiped
  out. Once weekly thereafter rats were caught in the previously
  infected sections and at other places which were insanitary and which
  had been infected in years gone by. This was continued for one year.

  The city was then divided as is shown in the diagram facing this page,
  and rats are caught once weekly at each point at which the lines
  intersect and sent to the laboratory for examination.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 59.—Isolated plague-infested center, Manila, P. I.
]

  In addition, sanitary inspectors are instructed to bring in dead rats
  which have evidently died of disease, and more detailed rat catchings
  are made along the water front.

  It is understood of course that rat proofing of the entire city should
  be thoroughly carried out and constantly maintained.


                              CONCLUSIONS.

  1. Since the above system was adopted plague has disappeared in the
  city of Manila; among human beings in 1906; among rats in 1907, and it
  has not reappeared since.

  2. That the cost is only a small fraction of that of general rat
  extermination.

  3. That the plan is thoroughly practical for any kind of a city.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 60.—General Scheme for testing plague rat infection, City of Manila.
  Sanitary Map Bureau of Health. _Escala 1:38,500_
]




                    THE RAT IN RELATION TO SHIPPING.

                           By WILLIAM C. HOBDY,

  _Passed Assistant Surgeon, Public Health and Marine-Hospital Service_.


  Since men first went down to the sea in ships the rat’s voyage-making
  tendencies have been known, and their fecundity is as well established
  as their fondness for travel. The record does not state that there
  were more than a pair on the ark at the beginning of her voyage, but
  the chances are better than even that her skipper began that voyage
  with more rats than his manifest showed; but whether he did or not, we
  can be sure he had more at the end of the voyage than at the
  beginning. Whether or not succeeding generations inherited from their
  forbears on the ark this well-known wanderlust is undetermined, but it
  is a fact that the intimacy and companionship established and begun
  then have been persistently maintained by the rat ever since. His
  travels have been coextensive with man’s, until to-day there is not a
  port on earth where the rat is not present. Any exception to this
  statement simply proves the rule. The rat is cute; he knows when he is
  well off and his absence from a port does not prove that he has not
  been there, but that he has been too intelligent to follow man ashore.
  In establishing this shipboard intimacy there has been no “by your
  leave” courtesy on his part either; he goes without consent—against
  orders, even—and man’s ingenuity has as yet discovered no effective
  means of keeping him off. This is not surprising when the rat’s
  ability as a rope walker is considered. I have seen a rat gallop with
  all appearance of enjoyment along an inclined electric cable from a
  church steeple on one side of a street into the second story of a
  hotel on the other. Others have been seen traveling along the
  telephone wires from house to house, and on shipboard they frequently
  have runways on small pipes along which they scurry in perfect
  security. When a ship is fended off 6 feet from the dock and her gang
  plank is lifted or guarded she is still freely accessible, because all
  her mooring lines are only so many highways along which rats can and
  do pass with ease and in perfect safety.

  This fondness for ships and sea travel is shared by the various
  species of the rat family, but the _Mus norvegicus_ has earned the
  reputation of being the greatest traveler of them all. He almost
  invariably predominated among those killed by fumigation on shipboard.
  That he finds life on shipboard easy and the conditions satisfactory
  is proved by the numbers that are destroyed from time to time by
  fumigation. While in charge of the outgoing quarantine work in San
  Francisco the chief engineer of a small lumber carrier called to book
  his vessel for fumigation. The vessel was small, only 260 tons, and
  carried nothing but lumber and her own ship’s stores, but the chief
  declared she was overrun with rats, and to prove it showed where they
  had eaten the patches from his shoes. He declared they robbed him of
  his sandwich when he came off watch, and requested me to give her a
  thorough fumigation. This was done. The next morning the agent of the
  vessel phoned to ask how I measured rats, stating that on this vessel
  they had collected “a barrelful and seven.” Three hundred and ten on a
  little vessel of only 260 tons burthen.

  On another vessel after one fumigation 100 were collected immediately
  after fumigation, but a few days later, when the vessel was undergoing
  extensive repairs, 425 others were found—a total of 525 on one small
  vessel. These numbers are small, however, when compared with the
  results obtained on others, i. e., on grain-carrying vessels. For
  instance, a vessel was fumigated some years since in Bombay where
  1,300 were destroyed at one time, and the _Minnehaha_, a new vessel
  only nine months in commission, on fumigation in London, England, in
  May, 1901, yielded a bag of 1,700 rats.


              ADAPTABILITY OF THE RAT TO HIS SURROUNDINGS.

  In addition to his qualities as a sailor and tight-rope walker, the
  rat has the power of adapting himself to most unusual conditions and
  surroundings. At the beginning of the outgoing work in San Francisco
  it was urged that rats either could not or would not live on any part
  of tank ships engaged exclusively in carrying oil, owing to the fumes
  and vapors that permeated the entire vessel. This statement was
  unquestionably correct for those compartments in which the oil itself
  was stored or carried. It was not true, however, for the
  superstructure of these vessels, for on one of the oil carriers 60
  rats were found after one fumigation, and of the thirty or more
  vessels of this class that were regularly fumigated in San Francisco,
  although the odors of oil or gasoline were quite strong in the living
  compartments, not one was found that did not harbor rats. Still more
  remarkable, as illustrating the rat’s adaptability, was the fact that
  from the large refrigerating plants which some vessels carried and in
  which fumigation had not been practiced for a long time rats were
  obtained that had grown a fur an inch and a half long to protect
  themselves from the cold.


                            DAMAGE TO CARGO.

  That rats on shipboard in any such numbers as mentioned above must do
  much damage to cargo can not be doubted.

  Inquiry as to the extent of this damage showed that there were no data
  on the subject. That such damage was common and considerable, however,
  was revealed by the fact, elicited by these inquiries, that nearly
  every steamship company on both the Atlantic and Pacific took
  precautions both to keep rats from getting on board and to destroy
  them after they did. One example will show what damage may occur. The
  British steamer _Gadsby_, on a voyage from India to Antwerp, covering
  a period of twenty-nine days, had 44,000 out of 46,000 bags of wheat
  cut by rats, with an estimated damage of $2,200.

  The constant and almost universal presence, then, of rats on shipboard
  can not be doubted, and if it could the results of fumigation,
  wherever practiced with SO_{2}, would serve to settle the question,
  for they are found under all conditions, even on the most unlikely
  vessels.

  How do these rodents gain access to a vessel? It has been the custom
  to assume that they came on board from the docks over the side when
  this was possible, and when it was not, as when the vessel was fended
  off or stood too high out of the water, that they made use of the
  gangways, mooring lines, hawsers, etc., as avenues of communication.
  It is still the practice, therefore, in enforcing antirat precautions,
  to compel the ship to fend off 6 feet from the dock, to wear fat
  funnels on all lines, and to raise the gangway from the dock at night.
  Just a word as to these precautions. The most practical fender is a
  floating one made of heavy timbers either bolted together into a solid
  frame, with the necessary cross braces bolted in, or made up of logs
  or spars chained together. They should be long enough to distribute
  the pressure of the vessel as the tide moves over a number of piers or
  piles so that the weight does not bear, through the medium of these
  fenders, on just one or two of the wharf foundations. Such a fender
  will stay in position, will do no damage to the vessel, and no matter
  how great the amplitude of the tide may be, will always remain below
  the ship’s gunwale and can not therefore be utilized by rats as a
  means to get on board. Large vessels require at least two. Small ones
  need but one, and it was found in San Francisco, in the case of those
  vessels changing their mooring several times daily, that this one
  could be carried from wharf to wharf by the vessel without trouble or
  delay simply by lashing it edgewise outside on top of the guard.

  Funnels should be of heavy galvanized iron, circular in shape, and not
  less than 36 inches in diameter. The spout of the funnel should be 3
  inches in diameter and should be at least 18 inches long. The flange
  of the funnel should be soldered to this 18-inch pipe at its middle so
  that the spout projects 9 inches out of the funnel and 9 inches into
  it. When the two halves of the funnel are brought together this spout
  or tube is occupied by the line or hawser to be protected, and by
  lashing this tube to the hawser the funnel is held in position and
  prevented from lying down. Such a funnel should be put on every line
  from the vessel to the dock, and when the tube does not fit the line
  the latter should be parceled before the tube is lashed to it.

  These, together with raising the gang plank from the dock at night,
  make up the precautions ordinarily taken to prevent the rats from
  getting on ships. As stated above, they are based on the assumption
  that these are the common avenues of entrance. That these precautions
  do much good can not be doubted, but in the writer’s opinion they do
  not entirely cover the case, for there remains one other road of
  ingress, one of the important, if not the most important, which these
  precautions do not and can not block and through which rats constantly
  get on board, and that is through the medium of the cargo itself.
  There is at present nothing to prevent access in this manner to a
  vessel and the route is so easy that there can be no doubt that whole
  families of rats are carried on board in this way. In fact some
  articles of cargo offer inviting harbors and homes to rats,
  particularly when these articles have been stored for a time in
  rat-infested warehouses. Among such articles of cargo may be mentioned
  crockery or china packed in hay or straw or excelsior and loosely
  crated; various articles of furniture packed in excelsior, wrapped in
  gunny, and loosely crated; wheat, corn, oats, peanuts, or barley when
  shipped in bags; and matting in hollow rolls when sewed up in gunny.
  Any of these articles could easily become the home of even an entire
  rat family after having been stored for a time prior to shipment in a
  rat-infested warehouse. As a matter of fact, the last plague rat
  discovered in San Francisco was found in a bag of peanuts on the third
  floor of a warehouse.

  That rats are thus carried on board is absolutely certain in my
  opinion. In the recent antiplague campaign at San Francisco there were
  ample opportunities for observations along this line, and in no other
  way can the presence of rats in troublesome numbers on board certain
  vessels be explained. These vessels were new, were freed from rats by
  careful and repeated fumigation, and between these acts touched at no
  wharves save in Honolulu and San Francisco, where constant antirat
  precautions were observed. And yet on their second trip (about five
  months after the fumigation had been discontinued) they were badly
  rat-infested. Of course, by no means had all these rats been carried
  on board in cargo, but the original patriarchs of the colony had,
  after which, as is probably the case in all rat-infested ships, their
  natural prolific characteristics did the rest.

  In the same way, too, rats are carried from ship to shore and the
  truth of Kitasatso’s aphorism that “wherever ships go, plague will
  go,” at once becomes apparent, and any regulations to prevent the
  introduction of such vermin and the plague which they may carry to be
  effective must include the inspection of cargo to insure its freedom
  from rats, this inspection to be made just before it goes on board.

  The relation these rodents bear to plague and the part they play in
  its transmission have been thoroughly discussed and set forth in
  another article in this work. The work of Ashburton Thompson in
  Australia and of the British Medical Commission in India was a
  scientific demonstration that plague was primarily a rat disease
  transmitted by fleas, while McCoy in the United States has gone
  further probably than anyone else in demonstrating the manner in which
  the flea does this work. The importance of this relation is emphasized
  and the difficulty of ridding a port of pest infection is explained by
  a fact, first observed so far as I know by Klein, of London, that rats
  suffer from a chronic form of pest, not fatal, at least for a long
  time, and during the course of which the rat may exhibit practically
  his normal activity. This fact then, that plague is primarily a rat
  disease and that it may occur in the rat in a chronic form, shows how
  great the danger may be from their presence on shipboard, explains why
  it is that where ships go plague will go, and emphasizes the
  importance of destroying them on shipboard apart from the damage and
  loss which their presence entails.

  So important is this and so preeminent is the rôle played by the rat
  in plague transmission and propagation that I believe regulations
  should demand that all ships be disinfected at least three times, and
  better still, four times, a year, for the destruction of rats. If this
  precaution were taken, and if to it were added an inspection of cargo
  at the port of embarkation to insure its freedom from rats, I believe
  the disinfection of cargo could be entirely dispensed with. It is
  infectious only in so far as it harbors rats, and if these are not
  present disinfection, in my opinion, does as little good in preventing
  plague as dipping ballast did in preventing yellow fever.


                              FUMIGATION.

  Once the rat has gained access to a vessel, what is the best method of
  getting rid of him?

  There are several methods, all of which are effective if properly
  used, and all of which depend on sulphur dioxide as the destructive
  agent. The following are mentioned: Pot and pan, sulphur furnace,
  Clayton system, and Marot system. A choice of one of these methods
  will be determined by the cost, the rapidity of fumigation desired,
  and the condition of the vessel, whether empty or loaded. No matter
  which method is selected, to be effective the sulphur dioxide must be
  simultaneously delivered to or generated in every compartment on the
  vessel.

  For an empty vessel nothing is so satisfactory as the pot and pan
  method of generating the gas. It has the following advantages; is more
  rapid than any other, is cheaper, is more effective, and is equally
  applicable to the largest and the smallest vessel afloat. With a
  sufficient number of pots and pans 3,500 pounds of sulphur can be
  burned just as quickly as 100. Ten pounds of sulphur in each of 350
  pots will be consumed just as quickly as will 10 pounds in any one of
  that number, namely, in less than five hours, a fact which was
  demonstrated over and over in the outgoing work in San Francisco.

  At the beginning of this work it was thought a 2½ per cent gas with
  three hours’ exposure would be sufficient. Practice proved, however,
  that this was not effective and the strength of gas was increased to 3
  per cent and the exposure to five hours which a test, extending over
  twelve months and embracing over 3,000 vessels, proved to be ample.

  The best pot in which to burn sulphur is 6 inches deep, has a flare of
  6 inches—that is, the diameter at the top exceeds the diameter at the
  bottom by that much, is from 16 inches to 24 inches in diameter at the
  top and has four hemispherical legs about the size of half a billiard
  ball. These pots when in use are set in a galvanized iron tub. These
  tubs contain a little water, and are of a diameter 6 inches greater
  than the top of the pot. The hemispherical legs of these pots will not
  punch holes into the tub. The pots are filled with sulphur, which is
  hollowed out into a little crater at the top, into which crater from 4
  to 6 ounces of alcohol are poured and when all are ready a lighted
  match is dropped into each little crater and the compartment is
  closed.

  In actual practice it was found that an exposure of five hours to a 3
  per cent gas would not destroy all the rats in absolutely every case.
  Some ships afford better hiding places than others, and on these an
  occasional rat would escape. It was the custom, however, to fumigate
  all vessels every thirty days and after the third fumigation, on
  vessels that did not carry general cargo, no more rats were obtained,
  though the fumigations were continued for a number of months.

  On those vessels that carried miscellaneous general cargoes a few rats
  were found after almost every fumigation. These vessels touched no
  wharf from the time they left San Francisco until their return, except
  for a short time in Honolulu, where adequate precautions were
  observed, and it is difficult to understand how these rats got on
  board if they were not carried on in cargo.

  For vessels with cargo in their holds the pot and pan method is
  dangerous owing to the possibility of fire. For these vessels one of
  the other methods of generating the sulphur gas must be used. This
  involves the use of an expensive plant consisting of a furnace,
  cooling chamber, blower, or fan, and a system of mains and delivery
  pipes by means of which the gas is delivered to the various holds and
  compartments of the vessel. To be at all effective the gas must be 4½
  per cent strength, with at least twenty-four hours exposure. The one
  recommendation of such a system is its freedom from danger by fire. It
  is too slow; the pipes, even where 6 inches in diameter, are liable to
  clogging with sublimed sulphur, an inevitable result if the fans are
  driven too rapidly, and it is not possible to do more than one or at
  most two ships at a time. The inadequacy of such a method when
  compared to the work done in San Francisco where we averaged over nine
  vessels every day for almost fourteen months is at once apparent. Many
  ships now carry their own disinfecting plants, by means of which not
  only is sulphur dioxide generated and pumped into a compartment, but
  at the same time also the air of this space is sucked out. This
  principle is excellent, but in its application the machines used are
  wholly inadequate, having a very limited sulphur capacity per hour and
  equipped with delivery pipes in many instances only 2 or 3 inches in
  diameter. It would be a matter of days to disinfect some of these
  ships with the machines they carry. In San Francisco we again and
  again used pots and pans to fumigate these vessels, including the very
  compartments in which their own machines sat doing nothing.

  The Marot system of generating the gas from compressed liquid sulphur
  dioxide has in this country been found too expensive to apply to
  vessels. Probably no system will effectually destroy all the rats on a
  cargo-laden vessel.


                                SUMMARY.

  To summarize then:

  1. The rat is found on all vessels, sometimes in enormous numbers, and
  is able to adapt himself to all sorts of conditions. He either gets on
  board himself or is carried on in cargo. Owing to his seagoing
  tendency, his distribution is world-wide.

  2. On shipboard, to live he must do damage to either cargo or stores,
  or both.

  3. Plague is primarily a rat disease; it may exist in the rat in a
  chronic form. Hence where ships go plague will go sooner or later.

  4. To prevent the ingress of rats and the consequent spread of plague,
  ships should observe antirat precautions, and cargo inspection should
  be included in these.

  5. At stated intervals, three or, better still, four times a year, all
  vessels should be fumigated for the destruction of rats.

  6. On empty vessels this can best be done by generating sulphur by the
  pot and pan method.

  7. On laden vessels some special apparatus must be used to generate
  the gas. A longer exposure is required, at least twenty-four hours,
  and the gas should be 4½ per cent strength instead of 3 percent. It is
  extremely difficult by any method to kill all the rats on a
  cargo-laden vessel.




                     THE RAT AS AN ECONOMIC FACTOR.

                            By DAVID E. LANTZ,

     _Assistant Biologist, United States Department of Agriculture_.


                             INTRODUCTION.

  The world has rightly learned to dread rats as disseminators of
  disease, and recent efforts to rid cities of the pests have resulted
  chiefly from sanitary considerations. Yet the material losses due to
  depredations of rats are now, and always have been, a sufficient
  argument for their destruction. The requirements of sanitation and
  public health are slowly bringing to pass what economic interests
  failed to accomplish, namely, a general recognition of the fact that
  the rat is a standing menace to prosperity. To point out some of the
  many ways in which rats inflict injury and the extent to which they
  drain the resources of the people is the object of the present
  chapter.


                          UTILITY OF THE RAT.

  Do rats serve any useful purpose? With very slight reservation, the
  question may be answered in the negative. There have been times and
  places in which the rat’s work as a scavenger accomplished good, but
  modern methods of garbage disposal are superseding the feeding it to
  rats.

  It was Robert Southey, the poet, who, nearly a century ago, humorously
  suggested as the first three steps to eradicate rats—first,
  introducing them as a table delicacy; second, utilizing the skins; and
  third, inoculating them with a contagious disease.[BY] The last of
  these plans is now receiving considerable attention from
  bacteriologists, but the others, for obvious reasons, have been
  neglected.

Footnote BY:

    Omniana, vol. 1, p. 25, 1812.

  It is true that under exceptional circumstances the rat has been a
  source of human food. The principal instances on record were during
  the siege of Paris in 1870, and during the siege of the French
  garrison at Malta, 1798–1800, when food was so scarce that rat
  carcasses brought high prices. Another was on board the ship _Advance_
  during an arctic winter, when Doctor Kane attributed his entire
  immunity from scurvy to his diet of fresh rats, of which none of the
  other members of the party would partake.[BZ]

Footnote BZ:

    Second Grinnell Expedition, vol. 1, p. 393, 1856.

  The statement is often made in newspapers, and even in encyclopedias,
  that in Europe, and especially in France, rat skins are extensively
  used in the manufacture of gloves. The late Frank T. Buckland, about a
  half century ago, made diligent inquiry in London, and through friends
  in Paris and other places on the Continent, but found no confirmation
  of such statement. He concluded that either rat skins were not used
  for making gloves or the manufacturers were unwilling to acknowledge
  such a use.[CA] Personally, the writer has been unable to learn of any
  demand or market for rat skins at the present time. They are not
  strong, and the fur is of inferior quality. The occasional finding of
  one or more rat skins in the fur lining of coats is probably to be
  explained by the fact that they are sometimes included in lots of
  small muskrat skins (“kitts”) and overlooked by the buyer.

Footnote CA:

    Curiosities of Natural History, first series, p. 83, 1857 (Reprint
    1900).


                      DESTRUCTIVENESS OF THE RAT.

  Rats inflict injury in a surprising number of ways, and before an
  attempt is made to consider the magnitude of the losses due to these
  animals a statement of the nature of their depredations should be
  made.


                           DAMAGE TO GRAINS.

  Cultivated grains are the favorite food of rats. The animals begin
  their depredations by digging up the newly-sown seed. They eat the
  tender sprouts when they first appear, and continue destroying the
  plants until the crop matures. They then attack the grain itself, and
  after harvest take toll from shock, stack, mow, crib, granary,
  elevator, mill, and warehouse. When rats are abundant their
  depredations amount to an appreciable percentage of the entire yield
  of grain, and in exceptional cases whole crops have been ruined.


                              INDIAN CORN.

  Probably this crop suffers greater injury from rats than any other in
  the United States. To some extent the animals dig up newly planted
  corn, but their injury to the maturing grain is far greater. They are
  especially fond of corn in the milk stage, and often climb the upright
  stalks and strip the cobs bare. In this way sometimes whole fields are
  destroyed.

  Corn in the shock is often attacked by rats, especially in parts of
  fields adjacent to hedges, drains, or embankments that afford shelter
  for the animals. A pair of rats often make a corn shock their home,
  and soon destroy both grain and fodder.

  Corn in cribs is often damaged by rats. Many cribs are built close to
  the ground, and rats take up their abode under the floor. They soon
  gnaw through the wooden barrier and have free access to the grain.
  They shell the corn and eat the soft part of the kernels, wasting much
  more than they eat. They carry the grain into underground burrows and
  bring up moist soil from below, which in contact with the grain makes
  it moldy and unfit for market or for feeding to stock. A number of
  farmers have reported the loss by rat depredations of from a fifth to
  a half of the contents of a large corn crib during a single winter.

  An Iowa farmer, writing to an agricultural journal, relates the
  following experience:


    We had about 2,000 bushels of corn in three cribs to which rats ran,
    and they ate and destroyed about one-fourth of the corn. Much of it
    was too dirty to put through the grinder until it had been cleaned
    an ear at a time. All the time we were poisoning and trapping the
    rats. We killed as high as 300 rats in two days and could hardly
    miss them. They destroyed more than enough corn to pay taxes on 400
    acres of land.[CB]


Footnote CB:

    Missouri Valley Farmer, April, 1907.

  Throughout the United States, but especially in the West and South,
  corn is often stored for months in rail or other open pens, to which
  rats have free access. Often the loss in a single season would pay for
  the construction of rat-proof cribs, or at least for wire netting,
  that would fully protect the crop.


                             SMALL GRAINS.

  Much has been written about the rat as a house and barn pest, but its
  depredations in the fields have usually been overlooked. In some
  localities the common rat, as well as the house mouse, swarms in the
  fields, especially in summer, and subsists entirely upon the farmers’
  crops.

  Stacked grain is peculiarly exposed to rat depredations. In the United
  States, although the cost of protection is small, rats are seldom
  fenced away from stacks, and, if threshing is delayed, serious loss
  results. Often, at the removal of a stack, large numbers of rats are
  discovered, which have been living at the expense of the farmer. As
  early as 1832 a farmer in Frederick County, Md., with the help of men
  and dogs, killed 217 large brown rats from one stack of rye.[CC] In
  England instances are on record of the killing of over a thousand rats
  from one stack of wheat.

Footnote CC:

    Am. Turf. Register, vol. 3, p. 632, August, 1832.

  The destruction of feed by rats is a serious loss not only on the farm
  but also in city and village. The feed bin or barrel is often left
  uncovered and rats swarm to the banquet thus exposed. Small feeders
  suffer greater proportional losses, for managers of larger barns
  recognize the enormous drain and usually provide rat-proof bins, if
  not rat-proof stables. When rats have access to a stable they take a
  good share of the feed directly from the mangers, but the loss is
  seldom noticed.

  Rats are exceedingly fond of malt, and in malt houses and breweries
  constant watchfulness is needed to prevent losses. Mills, elevators,
  and warehouses in which grain and feed stuffs are stored are subject
  to constant invasion by rats and mice.

  A full-grown rat consumes about 2 ounces of grain daily. A half-grown
  rat eats nearly as much as an adult. Fed on grain, therefore, a rat
  eats from 45 to 50 pounds a year. The cost depends somewhat on the
  kind of grain. If wheat, the value is 60 to 75 cents; if oatmeal,
  about $1.80 to $2. Several feeders of horses in Washington, D. C.,
  estimated the cost of keeping each rat on their premises at $1 a year.
  Even though half the grain eaten is waste, the direct loss from this
  source to feeders is enormous.


                 MERCHANDISE IN STORES AND WAREHOUSES.

  The loss from depredations of rats on miscellaneous merchandise in
  stores, markets, and warehouses, is second only to the losses on
  grains. Not only are food materials of every kind subject to attack,
  but the destruction of dry goods, clothing, books, leather goods, and
  so on is equally serious. Merchandise other than foodstuffs is usually
  destroyed for making nests, but books and pamphlets, especially the
  newly bound, and some other articles, furnish food in the glue, paste,
  oils, or paraffin used in their manufacture. Some kinds of leather
  have a peculiar attraction for rats, while others are never touched.
  Shoes are seldom gnawed unless they have cloth uppers or are made of
  kid. New harnesses are not often attacked, except collars, which
  contain straw, and cruppers, which are stuffed with flaxseed. Old
  harness leather is salty from the perspiration of horses, and rats and
  mice gnaw it for this reason. Kid gloves and other articles made of
  similar leather are often destroyed by rats.

  Lace curtains, silk handkerchiefs, linens, carpets, mattings, and
  other dry goods in stores are often attacked by rats. Some of the
  stuffs contain starch, which serves as food, but most of them furnish
  nesting materials only. A slight injury makes these articles
  unsalable; this is especially true of white goods, which are easily
  ruined by soiling. Nearly all large dry goods and department stores
  suffer heavy losses from rats. Grocers, druggists, confectioners, and
  other merchants also have similar experiences, and to the direct
  losses must be added the sums expended in fighting the pests.


                        MERCHANDISE IN TRANSIT.

  Merchandise billed for shipment often lies for days in stations and
  warehouses or on wharves, where depredations of rats and mice cause
  heavy losses to shippers and consignees. Similar losses occur on boats
  carrying merchandise from port to port.

  Fruits and vegetables in transit on steamboats are often destroyed or
  damaged by rats. Tomatoes, cucumbers, sweet potatoes, bananas,
  oranges, grape fruit, peanuts, and similar produce shipped by water
  from the South, especially in winter, reach northern markets with a
  large percentage of loss.

  In view of the practicability of destroying rats on ships by
  fumigation, and the ease with which rat-proof compartments for stowing
  produce can be constructed, it would seem that losses of this nature
  should be entirely prevented.


                           POULTRY AND EGGS.

  Aside from disease, the greatest enemy of poultry is the rat. The loss
  from rats varies with their abundance and the care taken to exclude
  them from the poultry yard. The magnitude of the damage is not
  generally known, because much of it is blamed on other animals,
  particularly minks, skunks, and weasels. Much of the injury occurs at
  night, and the actual culprit is seldom detected. Farmers have heard
  that minks, skunks, and weasels prey upon poultry. What more natural
  than to conclude that one of these animals is doing the mischief,
  especially if one has been seen about the premises?

  Rats often prey upon small chicks, capturing them in the nests at
  night or even about the coops in the daytime. The writer has known
  rats to take nearly all the chicks on a large poultry ranch, and over
  a large section of country to destroy nearly half of a season’s
  hatching. Young ducks, turkeys, and pigeons are equally liable to
  attack, and when rats are numerous, are safe only in rat-proof yards.

  A writer in a western agricultural journal states that in 1904 rats
  robbed him of an entire summer’s hatching of three or four hundred
  chicks.[CD] A correspondent of another newspaper says, “Rats destroyed
  enough grain and poultry on this place in one season to pay our taxes
  for three years.”[CE] When it is remembered that the poultry and eggs
  marketed each year in the United States have a farm value of over
  $600,000,000, it will be seen that a small percentage of loss
  represents an enormous sum.

Footnote CD:

    Homemaker (Des Moines, Iowa), May 27, 1907.

Footnote CE:

    Missouri Valley Farmer, April, 1907.

  The destruction of eggs by rats is great, not only on the farms where
  they are produced, but also in the markets. Commission men and grocers
  complain of depredations upon packed eggs. The animals break and eat a
  few eggs at the top of a case and the broken yolks run down and soil
  the eggs below. Then, too, rats carry away unbroken eggs, displaying
  much ingenuity in getting them over obstacles, as up or down a
  stairway.

  A commission merchant in Washington, D. C., states that he once stored
  100 dozen eggs in a wooden tub in his warehouse and left them for
  nearly two weeks. He then found that rats had gnawed a hole through
  the tub, just under the cover, and had carried away 71½ dozen, leaving
  neither pieces of shell nor stains to show that any had been broken.

  Besides their destruction of eggs and young fowls, rats eat much of
  the food put out for poultry. They are destructive also to tame
  pigeons and their eggs, but particularly to young squabs. They climb
  the wire netting and gain entrance to the cages through the same
  openings by which the pigeons come and go. Fanciers are often put to
  great trouble to protect their pigeons from rats, and because of these
  pests some of them have abandoned the business.


                          GAME AND WILD BIRDS.

  The rat is the most serious pest in European game preserves. A writer
  in Chambers’s Journal says:


    In a closely preserved country at the end of an average year the
    game suffers more from the outlying rats of the lordship than from
    the foxes and mustelines together. The solitary rats, whether males
    or females, are the curse of a game country. They are most difficult
    to detect, for in a majority of cases their special work is supposed
    to be done by hedgehog, weasels, or stoat.[CF]


Footnote CF:

    Chambers’s Journal, vol. 82, p. 64, January, 1905.

  The propagation of game birds is becoming a promising industry in the
  United States. The difficulties of the business are not yet fully
  known, but the rat is an enemy with which the raiser of game will have
  to contend. The animal has already proved itself a foe in American
  pheasantries.

  Our wild native game birds are less subject to rat depredations than
  birds kept in confinement. The nests of ruffed grouse are in
  woodlands; those of the prairie hen and related species are on plains
  remote from the haunts of rats. The quail, however, often makes its
  nest within the summer range of rats, which destroy many of its eggs.

  Rats are said often to destroy the nests of wild ducks, woodcock, and
  other marsh birds. Terns have been entirely driven from their nesting
  grounds in this way. In England the common tern was extirpated from
  the Thames marshes; and on Loggerhead Key, Tortugas Islands, off the
  Florida coast, rats recently nearly exterminated a colony of least
  terns by destroying the eggs.

  The nests of many ground-nesting and other song birds are robbed by
  rats. Crows, jays, snakes, and skunks are blamed for most of the
  destruction and the actual offender seldom suspected. While the other
  animals named do part of the mischief, the rat is a more serious foe
  of song and game birds than any of these.


                         FRUITS AND VEGETABLES.

  A well-known form of damage by rats is the destruction of fruits and
  vegetables in cellars and pits. Apparently no garden vegetable or
  common fruit is exempt from attack. But the rat does not confine its
  depredations to stored fruits and vegetables. It attacks ripe
  tomatoes, melons, cantaloupes, squashes, pumpkins, sweet corn, and
  many other vegetables in the field; and often the depredations are
  attributed to rabbits or other animals, which may or may not be
  concerned in the mischief.

  Rats are fond of the small fruits, eating not only the fallen but
  climbing vines and canes to obtain the ripe grapes or berries. They
  eat also apples, pears, cherries, and other fruits. The brown rat,
  while not so expert as the black or the roof rat, readily climbs trees
  and obtains fruit even at the extremities of the branches.

  Among tropical fruits injured by rats are oranges, bananas, figs,
  dates, cocoanuts, and especially the pods of cacao (_Theobroma
  cacao_), from which chocolate is manufactured. H. N. Riddey, writing
  of his experiences on the island of Fernando do Noronha, South
  America, mentions the destructiveness of rats in this penal colony.
  They climb the cocoanut palms and papaw trees to devour the fruit, and
  do mischief in melon patches. To lessen the evil, each convict was
  required to bring in a certain number of dead rats, and battues were
  held monthly to satisfy the requirement. Sometimes the number killed
  in a single hunt reached 20,000.[CG]

Footnote CG:

    Zoologist, vol. 46, p. 46, 1888.

  Fruits and vegetables grown under glass are subject to injury by rats.
  The animals usually find entrance to greenhouses by way of openings
  for pipes or drains.


                           FLOWERS AND BULBS.

  Rats attack seeds, bulbs, and the leaves, stems, and flowers of
  growing plants, whether in the greenhouse, propagating pits, or
  elsewhere. Of flowering bulbs, the tulip suffers most from rats.
  Hyacinths also are eaten; but, probably because they are slightly
  poisonous, narcissus and daffodil bulbs escape injury. Rats eat pinks,
  carnations, and roses, cutting the stems off clean. They denude
  geraniums of both flowers and leaves. They attack the choicest blooms
  of chrysanthemums and carnations in markets, stores, and exhibition
  rooms, causing heavy losses.


                                 FIRES.

  Rats and mice cause many fires. Several specific instances have been
  reported by the fire department of the city of Washington within the
  past two or three years. It is likely that some of these fires are
  caused by rats gnawing matches. The animals are fond of paraffin,
  which is often used to protect match heads. They carry the matches to
  their nests, which are composed of paper and other combustible
  materials, and the conditions for a conflagration are ready. Since the
  heads of matches contain from 14 to 17 per cent of phosphorus, actual
  gnawing is not required to ignite them, but heat or friction from any
  cause may suffice.

  Fires in mills or warehouses have sometimes been traced to the
  spontaneous ignition of oily or fatty rags and waste carried under
  floors by rats. Cotton and woolen mills are said to be peculiarly
  subject to fires of this kind.

  Sometimes rats cause fires by gnawing through the lead pipes leading
  to the gas meter. Workmen or others, searching for the leak,
  accidentally ignite the gas. Phillips’s warehouse, London, was twice
  badly damaged by fires originating in this way, and in several
  instances the sleeping inmates of houses have been in danger of
  asphyxiation by gas freed in this manner.

  The most common way in which rats and mice cause fires is by the
  destruction of the covering of electric light wires under floors or in
  partition walls. A considerable percentage of the enormous fire losses
  in the United States is caused by defective insulation of wires. After
  wires are once in position rats are the chief agents in impairing the
  insulation. These animals do much mischief also by gnawing off the
  coverings of telephone wires. In the case of electric light wires the
  covering is probably used by the rats for nesting material, but
  frequently the paraffin in the insulation is the object of attack.


                        BUILDINGS AND FURNITURE.

  Rats seem to be able to gnaw through almost any common material except
  stone, hard brick, cement, glass, and iron; neither wood nor mortar
  suffice to keep them out of bins or rooms. They sometimes gnaw through
  walls or doors in a single night. In the same way they enter chests,
  wardrobes, bookcases, closets, barrels, and boxes. Almost every old
  dwelling bears evidence of its present or former occupancy by rats.
  Often the depreciation of houses and furniture is largely due to marks
  left upon them by rats—marks that paint and varnish can not hide.

  Damage to dwellings by rats is a large item. The decay of sills and
  floors is hastened by contact with moist soil brought up from rat
  burrows. Ceilings, wall decorations, and floor coverings are flooded
  by leaks in lead pipes or wooden tanks gnawed by rats. Bricked areas
  and even foundations are undermined and ruined by rats. All this is
  real waste and a constant drain on the resources of the country.


                             MISCELLANEOUS.

  A few instances of miscellaneous damage by rats may be mentioned to
  show the great variety of mischief chargeable to the animals.

  A Washington, D. C., merchant reported that at one time rats in his
  store destroyed 50 dozen brooms worth $2.50 a dozen. In another store,
  in a single night, they broke $500 worth of fine chinaware on shelves
  and tables. A dealer in harness reported the loss of $400 worth of
  collars in one season. The manager of a restaurant complained of an
  average loss of $30 a month in table linen ruined by rats and mice. A
  hotel reported the destruction of $75 worth of linen in a month.

  At Mobile, Ala., in March, 1908, lost jewelry worth $400 was recovered
  from a rat’s nest in the home of Señor Viada.

  In London rats at one time killed all but 11 out of an aviary of 366
  birds.

  At Hamburg, Germany, Carl Hagenbeck once had to kill three young
  African elephants because rats had gnawed their feet, inflicting
  incurable wounds.

  Rats often gnaw the hoofs of horses until they bleed. They kill young
  lambs and pigs, and have been known to gnaw holes in the bodies of
  very fat swine, causing death.

  Like the muskrat, the brown rat often burrows into embankments and
  dams, causing serious breaks.

  The rat is one of the greatest enemies with which the sugar planter
  has to contend, destroying acres of growing cane.

  In rice plantations rats not only break down and destroy the growing
  crops, but burrow into the dikes and flood the fields at the wrong
  season.

  On the London docks and on shipboard ivory is often badly damaged by
  rats. They select for attack the greenest tusks, which are the more
  valuable.

  Mail sacks and other kinds of bagging are greatly injured by rats. The
  consequent loss and necessary outlay for repairs are a large item in
  post-office expenditures and in mills and other places where bagging
  is used.

  About the year 1616 rats caused a two years’ famine in the Bermudas.
  In the southern Deccan and Mahratta districts of India rats ate a
  large part of the scant crops of 1878 and 1879, and were regarded as
  in a great measure responsible for the severe famine which
  followed.[CH] A writer in Chambers’s Journal stated that the Dutch
  abandoned the Isle of France (Mauritius) in 1610 because of the great
  abundance of rats.[CI]

Footnote CH:

    Brit. Med. Journ., p. 623, September 15, 1905.

Footnote CI:

    Chambers’s Journal, vol. 21, p. 244, 1854.


                    AMOUNT OF LOSSES CAUSED BY RATS.

  The damage done by a single rat varies greatly with the circumstances.
  We have already stated that the cost of feeding a rat on grain varies
  from 60 cents to $2 a year. Assuming that much of the rat’s food is
  waste, each rat on a farm will cause a loss of over 50 cents a year.
  In cities the damage by a single rat probably averages more than in
  the country. Hotel managers and restaurant keepers state that $5 a
  year is a low estimate of the loss inflicted by a rat. In making an
  estimate it should be remembered that the rat is to be charged not
  only with the food it actually consumes but also with what it destroys
  or pollutes and renders unfit for use.

  If an accurate census of the rats in the United States were possible,
  and if the minimum average loss caused by a rat were known, an
  estimate of the total annual losses from their depredations could be
  made. It was on such a minimum basis that the Incorporated Society for
  the Destruction of Vermin arrived at their total estimate of
  £15,000,000 ($73,000,000) as the yearly losses from rats in Great
  Britain and Ireland. Three propositions were assumed: first, that in
  cities and villages the number of rats equals the population; second,
  that in the country there is at least one rat for every acre of
  cultivated land; third, that each rat in the kingdom inflicts a damage
  of at least a farthing per day. Circulars asking whether these
  assumptions are excessive were distributed throughout the country.
  From 90 to 99 per cent of the replies fully indorsed each of the
  assumptions.

  It can readily be seen that the English basis of estimate would not
  apply to farm conditions in the United States, where the area in the
  twelve leading crops alone is over 250,000,000 acres. On a basis of a
  rat per acre and damage of a farthing per day the annual loss on this
  area would be $450,000,000, a sum much too great for serious
  consideration. However, in the more thickly populated parts of the
  country an estimate of one rat per acre would not be excessive; and it
  is probable that in most of our cities there are quite as many rats as
  people. Yet it would be unsafe, owing to our vast territory and
  varying conditions, to make these assumptions the basis for
  conclusions.

  Over a year ago the writer made an attempt to investigate actual
  conditions, and thus arrive at an estimate of the total damage by rats
  in the cities of Washington and Baltimore. From the data obtained the
  direct annual damage in the two cities was calculated at $400,000 and
  $700,000, respectively. The Census Bureau in 1906 estimated the
  population of these cities at 308,000 and 554,000, respectively. If
  the estimates of damage were correct, the average loss for each person
  is $1.27 a year; and, on the same basis, the 28,000,000 of urban
  population in the United States (census of 1900) sustains an annual
  direct injury of $35,000,000 from rats. This is considerably lower
  than on the English assumption, which would make the losses in our
  cities over $50,000,000.

  Denmark (population 2,500,000) has an estimated rat bill of about
  $3,000,000 a year, or $1.20 a person. Germany (population 56,000,000)
  is said to sustain a loss from rats of 200,000,000 marks ($47,640,000)
  a year, or about 85 cents for each person. The per capita estimate for
  the United Kingdom is about double that made for Germany. In France
  the loss from rats and mice for a single year (1904) was placed at
  $38,500,000, or a little over a dollar for each of its 38,000,000
  inhabitants. These estimates are supposed to include only direct
  losses, but they vary enough to show that no common basis can be
  assumed for all countries. With present information, therefore, any
  attempt to state the amount of loss from rats in the United States
  would be largely guesswork. Considering the population and wealth of
  the country, however, and the vast area over which rats are abundant,
  it is not unreasonable to conclude that in the United States the
  losses from rats amount to much more than in any of the other
  countries named.


                            INDIRECT LOSSES.

  To the direct losses caused by rats must be added the cost of fighting
  the animals and of protecting property from them. In our larger cities
  a number of so-called expert rat catchers are to be found, who operate
  with dogs, ferrets, traps, poisons, or other means, and who have an
  extensive clientage among merchants, hotel managers, and others. These
  pay the rat catcher a yearly or monthly stipend to keep their premises
  free of rats and mice. Some of the large establishments pay $200 to
  $600 yearly for such service. While the agreements are seldom kept in
  full, the clients are usually satisfied that results warrant the
  expense. Even when no contractor is employed, merchants are at expense
  for traps, poisons, the keep of cats or dogs, and other means of
  fighting rats. The same is true in less degree of nearly every
  householder.

  The cost of protecting property from rats is no small item. It
  increases the expense of nearly all building, but it greatly reduces
  direct losses from the animals. The economy of rat-proof construction
  is everywhere manifest, in city or country, and the necessity for it
  can not be too strongly emphasized.

  Depreciation of property and loss of rents and custom are items not
  generally thought of in connection with rat damage. A few years ago
  the writer knew of almost an entire block of city houses that remained
  untenanted for several months, because infested by rats. As the houses
  were otherwise desirable, the loss of rent to the owners was probably
  nearly $2,000. The presence of rats in markets, hotels, and
  restaurants inevitably results in loss of custom, besides the direct
  damage by the rodents.

  From every point of view the keeping of rats is exceedingly expensive,
  and the sooner our population can be made to realize the enormous
  drain upon our resources caused by these rodents the sooner can
  concerted measures for their destruction be made effective.




            THE RAT IN RELATION TO INTERNATIONAL SANITATION.

                    By Asst. Surg.-Gen., JOHN W. KERR,

               _Public Health and Marine-Hospital Service_.


  Rats, like man, had their origin in Asia, from which continent they
  have finally become disseminated throughout the world. They, too, like
  man, are great travelers, and therefore prey on the commerce of the
  ships in which they are carried. For this reason, and on account of
  the fact that they are subject to plague and may transmit the disease
  from one country to another, these animals have an influence on
  international policy, and their control aboard ships is an
  international problem.

  It has been estimated that there are as many rats as there are human
  beings, and that each rat causes each day a loss by the destruction of
  material of at least half a cent.

  Assuming that the rat population aboard ships is as great as the human
  population—and my experience gained during the fumigation of ships to
  kill rats convinces me that on the whole it is greater—some idea may
  be had of the enormous migrations of rats and the toll they exact for
  food from international commerce. Some idea can also be had of the
  danger of rats in transmitting plague when it is remembered that 51
  countries have been infected with the disease since the present
  pandemic began in Canton, China, in 1894, and when it is known that at
  least 146 ships have had plague infection on board during that time.

  During the International Sanitary Conference of Paris in 1903 the
  influence of the rat in transmitting plague was borne in mind, and the
  international sanitary agreement, which was signed ad referendum
  December 3, 1903, requires the destruction of rats aboard
  plague-infected ships, recommends it on ships suspected of being
  plague infected, and permits it on ships indemne from plague. The ship
  is considered indemne from plague which, although coming from an
  infected port, has had neither death nor case on board either before
  departure, during the voyage, or at the moment of arrival.

  The International Sanitary Convention signed at Washington, October
  14, 1905, follows the text of the Paris convention, with respect to
  plague, consequently embodying similar requirements and
  recommendations as follows:


    ART. XX. _Classification of ships._—A ship is considered as infected
    which has plague, cholera, or yellow fever on board, or which has
    presented one or more cases of plague or cholera within seven days,
    or a case of yellow fever at any time during the voyage.

    A ship is considered as suspected on board of which there have been
    a case or cases of plague or cholera at the time of departure or
    during the voyage, but no new case within seven days; also such
    ships as have lain in such proximity to the infected shore as to
    render them liable to the access of mosquitoes.

    The ship is considered indemne which, although coming from an
    infected port, has had neither death nor case of plague, cholera, or
    yellow fever on board, either before departure, during the voyage,
    or at the time of arrival, and which in the case of yellow fever has
    not lain in such proximity to the shore as to render it liable, in
    the opinion of the sanitary authorities, to the access of
    mosquitoes.

    ART. XXI. Ships infected with plague are to be subjected to the
    following regulations:

    1. Medical visit (inspection).

    2. The sick are to be immediately disembarked and isolated.

    3. Other persons should also be disembarked, if possible, and
    subjected to an observation,[CJ] which should not exceed five days,
    dating from the day of arrival.

Footnote CJ:

      The word “observation” signifies isolation of passengers, either
      on board ship or at a sanitary station, before being given free
      pratique.

    4. Soiled linen, personal effects in use, the belongings of crew[CK]
    and passengers which, in the opinion of the sanitary authorities are
    considered as infected, should be disinfected.

Footnote CK:

      The term “crew” is applied to persons who may make, or who have
      made, a part of the personnel of the vessel and of the
      administration thereof, including stewards, waiters, “cafedji,”
      etc. The word is to be construed in this sense wherever employed
      in the present convention.

    5. The parts of the ship which have been inhabited by those stricken
    with plague, and such others as, in the opinion of the sanitary
    authorities, are considered as infected, should be disinfected.

    6. The destruction of rats on shipboard should be effected before or
    after the discharge of cargo, as rapidly as possible, and in all
    cases with a maximum delay of forty-eight hours, care being taken to
    avoid damage of merchandise, the vessel, and its machinery.

    For ships in ballast, this operation should be performed immediately
    before taking on cargo.

    ART. XXII. Ships suspected of plague are to be subjected to the
    measures which are indicated in Nos. 1, 4, and 5 of Article XXI.

    Further, the crew and passengers may be subjected to observation,
    which should not exceed five days, dating from the arrival of the
    ship. During the same time the disembarkment of the crew may be
    forbidden, except for reasons of duty.

    The destruction of rats on shipboard is recommended. This
    destruction is to be effected before or after the discharge of
    cargo, as quickly as possible, and in all cases with a maximum delay
    of forty-eight hours, taking care to avoid damage to merchandise,
    ships, and their machinery.

    For ships in ballast this operation should be done, if done at all,
    as early as possible, and in all cases before taking on cargo.

    ART. XXIII. Ships indemne from plague are to be admitted to free
    pratique immediately, whatever may be the nature of their bill of
    health.

    The only regulation which the sanitary authorities at a port of
    arrival may prescribe for them consists of the following measures:

    1. Medical visit (inspection).

    2. Disinfection of soiled linen, articles of wearing apparel, and
    the other personal effects of the crew and passengers, but only in
    exceptional cases when the sanitary authorities have special reason
    to believe them infected.

    3. Without demanding it as a general rule, the sanitary authorities
    may subject ships coming from an infected port to a process for the
    destruction of the rats on board before or after the discharge of
    cargo. This operation should be done as soon as possible, and in all
    cases should not last more than twenty-four hours, care being taken
    to avoid damaging merchandise, ships, and their machinery, and
    without interfering with the passing of passengers and crew between
    the ship and the shore. For ships in ballast this procedure, if
    practiced, should be put in operation as soon as possible, and in
    all cases before taking on cargo.

    When a ship coming from an infected port has been subjected to a
    process for the destruction of rats, this process should only be
    repeated if the ship has touched meanwhile at an infected port, and
    has been alongside a quay in such port, or if the presence of sick
    or dead rats on board is proven.

    The crew and passengers may be subjected to a surveillance, which
    should not exceed five days, to be computed from the date when the
    ship sailed from the infected port. The landing of the crew may
    also, during the same time, be forbidden except for reasons of duty.

    Competent authority at the port of arrival may always demand, under
    oath, a certificate of the ship’s physician, or in default of a
    physician, of the captain, setting forth that there has not been a
    case of plague on board since departure, and that no marked
    mortality among the rats has been observed.

    ART. XXIV. When upon an indemne ship rats have been recognized as
    pest stricken as a result of bacteriological examination, or when a
    marked mortality has been established among these rodents, the
    following measures should be applied:

    1. Ships with plague-stricken rats:

    (_a_) Medical visit (inspection).

    (_b_) Rats should be destroyed before or after the discharge of
    cargo, as rapidly as possible, and in all cases with a delay not to
    exceed forty-eight hours; the deterioration of merchandise, vessels,
    and machinery to be avoided. Upon ships in ballast, this operation
    should be performed as soon as possible, and in all cases before
    taking on cargo.

    (_c_) Such parts of the ship and such articles as the local sanitary
    authority regards as infected, shall be disinfected.

    (_d_) Passengers and crew may be submitted to observation, the
    duration of which should not exceed five days, dating from the day
    of arrival, except in special cases, where the sanitary authority
    may prolong the observation to a maximum of ten days.

    2. Ships where a marked mortality among rats is observed:

    (_a_) Medical visit (inspection).

    (_b_) An examination of rats, with a view to determining the
    existence of plague, should be made as quickly as possible.

    (_c_) If the destruction of rats is judged necessary, it shall be
    accomplished under the conditions indicated above in the case of
    ships with plague-stricken rats.

    (_d_) Until all suspicion may be eliminated, the passengers and crew
    may be submitted to observation, the duration of which should not
    exceed five days, counting from the date of arrival, except in
    special cases, when the sanitary authority may prolong the
    observation to a maximum of ten days.

    ART. XXV. The sanitary authorities of the port must deliver to the
    captain, the owner, or his agent, whenever a demand for it is made,
    a certificate setting forth that the measures for the destruction of
    rats have been efficacious and indicating the reasons why these
    measures have been applied.


  To be in conformity with these agreements regarding the destruction of
  rats, quarantine authorities may demand the fumigation of infected and
  suspected ships; suspected ships within the meaning of the treaties
  being those on board of which there have been a case or cases of
  plague at the time of departure or during the voyage, but no new case
  within seven days. In the case of indemne ships, on the other hand,
  without demanding it as a general rule, the sanitary authorities may
  subject them to fumigation to kill rats. When upon such ships rats
  have been recognized as pest stricken, as a result of bacteriological
  examination, or when a marked mortality has been established among
  these rodents, fumigation is prescribed.

  While the classification of ships and the limitations placed on
  quarantine procedures in relation thereto, as contained in existing
  international sanitary agreements, is more apparent than real, there
  appears to be a lack of exactness with respect to the destruction of
  rats necessary for the prevention of the importation of plague from
  one country to another.

  Since the adoption of the international sanitary agreement of Paris in
  1903, some of the unproven convictions of that time regarding the rôle
  of rats and fleas in the transmission of plague have been proven to be
  positive facts. Many epidemiological observations and exact scientific
  experiments have demonstrated particularly the importance of the rat
  in the propagation of plague and the rôle of the flea as the carrier
  of infection from rat to rat and from rats to man.

  At the same time there has been a growing conviction that other
  agencies, such as passengers, baggage, and merchandise play a very
  minor rôle in the dissemination of plague. It is of interest,
  therefore, to review the efforts being made at the more important
  seaports to exterminate rats, as well as the methods being employed to
  that end.


      INQUIRY INTO THE CRUSADE AGAINST RATS THROUGHOUT THE WORLD.

  The first law in modern times aiming at the destruction of rats
  appears to have been enacted in Barbados in 1745.[CL] According to
  Boelter this act was incorporated into a new act which was passed in
  1748. The same author states that the next legislative body to enact a
  law against rats was in Antigua in 1880. In the same article he refers
  to the rat ordinance of Hongkong, adopted in 1902.

Footnote CL:

    W. R. Boelter, “On Rat Laws,” Journal of Incorporated Society for
    the Destruction of Vermin, October, 1908.

  Private measures against rats have undoubtedly been practiced from
  time immemorial. The action of Denmark, however, in passing a law for
  the systematic destruction of rats and providing the organization for
  that purpose is perhaps the most notable advance taken on this
  subject. A copy of the Danish law appears elsewhere in this
  publication.

  That the citizens of other countries are equally alive to the
  importance of rat extermination is shown by the fact that in England
  there exists an incorporated society for the destruction of vermin,
  which society in October, 1908, began the publication of a journal
  which would supply trustworthy information upon the subject.

  It is recognized that a detailed review of past efforts against
  rodents would be unprofitable, but on account of the enormous trade
  relations between important seaports it is thought that a review of
  the measures taken therein against rodents would be of value.


               RAT EXTERMINATION IN UNITED STATES PORTS.

  Prior to the adoption of the International Sanitary Conventions of
  Paris and Washington, the Federal Government had made provision in its
  quarantine regulations for the prevention of the spread of plague on
  ships through rodents.

  The articles contained in the United States Quarantine Regulations,
  issued April 1, 1903, and bearing on the subject, are as follows:


    14. At ports or places where plague prevails every precaution must
    be taken to prevent the vessel becoming infected through the agency
    of rats, ants, flies, fleas, or other animals. At such ports or
    places the vessel should not lie at a dock, or tie to the shore, or
    anchor near any place where such animals may gain access to the
    vessel. In case cables are led to the shore they should be freshly
    tarred and provided with inverted cones or such other devices as may
    prevent rats and other animals passing to the ship. The introduction
    of vermin on board the vessel from lighters and all other sources
    should be guarded against. In such ports sulphur fumigation should
    be resorted to in the holds when empty and from time to time during
    loading in order to destroy vermin.

    45 (b) Free ventilation and rigorous cleanliness should be
    maintained in all portions of the ship during the voyage and
    measures taken to destroy rats, mice, fleas, flies, roaches,
    mosquitoes, and other vermin.

    45 (h) In the case of plague, special measures must be taken to
    destroy rats, mice, fleas, flies, ants, and other vermin on board.

    128. Vessels infected with plague, or suspected of such infection,
    should be anchored at a sufficient distance from the shore or other
    vessels to prevent the escape of rats by swimming.

    133. Special precautions must be taken against rats, mice, ants,
    flies, fleas, and other animals, on account of the danger of the
    infection of the disease being spread through their agency.

    134. As soon as practicable there shall be a preliminary
    disinfection with sulphur dioxide for the purpose of killing rats
    and vermin before further disinfecting processes are applied to the
    vessel and her cargo. The killing of any escaping rats shall be
    provided for by a water guard in small boats, and no person with
    abrasions or open sores should be employed in the handling of the
    vessel or her cargo.

    135. The vessel shall be submitted to a simultaneous disinfection in
    all parts with sulphur dioxide to insure the destruction of rats and
    vermin. The rats shall be subsequently gathered and burned, due
    precautions being taken not to touch them with the bare hands, and
    the places where found disinfected with a germicidal solution; and
    the quarantine officer shall assure himself that the vessel is free
    of rats and vermin before granting free pratique.


  Additional regulations prescribe the method of disinfection of vessels
  for plague, and elsewhere in this publication is given a detailed
  description of the measures taken aboard ships at Angel Island, one of
  the national quarantine stations.

  Elsewhere is also given an account of the measures taken to eradicate
  plague from certain cities on the Pacific coast, among the measures
  being the systematic destruction of rodents and practical rat
  proofing.

  In a letter dated November 21, 1908, requests were made to the
  Department of State for reports from certain of the more important
  foreign seaports as to systematic measures being practiced for the
  destruction of rats. As a result much valuable information has been
  received, and acknowledgments are due and here made to the consular
  officers furnishing it. The data received was abstracted and
  classified according to countries as follows:


                  RAT EXTERMINATION IN CHINESE CITIES.

  Although the present pandemic of plague had its origin in Canton,
  China, in 1894, and the disease has been endemic there practically
  ever since, Consul-General Bergholz states that the provincial
  government of Kwangtung has made no efforts to exterminate rats.

  In Amoy the local authorities have never taken measures to encourage
  the extermination of rats, and in the absence of assistance from the
  local authorities but little can be done toward effective eradication.

  An outbreak of plague in Shanghai in December, 1908, was attributed to
  the introduction of rats by ships from plague-infected ports.[CM] A
  plan of campaign for such an emergency had previously been formulated
  and was put in operation. It included collection and laboratory
  examinations of rats and organization of rat parties to destroy rats
  and render houses rat proof.

Footnote CM:

    The Municipal Gazette, Shanghai, January 7, 1909, Health Officer’s
    report for December, 1908.

  In Tientsin official efforts made to exterminate rats are on lines to
  suit the convenience of the particular health official. The consulate
  at that port states that generally on the appearance of plague, the
  officials pay about one-half cent for each rat brought, and as the
  epidemic becomes severe, as much as 2½ cents gold.

  In Hongkong, the question of rats in relation to plague has been of
  perennial interest. While on duty in the American consulate at that
  port, my attention was forcibly called to the influence of rodents in
  the transmission of plague. In 1900 it had been the practice to
  encourage the destruction of rats in the city, and a reward of 2 cents
  Mexican money was offered for each rat brought to the health
  department. A certain number of these rats were examined from day to
  day from different districts.

  In August, 1901, arrangements were made by which the health department
  collected and examined a specified number of rats each day to try to
  determine in some degree the relative prevalence of plague among these
  animals. This practice was continued for several months, with the
  result that the mortality among rodents from the disease was shown to
  have rapidly decreased until in November practically no
  plague-infected rats were found.

  In a discussion of the subject, furnished February 2, 1909, by Dr. W.
  W. Pierce, medical officer of health, through Consul-General A. P.
  Wilder, it is stated that in 1902 the fee for rats was raised to 5
  cents, and a special staff of coolies was engaged to destroy rats. The
  abuses on account of these bounties were so great, however, that it
  was found necessary to discontinue it in 1903, but the method of
  trapping rats was continued.

  While the total number of rats taken in 1903 was 101,047, Doctor
  Pierce stated in effect that on account of the prejudice against
  disinfection, it was practically impossible to secure the addresses
  where the infected rats were found. The services of the staff were
  continued, however, until 1908, when they were abolished because it
  was thought, as stated by Doctor Pierce, that results were not
  commensurate with the cost, and many complaints were heard. The plan
  of furnishing traps to all persons who applied was then introduced,
  and in addition, structural methods which had gone on for years were
  continued.

  The traps were distributed through district committees consisting of
  the more educated natives, who were informed that with their
  assistance it would be possible to avoid abuses which had been
  practiced by the official rat-catching staff.

  Doctor Pierce stated that it had been impossible under other systems
  to secure the addresses where infected rats were found, and in order
  to overcome this prejudice, several hundred receptacles were placed in
  different parts of the city whereby the rats could be collected. These
  tins were visited from day to day, and by this means it was possible
  to locate infected districts.

  Doctor Pierce stated that the use of ordinary disinfectants in
  plague-infected houses had been discontinued, and that a 2 per cent
  mixture in water of a kerosene emulsion made by stirring warm tank
  oil, 85 parts added gradually to 15 parts of hot, strong solution of
  “sunlight” soap, was used. This solution was found to instantly kill
  fleas and bugs, and it has been used systematically.

  For ordinary cleansing a 1 per cent solution is used, but Doctor
  Pierce stated that on the recurrence of plague special gangs would be
  employed to apply a 2 per cent solution in infected localities.

  Beginning with January 1, 1909, Doctor Pierce stated that a rat poison
  known as “Punjaub rat exterminator” had been laid down, and that the
  intensive destruction of rats by this means was under consideration.

  In summarizing the measures taken against rats, the American
  consul-general stated that four methods were in use, namely, rat
  proofing, trapping, poisoning, and use of cats. The use of bacterial
  viruses as poisons has thus far been unsatisfactory, and the use of
  chemical poisons, such as phosphorus, prepared, and known as “Punjaub
  rat exterminator,” has only given moderate results.

  The keeping of cats is encouraged, and the consul states that some
  hundreds of these animals have been imported from Macao and Canton by
  the colony and distributed.

  Finally, the consul states that the use of “rat funnels” has long been
  compelled whenever large vessels lie at the wharves.

  In Sinyang the work of exterminating rats is in charge of a physician
  who has 12 assistants, which number, however, may be increased in case
  of emergency. The means employed are trapping, offering rewards, and
  catching by means of cats. In his report, the consul states that the
  best results have been secured by trapping. For ridding houses of
  rats, some use is made of fumigation. It is stated that there is not
  much danger of rats invading cargo boats, but that in the country rats
  are present in enormous numbers, and that the problem of their
  destruction has thus far baffled all attempts at solution. Bounties at
  the rate of 15 cents per hundred are paid, and in one year the
  Government expended for this purpose $32,500.


       RAT EXTERMINATION IN MADRAS, BOMBAY, AND CALCUTTA, INDIA.

  In Madras, Consul N. B. Stewart states there is no legal enactment in
  effect requiring the destruction of rats, but the Government has done
  everything in its power to make the public understand the value of
  such a measure as a preventive against plague. In 1907 a reward of
  one-half anna, equal to 1 cent, was offered by the city for each large
  rat killed, and one-fourth anna for each small one. Bounties of
  one-fourth anna and one-twelfth anna each for the respective varieties
  of rats were still being continued at the time report was made.

  In Bombay, where plague has been endemic since 1896, destruction of
  rats and examination of all dead rats and evacuation of rat-infected
  areas are included among the measures taken by the health department
  in connection with plague operations. In his report Consul E. H.
  Dennison states that the present antirat campaign in Bombay includes
  the distribution of poisons, the trapping of rats, and the reward of 1
  cent for each live rat, and a half cent for each dead rat, delivered
  to the health department. He also states that there are no by-laws or
  acts under which the destruction of rats can be enforced in private
  houses.

  On account of religious opposition, and to teach the people,
  educational posters signed by the health officer were displayed,
  containing advice what to do to prevent plague, which in part reads as
  follows:


    1. Beware of rats in your dwelling houses.

    2. To harbor rats is to court plague.

    3. Rat infection and consequent rat mortality are the indications of
    the impending plague visitation among human beings.

    4. Allow the health department staff to place rat traps in and about
    your houses to catch rats and take them back.

    5. Freedom from plague is in the removal of rats.

    6. Inform the health department when dead rats are found in or near
    your houses.

    7. Clear your houses of all materials likely to harbor rats.


  The same placard also contains information regarding disinfection to
  kill fleas, evacuation of infected areas, and inoculations to produce
  immunity.

  In a special report dated January 23 the consul described a new
  experiment in rat destruction; that is, an intensive effort in the
  Kamatipura district. The district was divided into divisions and
  subdivisions in which simultaneously there were distributed for use on
  a certain day 19,642 poison baits and 2,670 traps. It was stated that
  as a result hundreds of rats were collected the following morning.

  No reference is made to measures taken for the destruction of rats
  aboard ships in the harbor.

  In Calcutta, it is reported by Consul-General W. H. Michael that
  various methods are resorted to for the extermination of plague, rats,
  the use of poison being the most general. Rewards have been offered
  for live and dead rats, and about 11,135 dead rats were produced, but
  it was found that a considerable portion of these was picked up by
  conservancy coolies, and the reward for dead rats was therefore
  discontinued. Of live rats, only 9,447 were produced. After December
  1, 1908, the reward was raised to 4 cents, with the result that 49,396
  live rats were captured. It is stated, however, that this did not seem
  to have any appreciable effect upon the rat population.


           RAT EXTERMINATION IN YOKOHAMA AND NAGASAKI, JAPAN.

  In the Kanagawa Ken, in which Yokohama is located, the following
  ordinances relating to the extermination of rats have been enacted:


    _Kanagawa Ken Ordinance No. 64 of 1902 (issued October 8)._

    Finders of dead rats within the prefecture shall immediately report
    and deliver same to the nearest police, village, or other
    authorities in charge. Upon receipt thereof, the police or other
    authorities shall without delay transmit the same to the police
    headquarters (Yokohama).

    _Kanagawa Ken Ordinance No. 45 of 1903 (issued June 26)._

    Finders of a dead rat or capturers of a live rat shall report and
    deliver the same within twelve hours to the police, mayor, medical
    inspector or officer, antiplague committee, or officer in charge of
    the Hygiene Guild.

    Violation of the foregoing shall be punishable either by a fine or
    detention in jail.

    _Kanagawa Ken Ordinance No. 63 of 1907 (issued June 8)._

    Persons who plan or are engaged in the importation of rats from
    without into the city of Yokohama, or persons who plan to breed rats
    in the said city, shall be punished by detention in jail or by a
    fine.

    _Extract from Kanagawa Ken Ordinance No. 14 of 1907, relating to
    supervision over storage and warehouses (issued March 6)._

    ARTICLE 1. The term “storage and warehouses,” hereinafter mentioned,
    shall mean and include any godown, storage or storehouses, or
    warehouses, used by storage or warehouse companies, individuals,
    forwarding agents or express companies, wholesale dealers, works and
    factories, wherein cotton, cereals, or grains, flour, peanuts,
    beancake, and other pressed oil cakes, cocoons, feathers, leather,
    old or waste cotton, old straw, bags, etc., are stored and kept.

    ART. 8, sec. 1. Owners of a storage or warehouse shall exercise at
    least four times a year a rigid and thorough method of house
    cleaning and rat destruction in the storage or warehouse. The date
    and time of cleaning shall be reported to the police, to whose
    satisfaction and approval the cleaning must be carried out.

    ART. 8, sec. 2. Owners of a storage or warehouse shall furnish and
    always keep at each doorway a suitable rat trap, and shall always
    endeavor to exterminate rats or pursue such method of extermination
    as may be directed by the police.


  In forwarding the above ordinances, Vice-Consul Babbit stated that
  vessels engaged in foreign trade, when deemed advisable by the harbor
  authorities, are required to endeavor to exterminate the rats on board
  by sulphur fumigation or other effective methods, as are also
  coastwise vessels.

  To encourage the extermination of rats, the mayor of Yokohama was
  authorized by the city council to pay bounties, the rate being 3 sen
  (1½ cents) each. The vice-consul states that in addition to this
  purchase price a ticket is given for a lottery, and for each 60,000
  rats 156 prizes, amounting to a total of 1,000 yens are given by the
  city.

  In a table giving the number of rats purchased and sent to the hygiene
  bureau for bacteriological examination, it is seen that for the year
  ending December 31, 1908, 447,981 were received.

  In Nagasaki the municipal council passed an ordinance January 6, 1906,
  as follows:


    1. Rats to be purchased are of two kinds—house and field rats—and
    they must be either caught or found dead within this city.

    2. A bounty of 3 sen (1½ cents) shall be paid for each rat with a
    ticket, to be cashed on presentation.

    3. Such tickets, to be cashed, must be presented at the city office
    within thirty days from the date of issue.

    4. Rats shall be purchased at the city office, police stations,
    branch police stations, police boxes, or by city officials, who go
    around for such purpose, by giving a ticket to be cashed upon
    presentation, provided that distinction must be made between a rat
    caught and one found dead.


  In transmitting a copy of this ordinance Consul G. H. Scidmore stated
  that it was issued in accordance with the infectious diseases law of
  Japan, No. 36, of March, 1897, which provides that cities, towns, and
  villages shall make all necessary arrangements relating to the
  extermination of rats as may be ordered by the prefectural governors.

  He also stated that when the above ordinance was decreed the mayor of
  Nagasaki issued detailed instructions regarding its enforcement. The
  ordinance was enforced from the time of its enactment until July 7,
  1908, when the city ceased paying bounties; from January 13, 1908, to
  July 7, 1908, 980.33 yen ($488.20) having been expended, and 30,767
  rats having been destroyed.


  RAT EXTERMINATION IN LOURENÇO MARQUEZ, EAST AFRICA, AND MADAGASCAR.

  In Lourenço Marquez, Consul W. S. Hollis states that a disinfecting
  barge is maintained, and requisitioned from time to time by vessels,
  by which means considerable numbers of rats are destroyed.

  He also states that the last efforts to destroy rats on shore were
  made during the plague outbreak in November and December, 1907.

  In a circular accompanying Provincial Decree No. 754 of the
  governor-general, the following relates to the destruction of rats:


    1. For the destruction of rats we advise the public to make use of
    poison paste.

    2. These may be obtained by requisition on the municipal chamber and
    from police stations.

    3. The paste furnished shall be divided into portions and
    distributed in different parts of the dwellings.


  In Provincial Decree No. 737, issued December 11, 1907, by the
  governor-general, it is required that grain and forage warehouses and
  stables be provided with cement floors, and that ventilators be
  provided with wire screens sufficiently fine to prevent the access of
  rats, and that interior doors and salient angles be provided with
  metallic points to prevent the climbing and entrance of rats.[CN]

Footnote CN:

    Cases of pest in Lourenço Marquez, official report.

  In Provincial Decree No. 48, issued by the governor-general January
  30, 1908, it is proposed among other things to establish a permanent
  service for the capture and bacteriological examination of rodents in
  the city and its suburbs.

  In transmitting the publication containing copies of these decrees the
  consul stated that by the end of February, 1908, the campaign against
  rats was relaxed, and since then nothing had been done to continue the
  work of extermination.

  In Tamatave, Madagascar, and other ports of that island no efforts
  were being made to exterminate rats, and the American consul reported
  that there were no municipal or colonial laws or regulations directing
  such action.


             RAT EXTERMINATION IN CAPE TOWN, SOUTH AFRICA.

  In a report dated January 20, 1909, Dr. A. J. Gregory, medical officer
  of health for the colony, states that at present no persons are solely
  employed on rat catching, but the sanitary staff is required to take
  all possible measures to reduce the rodent population. By the use of
  bird lime a very large number of rats have from time to time been
  destroyed. Doctor Gregory also refers to experiments made to determine
  the value of tar and funnels placed on ropes to prevent the access of
  rats to ships. The experiments were made to simulate actual conditions
  that would prevail at ships lying at docks. It was found that thickly
  coating a rope with fresh tar had not the slightest deterrent effect
  on rats passing along. Funnels of a less diameter than 20 inches were
  equally unsuccessful, and it was thought the experiments proved the
  fallacy of trusting to tarred ropes or to disks of a workable diameter
  being able to prevent rats from migrating in either direction between
  shipping and shore.


           RAT EXTERMINATION IN ALEXANDRIA AND CAIRO, EGYPT.

  In Alexandria, Consul D. R. Burch stated that measures for the
  extermination of rats were practiced; that the cost of disinfection
  was defrayed by the municipality, which also supplied rat traps and
  poison.

  In Cairo rat destruction was being practiced, but it was stated that
  the results could not be described as encouraging.


          EXTERMINATION OF RATS IN THE PORT OF CONSTANTINOPLE.

  Consul-General E. H. Ozmun, at Constantinople, states that while no
  special measures have been taken to exterminate rats in that city, the
  sanitary administration of the Ottoman Empire has provided measures
  for the destruction of rats and mice on all vessels arriving from
  places contaminated with plague, and he has furnished the following
  copy of instructions concerning vessels which have or have not
  undergone disinfection in view of destroying rats and mice on board:


    ARTICLE 1. Vessels coming from places contaminated with plague and
    which have not been disinfected either in the port of departure or
    in an intermediary port during voyage, for the destruction of rats
    and mice on board, according to the regulations of the superior
    council of health, shall undergo their disinfection in the lazaretto
    while finishing their quarantine.

    ART. 2. Vessels coming from places contaminated with plague provided
    with a certificate stating that the aforementioned disinfection has
    been undergone may, after their admission, work in the port but
    without landing on the quay.

    ART. 3. Vessels proceeding from an uncontaminated Ottoman or foreign
    port and which are provided with the certificate mentioned in
    article 2 shall be free to moor at the quay if it is proved that the
    vessel has been disinfected within a period of forty days; if not,
    the vessel will operate in the port or at anchor.

    Vessels in a similar case not provided with this certificate but
    which can prove by the journal of the vessel that they have not
    sailed within a period of four months to a contaminated port shall
    be authorized to moor at the quay.

    ART. 4. Vessels mooring at the quay must be at a distance of from 1
    to 2 meters (39⅓ inches to 78¾ inches) maximum. During night they
    must draw up the gangways and ladders, and must leave no towline
    suspended without protecting it with funnels, brush wood, etc.

    The vessels working in the harbor must also protect their towlines
    in the same manner.

    It is prohibited for lighters and boats to remain attached to these
    vessels during the night outside of the time for working.

    ART. 5. The above-mentioned vessels, mooring at the quay and on the
    way to an Ottoman port, shall be required after having finished the
    loading and discharging of cargo, to pass through the disinfection
    prescribed by article 1 if their certificate of disinfection
    mentioned by article 3 is found to be out of date, and also as long
    as the city of Constantinople shall be considered as contaminated.

    ART. 6. Vessels coming from uncontaminated quarters, although not
    under any restraint, are free to go to any lazaretto in the Empire
    and ask to be disinfected according to article 1; the latter will
    work without delay so as to prevent loss of time as much as
    possible.

    ART. 7. The expenses of disinfection are to be paid by the vessels
    disinfected.

    ART. 8. Captains, doctors, or any officers of vessels are expected
    to furnish the sanitary authorities with all information asked for
    relating to the presence of rats and mice on board the vessel.


                  RAT EXTERMINATION IN RUSSIAN PORTS.

  In Vladivostok, according to Consul Lester Maynard, the only efforts
  to exterminate rats were made by the commissary department of the
  army. Poisons, which had for their active principle caustic lime, were
  distributed but were not entirely satisfactory, as the baits were not
  sufficiently tempting food.

  The keeping of cats had been recommended as the best method of
  exterminating rodents, and it had been suggested that skunks, weasels,
  and similar animals should not be killed, as they are the best
  destroyers of rats and mice.

  In Riga and Libau there were no laws and regulations prescribing a
  systematic extermination of rats. The consul reported that only in
  case of plague did the sanitary authorities order a thorough
  destruction of rats not only on ships but also in warehouses and
  private dwellings. The steamship companies, however, were said to
  employ rat poison on their vessels, and, in addition, the ships were
  thoroughly disinfected by means of sulphur fumes several times a year.

  In Odessa it was reported by Consul J. H. Grout that the public health
  officers of the port had been fully alive to the importance of
  exterminating rats in order to prevent plague. In 1901 a systematic
  extermination of rats on board vessels had been inaugurated, and in
  1902 this practice was extended to include all vessels leaving the
  port. The agent used in this process was the burning of sulphur in
  specially designed iron containers. In 1902, 2,054 rats were killed in
  346 vessels. In 1903, 1,038 rats were killed in 68 vessels. In 1904,
  17,074 were killed in 168 vessels. In 1905, 512 rats were killed in
  166 vessels. In 1906, 553 rats were killed in 188 vessels. In 1907,
  1,887 rats were killed in 135 vessels; and in 1908, 1,138 rats were
  killed in 97 vessels.

  In St. Petersburg and vicinity no consistent effort, according to the
  consul, had been made to exterminate rats, but at Cronstadt the port
  authorities had experimented with ratin.


                DESTRUCTION OF RATS IN TRIESTE, AUSTRIA.

  All vessels arriving at Trieste from plague-infected countries on
  board of which rats appeared in abnormal numbers were disinfected with
  sulphur in accordance with rules of the Paris convention of 1903.
  Consul G. M. Hotschick stated that it was a rule, whether rats were
  numerous or not, to disinfect every vessel every six months so as to
  exterminate rats on board. An exception was made in the case of the
  Austrian Lloyd steamships plying between Trieste and the Far East,
  these vessels being disinfected by the Clayton apparatus. All attempts
  to destroy rats along the port shore had proven fruitless, according
  to the consul, but in custom warehouses cats were kept, thus limiting
  the number of rats.

  The rules applying to Trieste extended to all the ports of Austria.


                  DESTRUCTION OF RATS IN GENOA, ITALY.

  The methods employed at Genoa for the extermination of rats found on
  ships were those prescribed by the ministry of the interior at Rome in
  accordance with the Sanitary Convention of Paris.

  As stated by Consul-General J. A. Smith, the regulations place all
  ships arriving from plague-infected ports into three categories, as
  follows: Infected, suspected, and noninfected. On ships coming under
  the first two headings all rats must be destroyed previous to the ship
  being allowed to pass quarantine. Noninfected ships were subject to
  the same regulations only in case of an unusual mortality among rats
  aboard, or in case of an excessive number of them being found on board
  on arrival, which, in the opinion of the port medical officer,
  required their destruction. Sulphur was used as the agent of
  destruction, the gas being generated in a special apparatus. This
  apparatus had been installed in the ports of Naples, Genoa, Messina,
  Brindisi, Venice, and Asinara.

  Further regulations of the ministry provided for the means to be
  employed in preventing rats from reaching shore.


                  RAT DESTRUCTION IN BARCELONA, SPAIN.

  In Barcelona Vice-Consul-General Wm. Dawson, Jr., reported that the
  officials in charge of public health measures attached no really great
  importance to the destruction of rats as an effective means of
  preventing the spread of plague. Several attempts, however, had been
  made to kill rats, which invade Barcelona to an enormous extent. In
  his report the vice-consul further stated that bacterial cultures
  known as _Tifus ratoso_, and supposed to have given excellent results
  in Formosa, had been tried without appreciable results on wild rats.
  He further stated that wheat boiled in a 5 per cent solution of
  corrosive sublimate, dried in the air, and spread in sewers and other
  places, had proved the most effective means of killing a few thousand
  of them, but this practice had not been carried out to any great
  extent nor for any length of time.


                    RAT DESTRUCTION AT FRENCH PORTS.

  In Marseille the following was the practice as reported by the
  director of the maritime health service at that port and forwarded by
  Consul-General H. L. Washington:


    The obligatory destruction of rats in all French ports is enforced
    by virtue of a decree dated May 4, 1906. This applies: (1) To all
    vessels arriving from a port regarded as contaminated by plague or
    having only touched at such port. (2) To all vessels having received
    in transshipment—that is to say, from ship to ship—merchandise
    originating in a country deemed contaminated by plague. The
    destruction of these animals is carried out exclusively by means of
    apparatus whose efficacy has been recognized by the Superior Council
    of Hygiene of France.

    The devices employed at Marseille are:

    (1) The “Marot,” adopted June 19, 1905. This apparatus utilizes
    liquid sulphurous anhydrite, which is slackened, diluted in the air,
    and subjected or not to the action of the electric spark. The gas is
    introduced into the vessel by means of a ventilator at a rate of
    from 25 to 30 meters per minute (82.02 to 98.42 feet).

    (2) The “Gauthier-Deglos,” adopted February 18, 1907. This method
    requires the combustion in an oven of a mixture of sulphur and coal
    dust. A ventilator withdraws air from the vessel and causes it to
    pass over the mixture in combustion; the gas thus produced is cooled
    and then introduced into the vessel. A third device, known as the
    “Clayton,” in use in some of the French ports, also operates from
    time to time in Marseille on such vessels as are provided with it,
    but it does not exist in the port itself. The principle of this
    device is based upon the combustion of sulphur, its transformation
    into sulphurous sulphuric gas, the cooling of the gases leaving the
    oven, aspiration of the exterior air or the air in the holds of
    vessels, and introduction into the holds by means of a powerful
    ventilator.

    With all three systems, the ships’ holds are opened only after they
    have been in operation for three hours.


  In Bordeaux, according to the consul, contracts had been entered into
  between the Government and a private individual for the extermination
  of rats on all ships coming from plague-infected ports, the apparatus
  employed being that in use at Marseille.

  In Havre the extermination of rats on vessels from plague-infected
  ports was reported by Consul A. Gaulin as being systematically carried
  out in accordance with a ministerial decree of May 4, 1906, which is
  as follows:


    ARTICLE 1.—The destruction of rats, or “deratization,” effected
    exclusively by means of apparatus the efficiency of which has been
    recognized by the Superior Council of Public Hygiene of France, is
    obligatory for admission into French ports:

    1. Of every ship coming from or having called at a port considered
    as being contaminated with plague.

    2. Of every vessel having taken in transshipment—that is to say,
    from one vessel to the other—more than 50 tons of merchandise coming
    directly from a country considered as being contaminated by the
    plague.

    The above provisions are applicable to vessels having already
    discharged a part of their cargo in one or several foreign ports.

    ART. 2.—May be exempt from deratization:

    1. Vessels which only land passengers in French ports without
    docking and which sojourn only several hours.

    2. Vessels making a call of less than twelve hours and discharging
    less than 500 tons of merchandise, on condition that the
    surveillance of discharging be accomplished during the day
    exclusively, the ship being moored away from the quays, and the
    hawsers provided with rat guards.

    3. Steamships which shall not have called at any port considered as
    being contaminated by the plague for sixty days since their
    departure from the last contaminated port, and on board of which
    there shall have been observed nothing of a suspicious sanitary
    nature.

    4. Vessels which, having called at a port considered as being
    contaminated by the plague, will prove that they neither berthed
    alongside the quay or landing stages, nor embarked merchandise.

    5. Vessels which have undergone the process of deratization in a
    foreign port subsequent to their departure from the last port
    considered as being contaminated. It must be proven, in this case,
    that nothing of a suspicious sanitary nature has taken place on
    board during the voyage, and that the deratization has been effected
    with the same apparatus and the same guarantees as in France. The
    captain of the vessel shall deliver as proof to the sanitary
    authorities a certificate mentioning the apparatus employed, the
    conditions under which the operation was effected, the verifications
    made, etc., and a certificate viséed by a French consular officer.

    6. Vessels whose status is that indicated in paragraph 2 of article
    1, on condition that the merchandise has been transshipped from a
    vessel which has been deratized under the conditions prescribed in
    the preceding paragraph, and if such merchandise is accompanied by a
    certificate of deratization provided for in said paragraph.

    ART. 3.—Shall be considered as merchandise, for the application of
    the present decree, all products embarked, figuring or not figuring
    on the manifest, the only exception being coal embarked for the
    needs of the ship without touching the quay.

    ART. 4.—Deratization may be effected during the voyage by any French
    ship having a surgeon, and one of the machines prescribed by article
    1.

    The sanitary official at the port of arrival shall determine, upon
    examining the documents presented and the proofs furnished, the
    conditions under which the operation has been effected, and he may
    exact a total or partial renewal of the same.

    The same provisions are applicable to foreign vessels, by virtue of
    reciprocity, on the twofold condition that the sanitary officials of
    the one (nation) enjoy the same standing as French sanitary
    officials, and that the apparatus used are the same as those
    mentioned in article 1.

    ART. 5.—In ports, the deratization is effected before the unloading
    of the ship.

    The operation comprises the holds, bunkers, storerooms, crew’s
    quarters, emigrants’ quarters or compartments for third and fourth
    class passengers, and, in general, all interior compartments of the
    ship.

    The officers’ cabins, and those of first and second class
    passengers, as well as the dining rooms, and saloons which are
    provided for them, are not subjected to deratization except in cases
    where the sanitary official judges it necessary—notably when the
    ship is suspected of being or is infected by plague, when it has
    been observed that the malady exists among the rats on board, or
    when there has been a death from unusual causes.

    ART. 6.—The apparatus to be employed for the deratization, by virtue
    of article 1, are placed at the disposal of the owners or agents,
    according to the conditions approved by the sanitary authority.

    Ports possessing one of these machines are alone open to vessels
    coming from countries considered as being contaminated by plague.

    The operations are effected under the permanent supervision of the
    sanitary authority and with the least possible delay.

    ART. 7.—The expenses of deratization are borne by the owners, in
    conformity with the provisions of article 94 (last paragraph) of the
    decree of January 4, 1896. No sanitary tax is due, in consequence,
    for the operation.

    ART. 8.—The expenses considered in article 7 are based on the gross
    tonnage of the ship, if the deratization comprises all its parts,
    and on the cubic capacity of the parts deratized, if the operation
    is partial. The cubic capacity is determined by and from the plans
    of the ship, without allowing for the space actually occupied by
    merchandise.

    ART. 9.—A certificate setting forth the conditions under which the
    operation has been effected is delivered to the captain or owners by
    the sanitary authority.

    ART. 10.—Ships which are not necessarily subject to the requirements
    of deratization may, upon their request, be subjected to this
    operation upon their departure, as on their arrival, either with
    full or empty holds, and obtain, in consequence, the delivery of the
    certificate mentioned in article 9. Every facility should be
    accorded them for this purpose.

    ART. 11.—Violations of the provisions of the present decree are
    punishable by the penalties set forth in article 14 of the law of
    March 3, 1822, independently of the measures taken for the isolation
    or other measures to which ships are subjected by reason of their
    origin or the sanitary condition on board at the time of arrival.

    ART. 12.—Are annulled, the decree of September 21, 1903, and the
    provisions of the decree of September 23, 1900, which would be at
    variance with the second paragraph of article 6 above cited.

    ART. 13.—The minister of the interior is charged with the execution
    of the present decree, which shall be published in the Official
    Journal, inserted in the Bulletin of Laws, and posted in the ports.


                  DESTRUCTION OF RATS IN GERMAN PORTS.

  In Hamburg, according to Consul-General R. P. Skinner, stationed at
  that port, persistent efforts were being made to exterminate rats not
  only on board ship but in the city itself, and he reported the
  following method of procedure:


    Upon the arrival of every vessel an inspecting officer employed by
    the board of health boards the same to inquire whether, during the
    voyage, rats have died in exceptionally large numbers. While in port
    the vessel is visited almost daily by inspectors, who search for
    dead rats, particularly in the holds. On vessels from such ports
    whence plague-infected rats have been brought to Hamburg repeatedly
    an officer of the board of health is posted on board constantly to
    watch the discharging of the cargo. All dead rats found are
    immediately delivered to the Hygienic Institute; and if the latter’s
    bacteriological examinations give reason to suspect plague, the
    discharging is immediately discontinued and communication with the
    shore interrupted. The vessel’s crew and discharging gangs are
    placed under medical observation for a period of five days, the
    cargo compartments are treated with generator gas, so as to
    exterminate all rats, and, after the quarantine has been
    discontinued and the cargo discharged, all compartments are
    carefully disinfected. For the purpose of treating infected ships by
    means of generator gas the Hamburg government owns a special
    disinfection ship, called the _Desinfektor_, which will be described
    later.

    In order to exterminate rats on ships frequenting the port of
    Hamburg the master of every vessel arriving here receives the
    following instructions from a representative of the health officer
    of the port:

    He shall cause rat poison to be laid and fumigate holds by means of
    sulphur and charcoal as soon as the cargo has been discharged, not
    less than 10 kilos (22 pounds) of sulphur and 20 kilos (44 pounds)
    of charcoal to be used for a room of 1,000 cubic meters (1,308 cubic
    yards). Such rooms must be kept closed at least ten hours. On ships
    arriving from ports infected with plague, rat poison is laid, free
    of charge, immediately upon arrival, by an employee of the municipal
    disinfection establishment, at all places within reach. On all other
    ships the laying of rat poison is done by private persons whose
    charges are payable by the vessel’s master or owner.

    The disinfectors employed by the State of Hamburg use principally a
    rat poison called “Rattengiftspeise,” consisting chiefly of
    phosphorus and squills. Private rat killers may choose any other
    material, but from time to time samples of such poisons as are laid
    out on ships are taken by order of the harbor surgeon, and rats kept
    in the public laboratories are fed with them, to enable a control as
    to the effectiveness of the poison.

    Under special circumstances the harbor surgeon is authorized to
    waive the requirement of fumigation.

    Killed rats are not permitted to be thrown overboard, but must be
    delivered to the nearest police station, which causes their
    cremation.

    On river barges rat poison is laid by official disinfectors every
    three months.

    Finally there is rat poison laid, from time to time, in warehouses,
    cargo sheds, and trade establishments in the harbor, partly by
    official disinfectors and partly by private rat killers, which is
    regularly controlled by the harbor surgeon, a special officer of his
    department being engaged for such purpose.

    The ship called the _Desinfektor_, owned by the government of
    Hamburg for the purpose of disinfecting ships arriving from infected
    ports and for the extermination of plague infected rats, is a
    steamer equipped with a generator gas apparatus and other
    disinfecting facilities. The method of using generator gas has been
    chosen for reasons which are described in a booklet issued some time
    ago by the local board of health on this subject.


  In respect to the extermination of rats in Hamburg, aside from the
  system adopted for ships and in the harbor, the consul-general states
  that efforts to this end are being successfully carried out by
  official disinfectors by order of the board of health, and he refers
  to the procedures as follows:


    If it becomes known to the board of health that in any locality or
    group of buildings there are rats in large quantities, rat poison is
    immediately laid. For such purpose the above-mentioned
    Jungclaussen’s preparation is almost exclusively used. The several
    local citizens’ associations (Bürgervereine), at the meetings of
    which all topics of interest are discussed, contribute largely to
    the bringing to the knowledge of the proper authorities of all
    matters a remedy of which is, in public interest, considered
    necessary, among them rat and mice nuisances in the several
    districts of the city. Of late the board of health has also begun to
    lay rat poison in houses in the old parts of the city, employing the
    house-to-house method, and rat poison is laid, from time to time in
    sewers and other underground canals where rats usually congregate in
    large numbers.

    As the laying of rat poison at or in the vicinity of places where
    domestic animals are kept is dangerous to the latter, the Hamburg
    board of health has only shortly ago caused a small gas generator to
    be constructed, similar to that on the _Desinfektor_. The apparatus
    can easily be removed from one place to another, and is chiefly to
    be used on yards or unimproved lots, public parks, zoölogical
    gardens, etc., where rats live under the ground. In fumigating such
    a rat nest, all holes leading out of it are closed with earth,
    except two. The hose of the gas apparatus is introduced into one of
    the holes and gas insufflated. The majority of rats in the hole are
    dead before being able to reach the fresh air. Those succeeding in
    doing so, by getting out of the one open hole, are so dizzy that
    they can easily be killed with a club. Only a few experiments have
    so far been made with this apparatus, but the same promises good
    success.


  In Bremen, according to the consul, all disinfection of vessels and
  their cargoes was done with sulphur dioxide by means of a Clayton
  apparatus, and vessels equipped with this apparatus, and those having
  physicians aboard, had the advantage of being able to start
  disinfection twenty-four hours before arrival at port, this process
  having been recognized as sufficient compliance with the quarantine
  laws of Germany.


            MEASURES AGAINST RATS AT THE PORT OF ROTTERDAM.

  In the report from Consul-General S. Listoe it was stated that the
  extermination of rats had not been officially undertaken by the
  authorities of Rotterdam, either in the port or aboard incoming ships.
  The question had been investigated, however, and the harbor master had
  strongly advised the installation of a fumigating machine, which would
  be installed on one of the numerous river police boats. Ship owners
  had, for their own protection, caused their ships to be occasionally
  fumigated, and two of the well-known lines had fitted out some of
  their steamers with fumigating apparatus.


                DESTRUCTION OF RATS AT ANTWERP, BELGIUM.

  Consul-General H. W. Diedrich stated that no official action had been
  taken in the port of Antwerp for the extermination of rats, but that
  every vessel entering the port had to pass the sanitary station at
  Doel, and there was authority to hold up any suspected vessel and to
  insist on fumigation for the destruction of rats.


                    DESTRUCTION OF RATS IN DENMARK.

  As a result of the agitation started in 1898, the following law was
  passed and signed by the King of Denmark on March 22, 1907:


    1. When an association constituted for the purpose of effecting the
    systematic destruction of rats has proved to the satisfaction of the
    minister of the interior that it is in a position to expend on the
    furtherance of its objects, within a period of three years, a sum of
    not less than 10,000 kroner per annum, it shall become incumbent
    upon each local authority to make suitable arrangements at the
    expense of the local funds, and commencing with a date to be made
    known hereafter by the minister of the interior, for the reception
    and the destruction of all rats killed within the district of such
    authority and delivered up to such authority.

    For each rat delivered up each local authority shall pay a premium,
    for the payment of which an annual grant shall be made out of the
    local funds, which shall be not less than three kroner per each
    hundred inhabitants within the district of each local authority,
    according to the then last general census.

    The State shall make for a period of three years an annual grant of
    30,000 kroner, of which one-third may be expended on scientific
    experiments with preparations for the extermination of rats, under
    the control of, and in consultation with, the Royal Veterinary and
    Agricultural College, while the remainder shall be expended on
    purchasing preparations for the extermination of rats, which shall
    be either employed on or in public lands or buildings, or out of
    which remainder grants may be made to associations toward the
    purchase of such preparations, in a manner to be defined hereafter
    by the minister of the interior.

    2. Each local authority shall fix the amount of the premium (sec. 1)
    which shall not, however, be more than 10 oere or less than 5 oere.

    Instructions for the collection and destruction of the rats killed
    will be issued by the minister of the interior.

    3. The association cited in section 1 shall submit for the sanction
    by the minister of the interior at the beginning of each year a plan
    showing the proposed expenditure, and at the end of each year an
    account of the money expended by it, together with statistics
    obtained by it showing the expenditure on premiums made by each
    local authority.

    4. Where the proprietor or occupier of a messuage has participated
    in the grant to be made by the State (sec. 1), he shall not deliver
    up, or cause to be delivered up, for the purpose of obtaining a
    premium or premiums, rats killed within the said messuage, until the
    expiration of one month from the employment of such preparation for
    which such grant has been made. Any person acting in contravention
    of this section shall be liable to a penalty of 100 to 500 kroner.

    5. Any person who preserves or breeds rats or imports rats from
    abroad, in order to obtain premiums or enable another person to
    obtain them, shall be liable to a penalty of 100 to 500 kroner,
    unless he is liable to a higher penalty under the common law. A
    person who shall deliver up rats knowing them to have been
    preserved, bred, or imported for the purpose of obtaining a premium
    shall be liable to the same penalties.

    All proceedings under this act shall be taken in a public police
    court, the fines to go to the special funds provided by this act, or
    where such fund does not exist, to the public funds of such local
    authority.

    Any person delivering up rats to any other local authority than to
    that within the district of which they have been caught shall be
    liable to a penalty not exceeding 100 kroner.

    This act shall come into operation on a date to be fixed hereafter
    by the minister of the interior and remain in operation for three
    years.

    In the session of the Riksdag immediately preceding the expiration
    of this law a vote shall be taken for the renewal or revision of
    this law.

    The Government is authorized by royal rescript to make such
    alterations in the operations of this law within the Faroe Islands
    as may be considered most suitable, having regard to the special
    conditions obtaining within those islands.


  Following the enactment of this law, there was issued by the ministry
  of the interior May 1, 1907, a circular to the local authorities on
  the subject.


                   CIRCULAR TO THE LOCAL AUTHORITIES.

    Whereas the Association for the Authorized Extermination of Rats has
    proved to the satisfaction of the ministry of the interior that it
    is in a position to expend on the furtherance of its objects not
    less than 10,000 kroner within a period of three years, it is hereby
    requested, in pursuance of act No. 59, of the 22d March, 1907 (see
    public notice dated this day), and commencing with the 1st day of
    July of this year each local authority shall at its own expense take
    all such measures as may be necessary for the reception and
    destruction of all rats killed within the district of such authority
    and delivered up to it. For the purpose of paying a premium for each
    rat delivered up each local authority shall out of the common funds
    make an annual grant which shall be not less than 3 kroner for each
    hundred inhabitants, according to the then last general census,
    should the amount required for the payment of premiums make such
    grant necessary. It shall be left to each local authority to decide
    whether further grants shall be made toward this purpose. The
    premium to be paid for each rat delivered up shall not be more than
    10 oere or less than 5 oere, and shall be fixed by each local
    authority which shall give due and sufficient notice both of the
    date fixed for the commencement of the operations of the law and the
    premium to be paid. As far as possible, a uniform rate of payment by
    premium shall be fixed by local authorities within the same county.
    Rats may not be delivered up to any local authority but to that
    within the district of which they have been caught; any person
    acting in contravention (par. 5 of the aforementioned law) shall be
    liable to a penalty not exceeding 100 kroner.

    The chairman of the councils of the various local authorities are
    hereby requested to take steps for the discussion and carrying out
    of the provisions of this law.

    If the grant made by any local authority for the purposes of this
    law should prove insufficient for the payment of premiums on all
    rats delivered up, such authority may apply to the Association for
    the Authorized Extermination of Rats, Colbjornsengade 14, Copenhagen
    B, for a subsidy, this association having undertaken to organize the
    obtaining of voluntary subscriptions for the carrying out of the
    purposes of this act.

    The said association is further prepared, at the request of local
    authorities, to render expert assistance in commencing and carrying
    through operations under this act.

    For the collection and destruction of rats killed the ministry of
    the interior issues the following instructions:

    A.—THE LARGER TOWNS.

    _Collecting depots._—The local authorities shall provide a
    sufficient number of places suitable for collecting depots. Such
    depots must not be within any place where food or clothing is made
    or offered for sale. Fire brigade stations are considered most
    suitable for collecting depots.

    The collecting may suitably be done in the manner that for each
    depot a number of receptacles are provided, made of galvanized iron
    and furnished with a tight-fitting lid. Into these receptacles the
    rats are to be thrown after their tails have been cut off. The tails
    are to be kept in a separate tin box. All receptacles and boxes are
    to be collected daily and to be replaced by empty receptacles. The
    full receptacles are to be taken to the place where the destruction
    of the rats is effected.

    Further advice on the purchase of such receptacles and the apparatus
    for cutting off their tails will be given by the Association for the
    Authorized Extermination of Rats at the request of a local
    authority.

    The destruction may be effected either by cremating the dead
    rats—for instance, at the municipal gas works—or by burying the
    carcasses in the open, at a sufficient distance from the town,
    unless this course is prohibited by local sanitary considerations.
    It is recommended that the local authority act in this manner always
    with the local health committee.

    B.—THE SMALLER TOWNS.

    Instead of opening a fixed depot, it would appear more suitable in
    the smaller towns to provide a collecting cart. Any horse-drawn
    vehicle would serve the purpose as long at it is furnished with a
    fixed apparatus for cutting off the tails and a receptacle of
    galvanized iron for receiving the carcasses of the rats. The vehicle
    should also be fitted with a bell, to announce the arrival and
    presence of the collecting cart.

    The destruction of the carcasses is to be effected in the manner
    described under A.

    C.—THE VILLAGES.

    The authorities in the villages shall appoint a suitable person to
    receive the rats delivered up, for which work he shall be paid an
    adequate remuneration. Such persons must be supplied with an
    apparatus for cutting off the tails of rats handed in. After the
    tails have been cut off, the rats may be buried in a suitable place
    without delay. It is most undesirable that any person engaged in the
    carrying of milk or other foodstuffs be asked to convey rats to the
    persons appointed to receive them. Villages in close proximity to
    towns are advised to make arrangements for the cremation of the rats
    at the municipal gas works.

    In the case of villages whose buildings approximate those of a town
    it is recommended that the regulations given for towns are adopted.

    Respecting the payment of the premiums it is recommended that the
    person in charge of a collecting depot or otherwise appointed to
    receive rats is supplied with a fixed amount of petty cash, out of
    which he pays the premium for each rat delivered up. The tails cut
    from the rats serve as a receipt for the payment made, so that the
    total amount of tails will be a discharge for the total amount of
    petty cash received and paid out in premiums.

    In order to prevent abuse it is particularly requested that the
    local authorities take care that the rat tails are destroyed in an
    efficient manner as soon as they have served the purpose of control
    and checking.

    For the purpose of keeping satisfactory accounts the Association for
    the Authorized Extermination of Rats has on sale specially arranged
    account books which are recommended by the ministry of the interior.

    As in accordance with paragraph 3 of the law of 22d March, 1907, it
    is the duty of the Association for the Authorized Extermination of
    Rats to submit to the ministry of the interior a report on the money
    expended in the whole of the kingdom on such premiums, the local
    authorities are hereby desired to make a quarterly return to the
    aforementioned association on the number of rats killed within the
    district of each authority in each month of the quarter covered by
    such return and on the money paid out for premiums. Forms for such
    returns will be supplied by the association.

    Any associations which in accordance with terms of paragraph 1 of
    the law of 22d March, 1907, desire to participate in the grant made
    by the State for the purpose of purchasing preparations for the
    extermination of rats (ratin, etc.) must send a request to that
    effect to the minister of the interior, together with a statement
    showing the approximate cost of the proposed campaign and the amount
    at the disposal of the association for that purpose. As this law is
    essentially of an experimental character, the requests of all such
    associations will be treated as preferential, which show that the
    proposed extermination may be easily and successfully effected (as,
    for instance, on small islands).

    A number of copies of this circular will be forwarded to each local
    authority.


                 DESTRUCTION OF RATS IN SWEDISH PORTS.

  Consul W. H. Robertson at Gothenburg, Sweden, quoted the city
  physician to the effect that “upon the appearance of plague in Great
  Britain the city council decided in April and November, 1901, to make
  an appropriation of $2,680 for an attempt to reduce the number of rats
  within the community.” These attempts were continued during the period
  May, 1901, to September, 1902, 2.68 cents being paid for each rat
  caught. Any unusual mortality among rats on board a vessel coming from
  a plague-infected port was being dealt with in accordance with a royal
  proclamation of June 16, 1905.

  In Malmo, according to the consular agent, the authorities during the
  past seven years had given a premium for every rat killed during the
  first five years, 2.68 cents for each rat, but during the past two
  years only half of that amount.


                 DESTRUCTION OF RATS IN ENGLISH PORTS.

  The Local Government Board has issued regulations for the prevention
  of plague and certain other diseases. One of these regulations is as
  follows:


    The master of a ship which by reason of plague is an infected ship,
    or a suspected ship, or which has come from, or has during the
    voyage called at, a port infected with plague, or in which there are
    rats infected with plague, or in which there is or has been during
    the voyage an unusual mortality among rats, shall, under the
    direction and to the satisfaction of the medical officer of health,
    take all such precautions or employ all such means for effectually
    stopping the access of rats from the ship to the shore as in the
    opinion of the medical officer of health are measures reasonably
    necessary for the prevention of danger arising to public health from
    the ship.


  In accordance with this regulation, notice was given in a circular
  issued by the medical officer of health of the port of London of the
  precautions necessary for stopping the access of rats from ship to
  shore in that port. These precautions were outlined as follows:


    1. All ropes and mooring tackle for securing the vessel either to
    the shore or mooring buoys shall be fitted with metal brushes,
    funnels, or other effective guards, the portions of such ropes and
    mooring tackle leading from the vessel to a distance from the
    vessel’s side of at least 4 feet shall be coated each night with
    fresh tar. Ropes may, if desired, be protected by a covering of
    canvas or yarns before tarring.

    2. When not engaged in discharging cargo, one gangway only shall be
    permitted to afford means of communication between the ship and the
    shore.

    3. The end of the gangway near the ship shall be whitened for a
    length of 10 feet, and the watchman shall keep the gangway pulled
    inboard after sunset, or it shall be guarded in some approved
    manner.

    4. When alongside the quay, the ports on the side of the vessel
    nearest the quay shall be kept closed after sunset.

    5. All empty cases and barrels, especially those from the
    storerooms, shall be examined before being landed, to insure that no
    rats are contained therein.

    6. It is recommended that all possible means be adopted for catching
    and destroying rats, both on the voyage and during the stay of the
    vessel in port. Any rats so caught shall be killed, then placed in a
    bucket of strong disinfecting solution, and afterwards burnt in the
    ship’s furnace.

    7. No rats, alive or dead, are to be removed from the ship without
    my permission in writing.


  In London, the practice of destroying rats on the docks had been
  systematically carried out by the dock companies at their own expense
  and under the supervision of the port sanitary authority. Vice-consul
  Richard Westacott reported that the destruction of rats on vessels was
  provided for by regulation whenever the medical officer of health was
  satisfied that such precaution against the introduction of the spread
  of plague was necessary.

  In Liverpool, Consul J. L. Griffiths stated that earnest endeavors
  were made to capture rats by professional rat catchers. On infected or
  suspected ships, special precautions were taken to prevent the escape
  to the shore of rodents. On noninfected or nonsuspected ships the
  medical officer of health might also require the destruction of rats,
  and in this case the expense was borne by the sanitary authority. It
  is evident, therefore, that the precautions taken are in accordance
  with the provisions of the International Sanitary Convention of Paris.

  It was the practice, at the time the consul sent his dispatch, to
  maintain strict surveillance over vessels likely to develop plague
  aboard until after the period of incubation had been passed.

  In Southampton, according to Consul A. W. Swalm, a competent man was
  employed by the dock authorities whose sole duty was to wage war on
  rats. In addition, the night watchmen on all vessels were required to
  perform the additional duty of trapping rats. The usual precautions to
  prevent the passage of rats from ship to shore were also observed.


               MEASURES AGAINST RATS AT AUSTRALIAN PORTS.

  The following are the regulations issued under the quarantine act of
  1908 by the commonwealth of Australia relating to the ingress to and
  egress from vessels of rats and mice; the destruction of rats, mice,
  and other vermin; and precautions against the introduction of vermin
  from plague-infested places.


    136. (1) The master or owner of every vessel shall—

    (_a_) Effectively obstruct—against the migration of rats—by means of
    stout wire netting, all pipes, ports, cabin scuttles, and other
    openings or holes in the side of the vessel next to the wharf, and
    also when cargo is being discharged into lighters, in the side next
    to the lighters, and keep them so obstructed while the vessel is
    alongside the wharf or lighters;

    (_b_) Prevent any organic refuse, galley scraps and waste from being
    discharged into the waters or on the wharfs of any port.

    (2) The master or owner of any vessel arriving in any port in
    Australia from any place proclaimed infected with plague, or as a
    place from or through which plague may be brought or carried, under
    section 12 of the quarantine act, 1908, shall—

    (_a_) Produce to the quarantine officer a certificate showing that
    an efficient fumigation of such vessel while empty had been carried
    out prior to departure. Such certificate, in the case of an oversea
    vessel, must (if the port of departure be within the British
    dominions) be signed by the health officer of the port; or, when
    such port is a foreign port, by the British consul. In the case of
    an interstate vessel the certificate must be signed by a quarantine
    officer. In the absence of such certificate the quarantine officer
    may require the cargo to be discharged in the stream. Efficient
    fumigation in this regulation shall mean fumigation as specified in
    regulation 137 (2) _b_;

    (_b_) Suspend or cause to be suspended over the side of the vessel
    against the wharf, or against any lighter alongside, electric or
    other effective lights, distributed so as to afford from sunset to
    sunrise thorough illumination fore and aft along the whole side of
    the vessel.

    137. (1) The owner or master of any vessel shall—

    (_a_) Keep all foodstuffs and food refuse in rat-proof and
    mouse-proof receptacles;

    (_b_) Thoroughly flush out and afterwards empty the bilges before
    berthing at any port;

    (_c_) Keep on board the vessel a dog or a cat—or both—efficient for
    rat and mouse killing, and give it or them constant access to those
    parts of the vessel where rats or mice may harbor;

    (_d_) Set and keep set in sufficient numbers and in suitable places
    metal break-back traps or other effective traps for rats and mice;
    and

    (2) When so ordered by a quarantine officer, shall—

    (_a_) Lay on the vessel poison baits effective for rats and mice;

    (_b_) Submit the holds and other such parts of the vessel as the
    quarantine officer directs to sulphur fumigation in accordance with
    this regulation, or to some other method of fumigation approved by
    the director of quarantine. Sulphur fumigation shall be effected by
    passing sulphur fumes into the vessel under pressure, and at the
    same time exhausting the air in the parts of the vessel under
    fumigation, and shall be continued until all parts of the vessel
    under fumigation are filled with a gaseous mixture of a strength of
    not less than 3 per cent of sulphur oxides, and are kept so filled
    for at least eight hours.

    The fumigation shall, if the quarantine officer so orders, be
    carried out in the stream or away from a wharf.

    (_c_) Clean, wash, or spray all portions of the vessel likely to
    harbor or afford shelter to vermin, with an approved insecticidal
    solution effective for the killing of fleas, lice, bugs, and other
    vermin; and

    (_d_) Flush, cleanse, disinfect, or empty all lavatories, water
    tanks, or any closed-in space on board the vessel, and cause to be
    produced for disinfection any articles desired by the quarantine
    officer.


  In Sydney, it was stated by the president of the department of public
  health that steady, systematic poisoning and trapping of rats were
  done all the year round, and that this had been the case for the past
  eight years. The experience there had been that mineral poisons were
  found to answer best, and that organic viruses had been found to be
  not practically successful.

  In Melbourne, rat destruction was carried on by the board of public
  health of Victoria and by the local health authorities under the
  Victorian health act of 1890. As stated in the report of Consul J. M.
  Jewell, the board of public health restricts its operations to
  shipping wharves, to shores, and banks of the River Yarra upon which
  Melbourne is situated. Since 1900, the board had had a staff of men
  continually engaged in distributing poison baits. In order to prevent
  the passage of rats to and from vessels, certain specific berthing
  restrictions were in force. In addition, fumigation of vessels was
  practiced under the supervision of the board’s officers. The board had
  continually urged the various municipal authorities to maintain the
  crusade against rats and render dwellings rat proof.

  The consul also stated that the local municipal councils paid a bonus
  for every rat, and that the fee was then 4 cents.

  In Adelaide, it was stated there were no compulsory regulations for
  the destruction of rats, but shipping companies had cooperated with
  the local sanitary authorities to keep down these rodents on the
  wharves by means of poison and traps, the poison being supplied gratis
  by the board of health.

  In Fremantle, and other seaports of Western Australia, according to
  the consul-general, men were engaged in baiting and trapping rats,
  these precautions being maintained throughout the year.


             MEASURES AGAINST RATS IN SOUTH AMERICAN PORTS.

  In Buenos Aires it was stated by the chief of the asistencia publica
  that a regular staff of 150 men was employed in the destruction of
  rats and fumigation of houses. A map of the city showing houses that
  had been found to contain rats was marked. In addition, a pesthouse
  was maintained in which live rats were watched, and developments of
  pest noted.

  In Montevideo Consul F. W. Goding stated that there were no organized
  efforts for the destruction of rats, but that vessels were fumigated
  at stated intervals under the direction of the sanitary authorities.
  He also stated that the Government had required portions of the sea
  wall to be covered with cement in order to prevent rats obtaining a
  lodging there.

  In Callao, Peru, provision was made for the fumigation of vessels from
  infected ports, and it is stated by Consul-General S. M. Taylor that
  the Government had required steamship companies to install fumigating
  apparatus on board their passenger vessels.

  It is stated by the consul that there was a new municipal law in
  Callao calling for stone or brick 2 feet below and 2 feet above ground
  on all walls and foundations for new buildings, and concrete floors in
  all establishments where provisions are sold.

  In Iquique, Chile, it was reported by the consul that the director of
  the municipal laboratory disinfected houses infected with plague, and
  sent a corps of men to poison and trap rats which might be therein.


              MEASURES AGAINST RATS IN WEST INDIAN PORTS.

  From Habana it was reported that no action had been taken by the
  sanitary authorities toward exterminating vermin, except the
  promulgation of a circular letter calling attention to the presence of
  the plague in neighboring countries, and requesting citizens to free
  their premises of rats. The same statement was also said to apply to
  other Cuban seaports.

  In Kingston, Jamaica, on account of the appearance of the plague in
  Venezuela, the government took precautionary measures with the view of
  exterminating rats. These steps, as reported by Vice-Consul W. H.
  Orritt, were as follows:

  A. Lectures were delivered in various centers of the island showing
  how rats are the distributers of plague and the necessity of
  destroying them.

  B. Virus was imported, and live rats were inoculated and set free in
  every seaport in the island.

  C. Bamboo pots with poison glued to their bottoms were distributed to
  householders and placed in the haunts of rodents.

  In Santo Domingo bounties for rats were authorized May 19, 1908, by
  the city council. In addition, rat virus had been used in considerable
  quantity.


                     DESTRUCTION OF RATS IN PANAMA.

  In Cristobal, Canal Zone, Colon, and Bocas del Toro, it was stated by
  Consul J. A. Kellogg that the sanitary department of the Isthmian
  Canal Commission had for some time been exterminating rats by traps
  and poisons.

  In La Boca, Canal Zone, Consul-General Arnold Shanklin stated that the
  sanitary department of the Isthmian Canal Commission and the Public
  Health and Marine-Hospital Service had in charge and had most
  effectually carried on the extermination of rats, and that this
  crusade had also been extended to the old docks and wharves in the
  city of Panama.


                  MEASURES AGAINST RATS IN VANCOUVER.

  It was stated by Consul-General George M. West, December 17, 1908,
  that the city of Vancouver was paying a bounty of 50 cents per hundred
  for all rats caught. The following regulations for the docking or
  mooring of vessels arriving from plague-infected ports became
  effective April 8, 1908:


    1. All vessels arriving at British Columbian ports from ports
    infected or suspected of being infected with bubonic plague shall
    conform to the following regulations:

    (_a_) Vessels shall be moored or docked at a distance not less than
    6 feet from wharf or land.

    (_b_) Ropes or chains connecting a vessel with wharf or land shall
    be protected by funnels of size and shape satisfactory to local and
    provincial boards of health.

    (_c_) All gangways shall be lifted when not in use. Gangways when in
    use shall be guarded against the exit of rats by a person specially
    detailed for this purpose.

    (_d_) All vessels changing route to solely British Columbian ports
    shall give satisfactory evidence of disinfection and extermination
    of vermin to provincial board of health.

    2. Every owner, agent, or captain of any vessel, and every other
    person violating or instructing, authorizing, ordering, permitting,
    or otherwise suffering any person to violate any of the foregoing
    regulations, shall be liable, upon summary conviction before any two
    justices of the peace, for every such offense to a fine not
    exceeding $100, with or without costs, or to imprisonment, with or
    without hard labor, for a term not exceeding six months, or to both
    fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the convicting
    magistrates.

    Dated at Victoria, 8th April, 1908.


  In addition, the mayor and council of the city enacted a by law
  November 11, 1907, one provision of which made it unlawful for any
  boat entering the port of Vancouver to be connected with any wharf in
  the city by a gangway which was not guarded by some person there for
  the purpose of preventing rats from leaving such import by such
  gangway.


               NECESSITY OF CONCERTED ACTION OF NATIONS.

  It appears from the foregoing data that a more or less widespread
  crusade against rats is being carried on in the different ports of the
  world, and that the extent and persistence of these measures, with few
  exceptions, depend upon whether the particular port has been directly
  threatened with an invasion of plague. It is necessary to state here
  that the above data are not presented as a complete epitome of
  measures taken throughout the world, but refer to the ports from which
  consular reports were received.

  The fact that within fifteen years plague has spread to no less than
  52 countries indicates that the measures taken against rats have not
  been wholly efficient.

  It is too much to expect that the rat population can ever be
  exterminated from any country, but by the adoption of systematic
  measures, such as are in force in Denmark, the rat population should
  be markedly reduced, and the occurrence of plague among rodents
  quickly detected. It is not too much to expect, however, that ocean
  carriers could be freed from rodents and kept so, and this action
  would confine plague within continental boundaries.

  When the existing sanitary conventions were adopted several years
  since, the importance of the subject was just beginning to be
  recognized, but now that the rat has been proven beyond all doubt to
  be the greatest factor in the transmission of plague from one country
  to another it would appear that the conventions in question should be
  amended, and the Surgeon-General of the Public Health and
  Marine-Hospital Service, in a communication of February 26, 1909,
  addressed to the Secretary of State, suggested the advisability of
  submitting the question of the systematic destruction of rodents
  aboard ships to an international sanitary conference with the view to
  the adoption of an international sanitary regulation on the subject.

  It must be apparent that such a regulation would lessen quarantine
  restrictions, prevent the destruction of cargo by rodents, and in
  large measure obviate the danger of the further spread of plague.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                           TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 Page Changed from                     Changed to

   57 similar or identical to the      similar or identical to the
      affection in man known as favus  affliction in man known as favus

   57 This specie of Mus is very       This species of Mus is very
      susceptible to a large number of susceptible to a large number of
      bacterial                        bacterial

   59 Rabinowitch, L., ’03. Ueber ein  Rabinowitch, L., ’03. Ueber eine
      Hauterkrankung der Ratten. Cent. Hauterkrankung der Ratten. Cent.
      f. Bact.,                        f. Bact.,

  144 Universitat zu St. Petersburg.   Universität zu St. Petersburg.

  ● Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.
  ● Used letters for footnotes and numbers for endnotes. Renumbered all
      to avoid duplicates.
  ● Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
  ● Subscripts are shown using an underscore (_) with curly braces { },
      as in H_{2}O.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RAT AND ITS RELATION TO THE PUBLIC HEALTH ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


