The Project Gutenberg eBook of Travels and discoveries in North and Central Africa, Vol. 3 (of 5)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Travels and discoveries in North and Central Africa, Vol. 3 (of 5)
        being a journal of an expedition undertaken under the auspices of H.B.M.'s Government, in the years 1849-1855

Author: Heinrich Barth

Illustrator: Johann Martin Bernatz

Release date: June 16, 2025 [eBook #76318]

Language: English

Original publication: London: Longman, Brown, Green, Longmans & Roberts, 1857

Credits: Galo Flordelis (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/Getty Research Institute and Smithsonian Libraries)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRAVELS AND DISCOVERIES IN NORTH AND CENTRAL AFRICA, VOL. 3 (OF 5) ***

[Illustration: Drawn by J. M. Bernatz, from a Sketch by Dr. Barth.

M. & N. Hanhart, lith. et impt.

MÚSGU CHIEF.]

                       TRAVELS AND DISCOVERIES
                                   IN
                       NORTH AND CENTRAL AFRICA:
                                BEING A
                        JOURNAL OF AN EXPEDITION
                               UNDERTAKEN
               UNDER THE AUSPICES OF H.B.M.’S GOVERNMENT,
                              IN THE YEARS
                               1849-1855.

                                   BY
                       HENRY BARTH, PH.D., D.C.L.
        FELLOW OF THE ROYAL GEOGRAPHICAL AND ASIATIC SOCIETIES,
                               _&c. &c._

                            IN FIVE VOLUMES.
                               VOL. III.

                                LONDON:
              LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, LONGMANS, & ROBERTS.
                                 1857.

                _The right of translation is reserved._


                                LONDON:
                     Printed by SPOTTISWOODE & CO.
                           New-street Square.




                                CONTENTS
                                   OF
                           THE THIRD VOLUME.

                               * * * * *


                            CHAPTER XXXVIII.

                                                                    Page

  Rainy Season in Kúkawa                                               1

Supplies. — The Herbage. — Tropical Rains. — Mr. Vogel’s Statement. —
The Winged Ant. — Various Kinds of Cultivation. — Intended Excursion to
Kánem. — Mr. Overweg’s Memoranda. — Political Situation of Bórnu. — The
Turks in Central Africa. — Sókoto and Wádáy. — The Festival. —
Ceremonies of Festivity. — Dependent Situation. — My Horse.

                              CHAP. XXXIX.

  Expedition to Kánem                                                 23

Money-matters settled. — A Repentant Servant. — Delights of Open
Encampment. — Dawerghú. — Treatment by Slaves. — Variety of Trees. —
Scarcity of Water. — The Town of Yó. — Marriage Customs. — Character of
the Country. — Arrival of Mr. Overweg. — Banks of the River. —
Character of our Freebooting Companions. — Crossing the River. — Town
of Báruwa. — View of the Tsád. — Native Salt. — Desolate Country. —
Ninety-six Elephants. — Another Scene of Plunder. — Arrival at Berí. —
Importance of Berí. — Fresh-water Lakes and Natron. — Submerged in a
Bog. — A Large Snake. — The Valleys and Vales of Kánem. — Arrival at
the Arab Camp.

                               CHAP. XL.

  The Horde of the Welád Slimán                                       61

The Welád Slimán. — Their Power. — Slaughter of the Welád Slimán. —
Interview with Sheikh Ghét. — Interview with ʿOmár. — Specimen of
Predatory Life. — Runaway Female Slave. — Rich Vales. — Large
Desertion. — A Jewish Adventurer. — Musical Box. — False Alarm.

                               CHAP. XLI.

  Shitáti. — The Eastern, more favoured, Valleys of Kánem             81

Bír el Ftáim. — The Fugábú. — Projects frustrated. — Kárká and the
Keghámma. — Elephant’s Track. — Bóro. — Bérendé. — Towáder. — Beautiful
Vale. — Preparations for Attack. — Left behind. — Regularly-formed
Valley. — Hénderi Síggesí. — Attack by the Natives. — Much Anxiety. —
Join our Friends. — Encampment at Áláli Ádia. — Visited by the
Keghámma. — Camp taken. — Restless Night. — Fine Vale Tákulum. — Vales
of Shitáti. — Return to the principal Camp. — Wádáy Horsemen. — Set out
on return to Kúkawa. — Departure from Kánem. — Alarms. — The Komádugu
again. — Return to Kúkawa.

                              CHAP. XLII.

  Warlike Preparations against Mándará                               118

Set out on another Expedition. — The Camp, or Ngáufate. — The _Chef
de Police_ Lamíno. — Army in motion. — Lamíno again. — Major
Denham’s Adventure. — The Town of Márte. — Ála. — Encampment at Díkowa.
— Firearms and Civilization. — Slavery and Slave-trade. — The Shúwa. —
The Interior of Díkowa. — Industry. — Banks of the Yálowe. — Cotton
Plantations. — The Camp Market. — Friendly Services. — Important
Information. — Háj Edrís.

                              CHAP. XLIII.

  The Border-region of the Shúwa                                     149

News from Mándará. — Áfagé. — Thieves forced to Fight. — The Sweet
Sorghum. — Variations of Temperature. — Shallow Watercourses. —
Subjection of Mándará. — Extensive Rice-fields. — Hard Ground. —
Elephants. — The Court of Ádishén. — The Army on the March. — The
Súmmoli. — The Army badly off. — Entering the Músgu Country. — Industry
pillaged. — Native Architecture. — Affinity of the Músgu. — Their chief
Places. — The Adventurous Chieftain. — Ádishén. — Christmas Events.

                              CHAP. XLIV.

  The Country of the Shallow Rivers. — Water-parting between
  the Rivers Bénuwé and Shárí                                        186

The Deléb-palm. — New Features. — Worship of Ancestors. — Cut off from
the Army. — Spoil and Slaughter. — Alarm and Cowardice. — Músgu
Weapons. — The Túburi not attacked. — Ngáljam of Démmo. — Destruction.
— New Year. — Pagan Chiefs and Priests. — Fine Landscape. — The River
of Logón. — Singular Water-combat. — The Túburi and their Lake. — The
Swampy Character of the Ngáljam. — The River again. —
Water-communication. — Plucky Pagans. — Balls and Stones. —
Consequences of Slave-hunts. — Penetrating Southward.

                               CHAP. XLV.

  Return to Bórnu                                                    229

Another Alarm. — Policy of Negroland. — Cattle Indigenous or Imported.
— Another District Plundered. — The Músgu Slave. — Narrow Escape. —
Attack by Bees. — African Netherlands. — Miseries of Slave-hunts. —
Barren Country. — Residence of Kábishmé. — Native Architecture. —
Ground-plan of a Dwelling. — Amount of Booty. — Wáza. — Encampment at
Wáza. — Re-arrival at Kúkawa.

                              CHAP. XLVI.

  Setting out for Bagírmi. — The Country of Kótokó                   260

Mestréma the Consul of Bagírmi. — Setting out for Bagírmi. — Remains
of Pagan Rites. — _Poa Abyssinica_. — The Water. — Arborescent
_Euphorbiacea_ — Scarcity of Water. — Ngála; Buildings; Language.
— Rén. — Áfadé. — Historical View of Kótokó. — Former towns of the Soy.

                              CHAP. XLVII.

  Province of Logón. — Logón Bírni                                   281

Kála, New Character. — Húlluf. — The Deléb-palm again. — Reception in
the Kárnak. — The Ibálaghwán. — Palace of the Sultan. — Sultan Ýsuf. —
The River. — The Water-king. — Embarking on the River. — Names of
Rivers. — Bathing in the River. — Historical Account of Logón. — Date
of their Islám. — Government. — Food. — Manufactures. — Language.

                             CHAP. XLVIII.

  The two Rivers. — Entrance into Bagírmi                            310

Crossing the River. — Animated Scenery. — Political State of the
Country. — The Real Shárí. — River Scenery. — Sent back by the
Ferrymen. — Intrigues and Fears. — Trying another Ford. — The Shárí at
Mélé. — Character of the Natives. — Entering a Country by Stealth. —
Overtaken. — Residence at Mélé. — Ordered to wait at Búgomán. —
Character of the River. — Mustáfají. — The Shárí again. — Sent back
from Búgomán. — Búgarí. — Mókorí. — Arrival at Bákadá. — Háj Bú-Bakr
Sadík. — Decay of Bagírmi. — Destructive Insects. — Character of
Bákadá. — The Natives. — Intercourse. — Trees of Negroland. — Return of
Messenger.

                              CHAP. XLIX.

  Endeavour to leave the Country. — Arrested. — Final Entrance
  into Más-eñá. — Its characteristic Features                        351

Stay in Mókorí. — Importance of Needles. — Want of Water. — Leaving the
right Track. — A Night in the Wilderness. — Kókoroché. — Mélé again. —
Laid in Irons. — Released. — Return Eastward. — Arrival at the Capital.
— The Lieutenant-governor. — Háj Áhmed. — The Fáki Sámbo. — Mohammedan
Learning. — The Fáki Íbrahím. — Suspected of being a Rain-maker. —
Superstition of the Natives. — Becoming Retail Dealer. — The Market. —
Articles of Commerce. — Difficulties of a Journey into Wádáy. — Market
of Ábú-Gher.

                                CHAP. L.

  Description of the Town. — Arrival of the Sultan. — Final
  Departure                                                          388

General Character of Más-eñá. — The Palace. — The Bedá. — Patients. —
The other Sex. — Occurrences of Daily Life. — Battle with Ants. —
Arrival of the Sultan. — The Sultan’s Retinue. — His Entry into the
Town. — Despatches and Letters. — A Serious Visit. — Escape by
Frankness. — Audience with the Sultan. — Asked for a Cannon. —
Pardoning Enemies. — Death of Máina Beládemí. — Present from the
Sultan. — Reward of Friends. — Departure from the Capital.

                               CHAP. LI.

  Historical Survey of Bagírmi. — General Condition of the Country
  and its Inhabitants                                                425

Scarcity of Information. — The Dájó. — The Kingdom of Gaoga. —
Introduction of Islám. — Early History of Bagírmi. — Foundation of
Más-eñá. — The Kings ʿAbd-Allah and Mohammed. — Restless Reign of
ʿOthmán. — Subjection to Wádáy. — Struggle with Bórnu. — The Present
King ʿAbd el Káder. — His Policy. — General Character of Bagírmi. —
Mountain Gére. — No Snow on Mountains. — Edible _Poa_. — Vegetable
Produce. — Arms. — Language. — Dress. — Government. — Tribute. — Power
of the Sultan.

                               CHAP. LII.

  Home-journey to Kúkawa. — Death of Mr. Overweg                     456

Pleasant Starting. — Bákadá Hospitality. — Ásu and the Shárí. — The
Shúwa of Mókoró. — River of Logón. — Difficulty of Proceeding without
Delay. — Áfadé. — Crossing Rivers. — Bogheówa. — Meeting with Mr.
Overweg. — Treaty signed. — Money-matters. — Rising of the Komádugu. —
Mr. Overweg’s last Excursion. — Death of Mr. Overweg. — His Grave on
the Shore of the Tsád.

                               * * * * *

                              APPENDIX I.

  Account of the Eastern Parts of Kánem, from Native Information     481

  Mʿawó and its Neighbourhood                                        483

    I. — Itinerary from Mʿawó to Tághghel, directly South            484

   II. — From Berí to Tághghel, going along the Border of the
         Lake                                                        486

  III. — The Bahr el Ghazal, called “Burrum” by the Kánembú,
         and “Féde” by the Tebu Gurʿaán                              487

  Mondó, Egé, Búrku, Tribes of the Tebu or Tedá                      489

                              APPENDIX II.

  Geographical Details contained in “the Diván,” or Account given
  by the Imám Áhmed ben Sofíya of the Expeditions of the King
  Edrís Alawóma from Bórnu to Kánem                                  498

      First Expedition                                               498

      Second Expedition                                              507

      Third Expedition                                               508

      Fourth Expedition                                              511

      Fifth Expedition                                               517

      Last Expedition to the Borders of Kánem; Treaty                519

                             APPENDIX III.

  Account of the various Detachments of Cavalry composing the
  Bórnu Army in the Expedition to Músgu                              521

                              APPENDIX IV.

  Towns and Villages of the Province of Logón or Lógone              525

                              APPENDIX V.

  Copy of a Despatch from Lord Palmerston                            526

                              APPENDIX VI.

  Historical Sketch of Wádáy                                         528

                             APPENDIX VII.

  Ethnographical Account of Wádáy                                    539

                             APPENDIX VIII.

  Government of Wádáy                                                554

                              APPENDIX IX.

  Collection of Itineraries for fixing the Topography of Wádáy,
  and those parts of Bagírmi which I did not visit myself            563

    I. — Roads from Más-eñá to Wára                                  563

   II. — Routes in the Interior of Wádáy                             570

  III. — Routes in the Interior of Bagírmi                           588

                              APPENDIX X.

  Fragments of a Meteorological Register                             617




                         LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
                                   IN
                           THE THIRD VOLUME.

                               * * * * *


                                 MAPS.

                                                                    Page

  IX. Journey to Kánem                                                23

   X. Expedition to Músgu                                            118

  XI. Kúkawa to Más-eñá                                              260

                                PLATES.

   1. Músgu Chief                                         _Frontispiece_

   2. Yó and the Komádugu                                _to face_    35

   3. Herd of Elephants near the Tsád                        „        48

   4. Bír El Ftáim                                           „        82

   5. Hénderi Síggesí                                        „        96

   6. Kánembú Chief                                          „       116

   7. Landscape of the Músgu Country                         „       190

   8. Encampment in Forest                                   „       196

   9. Shallow Water (Ngáljam) at Démmo                       „       202

  10. Landscape in Wúliya                                    „       232

  11. Bárëa and the Deléb Palm                               „       236

  12. Interior of Dwelling                                   „       250

  13. Encampment at Wáza                                     „       256

  14. Logón Bírni                                            „       310

  15. The Shárí at Mélé                                      „       319

  16. Más-eñá, Return of the Sultan from the Expedition      „       405

                               WOODCUTS.

  Granary                                                            176

  Harpoon                                                            237

  Ornamented Granary                                                 249

  Ground-plan of Building                                            250

  Ground-plan of Palace in Logón Bírni                               292

  Ground-plan of Town of Más-eñá                        _to face_    388




                            ERRATA, VOL III.


  Page 203., line  6. read “south-_west_” instead of “south-east.”

   „   240.,  „    5. from below, “_southerly_” instead of “westerly.”

   „   298.,  „   16. “wórzi” _or_ “berdí” instead of “wórzi berdí.”




                        TRAVELS AND DISCOVERIES
                                   IN
                                AFRICA.

                               * * * * *

                            CHAPTER XXXVIII.

                        RAINY SEASON IN KÚKAWA.


I had left Kúkawa on my journey to Ádamáwa in the best state of health,
but had brought back from that excursion the germs of disease; and
residence in the town, at least at this period of the year, was not
likely to improve my condition. It would certainly have been better for
me, had I been able to retire to some more healthy spot; but trivial
though urgent business obliged me to remain in Kúkawa.

It was necessary to sell the merchandize which had at length arrived, in
order to keep the mission in some way or other afloat, by paying the
most urgent debts and providing the necessary means for further
exploration. There was merchandize to the value of one hundred pounds
sterling; but, as I was obliged to sell the things at a reduced rate for
ready money, the loss was considerable; for all business in these
countries is transacted on two or three months’ credit, and, after all,
payment is made, not in ready money, but chiefly in slaves. It is no
doubt very necessary for a traveller to be provided with those various
articles which form the presents to be made to the chiefs, and which are
in many districts required for bartering; but he ought not to depend
upon their sale for the supply of his wants. Altogether it is difficult
to carry on trade in conjunction with extensive geographical research,
although a person sitting quietly down in a place, and entering into
close relations with the natives, might collect a great deal of
interesting information, which would probably escape the notice of the
roving traveller, whose purpose is rather to explore distant regions.
Besides, I was obliged to make numerous presents to my friends, in order
to keep them in good humour, and had very often not only to provide
dresses for themselves and their wives, but even for their domestic
retainers; so that, all things considered, the supply of one hundred
pounds’ worth of merchandize could not last very long.

I have remarked that, when I re-entered Kúkawa, the cultivation of the
ground had not yet begun; indeed, the whole country was so parched, that
it became even a matter of perplexity to find sufficient fodder for the
horses; for the whole stock of dry herbage was consumed, and of young
herbage none was to be had.

It is stated in my memoranda, that on the 5th of August I paid twelve
rotl for a “kéla kajímbe,” or large bundle of dry grass; an enormous
price in this country, and sufficient to maintain a whole family for
several days; but that was the most unfavourable moment, for in a few
days fresh herbage sprang up and made good all deficiencies. While
speaking on this subject, I may also mention, that the herbage of
Kúkawa, being full of “ngíbbi,” or _Pennisetum distichum_, horses
brought from other countries generally fare but badly on it, as they are
reluctant to fill their mouths with its small prickles.

Rain was very plentiful this year, 1851, and I am sure would, if
measured, have far exceeded the quantity found by Mr. Vogel in 1854.
Indeed, there were twelve very considerable falls of rain during the
month of August alone, which together probably exceeded thirty inches.
It must be borne in mind, moreover, that the fall of rain in Kúkawa does
not constitute the rule for the region, but is quite exceptional, owing
to the entire absence of trees and of heights in the neighbourhood.
Hence, the statement of Mr. Vogel in one of his letters[1], that the
line of tropical rains only begins south of Kúkawa, must be understood
with some reserve; for if he had measured the rain in the woody country
north of that capital, between Dáwerghú and Kalíluwá, he would, in my
opinion, have obtained a very different result. It is evident that all
depends upon the meaning of the expression, tropical rain. If it imply a
very copious fall of rain, Kúkawa certainly does not lie within the
limit of tropical rain; but if we are to understand by it the regularly
returning annual fall of rain, produced by the ascending currents of
heated air, it certainly does.[2] There was a very heavy fall of rain on
the night of the 3rd of August, which not only swamped our courtyard,
but changed my room, which lay half a foot lower, and was protected only
by a low threshold, into a little lake, aggravating my feverish state
very considerably, and spoiling most of my things.

On the 5th of August rain fell for the first time unaccompanied by a
storm, though the rainy season in general sets in with dreadful
tornadoes. The watery element disturbed the luxurious existence of the
“kanám galgálma,” the large termites, which had fed on our sugar and
other supplies, and on the 6th they all of a sudden disappeared from the
ground, and filled the air as short-lived winged creatures, in which
state they are called by the people “tsútsu,” or “dsúdsu,” and, when
fried, are used as food. Their tenure of life is so precarious, and they
seem to be so weak, that they become very troublesome, as they fall in
every direction upon man and his food. Of each swarm of these insects
only one couple seems destined to survive; all the rest die a violent
death.

The town now began to present quite a different appearance; but while it
was agreeable to see the dryness relieved, and succulent grass and fresh
crops springing up all around, and supplanting the dull uniformity of
the _Asclepias gigantea_, on the other hand, the extensive waterpools
formed everywhere in the concavities of the ground, were by no means
conducive to health, more especially as those places were depositories
of all sorts of offal, and of putrefying carcasses of many kinds. The
consequence was that my health, instead of improving, became worse,
although I struggled hard, and as often as possible rode out on
horseback. All the people were now busy in the labours of the field,
although cultivation in the neighbourhood of the town is not of a
uniform, but of a varied character; and a large portion of the ground,
consisting of “ánge” and “fírki,” is reserved for the culture of the
masákuwá (_Holcus cernuus_), or winter-corn, with its variety the
kérirám.

On the 8th of August the neighbourhood presented a very animated
spectacle, the crownlands in Gawánge being then cultivated by a great
number of people, working to the sound of a drum. Their labours
continued till the 15th; on which day Mr. Overweg had the honour of
presenting his Búdduma friends to the sheikh of Bórnu. All nature was
now cheerful; the trees were putting forth fresh leaves, and the young
birds began to fledge. I took great delight in observing the little
household of a family of the feathered tribe; there were five young
ones, the oldest and most daring of which began to try his strength on
the 12th of August, while the other four set out together on the 14th.

Marriages are not frequent about this time, on account of the dearness
of corn; but matches are generally made after the harvest has been got
in, and while corn is cheap. I shall speak in another place of the
marriage ceremonies of this country.

On the 5th of September we obtained the first specimen of new “argúm
móro,” white Negro millet, which is very pleasant to the taste when
roasted on the fire; but this is regarded as a rarity, and new corn is
not brought into the market in any great quantities before the end of
November, or rather the beginning of December, when all the corn, which
has been for a long time lying in the fields in conical heaps, called
“búgga,” is threshed out.

My friend, the vizier, whose solicitude for my health I cannot
acknowledge too warmly, was very anxious that I should not stay in the
town during the rainy season; and knowing that one of our principal
objects was to investigate the eastern shore of lake Tsád, sent me word,
on the 11th of August, that I might now view the bahár el ghazál, an
undertaking which, as I have already mentioned, he had at first
represented as impossible. The news from Kánem, however, was now
favourable; but as I shall speak in another place of the political state
of this distracted country, and of the continual struggle between Bórnu
and Wadáÿ, I need only mention here that the Welád Slimán, who had
become a mercenary band attached to the vizier, had been successful
during their last expedition, and were reported on the very day of my
return from Ádamáwa to have made a prize of 150 horses and a great many
camels, which, however, was a great exaggeration.

We were well acquainted with the character of these people, who are
certainly the most lawless robbers in the world; but as it was the
express wish of the British government that we should endeavour to
explore the regions bordering on the lake, there was no course open to
us, but to unite our pursuits with theirs; besides, they were prepared
in some measure for such a union, for, while they inhabited the grassy
lands round the great Syrtis, they had come into frequent contact with
the English. We had no choice, for all the districts to the north-east
and east of the Tsád were at present in a certain degree dependent on
Wadáÿ, then at war with Bórnu, and we were told at the commencement that
we might go anywhere except to Wadáÿ. Instead of fighting it out with
his own people, which certainly would have been the most honourable
course, the vizier had ventured to make use of the remnant of the
warlike, and at present homeless, tribe of the Welád Slimán, in the
attempt to recover the eastern districts of Kánem from his eastern
rival; or at least to prevent the latter from obtaining a sure footing
in them; for this object he had made a sort of treaty with these Arabs,
undertaking to supply them with horses, muskets, powder and shot. Thus,
in order to visit those inhospitable regions, which had attracted a
great deal of attention in Europe, we were obliged to embrace this
opportunity. Under these circumstances, on the 16th of August, I sent
the vizier word that I was ready to join the Welád Slimán in Búrgu;
whereupon he expressed a wish that Mr. Overweg might likewise accompany
us; the stay in Kúkawa during the rainy season being very unhealthy.

Mr. Overweg had returned on the 9th to Maduwári from his interesting
voyage on the Tsád, of which everyone will deeply regret that he himself
was not able to give a full account.[3] Traversing that shallow basin in
the English boat, which we had carried all the way through the unbounded
sandy wastes and the rocky wildernesses of the desert, he had visited a
great part of the islands, which are dispersed over its surface, and
which, sometimes reduced to narrow sandy downs, at others expanding to
wide grassy lowlands, sustain a population in their peculiar national
independence, the remnant of a great nation which was exterminated by
the Kanúri. It was a little world of its own with which he had thus come
into contact, and into which we might hope to obtain by degrees a better
insight. He enjoyed excellent health, far better than when I saw him
before, on his first rejoining me in Kúkawa; and as he was well aware of
the strong reasons which our friend the vizier had for wishing us not to
stay in the swampy lowlands round the capital during the latter part of
the rainy season, he agreed to join me on this adventurous expedition to
the north-east.

Those regions had, from the very beginning of our setting out from
Múrzuk, attracted Mr. Overweg’s attention, and while as yet unacquainted
with the immense difficulties that attend travelling in these
inhospitable tracts, he had indulged in the hope of being able, at some
future time, to ramble about with our young Tébu lad, Mohammed el
Gatróni, among the fertile and picturesque valleys of Búrgu and Wajánga.
For this reason, as well as on account of my debility, which left me,
during the following expedition, the exercise of only a small degree of
my natural energy, it is greatly to be regretted that my unfortunate
companion, who seemed never fully aware that his life was at stake, did
not take into consideration the circumstance that he himself might not
be destined to return home, in order to elaborate his researches. If all
the information which he occasionally collected were joined to mine,
those countries would be far better known than they now are; but instead
of employing his leisure hours in transcribing his memoranda in a form
intelligible to others, he left them all on small scraps of paper,
negligently written with lead pencil, which after the lapse of some time
would become unintelligible even to himself. It is a pity that so much
talent as my companion possessed was not allied with practical habits,
and concentrated upon those subjects which he professed to study.

The political horizon of Negroland during this time was filled with
memorable events, partly of real, partly of fictitious importance.
Whatever advantages Bórnu may derive from its central position, it owes
to it also the risk of being involved in perpetual struggles with one or
other of the surrounding countries. And hence it is that, under a weak
government, this empire cannot stand for any length of time; it must go
on conquering and extending its dominion over adjacent territories, or
it will soon be overpowered. Towards the north is the empire of the
Turks, weak and crumbling in its centre, but always grasping with its
outlying members, and threatening to lay hold of what is around: towards
the north-west, the Tawárek, not forming a very formidable united power,
but always ready to pounce upon their prey whenever opportunity offers:
towards the west, the empire of Sókoto, great in extent, but weak beyond
description in the unsettled state of its loosely connected provinces,
and from the unenergetic government of a peacefully disposed prince; for
while one provincial governor was just then spreading around him the
flames of sedition and revolt, towards the south another vassal of this
same empire was disputing the possession of those regions whence the
supply of slaves is annually obtained: and towards the east, there is an
empire strong in its barbarism, and containing the germs of power,
should it succeed in perfectly uniting those heterogeneous elements of
which it is composed,—I mean Wadáÿ.

With regard to the Turks, the state of affairs at this time was
peculiar. Bórnu, as we have seen in the historical account of that
empire, once embraced the whole region as far as Fezzán,—nay, even the
southern portion of Fezzán itself, and even Wadán; but since the decline
of the empire in the latter half of the last century these limits had
been abandoned, and the communication with the north had, in general,
become extremely unsafe. This state of things is necessarily
disadvantageous to a country which depends for many things on the
supplies conveyed from the north; and the authorities naturally wish
that, since they themselves in their present impotent condition are
unable to afford security to this important communication, somebody else
may do it. Hence it was that, after my arrival in April, when the vizier
was conversing with me about the prospects of a regular commercial
intercourse with the English, he declared that he should be much pleased
if the Turks would occupy Kawár, and more particularly Bílma; and by
building a fort and keeping a garrison near the salt-mines of that
place, exercise some control over the Tawárek of Aïr, and make them
responsible for robberies committed on the Fezzán road. It was in
consequence of this communication that I begged Her Majesty’s government
to enter into communication upon this point with the Porte.

But the matter was of a very delicate nature with regard to Bórnu.
Indeed, it seemed questionable whether the Turks, if once firmly
established in Bílma, would not think fit to exercise some control over
the latter country. Nay, it was rather to be feared that they might try
to obtain there a firm footing, in order to extend their empire; and
when the news arrived in Bórnu that the ambitious Hassan Bashá had
returned to his post as governor of Fezzán, with very ample
instructions, the whole court of Bórnu became alarmed. The effect of
this news upon the disposition of the sheikh and the vizier to enter
into friendly relations with the British government was remarkable. On
the 5th of August they were not able to conceal their fear lest a
numberless host of Englishmen might come into their country, if, by
signing the treaty, access was once allowed them, as proposed by Her
Majesty’s government. For although they were conscious of the poverty of
their country in comparison with Europe, at times they were apt to
forget it. In the afternoon of the 6th the courier arrived, and the same
evening Háj Beshír sent me word that they were ready to sign the treaty;
and afterwards they were very anxious that the English government should
endeavour to prevent the governor of Fezzán from carrying out the
ulterior objects of his ambition. At that time I had assured myself that
a northern road through the desert was not suitable for European
commerce, and that a practicable highroad, leading several hundred miles
into the interior of the continent and passing to the south of Kanó, the
great commercial _entrepôt_ of Central Africa, and only about two
hundred miles in a straight line to the south of Kúkawa, had been found
in the river Bénuwé.

With regard to the empire of Sókoto, there happened at this time a
catastrophe which, while it was an unmistakeable proof of the debility
of that vast agglomeration of provinces, proved at the same time
extremely favourable to Bórnu. For on the 1st of August the news arrived
that Bowári or Bokhári, the exiled governor of Khadéja, who had
conquered the town and killed his brother, had thrown back, with great
loss, an immense army sent against him by ʿAlíyu, the emperor of Sókoto,
under the command of his prime minister, ʿAbdu Gedádo, and composed of
the forces of the provinces of Kanó, Báuchi, Katágum, Mármar, and
Bobéru, when several hundreds were said to have perished in the
komádugu, or the great fiumara of Bórnu. In the spring, while Mr.
Overweg was staying in Góber, the Mariadáwa and Goberáwa had made a very
successful expedition into Zánfara; and the emperor of Sókoto could take
no other revenge upon them, than by sending orders to Kanó that my
friends the Asbenáwa, many of whose brethren had taken part in the
expedition, should be driven out of the town, which order was obeyed;
while only the well-known Kandáke, the same man whom Mr. Richardson, on
his former journey into the desert, has so frequently mentioned, was
admitted into the town through the intercession of the people of
Ghadámes.

The immediate consequence of these circumstances was, that the court of
Bórnu tried to enter into more friendly relations with the Asbenáwa, or
the Tawárek of Asben, with whom at other times they were on unfriendly
terms, and the prisoners whom they had made on the last expedition were
released. The coalition extended as far as Góber; and the most ardent
desire of the vizier was to march straight upon Kanó. To conquer this
great central place of commerce was the great object of this man’s
ambition; but for which he did not possess sufficient energy and self-
command. However, the governor of that place, terrified by the victory
of Bokhári, who was now enabled to carry on his predatory expeditions
into that rich territory without hindrance, distributed sixty bernúses
and three thousand dollars among the Mʿallemín, to induce them to offer
up their prayers to Allah for the public welfare.

We have seen above, that the Bórnu people had given to their relations
with Ádamáwa a hostile character; but from that quarter they had nothing
to fear, the governor of that province being too much occupied by the
affairs of his own country.

I will now say a word about Wadáÿ. That was the quarter to which the
most anxious looks of the Bórnu people were directed. For, seven years
previously, they had been very nearly conquered by them, and had
employed every means to get information of what was going on there. But
from thence also the news was favourable. For although the report of the
death of the Sultan Mohammed Sheríf, in course of time, turned out to be
false, still it was true that the country was plunged into a bloody
civil war with the Abú-Senún, or Kodoyí, and that numbers of
enterprising men had succumbed in the struggle.

The business of the town went on as usual, with the exception of the
ʿaid el fotr, the ngúmerí ashám, the festival following the great annual
fast, which was celebrated in a grand style, not by the nation, which
seemed to take very little interest in it, but by the court. In other
places, like Kanó, the rejoicings seem to be more popular on this
occasion; the children of the butchers or “masufauchi” in that great
emporium of commerce mounting some oxen, fattened for the occasion,
between the horns, and managing them by a rope fastened to the neck, and
another to the hind leg. As for the common people of Bórnu, they
scarcely took any other part in this festivity than by putting on their
best dresses; and it is a general custom in larger establishments that
servants and attendants on this day receive a new shirt.

I also put on my best dress, and mounting my horse, which had recovered
a little from the fatigue of the last journey, though it was not yet fit
for another, proceeded in the morning to the eastern town or “billa
gedíbe,” the great thoroughfare being crowded with men on foot and
horseback, passing to and fro, all dressed in their best. It had been
reported that the sheikh was to say his prayers in the mosque, but we
soon discovered that he was to pray outside the town, as large troops of
horsemen were leaving it through the north gate or “chinna yalábe.” In
order to become aware of the place where the ceremony was going on, I
rode to the vizier’s house and met him just as he came out, mounted on
horseback, and accompanied by a troop of horsemen.

At the same time several cavalcades were seen coming from various
quarters, consisting of the kashéllas, or officers, each with his
squadron, of from a hundred to two hundred horsemen, all in the most
gorgeous attire, particularly the heavy cavalry; the greater part being
dressed in a thick stuffed coat called “degíbbir,” and wearing over it
several tobes of all sorts of colours and designs, and having their
heads covered with the “búge” or casque, made very nearly like those of
our knights in the middle age, but of lighter metal, and ornamented with
most gaudy feathers. Their horses were covered all over with the thick
clothing called “líbbedí,” with various coloured stripes, consisting of
three pieces, and leaving nothing but the feet exposed, the front of the
head being protected and adorned by a metal plate. Others were dressed
in a coat of mail, “síllege,” and the other kind called “komá-komí-
súbe.” The lighter cavalry was only dressed in two or three showy tobes
and small white or coloured caps; but the officers and more favoured
attendants wore bernúses of finer or coarser quality, and generally of
red or yellow colour, slung in a picturesque manner round the upper part
of their body, so that the inner wadding of richly coloured silk was
most exposed to view.[4]

All these dazzling cavalcades, amongst whom some very excellent horses
were seen prancing along, were moving towards the northern gate of the
“billa gedíbe,” while the troop of the sheikh himself, who had been
staying in the western town, was coming from SW. The sight of this
troop, at least from a little distance, as is the case in theatrical
scenery, was really magnificent. The troop was led by a number of
horsemen; then followed the livery slaves with their matchlocks; and
behind them rode the sheikh, dressed as usual in a white bernús, as a
token of his religious character, but wearing round his head a red
shawl. He was followed by four magnificent chargers clothed in líbbedí
of silk of various colours; that of the first horse being striped white
and yellow, that of the second white and brown, that of the third white
and light green, and that of the fourth white and cherry red. This was
certainly the most interesting and conspicuous part of the procession.
Behind the horses followed the four large ʿalam or ensigns of the
sheikh, and the four smaller ones of the musketeers, and then a numerous
body of horsemen.

This cavalcade of the sheikh’s now joined the other troops, and the
whole body proceeded in the direction of Dawerghú to a distance of about
a mile from the town. Here the sheikh’s tent was pitched, consisting of
a very large cupola of considerable dimensions, with blue and white
stripes, and curtains, the one half white and the other red; the
curtains were only half closed. In this tent the sheikh himself, the
vizier, and the first courtiers were praying, while the numerous body of
horsemen and men on foot were grouped around in the most picturesque and
imposing variety.

Meanwhile I made the round of this interesting scene, and endeavoured to
count the various groups. In their numbers I was certainly disappointed,
as I had been led to expect myriads. At the very least, however, there
were 3000 horsemen, and from 6000 to 7000 armed men on foot, the latter
partly with bow and arrow. There were besides a great multitude of
spectators. The ceremony did not last long; and as early as nine o’clock
the ganga summoned all the chiefs to mount, and the dense mass of human
beings began to disperse and range themselves in various groups. They
took their direction round the north-western corner of the east town,
and entered the latter by the western gate; but the crowd was so great
that I chose to forego taking leave of the sheikh, and went slowly back
over the intermediate ground between the two towns in the company of
some very chevaleresque and well-mounted young Arabs from Ben-Gházi, and
posted myself at some distance from the east-gate of the western town,
in order to see the kashéllas, who have their residence in this quarter,
pass by.

There were twelve or thirteen, few of whom had more than one hundred
horsemen, the most conspicuous being Fúgo ʿAli, ʿAli Marghí, ʿAli
Déndal, ʿAli Ladán, Belál, Sálah Kandíl, and Jerma. It was thought
remarkable that no Shúwa had come to this festivity, but I think they
rarely do, although they may sometimes come for the ʿAid-el-kebír, or
the “ngúmerí layábe.” It is rather remarkable that even this smaller
festivity is celebrated here with such _éclat_, while in general in
Mohammedan Negroland only the “láya” is celebrated in this way; perhaps
this is due to Egyptian influence, and the custom is as old at least as
the time of the King Edrís Alawóma.

I had the inexpressible delight of receiving by the courier, who arrived
on the 6th of August, a considerable parcel of letters from Europe,
which assured me as well of the great interest which was generally felt
in our undertaking, although as yet only very little of our first
proceedings had become known, as that we should be enabled to carry out
our enterprise without too many privations. I therefore collected all
the little energy which my sickly state had left me, and concluded the
report of my journey to Ádamáwa, which caused me a great deal of pain,
but which, forwarded on the 8th of August, together with the news of Mr.
Overweg’s successful navigation, produced a great deal of satisfaction
in Europe. Together with the letters and sundry Maltese portfolios, I
had also the pleasure of receiving several numbers of the “Athenæum,”
probably the first which were introduced into Central Africa, and which
gave me great delight.

Altogether our situation in the country was not so bad. We were on the
best and most friendly terms with the rulers: we were not only
tolerated, but even respected by the natives, and we saw an immense
field of interesting and useful labour open to us. There was only one
disagreeable circumstance besides the peculiar nature of the climate;
this was the fact that our means were too small to render us quite
independent of the sheikh and his vizier; for the scanty supplies which
had reached us were not sufficient to provide for our wants, and were
soon gone. We were scarcely able to keep ourselves afloat on our credit,
and to supply our most necessary wants. Mr. Overweg, besides receiving a
very handsome horse from them, had also been obliged to accept at their
hands a number of tobes, which he had made presents of to the chiefs of
the Búdduma, and they looked upon him as almost in their employment. He
lost a great deal of his time in repairing, or rather trying to repair,
their watches and other things. Such services I had declined from the
beginning, and was therefore regarded as less useful; and I had
occasionally to hear it said, “ʿAbd el Kerím faidanse bágo,”—“ʿAbd el
Kerím is of no use whatever;” nevertheless I myself was not quite
independent of their kindness, although I sacrificed all I could in
order to give from time to time a new impulse to their favour by an
occasional present.

The horse which they had first given me had proved incapable of such
fatigue as it had to undergo, and the animal which I had bought before
going to Ádamáwa had been too much knocked up to stand another journey
so soon; and after having bought two other camels, and prepared myself
for another expedition, I was unable, with my present means, to buy a
good horse. Remembering, therefore, what the vizier had told me with
regard to my first horse, I sent him word that he would greatly oblige
me by making me a present of one, and he was kind enough to send me four
animals from which to choose; but as none of these satisfied me, I
rejected them all, intimating very simply that it was impossible, among
four _nags_, “kádara,” to choose one _horse_, “fir.” This hint, after a
little farther explanation, my friend did not fail to understand, and in
the evening of the 7th of September he sent me a horse from his own
stable, which became my faithful and noble companion for the next four
campaigns, and from which I did not part till, after my return from
Timbúktu, in December, 1854, he succumbed to sickness in Kanó.

He was the envy of all the great men, from the Sultan of Bagírmi to the
chiefs of the Tademékket and Awelímmiden near Timbúktu. His colour was a
shade of gray, with beautiful light leopardlike spots, and the Kanúri
were not unanimous with regard to the name which they gave it, some
calling it “shéggará,” while others thought the name “kerí sassarándi”
more suitable to it. In the company of mares, he was incapable of
walking quietly, but kept playing in order to show himself off to
advantage. The Bórnu horses in general are very spirited and fond of
prancing. He was an excellent “kerísa” or marcher, and “doy” or swift in
the extreme, but very often lost his start by his playfulness. Of his
strength, the extent of the journeys which he made with me bears ample
testimony, particularly if the warlike, scientific, and victualling
stores which I used to carry with me are taken into account. He was a
“ngírma,” but not of the largest size. Mr. Overweg’s horse was almost
half a hand higher; but while mine was a lion in agility, my companion’s
horse was not unlike a hippopotamus in plumpness.

With such a horse, I prepared cheerfully for my next expedition, which I
regarded in the light both of an undertaking in the interests of
science, and as a medicinal course for restoring my health, which
threatened to succumb in the unhealthy region of Kúkawa. Besides two
Fezzáni lads, I had taken into my service two Arabs belonging to the
tribe of the Welád Slimán, and whose names were Bú-Zéd and Hasén ben
Hár.


[Footnote 1: Published in Journal of the R. Geogr. Soc. vol. xxv., 1855,
p. 241.]

[Footnote 2: It will perhaps be as well to call to mind the prudent
warning of Col. Sykes, in reference to the observations of Prof. Dove.
“These observations,” he says, “suggest to us the necessity of caution
in generalizing from local facts with regard to temperatures and falls
of rain.”—_Report of the National Association_, 1852, p. 253.]

[Footnote 3: I shall return to the subject of Mr. Overweg’s voyage.]

[Footnote 4: I shall say more on the military department in my narrative
of the expedition to Músgu.]




[Illustration: DR. BARTH’S TRAVELS IN NORTH AND CENTRAL AFRICA Sheet No.
9.

JOURNEY TO KÁNEM 11. Sept. To 14. Nov. 1851.

Constructed and drawn by A. Petermann.

Engraved by E. Weller, _Duke Strt. Bloomsbury._

_London, Longman & Co._]


                              CHAP. XXXIX.

                          EXPEDITION TO KÁNEM.


[Sidenote: September 11th, 1851.]

Having decided upon leaving the town in advance of the Arabs, in order
to obtain leisure for travelling slowly the first few days, and to
accustom my feeble frame once more to the fatigues of a continual
march, after a rest of forty days in the town, I ordered my people to
get my luggage ready in the morning.

I had plenty of provisions, such as zummíta, dwéda, or vermicelli,
mohámsa, and nákia, a sort of sweetmeat made of rice with butter and
honey; two skins of each quality. All was stowed away with the little
luggage I intended taking with me on this adventurous journey, in two
pairs of large leathern bags or kéwa, which my two camels were to carry.

When all was ready, I went to the vizier, in order to take leave of him
and arrange with my former servant, Mohammed ben Sʿad, to whom I owed
thirty-five dollars. Háj Beshír, as usual, was very kind and amiable;
but as for my former servant, having not a single dollar in cash, I was
obliged to give him a bill upon Fezzán for seventy-five dollars. There
was also a long talk on the subject of the enormous debt due to the
Fezzáni merchant, Mohammed e’ Sfáksi; and as it was not possible to
settle it at once, I was obliged to leave its definite arrangement to
Mr. Overweg.

All this disagreeable business, which is so killing to the best hours
and destroys half the energy of the traveller, had retarded my departure
so long that the sun was just setting when I left the gate of the town.
My little caravan was very incomplete; for my only companion on emerging
from the gate into the high waving fields of Guinea corn, which entirely
concealed the little suburb, was an unfortunate young man, whom I had
not hired at all; my three hired servants having stayed behind, on some
pretext or other. This lad was Mohammed ben Ahmed, a native from Fezzán,
whom I wanted to hire, or rather hired, in Gúmmel, in March last, for
two Spanish dollars a month; but who, having been induced by his
companions in the caravan, with which he had just arrived from the
north, to forego the service of a Christian, had broken his word, and
gone on with the caravan of the people from Sókna, leaving me with only
one useful servant. But he had found sufficient leisure to repent of his
dishonourable conduct; for having been at the verge of the grave in
Kanó, and being reduced to the utmost misery, he came to Kúkawa, begging
my pardon, and entreating my compassion: and, after some expostulation,
I allowed him to stay without hiring him; and it was only on seeing his
attachment to me in the course of time that I afterwards granted him a
dollar a month, and he did not obtain two dollars till my leaving
Zínder, in January, 1853, on my way to Timbúktu, when I was obliged to
augment the salary of all my people. This lad followed me with my two
camels.

All was fertility and vegetation, though these fields near the capital
are certainly not the best situated in Bórnu. I felt strengthened by the
fresh air, and followed the eastern path, which did not offer any place
for an encampment. Looking round I saw at length two of my men coming
towards us, and found to the left of the track, on a little sandy
eminence, a convenient spot for pitching my tent. I felt happy in having
left the monotony and closeness of the town behind me. Nothing in the
world makes me feel happier than a wide, open country, a commodious
tent, and a fine horse. But I was not quite comfortable; for, having
forgotten to close my tent, I was greatly annoyed by the mosquitoes,
which prevented my getting any sleep. The lake being very near, the dew
was so heavy that next morning my tent was as wet as if it had been
soaked with water.

[Sidenote: Sept. 12th.]

Notwithstanding these inconveniences, I awoke in the morning with a
grateful heart, and cared little about the flies, which soon began to
attack me. I sat down outside the tent to enjoy my liberty: it was a
fine morning, and I sat for hours tranquilly enjoying the most simple
landscape (the lake not being visible, and scarcely a single tree in
sight) which a man can fancy. But all was so quiet, and bespoke such
serenity and content, that I felt quite happy and invigorated. I did not
think about writing, but idled away the whole day. In the evening my
other man came, and brought me a note from Mr. Overweg, addressed to me
“in campo caragæ Æthiopiensis” (karága means wilderness).

[Sidenote: Saturday, Sept. 13th.]

I decided late in the morning, when the dew had dried up a little, upon
moving my encampment a short distance, but had to change my path for a
more westerly one, on account of the large swampy ponds, formed at the
end of the rainy season in the concavity at the foot of the sand-hills
of Dawerghú. The vegetation is rich during this season, even in this
monotonous district.

Having at length entered the corn-, or rather millet-fields of Dawerghú,
we soon ascended the sandhills, where the whole character of the
landscape is altered; for while the dúm-bush almost ceases, the rétem,
_Spartium monospermum_, is the most common botanical ornament of the
ground where the cultivation of the fields has left a free spot, whilst
fine specimens of the mimosa break the monotony of the fields. Having
passed several clusters of cottages forming an extensive district, I saw
to the right an open space descending towards a green sheet of water,
filling a sort of valley or hollow, where a short time afterwards, when
the summer harvest is over, the peculiar sort of sorghum called másakwá
is sown. Being shaded by some fine acacias, the spot was very inviting,
and, feeling already tired, sick and weak as I was, though after a
journey of only two hours, I determined to remain there during the heat
of the day. I had scarcely stretched myself on the ground, when a man
brought me word that a messenger, sent by Ghét, the chief of the Welád
Slimán, had passed by with the news that this wandering and marauding
tribe had left Búrgu and returned to Kánem. This was very unpleasant
news, as, from all that I had heard, it appeared to me that Búrgu must
be an interesting country, at least as much so as Ásben or Aïr, being
favoured by deep valleys and ravines, and living sources of fine water,
and producing, besides great quantities of excellent dates, even grapes
and figs, at least in some favoured spots.

The morning had been rather dull, but before noon the sun shone forth,
and our situation on the sloping ground of the high country, overlooking
a great extent of land in the rich dress of vegetable life, was very
pleasant. There was scarcely a bare spot: all was green, except that the
ears of the millet and sorghum were almost ripe, and began to assume a
yellowish-brown tint; but how different is the height of the stalks, the
very largest of which scarcely exceeds fifteen feet, from those I saw
afterwards on my return from Timbúktu, in the rich valleys of Kébbi.
Several Kánembú were passing by and enlivened the scenery.

When the heat of the sun began to abate I set my little caravan once
more in motion, and passed on through the level country, which in the
simplicity of my mind I thought beautiful, and which I greatly enjoyed.
After about an hour’s march, we passed a large pond or pool, situated to
the left of the road, and formed by the rains, bordered by a set of
trees of the acacia tribe, and enlivened by a large herd of fine cattle.
Towards evening, after some trouble, we found a path leading through the
fields into the interior of a little village, called Alairúk, almost
hidden behind the high stalks of millet. Our reception was rather cold,
such as a stranger may expect to find in all the villages situated near
a capital, the inhabitants of which are continually pestered by calls
upon their hospitality. But, carrying my little residence and all the
comforts I wanted with me, I cared little about their treatment; and my
tent was soon pitched in a separate courtyard. But all my enjoyment was
destroyed by a quarrel which arose between my horseman and the master of
the dwelling, who would not allow him to put his horse where he wished:
my horseman had even the insolence to beat the man who had received us
into his house. This is the way in which affairs are managed in these
countries.

[Sidenote: Sunday, September 14th.]

After a refreshing night I started a little later than on the day
previous, winding along a narrow path through the fields, where, besides
sorghum, karás (_Hibiscus esculentus_) is cultivated, which is an
essential thing for preparing the soups of the natives, in districts
where the leaves of the kúka, or monkey-bread-tree, and of the hajilíj,
or _Balanites_, are wanting; for though the town of Kúkawa has received
its name from the circumstance that a young tree of this species was
found on the spot where the sheikh Mohammed el Kánemi, the father of the
ruling sultan, laid the first foundation of the present town,
nevertheless scarcely any kúka is seen for several miles round Kúkawa.

The sky was cloudy, and the country became less interesting than the day
before. We met a small troop of native traders, with dried fish, which
forms a great article of commerce throughout Bórnu; for though the
Kanúri people at present are almost deprived of the dominion, and even
the use, of the fine sheet of water which spreads out in the midst of
their territories, the fish, to which their forefathers have given the
name of food (bú-ni, from bú, to eat), has remained a necessary article
for making their soups. The fields in this part of the country were not
so well looked after, and were in a more neglected state, but there was
a tolerable variety of trees, though rather scanty. Besides prickly
underwood of talhas, there were principally the hajilíj or bíto
(_Balanites Ægyptiaca_), the selím, the kurna, the serrákh, and the
gherret or _Mimosa Nilotica_. Farther on, a short time before we came to
the village Kalíkágorí, I observed a woman collecting the seeds of an
eatable _Poa_, called “kréb” or “kashá,” of which there are several
species, by swinging a sort of basket through the rich meadow ground.
These species of grasses afford a great deal of food to the inhabitants
of Bórnu, Bagírmi, and Wadáÿ, but more especially to the Arab settlers
in these countries, or the Shúwa; in Bórnu, at least, I have never seen
the black natives make use of this kind of food, while in Bagírmi it
seems to constitute a sort of luxury even with the wealthier classes.
The reader will see in the course of my narrative, that in Mas-eña I
lived principally on this kind of _Poa_. It makes a light palatable
dish, but requires a great deal of butter.

After having entered the forest and passed several small waterpools, we
encamped near one of these, when the heat of the sun began to make
itself felt. This district abounded in mimosas of the species called
gherret, úm-el-barka, or “kingar,” which affords a very excellent wood
for saddles and other purposes, while the coals prepared from it are
used for making powder. My old talkative, but not very energetic
companion Bu-Zéd, was busy in making new pegs for my tent, the very hard
black ground of Bórnu destroying pegs very soon; and in the meantime,
assisted by Hosén ben Hár, gave me a first insight into the numerous
tribes living in Kánem and round the bahar-el-ghazál. The fruits of the
gherret, which in their general appearance are very like those of the
tamarind-tree, are a very important native medicine, especially in cases
of dysentery, and it is most probably to them that I owed my recovery
when attacked by that destructive disease during my second stay in
Sókoto in September, 1854. The same tree is essential for preparing the
water-skins, that most necessary article for crossing the desert. The
kajíji was plentiful in this neighbourhood. The root of this little
plant, which is about the size of a nut, the natives use in the most
extensive way for perfuming themselves with.

Late in the afternoon we continued our journey through the forest, which
was often interrupted by open patches. After having pursued the path for
some miles we quitted it, and travelled in a more easterly direction
through a pleasant hilly country, full of verdure, and affording
pasturage to a great many cattle, for the Kánembú, like the Fúlbe, go
with their herds to a great distance during certain seasons of the year;
and all the cattle from the places about Ngórnu northwards is to be
found in these quarters during the cold season. But not being able to
find water here, we were obliged to try the opposite direction, in order
to look for this element so essential for passing a comfortable night.
At length, late in the evening, traversing a very rugged tract of
country, we reached the temporary encampment, or berí, of a party of
Kánembú with their herds, whilst a larger berí was moving eastward. Here
also we were unable to find water, and even milk was to be got but
sparingly.

[Sidenote: Monday, 15th.]

Before we were ready to move, the whole nomadic encampment broke up; the
cattle going in front, and the men, women, and children following with
their little household on asses. The most essential or only apparatus of
these wandering neatherds are the tall sticks for hanging up the milk to
secure it; the “sákti” or skins for milk and water, the calabashes, and
the kórió. The men are always armed with their long wooden shields, the
“ngáwa fógobe,” and their spears, and some are most fantastically
dressed, as I have described on a former occasion. After having loaded
our camels, and proceeded some distance, we came to the temporary abode
of another large herd, whose guardians at first behaved unfriendly,
forbidding our tasting a drop of their delicious stuff; but they soon
exchanged their haughty manners for the utmost cordiality, when Mʿadi,
an elder brother of Fúgo ʿAli, our friend in Maduwári, recognised me. He
even insisted on my encamping on the spot, and staying the day with him,
and it was with difficulty that he allowed me to pursue my march, after
having swallowed as much delicious milk as my stomach would bear.
Further on we joined the main road, and found to the left of it a
handsome pool of muddy water, and filled two skins with it. Certainly
there is nothing worse for a European than this stagnant dirty water;
but during the rainy season, and for a short time afterwards, he is
rarely able to get any other.

Soon after I had another specimen of the treatment to which the natives
are continually exposed from the king’s servants in these countries;
for, meeting a large herd of fine sheep, my horseguard managed to lay
hold of the fattest specimen of the whole herd, notwithstanding the
cries of the shepherd, whom I in vain endeavoured to console by offering
him the price of the animal. During the heat of the day, when we were
encamped under the scanty shade of a few gáwo, my people slaughtered the
sheep; but, as in general, I only tasted a little of the liver. The
shade was so scanty, and the sun so hot, that I felt very weak in the
afternoon when we went on a little.

[Sidenote: Tuesday, Sept. 16th.]

I felt tolerably strong. Soon after we had started, we met a great many
horses which had been sent here for pasturage, and then encountered
another fish kafla. My horseman wanted me all at once to proceed to the
town of Yó, from whence he was to return; and he continued on without
stopping, although I very soon felt tired, and wanted to make a halt.
The country, at the distance of some miles south from the komádugu, is
rather monotonous and barren, and the large tamarind-tree behind the
town of Yó is seen from such a distance that the traveller, having the
same conspicuous object before his eyes for such a length of time,
becomes tired out before he reaches it. The dúm-palm is the principal
tree in this flat region, forming detached clusters, while the ground in
general is extremely barren.

Proceeding with my guardian in advance, we at length reached the town,
in front of which there is a little suburb; and being uncertain whether
we should take quarters inside or outside, we entered it. It consisted
of closely-packed streets, was extremely hot, and exhaled such an
offensive smell of dried fish, that it appeared to me a very
disagreeable and intolerable abode. Nevertheless we rode to the house of
the shitíma, or rather, in the full form, Shitíma Yóma (which is the
title the governor bears), a large building of clay. He was just about
taking another wife; and large quantities of corn, intended as provision
for his new household, were heaped up in front of it.[5] Having applied
to his men for quarters, a small courtyard with a large hut was assigned
to us in another part of the town, and we went there; but it was
impossible for me to make myself in any way comfortable in this narrow
space, where a small gáwo afforded very scanty shade. Being almost
suffocated, and feeling very unwell, I mounted my horse again, and
hastened out of the gate, and was very glad to have regained the fresh
air. We then encamped about 600 yards from the town, near a shady
tamarind-tree; and I stretched my feeble limbs on the ground, and fell
into a sort of lethargy for some hours, enjoying a luxurious
tranquillity; I was so fatigued with my morning’s ride, that I thought
with apprehension on what would become of me after my companions had
joined me, when I should be obliged to bear fatigue of a quite different
description.

[Illustration: Drawn by J. M. Bernatz, from a Sketch by Dr. Barth.

M. & N. Hanhart, lith. et impt.

YÓ AND THE KOMÁDUGU.

Sepr. 17th. 1851.]

As soon as I felt strong enough to rise from my couch, I walked a few
paces in order to get a sight of the river or “komádugu.” It was at
present a fine sheet of water, the bed being entirely full,
“tsimbúllena,” and the stream running towards the Tsád with a strong
current; indeed, I then scarcely suspected that on another occasion I
should encamp for several days in the dry bed of this river, which,
notwithstanding the clear and undoubted statements of the members of the
former expedition with regard to its real character, had been made by
Capt. W. Allen to carry the superfluous waters of the Tsád into the
Kwára. The shores of the komádugu near this place are quite picturesque,
being bordered by splendid tamarind-trees, and “kínzim,” or dúm-palms,
besides fine specimens of the acacia tribe on the northern shore. At the
foot of the tamarind-trees a very good kind of cotton is grown, while
lower down, just at this season of the year, wheat is produced by
irrigating regularly laid-out grounds by way of the shadúf or “lámbuna.”
Cotton and small quantities of wheat are the only produce of this
region, besides fish and the fruit of the _Cucifera_ or dúm-palm, which
forms an essential condiment for the “kunú,” a kind of soup made of
Negro millet; for the place is entirely destitute of any other
_Cerealia_, and millet and sorghum are grown only to a small extent.
Cattle also are very scarce in Yó; and very little milk is to be
procured. Fish is the principal food of the inhabitants, of which there
are several very palatable species in the river, especially one of
considerable size, from eighteen to twenty inches long, with a very
small mouth, resembling the mullet.

I saw also a specimen of the electric fish, about ten inches long, and
very fat, which was able to numb the arm of a man for several minutes.
It was of an ashy colour on the back, while the belly was quite white;
the tail and the hind fins were red. Mr. Overweg made a slight sketch of
one.

During the night a heavy gale arose, and we had to fasten the ropes
attached to the top of the pole; but the storm passed by, and there was
not a drop of rain; indeed the rainy season, with regard to Bórnu, had
fairly gone by.

[Sidenote: Wednesday, Sept. 17th.]

Enjoyed in the morning the scenery and the fresh air of the river. Men
were coming to bathe, women fetching water, and passengers and small
parties were crossing the river, swimming across with their clothes upon
their heads, or sitting on a yoke of calabashes with the water up to
their middle. A kafla or “karábka” of Tébu people from Kánem had arrived
the day before, and were encamped on the other side of the river, being
eager to cross; but they were not allowed to do so till they had
obtained permission; for, during several months, this river or valley
forms annually a sort of quarantine line, whilst, during the other
portion of the year, small caravans, at least, go to and fro at their
pleasure.

The only boat upon the water was a mákara, formed by several yokes of
calabashes, and of that frail character described by me in another part
of this work, in which we ourselves were to cross the river.
Unfortunately it was not possible to enjoy quietly and decently the
beautiful shade of the splendid tamarind-trees, on account of the number
of waterfowl and pelicans which reside in their branches.

On removing some of my luggage, I found that the white ants were busy
destroying, as fast as possible, my leather bags and mats; and we were
accordingly obliged to remove every thing, and to place layers of
branches underneath. There are great numbers of ants hereabouts; but
only moderately sized ant-hills are seen; nothing like the grand
structures which I afterwards saw in Bagírmi.

[Sidenote: Thursday, Sept. 18th.]

About two hours after midnight Mr. Overweg arrived, accompanied by one
of the most conspicuous of the Welád Slimán, of the name of Khálef-
Allah, announcing the approach of our little troop; which did not,
however, make its appearance until ten o’clock in the morning, when the
most courageous and best mounted of them galloped up to my tent in
pairs, brandishing their guns. There were twenty-five horsemen, about a
dozen men mounted upon camels, and seven or eight on foot, besides
children. They dismounted a little to the east of our tents, and formed
quite an animated encampment; though of course quarrels were sure to
break out soon.

Feeling a little stronger, I mounted with my fellow-traveller in the
afternoon, in order to make a small excursion along the southern shore
of the river, in a westerly direction. The river, in general, runs from
west to east; but here, above the town, it makes considerable windings,
and the shore is not so high as at the ford. The vegetation was
beautiful; large tamarind trees forming a dense shade above, whilst the
ground was covered with a great variety of plants and herbs just in
flower. On the low promontories of the shore were several small fishing
villages, consisting of rather low and light huts made of mats, and
surrounded by poles for drying the fish, a great many of which,
principally of the mullet kind, were just suspended for that purpose.
Having enjoyed the aspect of the quiet river-scenery for some time, we
returned round the south side of the town. The ground here is hilly; but
I think the hills, though at present covered with verdure, are nothing
more than mounds of rubbish formed in the course of time round the town,
which appears to have been formerly of greater extent.

[Sidenote: Friday, Sept. 19th.]

Overweg and I, accompanied by Khálef-Allah and a guide, made an
excursion down the river, in order, if possible, to reach its mouth; but
the experiment proved that there is no path on the southern shore, the
track following the northern bank: for on that side, not far from the
mouth, lies a considerable Kánembú place called Bóso, though, in the
present weak state of the Bórnu kingdom, much exposed to the incursions
of the Tawárek. Having penetrated as far as a village, or rather a
walled town, named Fátse, the walls of which are in a decayed state, and
the population reduced to a dozen families, we were obliged to give up
our intended survey of the river. As for myself, I was scarcely able to
make any long excursion; for, on attempting to mount my horse again, I
fainted, and fell senseless to the ground, to the great consternation of
my companions, who felt convinced my end was approaching. We therefore
returned to our encampment. In the evening I had a severe attack of
fever.[6]

[Sidenote: Saturday, Sept. 20th.]

It had been determined the day before that we should cross the river to-
day, and the governor’s permission had been obtained; but as the
vizier’s messenger had not yet arrived, we decided upon waiting another
day. Feeling a little better, I made a rough sketch of the town, with
the dúm-palms around it, and prepared myself, as well as I was able, for
the fatiguing march before me. We had a good specimen to-day of the set
of robbers and freebooters we had associated with in order to carry out
the objects of the mission. The small Tébu caravan, which I mentioned
above as having arrived from Kánem, and which had brought the news that
the people of Wadáy had made an alliance with all the tribes hostile to
the Welád Slimán, in order to destroy the latter, had not been allowed
to cross the river until to-day. They were harmless people, carrying
very little luggage (chiefly dates) upon a small number of oxen; but as
soon as they had crossed, our companions held a council, and, the
opinion of the most violent having gained the upper hand, they fell upon
the poor Tébu, or Kréda, as they call them, and took away all their
dates by force. The skins were then divided; and the greater part of
them had already been consumed or carried away, when an old Arab
arrived, and, upbraiding his companions with their mean conduct,
persuaded them to collect what remained, or that could be found, and
restore it to the owners. In the evening the vizier’s messenger arrived,
and the crossing of the river was definitively fixed for the next day.

[Sidenote: Monday, Sept. 22nd.]

Rose early, in order to get over in time, there being no other means of
crossing than two mákara, each consisting of three yokes of calabashes.
The camels, as is always the case, being the most difficult to manage,
had to cross first; and after much trouble and many narrow escapes
(owing principally to the unevenness of the bottom of the valley, the
water-channel having formed a deep hollow—at present from ten to eleven
feet deep—near the southern shore, while in the middle the bottom rises
considerably, leaving a depth of only six or seven feet) they all got
safely over, and were left to indulge in the foliage of the beautiful
mimosas which embellish the northern border of the river. The horses
followed next, and lastly we ourselves with the luggage.

About nine o’clock in the morning I found myself upon the river on my
three-yoked “mákara,” gliding through the stream in a rather irregular
style of motion, according as the frail ferry-boat was drawn or pushed
by the two black swimmers yoked to it. It was a beautiful day, and the
scenery highly interesting; but, having been exposed to the sun all the
morning, I was glad to find a little shade. When all the party had
successively landed, and the heat of the day had abated, we loaded our
camels and commenced our march. We were now left entirely to the
security and protection which our own arms might afford us; for all the
country to the north of the komádugu has become the domain of
freebooters, and though nominally sheikh ʿOmár’s dominion stretches as
far as Berí, and even beyond that place, nevertheless his name is not
respected here, except where supported by arms.

The country through which we were passing bore the same character as
that for some miles round the capital; a very stiff, black soil, clothed
with short grass and a few trees far between. Having encountered a flock
of sheep, our friends gave chase; and after they had laid hold of three
fat rams, we decided to encamp.

[Sidenote: Tuesday, Sept. 23rd.]

For the first four hours of our march the character of the surrounding
country remained nearly the same; it then opened, and became better
cultivated; and soon after we saw the clay walls of Báruwa, though
scarcely to be distinguished, owing to the high mounds of rubbish
imbedding them on all sides. Near the south-west gate of the town the
road leads over the high mound (which destroys entirely the protection
the wall might otherwise afford to the inhabitants), and lays its whole
interior open to the eyes of the traveller. It consists of closely
packed huts, generally without a courtyard, but shaded here and there by
a mimosa or kúrna, and affords a handsome specimen of a Central African
dwelling-place. The inhabitants, whose want of energy is clearly seen
from the nature of the mounds, do not rely upon the strength of their
walls; and, to the disgrace of the sheikh of Bórnu, who receives tribute
from them, and places a governor over them, they likewise pay tribute to
the Tawárek. They belong in general to the Kánembú tribe; but many
Yédiná, or Búdduma, also are settled in the town. Their principal food
and only article of commerce is fish, which they catch in great
quantities in the lake, whose nearest creeks are, according to the
season, from two to three miles distant, and from which they are not
excluded, like the inhabitants of Ngórnu and other places, on account of
their friendly relations with the warlike pirates of the lake. As for
corn, they have a very scanty supply, and seem not to employ the
necessary labour to produce it, perhaps on account of the insecure state
of the country, which does not guarantee them the harvest they have
sown. Cotton they have none, and are obliged to barter their fish for
cotton strips or articles of dress. Indeed, gábagá or cotton strips, and
kúlgu, or white cotton shirts, are the best articles which a traveller,
who wants to procure fish for his desert journey by way of Bílma (where
dry fish is the only article in request), can take with him.

At the well on the north side of the town, which does not furnish very
good water, the horsemen belonging to our troop awaited the camels. Only
a few scattered hajilíj (_Balanites Ægyptiaca_) and stunted talha-trees
spread a scanty shade over the stubble-fields, which were far from
exhibiting a specimen of diligent cultivation; and I was very glad when,
having taken in a small supply of water, we were again in motion. We
soon left the scanty vestiges of cultivation behind us, and some bushes
of the siwák (_Capparis sodata_) began to enliven the country. At eleven
o’clock, having mounted a low range of sand-hills, we obtained a first
view of the Tsád, or rather of its inundations. The whole country now
began to be clothed with siwák. Having kept for about half an hour along
the elevated sandy level, we descended, and followed the lower road,
almost hidden by the thickest vegetation. This lower road, as well as
our whole track to Ngégimi, became entirely inundated at a later period
(in 1854), and will perhaps never more be trodden: in consequence, when
I came this way in 1855 we were obliged to make a circuit, keeping along
the sandy level nearer to the site of the ancient town of Wúdi.

Shortly afterwards we encamped, where the underwood had left a small
open space, at the eastern foot of a low hill. The prickly jungle was
here so dense that I searched a long time in vain for a bare spot to lie
down upon, when, to my great satisfaction, I found Bú-Zéd clearing me a
place with his axe. The swampy shore of the lake was only about four
hundred yards from our resting-place; but the spot was not well chosen
for an encampment, and it was found necessary to place several watches
during the night, notwithstanding which, a skin of mine, full of water,
disappeared from the stick upon which it was suspended, and the Arabs
tried to persuade me that a hungry hyæna had carried it off; but it was
most probable that one of themselves had been in want of this necessary
article of desert travelling.

[Sidenote: Wednesday, September 24th.]

We continued our march through the luxuriant prickly underwood, full of
the dung and footsteps of the elephant. Here and there the _capparis_
had been cut away, and large fireplaces were to be seen, where the roots
had been burnt to ashes. The tripods, of which several were lying about,
are used for filtering the water through these ashes, which takes from
them the salt particles which they contain. This water is afterwards
boiled, and thus the salt obtained. This salt is then taken to Kúkawa by
the Kánembú, whilst those who prepare it are Búdduma.

On our return from Kánem we met large numbers of this piratical set of
islanders; and on my home journey in 1855, I saw them in the full
activity of their labours. This salt, weak and insipid as it is, is at
least of a better quality than that which the people in Kótoko prepare
from neat-dung. In Míltu, on the Upper Shári, or Bá-busó, salt of a
tolerable quality is obtained from a peculiar species of grass growing
in the river. The Músgu, as we shall see, prepare this necessary article
(or at least something like it) from the ashes of the stalks of millet
and Indian corn.

After we had emerged from the underwood into the open country, we passed
a considerable salt-manufactory, consisting of at least twenty earthen
pots. Large triangular lumps of salt were lying about, which are shaped
in moulds made of clay. Several people were busy carrying mud from an
inlet of the lake which was close at hand, in order to make new moulds.
Keeping close along the border of the latter, and enjoying the fresh
breeze which had before been kept from us by the forest, we halted early
in the afternoon. A small Tébu caravan was also encamped here, no doubt
with the intention of passing the night; but they did not like the
neighbourhood of our friends, and, loading immediately, started off.

Our path now lay through fertile pasture-grounds, with a line of
underwood to our left. It was a fine cool morning. We passed a large
pool of fresh water, frequented by great numbers of waterfowl of various
species. Overweg, on his fine and tall, but rather heavy and unwieldy
charger, made an unsuccessful attempt to overtake a pair of kelára
(_Antilope Arabica?_ _Aigocerus ellipsiprymnus?_), who scampered
playfully away through the fine grassy plain. At nine o’clock we reached
the far-famed place Ngégimi, and were greatly disappointed at finding an
open, poor-looking village, consisting of detached conical huts, without
the least comfort, which, even in these light structures, may well be
attained to a certain degree. The hungry inhabitants would not receive
anything in exchange for a few fowls which we wanted to buy, except
grain, of which we ourselves, in these desolate regions, stood too much
in need to have given it away without an adequate substitute.

The situation of this place is very unfavourable, since the ruler of
Bórnu has restricted his real dominion within the border of the
komádugu, and the poor inhabitants are constantly in fear of being
molested by a ghazzia of the Tawárek. Indeed, two years later, this
village was plundered by these freebooting hordes; and some months
afterwards, in the year 1854, the remainder of the population, who had
not been carried away into captivity, were obliged, by the high floods
of the lagoon, to leave their old dwelling-place altogether, and build a
new village on the slope of the sand-hills, where I found it at the end
of May, 1855. As for Wúdi (a large place, once an occasional residence
of the Bórnu kings) and Lári, both mentioned by Denham and Clapperton,
they have long been deserted, Wúdi having been taken and ransacked by
the Tawárek in the year 1838, and Lári a little later. At present only a
few palm-trees (said to yield a kind of date far superior to the little
black Kánem dates) in the sand-hills about eight miles S.W. from
Ngégimi, indicate the site of the once celebrated Wúdi. Ngégimi was then
nominally under the control of Kashélla Hasen or Hassan.

Plunged into sad reflections on the fate of this once splendid empire of
Kánem, and the continued progress of the Berber race into the heart of
Sudán, I hung listlessly upon my horse, when, on leaving this
uncomfortable dwelling-place, we took our course over the unbroken
plain, once no doubt the bottom of the lake, and soon to become once
more a part of it. Sometimes it was dry and barren, at others clothed
with rich verdure, while on our left it was bordered by a range of sand-
hills, the natural limit of the lagoon. At a little before noon we came
to a deep inlet of the lake, spreading the freshest verdure all around
in this now desolate country. Having watered our horses, and taken in a
sufficient supply of this element for the night, we crossed the plain,
here not more than a thousand yards wide, and ascended a broad
promontory of the range of sand-hills, where we encamped.

It was a delightful spot, where the heart might have expanded in the
enjoyment of freedom. In front of us to the south-east, the swampy lands
of the lagoon, one immense rice-field (as it ought to be at least),
spread out to the borders of the horizon; but no “white water,” or open
sea, was to be seen, not even as much as connected channels, nothing but
one immense swampy flat, stretching out as far as the eye could reach.
To the south the green pasturages, along which we had come, extended far
beyond Ngégimi. It was a picture of one of the most fertile spots of the
earth doomed to desolation. But there was a feeble spark of hope in me
that it would not always be so; and I flattered myself that my labours
in these new regions might contribute to sow here the first germs of a
new life, a new activity.

My companions and friends did not seem to share in my feelings: for,
wholly intent upon mischief, they had been roving about, and having
fallen in with some Kánembú cattle-breeders, they had plundered them not
only of their milk, but also of the vessels which contained it; and in
the afternoon some respectable old men applied to Mr. Overweg and
myself, the only just people they were sure to find amongst this wild
band of lawless robbers, for redress, and we were happy, not only to
restore to them their vessels, but also to make them a few small
presents.

[Sidenote: Thursday, Sept. 25th.]

Descending from our lofty encampment, we continued our march in the
narrow grassy plain, between the sand-hills to the north, and another
blue inlet of the lake to the south, where the rich pasture-grounds
extended further into the lake.

It was about seven o’clock in the morning when we had the good fortune
to enjoy one of the most interesting scenes which these regions can
possibly afford. Far to our right was a whole herd of elephants,
arranged in regular array, like an army of rational beings, slowly
proceeding to the water. In front appeared the males, as was evident
from their size, in regular order; at a little distance followed the
young ones; in a third line were the females; and the whole were brought
up by five males of immense size. The latter (though we were at some
distance, and proceeding quietly along) took notice of us, and some were
seen throwing dust into the air; but we did not disturb them. There were
altogether ninety-six.

[Illustration: Drawn by J. M. Bernatz, from a Sketch by Dr. Barth.

M. & N. Hanhart, lith. et impt.

HERD OF ELEPHANTS NEAR THE TSÁD.

Sepr. 25th. 1851.]

The fine fresh pasture-grounds some time afterwards gave way to a drier
plain, covered with a species of heath, and the country presented rather
a melancholy appearance. A little before ten o’clock we came to a large
herd of cattle or “berí,” collected round a small hamlet or dawar,
consisting of light, high-topped huts of corn-stalks, fastened together
by three rings of straw, and lightly plastered with a little cow-dung.
But although we obtained some milk, some of our friends, not content
with filling their stomachs, laid hold of a fine pony and carried it
off, under the pretext that it belonged to the Búdduma, who, as they
asserted, were the enemies of the sheikh; and when we had started again,
and encountered a small caravan of oxen laden with dates, not only were
all the skins containing the dates taken, but another ruffian laid hold
of one of the beasts of burden and dragged it away with him,
notwithstanding the lamentations of its owner. And yet the people who
were thus treated were subjects of the king of Bórnu, and the Welád
Slimán were his professed friends and hirelings.

Fine fresh pasture-grounds, and melancholy tracts clothed with nothing
but heath, succeeded each other, whilst not a single tree broke the
monotony of the level country. At length we encamped near a deserted
village of cattle-breeders, consisting of about twenty small conical
huts, built in the form of a large circle. We had scarcely begun to make
ourselves comfortable, when a noisy quarrel arose about the dates so
unjustly taken from their owners, and some of the Arabs concerned in the
dispute came to my tent in order to have their claims settled, when the
whole particulars of the shameless robberies committed in the course of
the day, came under my notice, and especially that of the horse. But
this was a delicate subject, and one that excited the angry passions of
those concerned—so much so that one of them, named Ibrahím, came running
with his loaded gun straight into my tent, threatening to blow out the
brains of any body who spoke of injustice or robbery. As for Bakhér, and
ʿAbd e’ Rahmán, who were the actual possessors of the horse, they were
about to leave by themselves.

The violent proceedings of our protectors had spread such terror
throughout these almost desolate regions, that in the evening, solely
from fear, two oxen and a quantity of milk were sent from a neighbouring
berí as presents. The night was fresh, but not cold, and a very heavy
dew fell.

[Sidenote: Friday, Sept. 26th.]

Reached about noon the first large cluster of huts of the village of
Berí, after having followed a very numerous and fine herd of cattle (one
of the finest I saw in the interior of the continent) for awhile, with
the urgent desire of obtaining a drink of fresh milk, and then crossed a
tolerably deep inlet of the lagoon. Here we encamped on a terribly hot
sandy spot, without any shade, some two hundred yards from the village,
which stretches in a long line from north to south.

Berí is a place of importance, at least since the date of the greatest
splendour of the Bórnu kingdom, and is frequently mentioned in the
history of the great king Edrís Alawóma, written during his lifetime by
his chief imám Ahmed. Its situation is such as to render it of great
importance as a station; for here the army proceeding from Bórnu to the
interior of Kánem leaves the shore of the lagoon, and has generally to
make a long stay, in order to regain strength for the ensuing march, and
to supply itself with fresh provisions. Till a few years previously, a
Bórnu governor of the name of Shitíma Aba had been residing here; but he
had given up the place, and preferred living in the capital.

But here I must add, that there are two places called Berí, distant from
each other a few miles, the one where we were encamped being called
Berí-kurá, the Great Berí, the other with the surname “futé” (the
western), from its more westerly situation; but it is at present greatly
reduced, and we had left it unobserved on one side. The greater part of
the inhabitants of Berí are Kánembú, and belong to the clan of the
Sugúrti, a large division of that tribe, which, however, in the last
struggle of the old dynasty, suffered greatly. Besides these, a good
many Búdduma are settled here.

I was very glad when, after another severe quarrel, the young horse was
at length given up by the robbers, as likewise the beast of burden. One
of the oxen sent yesterday as a present was slaughtered to-day, and
divided amongst the whole band. As for myself, I made merry on a little
fresh milk; for though the people are, and appear to have been from
their birth (for “berí” means cattle-herd), in possession of numerous
herds of cattle, nevertheless, in the village, as is often the case,
there is very little milk—only just as much as is required for the use
of the owners themselves—the cattle being at a great distance. Very
little can be obtained here, and corn is scarcely cultivated, owing to
the insecure and desperate state of the country. The inhabitants are in
continual intercourse with the Yédiná, that section of the Kótoko who
inhabit the islands in the lake, and who are generally called Búdduma.
But of course the distance of their village from the lagoon varies
considerably; and the nearest branch or inlet at present was that which
we had crossed in the morning, and from which the inhabitants supplied
themselves with water. The want of firewood is greatly felt; scarcely a
single tree is to be met with in the neighbourhood.[7]

[Sidenote: Saturday, Sept. 27th.]

We now left the shores of the lake, ascending a little, but had a
difficult march this morning in order to avoid the many small boggy
inlets and natron-lagoons which are formed by the lake, and wind along
through the sand-hills. With regard to these natron-lakes, which, after
the report of Major Denham, have led to many erroneous conjectures
respecting lake Tsád, I have to observe that the natron or soda is not
originally contained in the water, but in the ground, and that all the
water of lake Tsád is fresh; but when a small quantity of water, after
the lake has retired from the highest point of its inundation, remains
in a basin the soil of which is filled with soda, the water of course
becomes impregnated with this quality. The consequence is, that there
are many basins round lake Tsád which, according to the season, are
either fresh or brackish; for the soda contained in the ground has very
little effect so long as the basin is deep, and does not begin to make
itself felt till the water becomes shallow. Of this same character seems
to be Lake Bóro in Kánem, which I shall mention hereafter. I here remind
the reader of what I have stated above with regard to the importance of
the natron-trade between Bórnu and Núpe or Nýffi.

Having no guide—for who would willingly trust himself in the hands of
such lawless robbers as our companions?—we found it rather difficult
work to get out of this labyrinth of lagoons; and after a few miles we
came to a narrow but very boggy inlet, which it was thought necessary to
cross.

Riding a lively horse, an excellent “sayár,” I was rather in advance,
and had only three horsemen in front of me; on coming to the bog, the
nature of which it was easy to perceive, we rode one after the
other,—Khálef-Allah being in front of me. The first horseman went in,
made a few steps, and then came down; but he got his horse upon his legs
again, went on, and again sunk into the bog, but being near the firm
ground, got over tolerably well. As soon as those who were before me saw
this they stopped their horses short, and wanted to return, pressing my
horse upon his side, who, being annoyed by the morass, made a
vacillating movement forward, and fell upon his knees; upon being raised
he made some wild exertions to get through, but after two or three
ineffectual attempts, he again fell on his side, and I under him. The
morass here was about four feet deep; and I received several smart blows
from the forelegs of my horse, upon the head and shoulders, before I was
fortunate enough to extricate myself from this interesting situation.
Being clad in a white bernús over a Nýffi tobe, with a pair of pistols
in my belt, my appearance may be easily conceived when, after a great
deal of labour, I succeeded in reaching firm ground. I had still the
difficult task of extricating my horse, which, after wild and desperate
exertions, lay motionless in the bog. I had on this occasion a good
specimen of the assistance we were likely to receive from our companions
in cases of difficulty; for they were looking silently on without
affording me any aid. Mr. Overweg was some distance behind, and, when he
came up, was enabled to supply me with dry clothing.

The spot would have been quite interesting but for this accident, as
there was here, favoured by the rich soil and this very morass, a
beautiful plantation of red ngáberi, or sorghum, of that peculiar kind
called mósogá, or rather, másakwá, in the highest state of exuberance,
and just beginning to ripen; it was the finest specimen I saw on my
whole journey. Fortunately the sun was moderately warm, as I began to
feel very chilly after my involuntary bath. We continued our march at
first along another hollow containing fresh water, and then, ascending a
little, came upon a sandy level well clothed with herbage and trees of
the mimosa kind. Here we seemed to be entirely out of reach of the lake;
and great was our astonishment when a little after nine o’clock we came
close upon another fine sheet of fresh, blue water. It was a great
satisfaction to me, in the state I was in, that we encamped at so early
an hour on its northern border, where some serrák afforded a tolerable
shade. I was busy drying my clothes, arms, saddlecloths, and journals,
when there appeared certain indications of an approaching storm; and in
order to avoid being wetted twice in the same day, I got my tent
pitched. After a furious gale the rain poured down, and about a dozen of
my companions took refuge in my small, frail dwelling; but all were not
so fortunate as to escape a wetting, for the rain, being very heavy,
came in at the door. The storm lasted more than an hour; and everything,
including horses and camels, being thoroughly soaked, it was decided to
remain here for the night.

[Sidenote: Sunday, Sept. 28th.]

For some reason or another, but chiefly in order to slaughter the other
ox, divide it, and cut it up into “gedíd,” we remained here the whole
morning; and the sun had long passed into zawál (past noon) when we
started through the sandy and slightly undulating country full of
herbage, principally of the plant called “nesí,” besides bu-rékkeba or
_Avena Forskalii_, the bur-feathered prickle _Pennisetum distichum_, and
various kinds of mimosa, chiefly consisting of the talha and úm el barka
(_Mimosa Nilotica_). Our companions found several ostrich-eggs, and met
a large troop of gazelles. The country then became more thickly wooded,
and, where we encamped for the night, presented a very interesting
character; but the danger from wild beasts was considerable, and the
roar of a lion was heard throughout the greater part of the night.

[Sidenote: Monday, Sept. 29th.]

Started early: the character of the country continued the same as
yesterday, and presented beautiful specimens of the mimosa, here
breaking down from age, at another place interwoven with creepers, one
species of which produces the red juicy fruit called “fito” by the
Kanúri, and has been mentioned by me before. It was nearly eight o’clock
when, proceeding in groups, two of our horsemen, on passing near a very
large and thick gherret, suddenly halted, and with loud cries hastened
back to us. We approached the spot, and saw a very large snake hanging
in a threatening attitude from the branches of the tree: on seeing us it
tried to hide itself; but after firing several balls, it fell down, and
we cut off its head. It measured 18 feet 7 inches in length, and at the
thickest part 5 inches in diameter, and was of a beautifully variegated
colour. Two natives, who had attached themselves to our troop the day
before, cut it open and took out the fat, which they said was excellent.

The ride was truly interesting; but by degrees it became too much for
me, and after seven hours’ march I was so utterly exhausted as to be
obliged to halt, and lie down. Most of the Arabs remained with us;
others, with ʿAli ben ʿAisa, went on to the well. When we pursued our
march in the afternoon, the country for the first three hours was more
level, but then became very hilly; and at five o’clock we ascended a
considerable elevation to our left, the highest point in the whole
country, but perhaps not more than 600 or 700 feet above the level of
the Tsád. From here we crossed two very pretty valleys, or dells,
especially the second one, where there were very curious hilly
projections of a calcareous stone. But these valleys were very poor
indeed, in comparison with the valley or hénderi Fóyo, situated at some
distance from the well where we encamped for the night; for its bottom
presented one uninterrupted mass of vegetation, impenetrable in many
spots. Here the botanist might be sure to find some new species,
although the principal trees were the kúrna (_Cornus_), serrákh, úm el
barka, or _Mimosa Nilotica_, hajilíj, or _Balanites_, and the talha, _M.
ferruginea_, but all interwoven with creepers, and offering the most
delightful shade.

These valleys, which afford the only watering-places, must of course be
very dangerous during the night, on account of the wild beasts,
principally lions, of which there are great numbers hereabouts. Here our
companions received a messenger from Ghét, the young chief of the Welád
Slimán.

[Sidenote: Tuesday, Sept. 30th.]

We remained in the forenoon and during the heat of the day in our
encampment. While stretched out in the shade of a fine mimosa, I
obtained some valuable information regarding the various tribes dwelling
in Kánem, and the districts of their settlements. But it will be better,
instead of inserting it here, to collect all the information I received
at different times into one general account, which shall be given in the
Appendix.

In the afternoon the camels and the heavier portion of the troop were
allowed to start in advance, and the horsemen followed about half an
hour afterwards, after having watered the horses; but instead of taking
care to follow the footsteps of the camels in a wild country where there
was no regular path, they rode on negligently, and soon became aware
that they had missed the track. There now began a very disorderly riding
in all directions. This fatigued me greatly, for nothing is so vexing to
a weak man as to ramble about without knowing when he is likely to reach
the place of repose so much looked for. After sending scout after scout,
we at length found the track, and reached our men in the dark.

[Sidenote: Wednesday, October 1st.]

Having set out early, after nearly two hours’ ride we were met by a
single horseman coming towards us from the encampment of the Welád
Slimán, and bidding us welcome to their wild country. They kept starting
up from the thicket on our right and left, firing their muskets and
saluting us with their usual war-cry “yá riyáb, yá riyáb.” Having thus
advanced for about half an hour, we came to a halt, in order to receive
in a more solemn form the warlike compliments of a larger troop of
horsemen, led on by a person of some importance.

The dust raised by the horsemen having subsided a little, and the
country being clearer of wood, we now saw before us the whole cavalry of
the Welád Slimán drawn up in a line in their best attire, their chief
Ghét the son of Séf el Nasr ben Ghét, and his uncle ʿOmár the son of
Ghét and brother of ʿAbd el Jelíl, in the midst of them. This stately
reception, not having been anticipated by Overweg and myself, made a
great impression upon us; but we were not left to gaze long, but were
desired by our Arab companions to ride in advance of the line in
compliment to the chiefs. We accordingly put our steeds into a gallop,
and riding straight up to our new friends, saluted them with our
pistols. Having answered our compliments, and bidding us welcome to
their wild abode, the young Ghét galloping along at the head of his
squadrons, his sword drawn, and with the continuous cry “yá riyáb, yá
riyáb,” they led us to the encampment, and we had a place shown to us
where we might pitch our tents.


[Footnote 5: The marriage (nigá) ceremonies in this country fill a whole
week. The first day is dedicated to the feasting on the favourite
“nákia,” the paste mentioned before; the second to the “tíggra,” a dried
paste made of millet, with an immense quantity of pepper; the third to
the “ngáji,” the common dish made of sorghum, with a little fish sauce,
if possible; the fourth day is called “líktere,” I think from the taking
away the emblems of the virginal state of the bride, “larússa;” the
fifth, the bride is placed on a mat or búshi, from which she rises seven
times, and kneels down as often; this is called “búshiro,” or “búchiro
genátsin;” the next day, which must be a Friday, her female friends wash
her head while singing, and in the evening she is placed upon a horse
and brought to the house of the bridegroom, where the final act of the
nigá is accomplished. The Kanúri are very peculiar in the distinction of
a marriage with a virgin, “féro,” or “féro kuyánga,” or a widow, or
“kámo záwar.”]

[Footnote 6: Mr. Overweg, at a later period, visited the town of Bóso,
but without accurately surveying the line of the river, and without
stating exactly the character of the point where it joins the lagoon,
except that the river, beyond Fátse, takes a much more northerly
direction.]

[Footnote 7: I will here add the stations of another route between
Ngégimí and Berí. 1st day: sleep in Ngubó, an open village inhabited by
Kúri; arrive before heat of day. 2nd. Tabúnte, the first place in Kánem.
3d. Berí. Some people going from Ngégimí to Berí sleep the first night
in Turra, second night in Baláya.]




                               CHAP. XL.

                     THE HORDE OF THE WELÁD SLIMÁN.


We had now joined our fate with that of this band of robbers, who, in
consequence of their restless habits, having been driven from their
original dwelling-places in the Syrtis[8], after a great variety of
events, have at length established themselves in this border region
between the desert and the fertile regions of Negroland, under the
guidance of Mohammed the son of ʿAbd el Jelíl, on the ruins of the old
kingdom of Kánem, very much in the same way as in the west the Welád
Ammer (Ludamar) have established themselves on the ruins of the empire
of Mélle. At that time they mustered a considerable force, and being
joined by a great many adventurers from all the Arab tribes from the Ríf
as far as Fezzán, were able to bring into the field from 900 to 1000
horsemen. They then turned their attention towards our friends the Kél-
owí, and began to seize upon their camels, which came to Bílma for the
salt-trade; these, as the reader has seen from my previous account, are
always proceeding in large caravans; but it is almost impossible to give
implicit credit to the statement which was made to us by several
individuals, that the Welád Slimán had taken from the Tawárek more than
30,000 camels in the course of two or three years.

If they had continued in this way for a short time, they would have
brought about an immense revolution in the whole of Central Africa; for
the Kél-owí would of course not have been able to provide Háusa with
salt, after having lost their camels, and thus, having no salt for
bartering, would have remained without the most necessary articles of
subsistence: they would accordingly have been obliged either to starve
or to emigrate into, and take possession by force of, the more fertile
districts of Sudán. But before they were driven to this extreme, they
made one energetic effort against their enemies, and succeeded; for,
having summoned the contingents of all the different tribes inhabiting
Aïr or Ásben, they collected a host of at least 7,000 men, chiefly
mounted on camels, but comprising also a considerable number of
horsemen, and proceeded to attack the lion in his den, in the beginning
of the year 1850.

I am almost inclined to suspect that the people of Bórnu had a hand in
this affair; at least, the existence of such a warlike and restless
horde of men, and mustering considerable forces, as the Welád Slimán
were then, under the guidance of Mohammed, and in such a neighbourhood,
could not be wholly indifferent to any ruler of Bórnu possessed of
prudence and foresight. Of course, since its power had decreased to such
a degree that it could not of itself make the necessary resistance
against the daily encroachments of the Tawárek, it was of great service
to Bórnu to have such a strong and energetic auxiliary to keep them
down. But, be this as it may, the Arabs left their very strong
entrenchments at Késkawa (which, at the first news of the intended
expedition, they had formed on the border of the Tsád, and which the
Tawárek themselves confessed to me they would never have been able to
conquer), and separated, not thinking that their enemies were able to
carry out their intention; for all those tribes which had come to join
them, as the Gedádefa, the Ferján, the Urfílla, the Ftáim, Swási,
Temáma, and Dhóhob, after having enriched themselves with the spoils of
the Tawárek, were anxious to carry away their booty in safety, and
proceeded on their home-journey by way of Kúffara. They were just
encamped in the Wadi ʿAlála, where my readers will soon have to
accompany me, when a scout brought the news that a very large host of
the Tawárek was close at hand; but they say that his report did not find
credit, and that on this account the Arabs had no time to make any
preparations, but were all on a sudden surrounded on all sides by the
numerous host of their enemy. It is moreover to be understood that the
greater part of this band were merely armed with guns, which are very
useful in a skirmish of horsemen, who can retreat after having fired
them off, but of very little use in close combat; few of them were armed
with pistols, and still fewer with swords. But the Kél-owí, in addition
to their numbers, had also the advantage of superior arms, having spear,
sword, and dagger, even if we do not take into account their muskets,
which they rarely know how to use. The consequence was, that the Arabs,
after having killed a small number of their enemies in the foremost
lines, were soon overpowered and massacred, not half of them succeeding
in making their escape. Their chief Mohammed himself made his way
through the host very severely wounded, and was slain, according to
report, shortly after by a Tébu woman who recognized him. Sʿaid, the
most valiant of all the Welád Slimán, but also the most violent, was
killed on the spot, together with the bravest champions of the little
horde; and a very considerable booty was made by the Tawárek, not only
in camels and slaves, but also in silver, the chiefs having amassed a
great deal of property. Thus the flower of this troop was destroyed, and
only the least brave and youngest were left.

The vizier of Bórnu then took the young man, to whom very little power
and property were left, under his special protection, entering with him
and the remaining part of the tribe into a contract, to the effect that
he would furnish them with horses and muskets, as far as they should
stand in need of them, on condition of their delivering to him a certain
share of their booty in every expedition. Of course, such a troop of
swift horsemen armed with muskets, if kept in strict subjection and
subordination, might have proved exceedingly useful on the northern
borders of Bórnu, on the one side as a check upon the Tawárek, on the
other upon Wadáy. But the great difficulty, which the vizier appears not
to have overcome, was to subject the predatory excursions of such a set
of people to some sort of political rule.

With this view, he sent the young chief, who was scarcely more than
twenty years of age, to Kánem with all that were left of the Welád
Slimán, keeping back in Kúkawa, as hostages for his proceedings, his
mother and the wives and little children of some of the principal men.
But from the beginning there was a strong party against the young chief,
who had not yet achieved any exploit, and whose sole merit consisted in
his being the nearest relation of ʿAbd el Jelíl. ʿOmár, his uncle, who
from his youth had given himself up to a life of devotion, and was
called a Merábet, had a considerable party; and there were, besides,
several men who thought themselves of as much importance as their chief.
In the absence of individual authority in a small band like this, which
only numbered 250 horsemen, no great results could be produced. All the
tribes settled in Kánem and the adjacent districts were their natural
enemies: the Nóreá or Nuwárma and the Shendákóra and Médema, the Sákerda
and Karda in the Bahar el Ghazál, the Búltu, the Woghda, the Welád
Ráshid, the Díggana or Dághana, the Welád Hamíd, the Hommer and the
Máhamíd in Khúrma, all were bent upon their destruction, while none but
the Lasálʿa or el Asálʿa beyond Kárká, and the Kánembú tribe of the
Fugábú, were attached to them. All the tribes around call them only by
the name Mínnemínne, or Menémené (“the Eaters”), which name, although it
seems to have arisen in the real gluttony of these Arabs, might be
referred appropriately to their predatory habits.[9]

In the course of these broils and petty intrigues the most respectable
among them took to commerce, while others formed the design of
returning; and when I left Bórnu in May, 1855, the rest of the little
band had separated into two distinct camps, and the dissolution or ruin
of their community was fast approaching.

This was the horde with which, in order to carry out the objects of our
mission to the utmost of our power, Mr. Overweg and I were obliged to
associate our fate; but, unfortunately, we were unprovided with that
most essential article for exciting a more than common interest in
ourselves personally, or the objects of our mission, namely, valuable
presents.

While our people pitched our tents, Mr. Overweg and I went to pay our
compliments to Sheikh Ghét and ʿOmár, and to have a friendly talk with
them before we proceeded to more serious business. They seemed to expect
this compliment, having lain down in the shade of a tree at a short
distance from our place of encampment. Ghét, who was smoking a long
pipe, was a tolerably handsome young man; but his pronunciation was very
defective, and he had nothing very commanding in his manner. Having
exchanged a few compliments, and asked some general questions, we
withdrew, and soon after received a present of dates and milk. A great
many of the Arabs paid us a visit; and a renegade Tripolitan Jew, ʿAbd-
Allah, with the surname “el Musulmáni,” who would not leave us for a
moment, kept telling us of his adventures and his importance, and
assuring us of his most disinterested affection for us. Though his
former religion differed from ours, and he had again exchanged this for
another from mere worldly motives, he nevertheless thought himself
entitled to the claim of brotherhood, and was gracious enough to call us
sometimes his cousins (welád ʿamí). There was another man who tried to
make himself as agreeable as possible to us, and endeavoured to obtain
our friendship: this was an Egyptian named Ibrahím, a fine tall man who
evidently belonged originally to a good family; but he had run away from
home, and was now leading, in company with this little horde, a
restless, remorseful, and wearisome life.

When the heat of the day had a little abated, we prepared the small
present we had to give to Sheikh Ghét, and which consisted of a red
cloth bernús of good workmanship, a pound of cloves, a pound of jáwi or
benzoin, and a razor. We were well aware that it was rather a trifling
gift, considering the assistance we required from these people to carry
out our object; but we knew also that it was rather a favour bestowed
upon us by the vizier of Bórnu, who regarded these people as in his
service. Referring therefore to the friendship which existed of old
between their tribe, when still in their old settlements in the Syrtis,
and the English consul in Tripoli, and delivering a letter from Mr.
Frederic Warrington, who was personally well known to the chief men, we
openly professed that the object of our coming was to try, with their
assistance, to visit the eastern shore of the lake, and especially the
Bahar el Ghazál, which had formed a remarkable object of curiosity in
our country for some time. But Sheikh Ghét without hesitation declared
it was impossible for them to take us to that place, the most dangerous
locality in all these quarters, on account of the many predatory
expeditions which were made to that spot from different quarters, and by
tribes hostile to them. After some common-place talk about the English,
we left him, and went to his uncle with a present of precisely the same
kind, and began here to urge the distinct object of our coming in a more
positive way. I expressed the opinion that, as they would render
acceptable service to the British government, if they were to enable us
to investigate the connection between the Bahar el Ghazál and the lake,
so, on the other hand, a great portion of the blame, if we should not be
able to carry out our design, would certainly fall upon them, inasmuch
as they had always professed to be under great obligations towards the
English. ʿOmár ben Ghét ben Séf e’ Nasr acknowledged all this; but he
doubted very much if the band, in its present reduced state, would be
able to carry us to those quarters, which were entirely under the sway
of Wadáy. The Bahar el Ghazál having given an opportunity of speaking
about the river-system between the Tsád and the Nile, our friend came
forward with a most confused statement, which it would not be worth
while to explain. But with regard to that large wádi itself we found
that he, as well as the experienced men among these Arabs, asserted that
it took its course not towards, but from the lake.

We then took our leave of ʿOmár, and returned to our tents. The place of
the encampment was a fine, open, sandy, undulating level, commanding the
vale, where are the wells Yongo or Bú-Halíma, covered with verdure, and
richly adorned with scattered mimosas. The tents and sheds of the Arabs
were spread over a great space; and no precaution was taken to obtain
some degree of security by means of fences and stockades. The sun having
set, I lay down outside my tent to enjoy the coolness and tranquillity
of the evening after a hot and troublesome day.

All seemed calm and tranquil, when suddenly a terrible screaming and
crying arose from the women in the west part of the encampment. We
hurried to our arms, thinking that an enemy had entered the place. The
cry “ʿAlá e’ dhahar! ʿala e’ dhahar” (“Mount! mount!”)—properly
speaking, “In the saddle!” “in the saddle!”—sounded from all sides, and
the horsemen hurried past us; but it was only a small party of
freebooters, who, in the twilight of the evening, had made an attack
upon the camels, and after having put to flight two or three men and
killed a horseman, had driven off a part of the herd. Our friends
pursued the robbers at full speed, and soon overtook them, when they
retreated into the thicket, and gave up their booty.

In this way we had a specimen of the character of our present expedition
the very first day we had joined this little horde; and the lamentations
of the females, on account of the man who had been slain, sounded
wofully through the night, and brought before our minds the fate which,
in a very short time, might befall ourselves. Late in the night, when
the alarm had subsided, Sheikh Ghét sent us a heifer as a present.

[Sidenote: Thursday, October 2nd.]

We remained quietly in our encampment, and obtained a great deal of
valuable information respecting the south-eastern part of the lake and
the districts adjacent.[10] Thus the day passed by most pleasantly.

Nothing remarkable happened to us on the following day, except the
arrival of the important news that the Agíd of Wadáy, who had resided in
Mʿawó, on the report of an attack intended to be made by the Arabs upon
that town, had fled. This news, if it proved true, held out, of course,
a feeble ray of hope that we might be able to penetrate to the eastern
shore of the lake; and the Arabs formed schemes accordingly. As Háj
ʿAbbás, who had come with us in order to raise from the Arabs Háj
Beshír’s share in the spoil of their last predatory excursions, was to
return to Kúkawa in a few days, I wrote a letter to the vizier
concerning the prospect we had of probably not being able to accomplish
the whole of our design. The rest of the day I enjoyed in comfort,
stretched quietly in the shade of a tree; but my tranquillity was a
little disturbed by disputes that arose amongst my men.

[Sidenote: Saturday, October 4th.]

Very early in the morning, when all was quiet, I was aroused from my
sleep by the mournful song of an Arab, who, between the different
stanzas of his dirge, seemed to give vent to his tears. The impression
made by this song, which was full of deep feeling, among such a horde of
lawless people, where generally only the meanest side of man was
exhibited, was charming; but as the singer was at some distance from my
tent, I could not distinctly make out what was the cause of his grief,
neither was I able to learn it afterwards: the thoughts of the Arabs
were taken up by another affair. The most handsome among the female
slaves who composed part of the spoil that was to be taken to the vizier
by his officer Háj ʿAbbás, had made her escape during the night; they
were eagerly searching from dawn of day, but could not find her. At
length they discovered her necklace and clothes, and the remains of her
bones,—evident proofs that she had fallen a prey to the wild beasts. She
belonged to the Yédiná or Búdduma, and was represented as having been
possessed of considerable charms; and it was supposed that her loss
would affect the vizier greatly, who, as I have before observed, was
rather fond of an ethnological variety of female beauty. There was a
great deal of unpleasant conversation about this affair, the girl not
yet having been delivered up to Háj ʿAbbás when she made her escape.

But there were many other causes of discord among this little horde, and
when the vizier’s officer set out, a great many more of the Arabs made
use of this opportunity to go to Kúkawa than had been agreed upon. The
most serious loss to us was certainly the departure of Sheikh ʿOmár,
Ghét’s uncle, who, on account of his experience and knowledge of the
English, which much exceeded that of his youthful nephew, might have
been of considerable service to us. At any rate he ought to have
informed us of his intention to leave, as by his accepting our present,
it was understood that he undertook the obligation of assisting us in
carrying out our project; and having nothing to spare, we felt rather
disappointed. But although our prospects were not too flattering, at
least we had hopes of moving a little onwards, as our departure from
this place was fixed for the following day.

[Sidenote: Sunday, October 5th.]

When the camels, guarded by the men on foot, had left in the morning, we
went first with the other horsemen to the well, in order to water our
horses. We had not visited it before, as it was at some distance from
our tents. The vale was of that general wild and luxuriant character
which distinguishes the valleys of Kánem; but it was even more wild and
picturesque than usual, and a chill draught of air met us proceeding
from the richly-wooded dale, where the sun’s rays never penetrated.
There were several wells, which exhibited a busy and interesting scene,
the horsemen in their picturesque attire (a mixed dress of their native
abode and their present adopted home) thronging around these sources and
centres of life, in order to water their poor-looking but persevering
nags. When we returned to the place of our former encampment all was
desolate, and loneliness and silence had succeeded to the animated
dwelling-place of a quarrelsome multitude of people. We hurried on over
undulating sandy ground, richly overgrown with trees, and soon overtook
our camels: the place of our destination was not far off; and at noon we
were already encamped on a fine sandy level, rising over another
luxuriant hollow or vale especially rich in kúrna-trees, whence the well
“Bír el Kúrna” has received its name. It was a spacious encampment, with
Arabs and Tébu intermixed, and could not but be very salubrious,
although we found afterwards, just in this elevated position, the
difference between the cold of the night and the heat of the day
extraordinary. Our appetite being rather keen, we indulged in the luxury
of some turtle-soup: for turtles are by no means a rarity in these
districts, although in general they seem to be of a rather small size. I
do not remember to have seen or heard in this quarter of such large
specimens as seem to be common in the country round Aïr.

[Sidenote: Monday, October 6th.]

The day of the ʿAíd el kebír. I went in the morning, as soon as the sun
began to shine forth, to a place in a cool shade a little south from our
encampment, without knowing that this was the very spot which the Arabs
had chosen for their holiday prayers. In general only a few of them were
praying; but to-day the leading persons among them, who came here with
Sheikh Ghét, offered up their prayer with solemnity and apparent
fervour.

This proved an unlucky day to us, and very unfavourable to our design to
penetrate into those dangerous districts on the east side of the lake;
for a considerable portion of the tribe (one hundred and fifty men with
about seventy horses) left that day for Kúkawa, to our great surprise
and mortification, and, as it would seem, also to the mortification of
the young chief, a circumstance of which we became fully aware when we
paid him a visit about noon. Of course, with our very small means, and
the poor and insignificant character of our mission, we could not expect
that this unsettled horde should have a scrupulous regard to our wishes
and designs in arranging their affairs. It was quite evident that their
proceeding was the mere effect of a stubborn sense of independence, and
jealousy; and it seemed to be done in open opposition to the wish of
their young chief. About one o’clock in the afternoon they left; and we
forwarded a short note with them expressive of our dissatisfaction at
this state of things, which filled us with the saddest forebodings as to
the success of our mission.

But while thus disappointed in more important matters, we felt tolerably
well off in material comforts; for in the morning a party of Fugábú
arrived with a number of sheep for sale, selling two for a dollar, and
thus enabled us to gratify the religious longing of our servants for an
extra dish on this their holiday. In the course of the evening, a
numerous caravan of oxen laden with grain, or rather negro-millet,
arrived from Bórnu, which made provisions a little cheaper. The grain
grown in the country, in its present wild and desolate state, is not
sufficient for the population, though so greatly reduced; and the last
season had been rather an unfavourable one. In consequence of the
arrival of this caravan, we not only had the opportunity of buying corn
at a cheaper rate, but we also got some from the chief as a present.

Everything in Kánem is bought with the common white Bórnu shirts, which
form the general dress of the people, black tobes being worn only by
richer persons. Even the general dress of the Arabs settled here in
Kánem consists of these white tobes and a háík made of the same stuff,
only the wealthier individuals being able to buy a woollen plaid. The
dress of the females, too, is made of these very tobes, which are cut
into the regular oblong pieces of which they consist, and sewn together
lengthwise.

[Sidenote: Tuesday, October 7th.]

Being obliged to remain here without the certain prospect of doing
anything worth while, we at least thought we had some right to the
hospitality of our hosts; and we expressed our desire to obtain a little
more milk, as we ourselves possessed neither cows nor she-camels. Our
request was complied with. Thus we accustomed ourselves entirely to
camel’s milk, and found it by degrees more palatable and wholesome than
the milk of cows. I attribute the recovery of my strength principally to
this sort of diet. There was always some milk brought into the
encampment by the daughters of the Bení Hassan; but this was generally
milk in an unpleasant intermediate state between sweet and sour, and the
vessels (the kórió, made of the leaves of the palm-tree) in which it was
carried had usually a bad smell, which they communicated to the milk.

As the renegade Jew ʿAbd-Allah (el Musulmáni) was the medium through
which all our business with the chief was transacted, I made him to-day
a present of a red sash, and continued to keep him in good humour by
occasional small presents. This man was a curious specimen of a Jewish
adventurer. He was by birth a Tripolitan, but had been obliged to leave
his native home on account of a murder which he had committed. He then
betook himself to the tribe of the Welád Slimán, exchanging his Jewish
creed for that of Mohammed, and obtained protection. When he had gained
a good deal of property as a silversmith, his new companions stripped
him of his treasures: he then for a time separated from them, and in
company with two other renegade Jews, Músa and Ibrahím, made a journey
to Negroland—a memorable event, as they were the first of their nation
who trod this road. On his receiving news of the prosperity of the Welád
Slimán in Kánem, he once more joined them, and became a freebooter. He
was a very good horseman; but that was all, his horsemanship but badly
supplying his want of courage. However he was useful to us in many
respects, although we had to take care that the people did not confound
us with these Jewish adventurers.

I began this day my little vocabulary of the Tébu language, or rather
the “módi Tedá,” and provisionally that dialect of this language which
is spoken by the inhabitants of Búrgu, and which varies considerably
from the language as it is spoken by the inhabitants of Bílma and in the
South of Fezzán. Already at that early period I became aware that this
language is nearly related to the Kanúri, while it has scarcely any link
whatever which externally connects it with the Berber language.

[Sidenote: Wednesday, October 8th.]

The only thing which happened this day, worth mentioning was the arrival
of Hallúf, a warlike Tébu chieftain, with seventeen horsemen of the
Fugábú Tébu, who rode up in a very spirited manner to the tent of Sheikh
Ghét. Hallúf, a man of great bodily size and strength, and renowned in
these quarters on account of his valour, had formerly been the enemy of
Bórnu, but had now been won over to its interest. However, he was still
too much afraid of the Bórnu people to join the Welád Slimán, as long as
Háj ʿAbbás the vizier’s messenger was present; but he came as soon as he
heard that he was gone. He was not a very scrupulous man, as I soon
convinced myself, when he with the Fugábú called upon us, and as soon as
he had introduced himself began begging for poison. We of course cut his
demand short. He then sat quietly down with his companions, and took
great delight in the performances of my musical box, which I really
found, together with the watch, the most useful instrument for
demonstrating to the people the great superiority of European genius and
handicraft. These people were not without sympathy for those lively airs
which the little instrument was capable of performing, and would sit
down quietly for a great length of time enjoying this mysterious music.
The rumour soon spread, and Sheikh Ghét likewise desired to be made
acquainted with the mysterious little box. But the day did not end so
harmlessly; for bad tidings arrived. Háj ʿAbbás, on his way to Bórnu,
had seen a troop of Kindín near Ngégimi, and warned the Arabs to beware
of a sudden attack. Thus uneasiness and anxiety spread through the
encampment, and scouts were sent out to scour the country in every
direction.

[Sidenote: Friday, October 11th.]

News having been brought in the morning that three Tawárek on horseback,
and five on camels, had been seen at a neighbouring well, an alarm was
raised immediately. All the Arabs mounted; and we followed their
example, though I felt extremely weak, while my horse, having had rest
and good food for several days, and seeing so many companions galloping
and capering about, was almost unmanageable.

The whole encampment presented a very warlike appearance; but it turned
out to be a false alarm. We therefore returned into the encampment, and
began to arrange our luggage, as we were to leave here the heaviest part
of our things, and take only as little as possible with us in our
progress further eastward; for the Arabs had conceived the hope of
plunder, the news having been brought that the Khalífa of Wadáy had left
his residence Mʿawó, and that nobody was there to defend that quarter
against their inroads. At the same time, our friends cast a longing look
towards Báteli, the celebrated pasture-grounds in the northern course of
the Bahar el Ghazál, two days’ march beyond Egé, where numbers of camels
were reported to be collected at the time. Of course they did not want
it to become known where they intended to direct their foray, and
therefore spoke now of this, then of that quarter, as likely to be the
object of their expedition.


[Footnote 8: I will only refer to the animated description which Captain
Lyon (Narrative, p. 54.) gives of the former power of this tribe.]

[Footnote 9: The Tébu call them Erdi mádé, “the red enemies,” or
Yógodé.]

[Footnote 10: The whole of this information is collected in the
Appendix.]




                               CHAP. XLI.

        SHITÁTI. — THE EASTERN, MORE FAVOURED, VALLEYS OF KÁNEM.


[Sidenote: Saturday, October 11th.]

With the rest of our people, and with the remaining two camels
carrying the smaller part of our luggage, we accompanied the following
day the more active part of the horde, while the older men were left
behind for the defence of the encampment, with their families and
property.

The country through which our way led was entirely of the same character
as that which I have already described, a sandy level adorned with trees
of moderate size, almost all of the genus _Mimosa_, and in favourable
seasons well adapted for the cultivation of Indian corn—now and then
broken by deep hollows of larger or smaller extent, generally with a
sufficient supply of water to produce fine plantations or corn-fields,
and overgrown with more luxuriant vegetation. We crossed a fine vale of
this description about eight miles from our starting-point, and chose
our camping-ground on the higher level commanding the “Bír el Ftáim.”
The hollow, however, which contains this well is rather of a peculiar
kind; for, unlike the other basins, which afford sufficient space for
cultivation, it is extremely narrow, while the encompassing slopes, at
least that on the north side, rise to a greater altitude than the
general level of the country. I made a sketch of it.

[Illustration: Drawn by J. M. Bernatz, from a Sketch by Dr. Barth.

M. & N. Hanhart, lith. et impt.

BIR EL FTAÍM.

Octr. 11th. 1851.]

On this commanding point there was a village of the Fugábú Kóbber; and
Overweg and I, before we went to our encampment, which was chosen on the
southern slope, paid these people a visit, dismounting under a tree at
some distance from their light huts, and were well received. They
brought us immediately a dish made of the meal of Indian corn and sour
milk, and sat down cheerfully, questioning us as to the difference
between their country and ours, and asking, with regard to the politics
of England, whether we were the friends or enemies of Dár-Fúr and Wadáy
(which countries, together with Bórnu, comprised their political
horizon), and expressed great astonishment at our instruments. They
brought us a lion’s-skin, and soon after another very palatable dish of
deshíshe made of wheat, with very good butter, which had nothing of that
nasty taste peculiar to the butter of Bórnu and the surrounding
countries: the dish was seasoned with dates.

It would have been far more instructive and agreeable to us to be in the
constant company and under the protection of these people, the natives
of the country, who would have made us acquainted with its
characteristic features so much better than that band of lawless robbers
who took no real interest in it, except as regarded the booty which it
afforded them. But they had neither power nor authority; and we were
satisfied that where the Arabs were not able to conduct us, these people
never could. Notwithstanding their alliance with the Arabs, they are
treated with contempt by the latter, and the Arabs never omit to add a
sneer when they speak of the “damned” (“ám bú”) Keráda; for so they call
the Fugábú. Of course the intercourse of these two different people can
neither be sincere nor intimate, and the natives were only waiting for
their day of revenge.

A storm gathering and threatening to burst upon us, we hastened away
from this spot; but there was only a little rain. In the evening there
arrived two Shúwa from the villages of the Woghda, and were thrown into
irons, in order not to betray the approach of the Arabs.

[Sidenote: Sunday, October 12th.]

We went on a short distance to another well situated in a considerable
hollow or basin, which might afford, and has once afforded a splendid
place for cultivation, but which at present was entirely blocked up and
made really impassable by rank and wild vegetation. With great trouble
we penetrated with the first horsemen to the well. Nobody had made use
of it for a long period. The water was very bad and unwholesome. The
Arabs had not encamped at this place for at least seven years; hence
there was a rich abundance of excellent food for the camels; but the
danger from beasts of prey was also very great. The ground was full of
elephants’ dung; and wild pigeons were hovering about in great numbers.

The place for our encampment was chosen on the level commanding the rich
basin on the eastern side, and descending into it by a steep slope of
from 300 to 400 feet. Here I laid myself down in the cool shade of a
luxuriant serrákh not far from the slope, and surveyed the trains of the
Fugábú, who in the course of the day arrived with their little movable
household, having left their former residence near Bír el Ftáim. In the
evening we paid a visit to the sheikh, and as usual were obliged to give
him and his companions some account of European matters, though it would
have been far more interesting for us to listen to their own stories, so
full of incidents of a wild restless life.

[Sidenote: Monday, October 13th.]

The weather was cool, and a strong north wind made it rather chilly.
Having been told that we were not to leave the next day, I purchased a
ram, with a white tobe which I had bought for about forty rotl in
Kúkawa, receiving, besides the ram, one sʿaa or zékka of Guinea corn to
complete the bargain. I afterwards got a fine fat goat, which we
slaughtered to-day, and found its meat pretty good. Hallúf came while I
was lying in the shade of my serrákh of the preceding day, which I had
nicely cleaned, and sat down to a chat; he assured me that he was able
to bring us to Kárká or Kargha, the swampy country in the south-east
corner of the lake, which forms an archipelago of small islands, and
would offer his services for that purpose, but that he was afraid of
Sheikh Ghét’s jealousy. He then went with me over my little Tébu
vocabulary, and corrected some slight mistakes. He was quite a sociable
man; but Overweg, as well as I, doubted much whether he could be
trusted.

Having consulted what course to take, we went to the sheikh and asked
him whether he really thought Hallúf would be able to take us with any
degree of safety to Kárká. He did not hesitate to declare that Hallúf
was unable to accomplish what he had boasted of, and begged us to have
patience till news should arrive from Bórnu, where he had sent to ask
for advice with regard to our design of visiting the eastern side of the
lake, and respecting his own proceedings. We rather imagined that the
vizier had given him orders, at the same time that he sent us out to
Kánem, to assist us in carrying out our project in every respect; and we
could scarcely hope for any favourable result by their asking advice at
such a distance. We therefore complained to ʿAbd-Allah of the sheikh’s
lukewarmness; and presuming that he was not content to leave us under
the protection of Hallúf because he expected that the latter would get
some handsome present from us, we told him that even if we were to go
with Hallúf, we should regard ourselves as still under the protection of
the sheikh, to whom we were entirely indebted for Hallúf’s acquaintance,
and would make him a valuable present if we should not fail in our
enterprise. This seemed to take effect; and we received the satisfactory
message in the evening, that we should be allowed to go with Hallúf, but
that we must make a handsome present to the sheikh, besides the large
tent which I had prepared for myself in Tripoli. Being willing to make
any sacrifice in order to carry out the express wish of the government
who had sent us, and elated by the prospect that something might be
done, we paid another visit to Sheikh Ghét in the evening, but could not
arrive at any definite arrangement. There was a great deal of talk about
a certain Keghámma, who alone had the power to take us to Kárká, while
Hallúf at best was said to be able to conduct us to Mʿawó; but at that
time we could not make out distinctly who this Keghámma was, except that
we learnt that he resided in a place called Kárafu, in the direction of
Mʿawó.

[Sidenote: Tuesday, October 14th.]

The strong wind making it rather uncomfortable outside, I remained in my
tent studying the Tébu language, and conversing with the fáki ʿOthmán, a
man who, by his mild conduct, formed a curious contrast to the lawless
and quarrelsome character of this band of robbers, besides being
possessed of less prejudice and superstition. In the afternoon several
Fugábú paid us a visit; they all behaved well, and were not troublesome.
It was at length decided that we should leave the second day following,
with Hallúf, for the Bahar el Ghazál and Kárká; and although we were
sorry at not having brought the affair to a more definite conclusion, we
yet indulged in the hope that we should be able to attain our object,
when suddenly in the evening we received information that Hallúf had
receded from his engagement, and that therefore no further idea of our
going with him could be entertained.

What the reason was for this sudden change of proceeding I cannot say;
but all our arguments, of course, were faulty, as we were unable to give
them sufficient weight by good presents. That the tidings of the
carrying off of three herds of cattle from a village at a few miles’
distance from Yó, by the Tawárek, which arrived this evening, could have
had any influence upon this course of policy was rather improbable.

[Sidenote: Wednesday, October 15th.]

I was so happy as to collect a good deal of information about the
country of Shitáti, which we had now entered, once densely inhabited in
large and populous cities, and passed the day quietly and usefully. We
heard, to our great joy, that we were to go on the next day with the
whole expedition.

[Sidenote: Thursday, October 16th.]

We had scarcely left the place of our encampment when we fell in with an
elephants’ track, apparently leading to the well, and followed it for a
long distance; it was well trodden, and was an undoubted proof that
these huge animals abounded in this wild deserted region, where man had
left scarcely any trace of his presence. Having proceeded at a swift
rate, we crossed, at the distance of about six miles, a very fine hollow
or vale stretching south and north, and capable of producing everything,
and even at that time exhibiting a few vestiges of human activity and
industry in a small field of wheat, irrigated from those wells called
“kháttatír” by the Arabs, which name is given by them also to the spot
irrigated in this way. Its native name, if I am not mistaken, is
“Yakállogo.”

We then came to another hollow, formed like an ancient circus, and
having its soil richly impregnated with natron; it is called Bérendé.
After a short halt here, we continued our march; and Overweg and I,
while our men and camels followed the direct road, turned off towards
the south, and visited another hollow, called “Bóro,” in whose deep
bottom a lake is formed, which, according to the season and to the
quantity of water it contains, like several other water-basins round the
lake, may be termed a fresh or brackish-water lake.

During the last rainy season but very little rain had fallen in Kánem;
and consequently this lake was of rather small extent, being about one
mile and a half round, and limited to the more deeply depressed southern
corner of the basin, while its northern corner, which is rarely
inundated, was thickly wooded. There was formerly much cultivation here,
and a small village stood on the border of the lake. Now all is desolate
and our Kánemma guide, Músa Bedé, unwilling to make a longer stay in
such a spot, hurried on, ascending the steep eastern slope, which is at
least three hundred feet high. Here we obtained a view over a great
extent of country; but it was all one desolate wilderness, and nothing
particular to be seen, excepting a party of five men watching our
movements, and keeping parallel with us. We therefore returned to our
troop and informed them of the circumstance; and a body of horsemen were
sent in pursuit.

We then, about half an hour before noon, crossed another hollow or vale,
called Towáder, with the dry basin of a lake in its southernmost part,
on whose border were several wells; the ground was thickly overgrown
with underwood. Continuing our march, we reached, after noon, a more
extensive and extremely beautiful vale, richly clothed with vegetation,
but not in so wild a state, and not of the same impenetrable character,
as many of those which we had seen; the reason seemed to be, that it was
less deep, being only about 150 feet under the higher level.

Here the troop halted during the heat of the day, the groups being
scattered over the whole extent of the hollow; but it was not a fit spot
for a night’s encampment, as well on account of the wild beasts, as of
the danger of a sudden attack from hostile men. Sweet as repose was here
in the cool shade of a luxuriant serrákh or a kúrna, the ground was full
of scorpions; and my bodyguard, Bú-Zéd, was severely stung by one.
Accordingly, when the dhohor had passed by, the order was given for
decamping, and we kept along the vale and ascended the eastern slope,
when, on an entirely open ground almost bare of trees, we chose a place
for our night’s encampment. The Arabs here brought us a young ostrich
which they had caught in the valley; and we had a long unprofitable
conversation with them in endeavouring to obtain their goodwill.

[Sidenote: Friday, October 17th.]

We started very early, for a long day’s fatiguing ride; for,
notwithstanding all the care I took of myself, I could not recover from
my sickly state, and was extremely sensitive of fatigue. The country in
the beginning of our march was less adorned with trees than usual; but
it became more densely wooded after we had passed the vale called
Asfúra. This hollow, of small extent, and inclosed all around by steep
slopes, is provided with a great number of wells of excellent water; but
its bottom, being in most parts stony, is almost bare of vegetation,
with the exception of here and there a dúm-bush. While the men made a
short halt for taking in a supply of water, I went a little in advance
with Abd-Allah; but I soon found that he did not know the road at all,
keeping far too much to the south, and I thought it wiser to return to
our people, and march along with them.

The country here offers a greater variety in its configuration; and,
instead of an extensive level, as before, hill and dale succeed each
other. Having passed several smaller concavities, we reached a more
considerable valley, called Jená ú Shelúkko, which contained corn, or
rather durra fields, but they were entirely destroyed by the elephants.
Grain had also been cultivated at the foot of the slope; but it had
failed entirely, on account of the scarcity of rain. There were no
vestiges of human habitations.

Our people had begun to make themselves comfortable in this fine valley
for passing the heat of the day, when suddenly orders were given for
continuing our march. The country now became more hilly. Having passed
_en route_ a hollow provided with wells and called Aghó, once one of the
most famous places of Kánem, we made, after noon, a short halt in the
flat dell called Núndul, in which are several kháttatír, or draw-wells,
and stubble-fields, in order to provide ourselves with water, and also
to water our horses. There was a great bustle and confusion, everybody
wanting to get first to the wells, and proceed with the principal troop,
as we were now approaching a hostile territory. My she-camel, which was
a very fine little animal, but rather too heavily laden for such an
expedition, was among the last that arrived; and, starting after the
others, was soon left behind the whole troop; and I endeavoured in vain
to bring her up.

The country here was more level than it had been in the latter part of
our route; and we left on our right only one vale, which is called
Maínasa. Fortunately for me, the whole host made a longer halt at two
o’clock in the afternoon, in one long line, in order to exhort the
little band to valour, and to give them some instructions in case of a
conflict with the enemy. No quarter was to be given, and any one of them
who should lose his horse or camel was to be indemnified for the loss.
But a great deal was proclaimed besides, which, as I was at the very end
of the line, I could not make out. Two horsemen were galloping along the
line and brandishing white banners, such as I had not observed before.
There was a good deal of parade in the whole scene; and at the end of it
several small troops of horsemen galloped out in advance of the line as
“imán,” that is to say, as bound by an oath either to be victorious or
to die.

At length we pursued our course, the line breaking up into small
irregular detachments, as chance or attachment grouped the people
together; but we soon came to another halt, and much conversation
ensued, in consequence of which, three of the Fugábú horsemen were
despatched to the south, to bring up an experienced guide. Having at
length resumed our march, through a fine undulating and well-wooded
country, we chose about sunset an open place for our encampment, where
we were told we should rest till the moon had risen. Strict orders were
given not to light a fire, in order that the enemy might not become
aware of our approach. But as soon as it became dark, very large fires
were seen to the south-east, forming one magnificent line of flame; and
as it was clear that these were not common fires for domestic use, but
appeared rather to be beacons, it was conjectured that the enemy had
tidings of our coming, and were calling together their people. An order
was therefore immediately given to proceed; but scarcely were the loads
put upon the camels, and every thing ready for the march, when a
counter-order was received, that we were to remain. We then began to
make ourselves comfortable, when a third order was given to load
immediately and to pursue the march.

This ordering and countermanding seemed to arise rather from the bad
organization of a band subject to no strict authority, but where every
man of any experience and a little valour had something to say, than
with the intention of misleading a lurking spy; but, whatever the cause,
it was rather trying, and my two men, Bu-Zéd and Áhmed, neither of whom
was very energetic, could scarcely be persuaded to load a second time,
while all the people were getting ready with great expedition, and
marched off as soon as they were ready. We therefore remained behind
from the beginning. Unfortunately the load was so badly adjusted that
several things soon fell down and had to be replaced; and this happening
more than once, the distance between us and the host became so great,
that at last not even the slightest noise could be heard of the troop
before us to direct our course; but having once noticed the direction by
the stars, I was able to guide my servants. To make matters worse, the
ground was covered with high grass, and it was not easy to proceed at a
rapid rate. Trees were very scanty here.

At length the Arabs became aware of my having been left at a great
distance behind, and about midnight made a halt, when I overtook them.
After having lightened my camel, we proceeded with expedition through
the dark night, illuminated only by the distant fires, which gave a
painful idea of the resistance we were to meet with, till after two
o’clock in the morning of the 18th, when we reached a rising ground,
and, dismounting, lay down near our wearied horses to get an hour’s
rest.

We then continued our march with great alacrity for an hour, when we
came to a halt on undulating sandy ground thickly covered with bushes.
The horsemen galloped on in advance, while Overweg and I remained with
the train, consisting of from sixty to seventy camels mounted by young
men, and boys not more than ten years old, who were looking forward with
such avidity for prey that they could scarcely be kept back. At length
we began to proceed slowly, but soon came to another halt, as till now
we had not heard a single shot; but when the day dawned, the greedy
multitude could not be kept back any longer, and on we went.

We here obtained a faint view of an irregular valley-formation ahead of
us, adorned with a few palm-trees, which, in the dubious light of the
dawn, gave to the country an interesting and entirely new appearance.
Crossing this valley-plain, we gradually ascended higher ground, and
reached a small deserted village, consisting of large spacious huts. But
though we turned off from it to the north, in order to prevent our
little troop from dispersing to make booty, the best-mounted and most
daring of them started off on their light mehára to see if something
might not have been left to suit them.

Some little cultivation was to be seen around the village; but in
general the country continued to bear the most evident traces of
desolation. At length its dreary aspect became relieved, and we
descended into a regularly formed valley called Gésgi, about 500 yards
broad, and inclosed between high cliffs of sandstone. This was the first
regular valley-formation which we saw on our journey to Kánem; for as
yet all depressions in the ground presented rather the character of
hollows without a regular shelving or sloping in any direction. This
valley, on the contrary, extending from north to south, was apparently
the occasional channel of a small torrent, and, on account of the
moisture extending over the whole of it, was adorned with several groups
of palm-trees, and in several places with corn-fields.

But while this valley presented great attraction to the European
traveller, it was not less attractive to the covetous Arab freebooter;
and all order ceasing in our little troop, the young inexperienced lads
who composed our _cortége_ dispersed in all directions. Some small
flocks of sheep had been observed in the valley; and they were now
pursued by part of our companions, while others ransacked the huts of a
small hamlet situated on the western brow of the vale. It was very
fortunate for us that no natives were lurking hereabouts, as they might
have done immense mischief to our troop, scattered as it was about the
country. Overweg and I were almost left alone, when, after having looked
about in vain for traces of the footsteps of the horsemen who had gone
in advance, we ascended the eastern slope, which was extremely steep and
very difficult for the camels. Gradually our companions, fearing to
expose themselves by staying behind, collected around us, and we
proceeded in a south-easterly direction, when we soon came to another
and more favoured valley, called Hénderí Síggesí, its bottom adorned
with a thicker grove of date-trees and with beautiful corn-fields—that
is to say, fields of wheat with their golden stalks waving in the
wind—while the high ground, being elevated above the bottom of the
valley about 120 feet, was planted near the brow with fields of millet,
which was just ripe, but not yet reaped. What with the rich vegetation,
the steep cliffs, the yellowish crop, the burning hamlet, and the people
endeavouring to make their escape, it formed a very interesting scene,
which is represented in the accompanying view.

[Illustration: Drawn by J. M. Bernatz, from a Sketch by Dr. Barth.

M. & N. Hanhart, lith. et impt.

HÉNDERI SÍGGESI.

Octr. 18th. 1851.]

Keeping along the western brow, which in some places, where the rock lay
bare, was extremely steep, we observed that several natives, including
even two or three horsemen, had taken refuge in the thickest part of the
date-grove, watching our motions. A small hamlet of straw huts of a
peculiar shape, not unlike those of the Koyám described on a former
occasion, and lying at the very brink of the steep rocky declivity, had
been set on fire. Our wild, lawless companions now began to descend into
the valley at a spot where the slope was more gradual, raising a war-cry
in order to frighten those people who were hid in the grove. Five good
horsemen would have sufficed to overthrow this whole troop of young
unbearded lads, who were snapping their firelocks without being in
general provided with balls. It was very lucky, indeed, that Overweg and
I with our people kept well together in the foremost part of the train,
for the natives, rushing suddenly out from their hiding-place upon the
stragglers, laid hold of two camels, with which they immediately made
good their retreat, their young riders, who a moment before had shown
such courage, having betimes jumped off their animals and run away. Our
companions were now full of gesticulations and warlike threats; but
nobody dared to attack the small body of men, and dispute with them
their booty. We soon reached the level on the eastern side of the
valley; but if we had hesitated before what course to pursue, we were
now quite puzzled to find the whereabouts of the horsemen. Wandering
thus up and down without any distinct direction, we of course, as it was
not safe for us to dismount and take a moment’s rest, suffered great
fatigue, after a whole day and night’s journey. Meanwhile the sun had
almost reached the zenith, and I felt extremely weak and exhausted.

At length some of the horsemen were seen, at a great distance beyond a
more shallow dell, driving before them a herd of cattle; and rescued at
length from the dangerous position in which we had been, destitute as we
were of any sufficient protection, we hastened to cross the valley, and
to join our more warlike and experienced friends. Falling in with them,
we went together to a place a little further down this wide flat valley,
where there were a small hamlet and stubble-fields. Here at length I
hoped to get a little rest, and lay down in the scanty shade of a talha;
but unfortunately there was no well here, and after a very short halt
and a consultation, the order was given to proceed. I was scarcely able
to mount my horse again and to follow the troop. The Arabs called this
valley, which was very flat and produced no date-trees, Wádi el Ghazál,
but what its real name is I did not learn; it has of course nothing to
do with the celebrated and larger valley of this name. The well was not
far off, in another fine valley, or rather hollow, deeper than Wádi el
Ghazál but much flatter than either Síggesí or Gésgí, and called Msállat
or Amsállat. It was adorned with a wild profusion of mimosa, and in its
deepest part provided with “kháttatír” or draw-wells, irrigating a fine
plantation of cotton, the first we had yet seen in Kánem.

The Arabs had not made a very considerable booty, the Woghda having
received intelligence of their approach and saved what they could. The
whole result of the expedition was fifteen camels, a little more than
three hundred head of cattle, and about fifteen hundred sheep and goats.
The Arabs were for some time in great anxiety about Ghét, and a party of
horsemen who had gone with him to a greater distance; but he joined us
here, driving before him a large flock of sheep. We were busy watering
our horses, and providing ourselves with this necessary element. But
there was not much leisure; for scarcely had we begun to draw water,
when the alarm was given that the Woghda were attacking us, and three
bodies of horsemen were formed in order to protect the train and the
booty. The main body rushed out of the valley on the south-east side,
and drove the enemy back to a considerable distance; but the intention
of encamping on the slope near this well was given up as too dangerous,
and it was decided to go to a greater distance, though the intention of
penetrating to Mʿawó seemed not as yet entirely to be abandoned. It took
us a considerable time to get out of this wooded valley, the Arabs being
afraid of being attacked and losing their booty.

At length, the cattle and flocks having been driven in advance, we
started, and, leaving the vale, ascended elevated rocky ground, from
which, following a south-westerly direction, we descended, a little
before two o’clock in the afternoon, into the narrower eastern part of a
deep and beautiful valley, which here is adorned by a pretty grove of
date-trees, while its western part expands into fine cultivated ground.
Here we made a halt of about half an hour, in order to water the animals
and replenish our skins; for not even here was it thought advisable to
encamp, as it is regarded as a very inauspicious place, this being the
spot where, in 1850, the Kél-owí fell upon the Welád Slimán and almost
exterminated them. After so short a halt we again pursued our march. I
was now so totally exhausted that I was obliged to dismount at short
intervals and lie down for a moment; and once, when left alone, it was
only with the utmost exertion that I was able to mount my horse again;
but nevertheless I managed to drag myself along. At length, about
sunset, we chose a place for our encampment on the brow of the slope
descending into a deep valley. Having now been thirty-four hours on
horseback with only short and insufficient intervals, I fell senseless
to the ground, and was considered by Mr. Overweg and our people as about
to breathe my last. But after an hour’s repose I recovered a little,
and, having had a good night’s rest, felt myself much stronger on the
following morning, so that I could even undergo some exertion which was
not exactly necessary.

[Sidenote: Monday, Oct. 20th.]

Descended with our people into the valley when they went to fetch water.
It is called Áláli Ádia, or Jerád, from a small hamlet lying on the
highest ground, and called Áláli. The well was very rich and plentiful;
but no traces of cultivation appeared at the foot of the date-trees. The
slope was rather steep, and about 130 feet high. The Arabs, who had
contracted their encampment or “dowar” within the smallest possible
compass, barricading it with their baggage, as all the empty bags which
they had taken with them on the expedition were now full of corn from
the magazines of the enemy, were not at all at their ease, and seemed
not to know exactly what course to take, whether to penetrate further in
advance or to return. Several Fugábú and people belonging to Hallúf came
to pay their respects to Sheikh Ghét; and a person of considerable
authority, called Keghámma, or rather Keghámma-futébe (Seraskier of the
West), the very man of whom we before had heard so much talk, came also
and paid me a visit in my tent; for, being in a weak state, I had been
obliged, when the sun became oppressive, to pitch my tent, as there was
no shade. There being no other tent in the encampment, I received visits
from several parties who wished to breakfast a little at their ease, and
among others from a man called Kédel Batrám, Hallúf’s brother. Keghámma
stated that he was certainly able to bring us to Kárká; but this was a
mere pretence, and he himself retracted his promise shortly afterwards
before the sheikh. Our cherished object lay still before us, at a
considerable distance; but our friend Ghét thought that he had brought
us already far enough to deserve some more presents, and plainly
intimated as much to us through ʿAbd-Allah. Fortunately I had a handsome
yellow cloth caftan with me, embroidered with gold, and towards evening,
when I had recovered from a severe fit of fever which had suddenly
attacked me in the afternoon, we went to pay our compliments to the
chief, and begged him to accept of it; at the same time we told him we
should be satisfied if we were enabled to visit the district belonging
to the keghámma. But the situation of the Arabs soon became more
dangerous, and nothing was thought of but to retrace our steps westward
with the greatest possible expedition.

I was lying sleepless in my tent, in a rather weak state, having
scarcely tasted any kind of food for the last few days on account of my
feverish state, when, in the latter part of the night, a great alarm was
raised in the camp, and I heard the Arabs mount their horses and ride
about in several detachments, raising their usual war-cry, “yá riyáb, yá
riyáb;” but I remained quietly on my mat, and was not even roused from
my lethargical state when I received the intelligence that a numerous
hostile army, consisting of the Woghda, the Médelé, the Shíri, and the
people of the Eastern Keghámma, was advancing against the camp. I
received this news with that indifference with which a sick and
exhausted man regards even the most important events. Neither did I stir
when, with the first dawn of day on the 21st, the enemy having actually
arrived within a short distance, our friends left the camp in order to
offer battle. I heard about ten shots fired, but did not think that the
Arabs would be beaten. Suddenly Overweg, who had saddled his horse at
the very beginning of the alarm, called out anxiously to me that our
friends were defeated, and, mounting his horse, started off at a gallop.
My mounted servant, Bú Zéd, had long taken to his heels; and thus, while
Mohammed was hastily saddling my horse, I flung my bernús over me, and
grasping my pistols and gun, and throwing my double sack over the
saddle, I mounted and started off towards the west, ordering Mohammed to
cling fast to my horse’s tail. It was the very last moment, for at the
same time the enemy began to attack the east side of the camp. All the
people had fled, and I saw only the chief slave of Ghét, who, with great
anxiety, entreated me to take his master’s state sword with me, that it
might not fall into the hands of the enemy.

But I had not gone a great distance when I heard firing close behind me,
and, turning round, saw the Arab horsemen rallying, and with the cry,
“He keléb, keléb,” turn round against the enemy, who had dispersed in
order to collect the spoil. I went on in order to inform Mr. Overweg,
who, together with the Arabs who were mounted on camels, and even
several horsemen, had fled to some distance and posted themselves on a
hill. Assuring him that the danger was over, I returned with him to the
camp, where we were rather surprised to find that not only all our
luggage was gone, but that not even a vestige of my tent was left.

The enemy, attracted only by the English tent and Sheikh Ghét’s baggage,
had scarcely touched the effects of the other people, but considered my
tent as a fair prize and ran away with it. But the Arabs pursuing them,
we got back most of our things. A leathern English bag of mine which
contained some articles of value had been cut open, just, as it seemed,
at the moment when our friends came up with the enemy. Our chief loss
consisted in our cooking utensils and provisions; I also much regretted
the loss of an English prayer-book, which had belonged to Mr.
Richardson. Four of the Arabs had been killed, and thirty-four of the
enemy. Mr. Overweg was busily employed in dressing some severe wounds
inflicted on our friends. The Arabs were furious at the insolence, as
they called it, of the enemy who had dared to attack them in their own
encampment, and they swore they would now go and burn down all their
hamlets and their corn. The horsemen actually left, but returned in the
course of the afternoon rather silently, with a sullen face and
unfavourable tidings; and before sunset they were once more obliged to
defend their own encampment against another attack of the energetic
natives; they, however, succeeded in beating them off. Hallúf
distinguished himself greatly by his valour, killing three or four of
the enemy with his own hand.

But notwithstanding this little victory, the forebodings for the night
were very unfavourable, and our friends would certainly have decamped
immediately if they had not been afraid that in the darkness of the
night the greater part might take to their heels, and that a shameful
flight would be followed by great loss of life and property. Accordingly
they determined to remain till the next morning. But an anxious and
restless night it was; for they had received authentic news that a body
of from thirty to forty Wadáy horsemen were to join their enemies that
night and to make a joint and last attack upon them; and they were well
aware that the enemy had only been beaten from want of horses. All the
horses remained saddled, and the whole night they sounded the watchcry;
but the most restless was the renegade Jew ʿAbd-Allah, who felt
convinced that this would be his last night, and was most anxious to get
a razor in order to shave his head before the hour of death.

[Sidenote: October 22nd.]

The night passed on without the enemy appearing, and with the dawn of
day the sign for decamping was given, when everybody endeavoured to get
in advance of his neighbour. The enemy, as was positively stated
afterwards, arrived there about an hour later; but seeing that we were
gone, did not choose to pursue us.

Thus we left the most interesting part of Kánem behind us, the country
once so thickly studded with large populous and celebrated towns, such
as Njímiye, Agháfi, and all those places which I shall describe in the
Appendix from the account of the expeditions of Edrís Alawóma, with many
rich valleys full of date-trees.

Keeping first in a westerly, and afterwards in a more south-westerly
direction, through a rather uninteresting country, we arrived about
eight o’clock in the morning in a wide vale called Tákulum, full of rich
succulent herbage and fine trees, where, it being supposed that we were
out of danger, it was decided to give the horses and camels a feed after
having watered them. I, for my part, was extremely thankful for getting
a few hours’ rest in the shade of a venerable acacia, near the gentle
slope surrounding the hollow. But just in the greatest heat of the day
we left this pleasant resting-place, near which is the ordinary
residence of the keghámma, in the valley Kárafu, and followed a more
north-westerly direction, ascending gradually from the vale, and
entering a well-wooded district, where all the grass had recently been
burnt, or was still burning; and in one place it was even with some
danger that we found our way through the flames. This burning of the
grass, as I have stated above, seems to be a general practice all over
Negroland.

Towards evening the country became quite open, and ahead of us a small
range was seen, at the western foot of which our resting-place was said
to be; but it seemed very distant, and it was quite dark when we made
halt in two separate encampments, not being able to reach the point of
destination. Our supper was very simple indeed; for, having lost all our
provisions at the taking of the camp at Áláli, we were obliged to
content ourselves with a few bad dates, the only thing we were able to
obtain from our friend Sheikh Ghét.

[Sidenote: Thursday, October 23rd.]

While our camels and people kept along the direct road, together with
the train and part of the horsemen, Overweg and I, following Sheikh Ghét
and his troop, took a more northerly direction, and passed the heat of
the day in a fine valley. It was certainly one of the finest vales we
had seen in the country, except that it did not produce date-trees. But
the district of Shitáti, which we again had entered here, seems not to
be favourable for that tree, while Shíri and the neighbourhood of Mʿawó
is very productive in date-trees. Part of the bottom was laid out in
corn-fields, irrigated from Kháttatír, near which some huts were
standing, while a larger village, at present deserted, is situated on
the brow of the slope dominating the valley. It is called Burka-drússo,
or Burka-drústo. Here we enjoyed a few hours of tranquil repose; but
with the exception of this our enjoyment was very scanty, having nothing
to breakfast upon but a handful of dates and some water. But our
material wants were inconsiderable in comparison with the disappointment
which we felt, as we clearly saw that all hope of reaching the Bahar el
Ghazál, or even Mʿawó, was to be given up, and the hope of attaining
those districts had been the only reason which had induced us to join
our fate with this band of freebooters. We had spent all the property
that remained to us to enable us to undertake this expedition, and our
reflections therefore were far from pleasant.

When the heat of the day had passed by, the Arabs pursued their march,
and we followed them, reascending the higher level and marching over a
pleasant country well adorned with trees and bushes, while we left a
hollow called Núkko on our left, one of the three vales of Shitáti which
bear this name, and further on crossing another one called Arnánko. When
night approached, our companions began to put their horses into a gallop
in order to arrive betimes, while we preferred going on more slowly.

The country here became more undulating, and afterwards even rugged, and
we made our way as well as we could in the dark, stumbling along over a
rugged ground in a north-westerly direction, and were not a little
delighted when at length we saw the fires of the encampment, which this
time had not been pitched on the highest level, but rather in a hollow
not far from the well. Its name is Bír el Hamésh, or Yégil, or, as it is
generally pronounced, Yíggeli. We were the more delighted to reach it,
as we found here, not only all our people and luggage, but also
provisions, and we were nearly famished. Of course, we were most
cheerfully hailed by those of our servants whom, with the remainder of
the Arabs, we had left at the Bír el Kúrna, and who had felt the
greatest anxiety about our safety, on account of the many unfavourable
rumours which had reached them with regard to the proceedings and
sufferings of our party. They had transported the camp from Bír el Kúrna
to this place several days previously, and were looking forward to our
return most anxiously.

We immediately attacked a bowl of camel’s milk, and thus materially
comforted, rested outside our tents enjoying the freshness of the
evening. The camp or dowar was rather narrow, being encumbered by the
booty which had been taken from the enemy; and the people, dreading lest
the enemy might follow them, all huddled closely together, and kept
strict watch. In such circumstances the wailings of the women over the
dead, which sounded through the night, accompanied by loud, mournful
strokes on the great drum, could not fail to make a deep impression.
However, we passed here tranquilly the following day, and enjoyed rest
and repose the more as the weather was very oppressive.

We received here the positive news that the body of Wadáy horsemen who
had come to the assistance of the Woghda, and had caused the Arabs so
much fear and anxiety the day before, had returned to Mʿawó; and a very
curious story was told with regard to them, which at once shows how
highly these horsemen of Wadáy are respected by the Arabs, and the
esteem which they themselves entertain for the latter. Thirty Wadáy
horsemen were said to have arrived with the Woghda in consequence of
their entreaties, and to have followed with them the traces of our
friends, the Woghda representing to them that many of the latter had
been killed. Thus they arrived in the morning when we had just left the
camp at Áláli, and the dust raised by our host was plainly visible in
the distance; but when the Woghda instigated the Wadáy people to go and
attack that host, they wanted to assure themselves how many of the Arabs
had fallen in the last battle, in which thirty-four of the Woghda were
said to have been slain, and when they found only two tombs, the latter
told them that in each there were ten bodies; but the Wadáy people,
being anxious to make sure of the valour of their friends, had the tombs
dug up, and found only two buried in each. Whereupon they stigmatized
the Woghda as liars, and felt little inclined to follow the valiant
robbers who had killed so many of the enemy, while they had lost so few
of their own. But this story may have been adorned by our friends the
Welád Slimán, who could not even deny that, besides a great deal of
other booty from their own camp, which the enemy had succeeded in
carrying away, the chief of the Woghda could pride himself on the red
bernús which we had given as a present to Sheikh Ghét; nay, he could
even boast of four horses taken from the Arabs.

[Sidenote: Sunday, October 26th.]

This and the following day the Arabs were all busy in writing, or
getting letters written, to Kúkawa, as a courier was to leave. I myself
was almost the only person who did not get a note ready; for I could not
muster sufficient energy to write a letter. Had I been strong enough, I
should have had sufficient leisure to make up the whole journal of my
excursion to the eastern parts of Kánem; but I was quite unable, and the
consequence was, that this part of my diary always remained in a very
rough state. Sheikh Ghét, who thought that we were greatly indebted to
him for having seen so much of the country, sent for a variety of
things; but we were only able to comply with very few of his wishes. On
our telling him that we were not at all satisfied with what we had seen,
and that, in order not to waste more time, we had the strongest wish to
return to Kúkawa as soon as possible, he wanted to persuade us that he
himself was to leave for the capital of Bórnu in five or six days. But
we prudently chose to provide for ourselves, and not rely upon his
promise.

[Sidenote: Monday, October 27th.]

The courier for Kúkawa left in the morning, and in the evening a party
of freebooters made an attack upon the camels of the Arabs, but, being
pursued by the horsemen, whose great merit it is to be ready for every
emergency, they were obliged to leave their booty, and be contented to
escape with their lives. The vale in which the well is situated is
rather more exuberant than is the case generally, and there were several
pools of stagnant water, from which the cattle were watered. There was
even a real jungle, and here and there the den of a ferocious lion, who
did not fail to levy his tribute on the various species of animal
property of our friends, and evinced rather a fancy for giving some
little variety to his meals; for a horse, a camel, and a bullock became
his prey.

[Sidenote: Tuesday, October 28th.]

Seeing that there was a caravan of people forming to go to Kúkawa, while
the Arabs intended once more to return to Burka-drússo, we at once went
to the chief to inform him that we had made up our minds to go with the
caravan. A chief of the Haddáda, or rather Búngo, arrived with offerings
of peace on the part of the Shíri, and came to see us, together with the
chief mentioned above, Kédl Batrám, who was the father-in-law of the
khalífa of Mʿawó; Kóbber, or rather the head man of the Kóbber, and
other great men of the Fugábú; and I amused them with my musical box.
Overweg and I, disappointed in our expectations of penetrating further
eastward, prepared for our return-journey, and I bought a small skin of
tolerable dates for half a túrkedí; while to ʿAbd-Allah, who had been
our mediator with the chief, I made a present of a jeríd, in order not
to remain his debtor.

All this time I felt very unwell, which I attribute principally to the
great changes of atmosphere, the nights being cool and the days very
warm.

[Sidenote: Friday, October 31st.]

Though we were determined to return to Kúkawa, we had yet once more to
go eastward. The Arabs removed their encampment to Arnánko, the hollow
which we passed on our way from Burka-drússo to Yégil. There had been a
great deal of uncertainty and dispute amongst them with reference to the
place which they were to choose for their encampment; but though, on the
following day, very unfavourable news was brought with regard to the
security of the road to Bórnu, the departure of the caravan nevertheless
remained fixed for the 2nd November; for in the morning one of the Welád
Slimán arrived from Kúkawa, accompanied by two Bórnu horsemen, bringing
letters from the vizier, requesting the Arabs, in the most urgent terms,
to remove their encampment without delay to Késkawa, on the shore of the
lake, whither he would not fail to send the whole remainder of their
tribe who at that time were residing in Kúkawa; for he had positive
news, he assured them, that the Tawárek were meditating another
expedition against them on a large scale.

The report seemed not without foundation; for the three messengers had
actually met, on their road between Bárrowa and Ngégimi, a party of ten
Tawárek, three on foot, and the rest on horseback, and had only escaped
by retreating into the swamps formed by the lake. This news, of course,
spread considerable anxiety amongst the Arabs, who were still more
harassed the same day by information received to the effect that a party
of fifteen Wadáy horsemen were lying in ambush in a neighbouring valley;
and a body of horsemen were accordingly sent out to scour the country,
but returned without having seen anybody.

[Sidenote: Sunday, November 2nd.]

The day of our departure from Kánem at length arrived. Sorry as we were
to leave the eastern shore of the lake unexplored, we convinced
ourselves that the character of our mission did not allow us to risk our
fate any longer by accompanying these freebooters.[11] The camels we had
taken with us on this expedition were so worn out that they were unable
to carry even the little luggage we had left, and Sheikh Ghét made us a
present of two camels, which, however, only proved sufficient for the
short journey to Kúkawa; for the one fell a few paces from the northern
gate on reaching the town, and the other a short distance from the
southern gate on leaving it again on our expedition to Músgu.

The caravan with which we were to proceed was numerous; but the whole of
the people were Kánembú, who carried their little luggage on pack-oxen
and a few camels, while, besides ourselves, there were only two
horsemen. But there were some respectable people among them, and even
some women richly adorned with beads, and, with their fine regular
features and slender forms, forming a strong contrast to the ugly
physiognomy and square forms of the Bórnu females. The difference
between the Bórnu and Kánembú is remarkable, although it is difficult to
account for by historical deduction.

We were so fortunate as to perform our home-journey without any serious
accident, although we had some slight alarms. The first of these
occurred when we approached the town of Berí and found all the
inhabitants drawn up in battle-array, at a narrow passage some distance
from the town; and at the first moment there was considerable alarm on
both sides: but we soon learned that they had taken us for Tawárek, of
whom a numerous freebooting party, consisting of 200 camels and about as
many horses, had a short time previously carried away all the cattle
belonging to the place. The state of the country was so insecure that
the inhabitants would not allow Mr. Overweg to stay here,
notwithstanding his earnest protestations, so that he was obliged to
make up his mind to proceed with the caravan, although he was sensible
of the danger connected with such an undertaking; and certainly, if we
had met with a tolerably strong party of the Tawárek, our companions
would have afforded us very little protection. We were so fortunate,
however, as to pass through this infested track just at the time when an
expedition, laden with booty, had returned homewards.

We, however, met more than forty Búdduma half a day’s journey beyond
Ngégimi, armed with spears and shields, and clad in nothing but their
leather apron. They had been occupied in preparing salt from the roots
of the siwák or _Capparis sodata_; and when they saw the first part of
our caravan coming through the thick forest, they commenced an attack,
so that Overweg and I were obliged to fire a few random shots over their
heads, when, seeing that we were stronger than they had supposed, and
recognizing some friends among the Kánembú, they allowed us to pass
unmolested. But our whole march from Ngégimi to Bárrowa, through the
thick underwood with which the shores of the lake are here overgrown,
resembled rather a flight than anything else.

On the 10th we reached the komádugu; and after some lively negotiation
with the governor or shitíma, who resides in the town of Yó, I and my
companion were allowed to cross the river the same afternoon: for it has
become the custom with the rulers of Bórnu to use the river as a sort of
political quarantine, a proceeding which of course they can only adopt
as long as the river is full. During the greater part of the year
everybody can pass at pleasure. Even after we had crossed, we were not
allowed to continue our journey to the capital, before the messenger,
who had been sent there to announce our arrival, had returned with the
express permission that we might go on. The shores round the komádugu
were greatly changed, the river being now at its highest. Extensive
patches were cultivated with wheat, being regularly laid out in small
quadrangular beds of from four to five feet in diameter, which were
watered morning and evening from the river by means of buckets and
channels.

We reached Kúkawa on the 14th, having met on the road a party of about
fifty Welád Slimán, who were proceeding to join their companions in
Kánem. We were well received by our host, the vizier of Bórnu.

We had already heard from the governor of Yó, that the sheikh and his
vizier were about to leave in a few days on an expedition; and, being
desirous of employing every means of becoming acquainted with new
regions of this continent, we could not but avail ourselves of this
opportunity, however difficult it was for us, owing to our entire want
of means, to make the necessary preparations for another campaign, and
although the destination of the expedition was not quite certain.

[Illustration: Drawn by J. M. Bernatz, from a Sketch by Dr. Barth.

M. & N. Hanhart, lith. et impt.

KANÉMMA CHIEF.]


[Footnote 11: The information which, in the weak and exhausted state I
was then reduced to, and under the unfavourable circumstances in which I
was placed as an hostile intruder, I was able to collect with regard to
this country, once the mighty and populous kingdom of Kánem, and now
reduced to the desolate abode of the scanty remnants of the former
native population preyed upon every day by roving and lawless tribes
from different quarters, I shall put together in an Appendix (I.) at the
end of this volume, as well as the interesting geographical details with
regard to Kánem in its flourishing state, as they are to be gleaned from
the historical work of Imám Ahmed (Appendix II.). The dates of the
earlier history of Kánem, as far as they have come to our knowledge,
have been detailed in a former chapter, Vol. II.]




[Illustration: DR. BARTH’S TRAVELS IN NORTH AND CENTRAL AFRICA Sheet No.
10.

MAP OF THE ROUTE from KÚKAWA TO MÚSGU 25 Novr. 1851-1 Feby. 1852.

Constructed and drawn by A. Petermann.

Engraved by E. Weller, _Duke Strt. Bloomsbury._

_London, Longman & Co._]


                              CHAP. XLII.

                 WARLIKE PREPARATIONS AGAINST MÁNDARÁ.


[Sidenote: November 25th, 1851.]

Ten days after having returned to our head-quarters,
from the wearisome journey to Kánem, I left Kúkawa again, in order to
join a new warlike expedition.

The sheikh and his vizier, with the chief part of the army, had set out
already, the previous Saturday. The route had not yet been determined
upon—it was, at least, not generally known; but Wándalá or, as the
Kanúri call it, Mándará was mentioned as the direct object of the march,
in order to enforce obedience from the prince of that small country,
who, protected by its mountains, had behaved in a refractory manner. The
chief motive of the enterprise, however, consisted in the circumstance
of the coffers and slave-rooms of the great men being empty; and, a new
supply being wanted, from whence to obtain it was a question of minor
importance. There was just then much talk about a final rupture between
ʿAbd e’ Rahmán and the vizier, the former having intimate relations with
the prince of Mándará; and it was for that reason that Mr. Overweg had
at first thought it better to remain behind.

My means were scanty in the extreme, and did not allow me to have a
mounted servant, my camp-followers consisting merely of the same naga or
“jíge,” as the Kanúri call the female camel, which had proved of the
highest value to me on the journey to Kánem, and of two very indifferent
Fezzáni lads, weak in mind and body,—Mohammed ben Habíb and Mohammed ben
Ahmed.

The weather being temperate, and my spirits excellent, I followed
cheerfully the Ngórnu road, with which I was well acquainted. The
country looked much more interesting now than three months before, on my
return from Ádamáwa. Then all was dry and barren, scarcely a single
fresh blade had started from the ground, and I was obliged to draw with
immense exertion my supply of water from a deep well near Kaine; now the
ground was covered with young herbs, the trees were in foliage, and,
near the very place of Kaine where the sheikh with his camp-followers
had rested the first night, a large lake had been formed by the rains.
This lake, which is surrounded by shady trees, retains its water until
two or three months after the rainy season, when it begins gradually to
dry up. I was therefore enabled to water my horse without any further
trouble, after which I followed my people, who were in advance. Here I
met with my friend Háj Edrís and Shitíma Makarémma, who were just
returning from the camp. They told me that the sheikh had encamped that
day at Kúkia, beyond Ngórnu. I therefore made a short halt at noon on
this side of that town, in order to reach the camp during the evening
without staying in the place; for the city, on all sides, at about an
hour’s distance, is almost entirely surrounded by fields devoid of
trees. After I had enjoyed about an hour’s rest, Overweg arrived with
the disagreeable tidings that his camel, soon after leaving the gate,
had fallen, and was unable to get up again even after the luggage had
been removed. He therefore sent his servant Ibrahím in advance, in order
to procure another camel from the vizier, while he remained with me.
When we set out again we took the direct route to the camp, the road
being enlivened by horsemen, camels, and pedestrians. The country on
this side was only cultivated in some places; we perceived, however, two
miles behind Ngórnu a carefully-kept cotton-plantation, and the fields
near the village of Kúkia were well cultivated.

The whole of this fertile plain became a prey to the inundations of the
Tsád in the year 1854, caused by a sinking of the ground, when the whole
country was changed in the most marvellous way. Here we obtained a first
view of the camp with its tents; but it made no remarkable impression
upon me, being still in an unfinished state, including only those people
who were in the most intimate connection with the court.

The “ngáufate” having its fixed arrangements, our place was assigned
near the tents of Lamíno, at some distance east from those of Háj
Beshír. As the greater part of the courtiers were taking at least a
portion of their harím with them to the “kerígu,” a simple tent was not
sufficient for them; but by means of curtains made of striped cotton-
stuff a certain space is encompassed in order to insure greater privacy.
For the sheikh and the vizier, as long as we remained in the Bórnu
territories, at every new encampment an inclosure of matting was
erected; for it is not the custom, as has been asserted, to separate the
royal camp from that of the rest, at least not on expeditions into a
hostile country, nor has it been so in former times. The common soldiers
had no further protection, except some light and small huts with high
gables, which some of them had built with the tall stalks of the Indian
corn, which lay in great abundance on the stubble-fields.

But I shall first say a few words about our friend Lamíno, whom I have
already occasionally mentioned, and with whom on this expedition we came
into closer contact. This man furnishes an example how in this country,
notwithstanding the immense difference of civilization, in reality
matters take the same course as in Europe, where notorious rogues and
sharpers often become the best police-functionaries. Lamíno, originally
“El Amín,” had formerly been a much-dreaded highway-robber, but had now
become _chef de police_, or, as the Háussa people would say, “serkí-n-
karfi,” being, in consequence of his hard-heartedness and total want of
the gentler feelings, of the greatest importance to the vizier, whose
mild character did not allow him personally to adopt severe measures.
Imprisoning people and ordering them to be whipped constituted one of
Lamíno’s chief pleasures. He could, however, at times be very gentle and
amiable; and there was nothing which afforded greater amusement to my
companion and me than to hear him talk in the most sentimental manner of
the favourite object of his affections, a woman whom he carried with him
on this expedition. It caused us also great delight to witness the
terror he felt at our comparing the shape of the earth to an ostrich’s
egg; for he seemed to be quite at a loss to understand how he should be
able to preserve his balance on such a globe, with his great heaviness
and clumsiness.

[Sidenote: Wednesday, November 26th.]

Early in the morning the signal for the decampment of the army was given
in front of the tent of the sheikh, by the sound of the great drum; and
in broad battle-array (“báta”) the army with its host of cavalry moved
onwards over the plain, which was covered with tall reeds, and showed
only here and there a few signs of cultivation.

This time I still remained with the camels and the train-oxen, which,
mixed with pedestrians and some single horsemen in long unbounded lines,
kept along the road, while single troops of Kánembú spearmen, in their
light fanciful garments, mostly consisting of a small apron of rags, or
a hide tied round the loins, and armed with their light wooden shields,
passed the luggage train, shouting out in their wild native manner.
Thus, after a march of about eleven miles, we reached the cotton-fields
of Yédi, a town of considerable magnitude, surrounded by a clay wall in
a state of good repair. We passed it on a rising ground to our left,
while the country on the north-western side spread out in one continuous
sandy plain, dotted here and there by a few dúm-bushes (ngílle) and by a
few single dúm-palms. On this side of the town, at about a quarter of an
hour’s distance, after the autumnal rains, a large pond is formed, on
the borders of which gardens of onions are planted by the inhabitants of
Yédi, and irrigated with the aid of khattatír.

The sun was intensely hot; and the heat at noon was very great. Strange
to say, during all this time I neglected to make thermometrical
observations; and as far as I am aware Overweg did not pay more
attention to this subject than myself: but the reason of this neglect
was, that we usually started early in the morning, and seldom had shade
in the neighbourhood of our tents at noon; for these, which by this time
were so much worn that every object inside cast a shadow as well as
outside, could give us, of course, no measure for the temperature of the
air.

Our protector Lamíno afterwards sent us an excellent dish of rice boiled
in milk and covered with bread and honey. The rice was of a whiteness
unusual in this country. Having received likewise a dish of bread and
honey from the vizier, we thought it our duty to pay him a visit, and
through his mediation to the sheikh also. The sheikh had alighted at his
spacious clay mansion outside the walls of the city; and he was just
occupied with granting a grand reception to the townspeople.

After the usual exchange of compliments, our discourse turned upon
Captain Denham (Ráís Khalíl), who had once taken the same road in
conjunction with Kashélla Bárka Ghaná, and with Bú-Khalúm. On this
occasion also the manner in which old Mʿallem Shádeli or Chádeli, then a
simple fáki, who was present, behaved towards that Christian was
mentioned. We related to them what a faithful description Major Denham
had given, in the narrative of his adventures, of the hostile
disposition of the fáki, when the old mʿallem, who was now one of the
grandees of the empire, in order to revenge himself upon Major Denham
and ourselves, described to the assembly, with sundry sarcastic hints,
how he had seen the Major, after his shameful defeat at Musfáya, half
dead and stripped of his clothes, and exhibiting to uninitiated eyes all
the insignia which mark the difference between the faithful and
unfaithful. The whole spirit in which the story was told bore evidence
of the enlightened character and the tolerance of these gentlemen.

All the people behaved very friendly; and the sheikh sent us in the
evening two sheep, a load of “ngáberí” or sorghum, besides two dishes of
prepared food. We were also entertained by a young musician, who had
accompanied Mr. Overweg during his voyage on the Tsád; and in this way
there was no end of feasting. Nor was there any want of intellectual
food, the inquisitive and restless vizier being desirous of learning
from us as much as possible on this expedition, where he enjoyed plenty
of leisure. Here we remained also the following day, as some more
detachments were to join the army.[12]

[Sidenote: Friday, November 28th.]

The ngáufate advanced as far as the town of Márte. Not far from Yédi
there extends, in a southerly direction, a very expansive plain devoid
of any sort of vegetation except some mimosas. This is the beginning of
the “fírki” ground, which comprises so large a space in the southern
regions of Bórnu, and of which I have repeatedly spoken on former
occasions; but the plantation of the _Holcus cernuus_, called “másakwá”
or “mósogá” (which is limited to this peculiar territory), had not
turned out well this year, in consequence of the scarcity of rain.

I had marched in advance with my camel, when the vizier got sight of me,
and begged me to come to the sheikh. After having saluted me in the most
friendly way, he asked me why I always wore my pistols in my belt round
the waist, instead of fixing them at the saddle-bow; but he praised my
foresight when I appealed to the example of Ráís Khalíl, who, when
thrown from his horse, on his unlucky expedition to Mándará, remained
without a weapon in his hand. However, he was of opinion that at
present, with such a large army, no danger of this kind was to be
feared. He showed me also, in the most flattering manner, that he had
imitated my example of having my chronometer continually girded around
my waist; and he assured me that he found it very convenient.

The troop was here proceeding in stately order, and a broad line of
battle deployed, one officer, with the title of jérma, riding in
advance, and being followed by the four fan-bearers of the sheikh, in
full array; but a little further on, a small tract of underwood
compelled them to change their order of march, and proceed in one long
line. The vizier was kind enough to send me a message to the effect that
I had better get in front, so as not to be in the midst of the
confusion.

The place of encampment was chosen on the north-west side of the town of
Márte; and when the sheikh had dismounted, in order to take possession
of the mat house which had been prepared for him, the whole host of
cavalry galloped up in the fiercest manner, before I was able to get out
of their way, so that I received a very severe shock from a horseman,
who struck against me with great violence.

In the afternoon my friend and companion on my journey to Ádamáwa,
Kashélla Bíllama, called on me; and we mounted on horseback, in order to
pay a visit to the market, which is held every Friday outside the
western gate of the town, where an open area surrounded by several wells
spreads out. But the market, at least that day, was very insignificant:
it was not furnished with a single shed or stall, and not a single
article of manufacture was exposed, Negro millet, butter, and wooden
bowls being almost the only articles offered for sale; and sellers, as
well as buyers, were very few in number. The town contains about four
thousand inhabitants, and, taking into account the strategetical art of
this country, possesses proper defences, the clay wall being in a good
state of repair, and having a gate on each side excepting the side of
the market, where there are two. Towards the east there is a little
cultivated ground, and on the north a small suburb, consisting of large,
conical, thatched huts, where, besides Kanúri, several Fúlbe or Felláta
families are living. The interior of the town consists of narrow lanes;
and most of the houses are clay buildings. There was nothing interesting
to be seen; but I was agreeably surprised when my companion, who was a
native of this place, took me to pay my compliments to his mother, who
kept a small shed, or rather, as we should say, a shop, in the little
market-place inside the town. It was certainly a trait of a good-natured
and friendly disposition.

We remained here the following day; but our stay was not at all
pleasant, there being very little shade near the encampment, while our
tents were so worn that they scarcely afforded any protection against
the sun. Owing to the smallness of my means, I had been obliged to leave
my large tent, in Kúkawa.

[Sidenote: Sunday, Nov. 30th.]

The following morning I was obliged to remain behind the army a
considerable time, in order to allow the air to acquire a more genial
temperature. I enjoyed the more the beautiful morning, although the
country did not possess many attractions. Here, also, it exhibited that
black boggy soil, called “fírki,” which is peculiar to the southern
parts of Bórnu, though near the village of Little Márte, or “Márte
ghaná,” some slight variation was seen, in a crop of Indian corn or
“holcus” still standing in the fields; the ears, however, were quickly
plucked off by the undisciplined army. Further on I reached a group of
villages ornamented by a cluster of beautiful tamarind-trees, and here
lay down awhile to enjoy the delicious shade. Numbers of people were
resting here and there, in order to partake of the hospitality of the
villagers; for, to the ruin of the country there is no commissariat in
these armies to provide for the wants of the private individual, and
every one must supply himself with food in the best manner he can.

Our march, however, was very short, the encampment having been chosen on
the west side of the town of Alá. This town also is of some importance,
and surrounded by a wall in good repair, with two gates on the north and
west sides and only one on the south and east. The interior is enlivened
by large trees, consisting of chédia (elastic gum), and kúrna trees,
while the huts are remarkable for their high conical roof, the thatch of
which, in a great many instances, is interlaced by the clasps of the
_Cucurbita lagenaria_, the whole looking very cheerful. The sheikh
having requested me repeatedly to give my compass up to him, as he
imagined it would be sufficient for one of us to possess such an
instrument, I thought it prudent to offer him my musical-box as a
present, remarking that I would willingly give away such articles, but
not scientific instruments. Several hares had been caught in the course
of the day; and in the evening we had some of them very palatably
dressed by the experienced female slave of Lamíno.

[Sidenote: Monday, December 1st.]

Soon after starting, early in the morning we had to traverse some
underwood, which caused a great rush and much confusion among the
undisciplined army, so that two or three horsemen were seriously
injured. On such occasions, as well as in the thick covert of the
forest, I had full opportunity of testing the valuable properties of the
Arab stirrups, which protect the whole leg, and, if skilfully managed,
keep every obtruder at a respectful distance; indeed I am almost sure
that if, on these my African wanderings, I had made use of English
stirrups I should have lost both my legs. Our way afterwards led over
monotonous fírki ground, where we were cheered by the sight of some fine
crops of sorghum. Detached hamlets were seen in every direction, even
where the country did not present any traces of cultivation; but, with
the exception of the Shúwa villages, this province does not contain many
small hamlets, the population being concentrated in larger places.
Underwood succeeded to the fírki ground, and extended to the very walls
of the large town of Díkowa.

The sight of this town, with its walls over-towered by the regularly-
shaped crowns of magnificent fig-trees, was very imposing. The western
wall, along which our road lay, was covered with women and children, and
we met a numerous procession of females in their best attire, who were
going to salute their sovereign upon his arrival at the encampment; and
coming from the capital, which is distinguished by the ugliness of its
female inhabitants, I was agreeably surprised at their superior
countenance and figure. But though the observer might be gratified with
the personal appearance of the natives, their industry was questionable;
for only a small tract of cultivated ground was to be seen on this side
of the town, girt by a forest of mighty trees.

The encampment, or “ngáufate,” began to form close to the southern wall
of the town, amidst sandy ground free from trees, and completely
surrounded by a thick covert. Although it was December, the sun was very
powerful; and, until the camels arrived, I sat down in the shade of a
“bíto” or _Balanites_, while the encampment was spreading out in all
directions, and approached the edge of the covert. I then gave up my
shady place to Kashélla Játo, an officer of the musketeers, who, in
acknowledgment, offered me a clear piece of delicious gum, just taken
from the tree and full of sweet fluid; in which state it is certainly a
delicacy, and is so esteemed here as well as in Western Negroland. The
encampment springing up gradually from the ground, with its variety of
light dwellings built only for the moment—the multifarious appearance of
armed people—the numbers of horses of all colours, some of the most
exquisite beauty—the uninterrupted train of beasts of burden, camels,
and pack-oxen, laden with the tents, furniture, and provisions, and
mounted by the wives and concubines of the different chiefs, well
dressed and veiled,—altogether presented a most interesting picture; for
now almost the whole host or “kebú,” had collected, and twenty thousand
men, with ten thousand horses, and at least as many beasts of burden,
were no doubt assembled on this spot.

At length our two tents also were pitched, and we could make ourselves
as comfortable as the scanty shade which they afforded allowed us.

In the evening our conversation with the vizier turning upon the means
which remained for Bórnu to attain once more to her former greatness,
these devastating expeditions and slave-hunts fell under discussion; and
I took the liberty to indicate, in opposition to such a system, the
necessity of a well-established government, with a strong military force
capable of extending their dominion. I also called the attention of the
vizier to the point, that, as they could never rely upon the Turks, who
might easily cut off all supplies of foreign merchandise, it was greatly
to their interest to keep open to themselves that large river which
passed a short distance to the south of their dominions, and which would
enable them to supply themselves with every kind of European manufacture
at a much cheaper rate than they were able to obtain them by the
northern route. He did not hesitate to throw the whole blame upon the
former sultans; but those poor men, when they possessed the dominion of
the Kwána tribe, probably had no idea that the river which ran through
their territory joined the sea; and even if they had, the relation
between Islám and Christianity at that period was of so hostile a
character, that, for the very reason that this stream might open to the
Christians a more easy access to their country, they shunned any nearer
connection with it as dangerous. However, under the present entirely
altered state of affairs, there is no question that an energetic native
chief, basing his power on a supply of European merchandise, as
facilitated by the river Bénuwé, might easily dominate a great part of
Central Africa; but energy is just the very thing these people are
wanting in.

From this point of our discourse there was an easy transition to that of
the abolition of slavery; and here my late lamented friend Mr. Overweg
made a most eloquent speech on this important question. The vizier could
not bring forward any other argument in his defence, than that the
slave-trade furnished them with the means of buying muskets; and,
lamentable as it is, this is certainly the correct view of the subject,
for even on the west coast the slave-trade originated in the cupidity of
the natives in purchasing the arms of Europeans. Such is the history of
civilization! If the poor natives of Africa had never become acquainted
with this destructive implement of European ingenuity, the slave-trade
would never have reached those gigantic proportions which it has
attained. For at first the natives of Africa wanted firearms as the
surest means of securing their independence of, and superiority over,
their neighbours; but in the further course of affairs, these
instruments of destruction became necessary, because they enabled them
to hunt down less favoured tribes, and, with a supply of slaves so
obtained, to procure for themselves those luxuries of European
civilization with which they had likewise become acquainted. This is the
great debt which the European owes to the poor African, that after
having caused, or at least increased, this nefarious system on his first
bringing the natives of those regions into contact with his state of
civilization, which has had scarcely any but a demoralizing effect, he
ought now also to make them acquainted with the beneficial effects of
that state of society. Entering, therefore, into the views of our hosts,
I told them that their country produced many other things which they
might exchange for firearms, without being forced to lay waste the whole
of the neighbouring countries, and to bring misery and distress upon so
many thousands.

I informed them of the last negotiations of Her Britannic Majesty’s
messengers with the king of Dahomé, when our friend, listening with the
greatest interest to the account of these noble endeavours of Her
Majesty’s government, which he could not but admire, declared, in the
most distinct manner, that if the British government were able to
furnish them with a thousand muskets and four cannons, they would be
willing to subscribe any obligatory article for abolishing the slave-
trade in their country—of course not including, all at once, domestic
slavery; for such a measure would scarcely be feasible in a country
where all the relations of domestic life are based upon this system. But
the abolition of the foreign slave-trade would be the beginning of a
better system. However, I told them that, supposing Government were to
entertain such a proposal, the first thing for them to do was to open
themselves a road to the river Bénuwé, as it would be difficult, not
only with respect to the state of the country to be traversed, but also
on account of the suspicions of the Turks, to provide them with such a
military store by way of the desert. But at present this whole question
has been superseded; the vizier himself has succumbed, and his master,
the sheikh ʿOmár, although he has been fortunate enough once more to
usurp the sovereign authority, seems scarcely sufficient to hold out any
guarantee of the stability of his dynasty. Moreover, the slave-trade at
present is, in fact, abolished on the north coast; and this circumstance
must eventually exercise a great influence over the destinies of Bórnu,
on account of its central situation, especially if at length a regular
intercourse be established on the river Bénuwé.

It was our lot to remain here several days; for while the Kanúri people,
who were expected to join the expedition, had already assembled in
sufficient numbers, only a very small portion of the indigenous Arab or
Shúwa population had as yet come up; for almost all of them live in the
south-eastern parts of the country, where they have taken possession of
the deserted seats of former tribes, which were annihilated or weakened
in the relentless wars between Islamism and Paganism.

On the first day of our arrival, our encampment was very comfortable;
but every day that we stayed here it became more confined, owing
principally to the numerous cavalry of these Arab tribes, almost all of
whom are mounted; and many a new-comer was seen hurrying about without
being able to find a spot to lie down, or to meet with friends to treat
him. I myself had to entertain a respectable man among these Shúwa, of
the name of Háj Hamadán, belonging to the tribe of the Hasúnna.

This man, who generally had his settlement far to the east, in the Wádi
Guskáb, had come some time previously to Logón in order to pay a visit
to some relations of his, and had now joined this expedition. But one
must be very careful with these Shúwa; for, to use a common expression,
if you give them an inch, they are wont to take an ell. But for their
Jewish character, I should have liked to enter into more intimate
relations with them than I actually did.

Their emigration into these regions, at least several centuries ago, is
certainly not without interest; and, as I have already had occasion to
observe in another place, they preserve the characteristic type of their
race very distinctly—a middle-sized, slender figure (which, however, is
apt to become fuller as they advance in years), small pleasing features,
and a dark olive complexion. Their dialect is very peculiar; and while
it lays claim to a far greater purity than belongs to the dialects of
the coast, by the profusion of vowels which it has preserved, its
character is deteriorated, and becomes nearly ridiculous, by the
continued repetition and insertion of certain words. A Shúwa is not able
to say three words without inserting his favourite term “kúch, kúch,”
which corresponds to the English word “thorough,” but which is not
Arabic at all. When they omit the word “kúch,” they make use of another
term, “bérketek,” “your worship,” which at once bears testimony to the
servile and degraded position which they occupy in Negroland, although
in Bórnu they are still treated with some indulgence and lenity,
especially since the time when Mohammed Tiráb, the father of the present
vizier, who belonged to the tribe of the Sálamát, attained the highest
degree of power and influence in the country. In Wadáy again, even at
the present time, they are treated very badly.

Of Kanúri people, besides a few smaller bodies of troops, only two
officers, or kashéllas, ʿAli Marghí and Jérma, were wanting. All the
officers and bodies of troops on this side of the komádugu of Bórnu, the
so-called Yeou, were collected together, the only exception being
Kashélla Mánzo, my hospitable host in Zurríkulo, whose presence at his
post was required on account of the Tawárek; for, as regards the
officers and chiefs of the provinces on the other side of the komádugu,
nobody is required to take part in these expeditions of the sheikh,
every officer remaining at his post, except when his master enters upon
a war in his own quarters.

While the encampment itself presented considerable interest, as being
the temporary abode of so many people, the town of Díkowa, near which we
were encamped, seemed well deserving some attention, as having been
repeatedly the residence of the rulers of the country, and being still
one of the largest towns in the kingdom. I therefore paid a visit to it
in the afternoon of the second day of our stay, being accompanied by my
friend Bíllama. We entered the town by the western gate; and I saw that
the walls were about thirty feet high and terraced on the inside like
those of the capital, and of considerable breadth at the base: they were
in a state of good repair. I was struck by the height and round shape of
the huts, which entirely wanted the characteristic top, or, as the
Kanúri people call it, kógi ngímbe, and were of the same kind as I had
observed in the other towns of this southern province. Every hut had its
little courtyard, in some of which vegetation was seen, mostly karás.

The further we proceeded, the more I was pleased with the general
appearance of the town, the exterior of which had made a favourable
impression upon me on our first arrival. Large, beautiful, wide-
spreading fig-trees, ngábore, chédia or elastic gum-trees, and kórna-
trees, spread their shade all around, and two or three isolated papaw-
trees, or, as the Kanúri call them, bambús-másarbe, with their
remarkable feathery crowns and their smooth virgin-like stems, formed a
lively contrast to the broad-leafed canopy of the other trees, while the
hedges and fences of the courtyards were partly enlivened by a luxurious
creeper called “dagdágel” by the natives. The real nucleus of the town
seemed to consist entirely of clay houses.

After a very pleasant ride we reached the house of the “mainta,” or
governor, who still enjoys a certain degree of independence. The chief
ornament of the place in front of his house was the most splendid
caoutchouc-tree I have ever seen; indeed I can scarcely imagine that the
diameter of its crown, which was so regularly and symmetrically shaped
that it appeared as if effected by art, measured less than from seventy
to eighty feet. It really formed a beautiful fáge, or, as the Háusa
people call it, íchenbatú, or open council-hall, such as are common in
these places; but at present no political business of any importance was
transacted here, and it formed a favourite lounge for idle people,
amongst whom there was a troop of musicians, playing lustily upon their
instruments to console the petty chief for the loss of his former power,
which had dwindled away to a mere shadow. I would gladly have paid him a
visit; but, poor as I was at the time, and without a single article
worthy of his acceptance, I was rather glad that I was under no
obligation to him. The interruption in the daily course of life of the
inhabitants, by the presence of the army, was the more to be lamented as
it prevented me from becoming an eye-witness to the chief industry of
the natives, which consists in weaving and manufacturing into shirts the
cotton which they grow; for they are almost exclusively cotton-growers,
and have very little corn. But although they are able to produce a fine
sort of texture, they are very badly off for dyeing, and in this respect
are far outstripped by the inhabitants of Ujé and Mákari. Instead of the
beating of shirts, which forms so pleasant a sound in many other
industrial towns of Negroland, there was nothing to be heard but the
sound which proceeded from the powder-mill, if I may be allowed to give
this grand name to a yard in which eight slaves were employed in
pounding powder in large wooden mortars; for this is the way in which
powder is prepared in Negroland, and during my stay in Bagírmi every
time I had my coffee pounded (as I did not possess a coffee-mill), I
excited the suspicion that I was preparing powder. Of course the
presence of the army was the reason why so little activity was to be
seen at present, and the little market, or durríya, which is held in the
afternoon, was very badly attended; but the size and populousness of the
town made such an impression upon me, that I thought myself justified in
rating the number of inhabitants at about twenty-five thousand.

Altogether I was so much pleased with the character of the place, that
on expressing my satisfaction to one of the inhabitants who came to
salute my companion, with the words, “Átema bílla ngílla,” “This is a
fine town,” he replied, with conscious pride, “Áte bílla déka gení, áte
bílla maíwa,” “This is not a country town; this is a royal residence.”
We reached the gate on the north-west side of the town, just at the
moment when ʿAbd e’ Rahmán, the eldest brother of the sheikh ʿOmár,
arrived with a party of horsemen. What his business was I do not know;
but before the expedition left the town, there had been a great many
unfavourable rumours concerning his ambitious designs, and the
malcontents expected that he would avail himself of this opportunity for
striking a blow at the vizier, in order to prevent the expedition from
proceeding against Mándará, as he himself was supposed to be on friendly
terms with the chief of that country. But whatever may have been his
intentions, he found his rival still too strong; and, after a friendly
parting from his brother, he retraced his steps.

The view over the encampment, which presented itself when from the north
I turned to the south-west side of the town, was extremely interesting;
and I kept along the higher ground formed by the rubbish which had
accumulated at the foot of the wall. Tents of every description and
size—light sheds constructed with the long stalks of Indian corn,
supported by four poles, and connected lightly at the top and forming
high-topped gables—horses and men, all in the greatest confusion,
presented a busy scene of animated life; but the place where our tents
were pitched had become so confined, that I was glad to avail myself of
any opportunity which presented itself of roving about in the
neighbourhood.

The most attractive place was the komádugu, or water-course, which
passes at some distance to the south of the town, and is distinguished
by the special name of Yálowe. It was a very charming spot, winding
along through a rich and varied forest, bordered by an uninterrupted
line of the finest fig-trees, principally of the kind called “ngábore.”
The channel itself was only about forty yards wide, encompassed by banks
of from twelve to fifteen feet in height, and at present it was not
enlivened by a continuous stream, but contained several detached pools
of stagnant water. Although the water was cool, and not disagreeable to
the taste, still it was not very pure, and could not but contain the
germs of much disease. This is the same komádugu with which, in its
upper course in the territory of Ujé, I had become acquainted on my
journey to Ádamáwa.[13] The banks all around were enlivened by horses
and pack-oxen, who were enjoying the rich verdure; and there was not a
shady tree but had been taken possession of by a troop of Kánembú or
Kanúri, in order to find that comfortable repose which the noisy
encampment could not afford.

Having heard that the wealth of the inhabitants of Díkowa consisted of
cotton, I expected to find extensive well-kept cotton-plantations; but
although the article was cultivated to a great extent, I was astonished
at the neglected appearance which it exhibited, the cotton-fields being
almost buried beneath the thicket, and overgrown not only with rank
grass, but even with trees and bushes, so that scarcely any space was
left for the plants to spread out; nevertheless their luxuriant growth
bore ample testimony to the rich nature of the soil, and gave an idea of
the wealth that lies buried in these regions. I have already observed,
on another occasion, that the natives of Negroland take very little care
of their cotton-plantations; and there is no doubt that, if sufficient
care was bestowed, quite a different quality might be produced.

I roved about in this wild and fertile region till I was entirely hemmed
in by an impenetrable thicket. While returning hence to our encampment
by a more westerly path, I was ruminating in my mind how the former
rulers of this country had evinced so much more feeling for the bounty
and beauty of nature than its present possessors; for while these have
chosen for their residence the most monotonous district of the empire,
the former selected those parts which nature itself had embellished—the
shores of the so-called Yeou, or the komádugu Wáube, and this fine
watercourse of Díkowa; and they not only chose the most interesting
spots, but they even embellished them by art, as the large artificial
basins in the neighbourhood of Ghasréggomo, Ghámbarú, and Dámasak amply
testify. In this respect it is not uninteresting that we are informed by
the imám Áhmed, the historian of the king Edrís Alawóma, that his
master, when he visited the town of Fíka, could not forego the pleasure
of paying a visit to the famous little alpine lake which lies at some
distance from that town. Although the country of Bórnu is far from being
the most favoured part of Negroland, yet the shores of these
watercourses are very rich indeed, and capable of maintaining a numerous
population.

In returning to our encampment, I passed the market or durríya, which
was held every afternoon on the west side of the encampment. It was
really a busy scene, not yielding in importance to the little daily
market of the capital; and this was not at all marvellous, as a greater
crowd of people, and a far greater number of horses, were gathered here
than the average population of Kúkawa. Not only were provisions, such as
meat, grain, beans, ground-nuts, and other articles of a like
description, offered for sale; but even small luxuries; and there was a
good deal of bartering, as the buyers were destitute of
currency—kúngona, or cowries, as well as gábagá or cotton strips. I also
observed that the encampment, especially on this side, where it was
skirted by a thick covert of trees, was encircled by a living wall of
light Kánembú spearmen, who were keeping watch; for although the army
was still in its own territory, yet, in the weak state of the
government, a certain degree of insecurity already commences here; and
the very first evening of our being encamped on this spot, the ngáufate
was roused by the gangéma, or announcement by beat of drum, to the
effect that everybody should be on his guard against horse-stealers.

While the country around presented interesting features, and the
encampment itself exhibited a scene of great variety, the time we spent
here passed away comfortably and agreeably, with the sole exception that
the space allotted to us was too confined to be comfortable. We were on
the most friendly terms with the sheikh as well as with his vizier; and
all court etiquette was dispensed with. This went so far that I and my
companion accommodated our noble and princely friends with our woollen
jackets and drawers; for they began to feel the cold at night very
severely, and on these occasions the very respectable Háj Edrís had to
play the part of a royal laundress.

Already, during our hibernal stay in the country of Aïr, we had been
obliged to accommodate our old and austere friend Ánnur and his numerous
relatives with our Turkish waistcoats: but we had not yet condescended
to give away our under-clothing; and being ourselves extremely poor and
destitute in every respect, it was certainly not a little privation we
imposed upon ourselves. The clothes of the sheikh and his vizier were
all very wide, and not fit for keeping out the cold. I have repeatedly
had occasion to mention how sensitive the Africans are to cold; and I am
persuaded that, in the burning regions of Central Africa, a good cargo
of warm underclothing would find a ready sale, especially if it should
arrive in the months of December and January. But neither did our noble
hosts, on their part, fail to do everything in their power to render our
situation as comfortable as possible; and it was very satisfactory to
see how anxious the vizier was to supply us with all desirable
information.

One evening at a late hour, when I was reposing in my tent and about to
go to bed, he sent for me in the greatest hurry, as if my life or death
were at stake; and upon hastening thither, anxious to hear what was the
matter, I was told that the vizier had been informed of a person being
in the encampment who, like my old friend the mʿallem Katúri, had
accompanied the memorable expedition of Ámba Sámbo, the warlike chief of
Chámba, towards the country of Ígbo on the sea-coast. But while the
latter had gone to Mbáfu with the main body of the army, the adventurous
proceedings of that person had not even been limited by the boundaries
of the sea; and he informed me in the most positive and conclusive
manner that the body of troops which he accompanied had sailed along a
rocky coast for fifteen days, when they unexpectedly met with an island,
where they took possession of a number of muskets, their owners, who
were all dressed in jackets, having taken refuge in their large vessel.

He did not doubt that these people were Christians, and according to the
description which he gave me of the vessel, there can scarcely be any
doubt that it was a European one; but I did not feel quite certain as to
the point whether he had navigated a large river, or the open sea,
though I think it probable they went down the Niger, and surprised one
of the European traders at the mouth of the river. At any rate, however,
this is an extremely interesting circumstance. I apprehend that the
chiefs of Ádamáwa will hesitate in future to extend their expeditions so
far, after an English steamer has gone up the river to the very heart of
their own country. It was this same Bórnu horseman who informed me that,
on that expedition, all the horses had died from a disease proceeding
from worms.

While chatting together upon these subjects till after midnight, I had
an opportunity of giving the vizier some little information regarding
the peculiar character of the maritime power of the imám of Maskat, of
which he had never heard before, and which interested him exceedingly.
With the Arabs of Timbúktu, also, this subject formed a topic of the
highest interest, as they had no idea that there were people of the same
faith living on the eastern shores of this continent; and they delighted
in the thought, that even in those regions there were Moslems, who were
not quite destitute of political power. For, although the famous
traveller Ebn Batúta has given to his countrymen an account of these
regions, it was only in Sókoto that I met with a man, the learned Káderi
dan Táffa, who knew Sofála by name.

My friend Bíllama also frequently called on me, and furnished me with a
variety of information[14], while I applied myself strenuously to the
study of the Kanúri language, which had discouraged me at first, owing
to the difficulties of its grammatical structure: and I could scarcely
have had a better teacher than our friend Háj Edrís; for, being of
Kanúri origin, he had lived a great many years in the east, especially
in Medína, and had become almost an Arab. He was certainly an
intelligent and honest man; and in the course of our stay we became
indebted to him in many respects. Of course we could not expect him to
render his service gratuitously, as he himself was not in affluent
circumstances, though as a courtier he had to keep up a good appearance;
but being myself very poor at the time, I could do nothing but place him
upon a needle-pension, the needles being very useful in the encampment
for buying provisions.


[Footnote 12: Between Yédi and the Tsád, the following places are
situated—Léga, a considerable town surrounded by a wall; Díbbuwa,
Jíggeri, Manawáze, Górdiná, and Mógolám.]

[Footnote 13: With regard to the direction of its lower course, the
statements of the people do not entirely agree, and I shall have
occasion to say something more about it when I speak of my return
journey from Bagírmi.]

[Footnote 14: Among other things, he informed me that at a short
distance north from Díkowa lies the town Ájiri, equally surrounded by a
clay wall, and inhabited by Kanúri; but while a tribute is levied on
Díkowa by the Malá Mása Mándará, Ájiri belongs to a man called Ábsa.
About two hours south by west from Díkowa is another walled town, called
Gáwa; but this town still at the present day is inhabited by the ancient
population of the country, viz., the Gámerghú, and is the residence of a
petty native chief, Bíllama Sára, while another petty chief of the
Gámerghú has his residence in Degímba, the Dagwamba of Major Denham. Of
the Gámerghú I have spoken on a former occasion.]




                              CHAP. XLIII.

                    THE BORDER-REGION OF THE SHÚWA.


[Sidenote: Saturday, December 6th.]

At length, after a protracted stay, we left our encampment at Díkowa,
though still in complete uncertainty whether the expedition was
directed against Mándará or not; for as yet the chief of that little
country (which, through the adventures of Major Denham, has obtained
in Europe a greater share of attention than it really deserves),
relying upon the natural strength of his mountains, had not yet made
his submission. The rumours which we heard from thence were of the
most contradictory nature; and it seemed as if Abú Bakr, which is the
name of the present chief, had made up his mind to a determined
resistance, having retired into his mountain-fastnesses, to the great
disappointment of the vizier, who repeatedly asked me and my companion,
with great anxiety, what was to be done, and how it was possible for the
cavalry to attack the enemy in his mountainous retreat: for, whatever
military strength the Kanúri may still possess, it is almost solely to
be looked for in their cavalry. The former excellence of the Kánembú
spearmen, resulting from their enthusiastic devotion to their leader,
has disappeared long ago, at least since the overthrow of the old
dynasty; and the vizier had to expect very little sympathy from this
body, as most of them were decidedly favourable to the interest of his
adversary, ʿAbd e’ Rahmán. As far as I had been able to learn the nature
of those rocky mountains on my journey to Yóla, I could not but think
that not only the cavalry of Bórnu, but even the Kánembú spearmen,
accustomed as they were to the level plains of their country, would be
incapable of climbing those rocky cliffs.

The whole country was enveloped in a thick fog when we started in the
morning; so that the passage of the komádugu, with its steep banks,
caused a considerable crowding and pushing, which was far from
agreeable. When we had got safely over, we had to pass a thick forest
consisting of “bíto” and “kindín” or talha-trees; and on our left
appeared the large walled place of Áfagé, a considerable town, but not
so large as Díkowa. After only a short interval, we saw another town on
our right, called Kodége, the walls of which were in an advanced state
of decay, but were at present adorned with living battlements of male
and female spectators.

Proceeding a short distance onward, we encamped at an early hour to the
westward of another walled town, called Zógoma. The whole of this
district, favoured as it is by nature, seems to have been once in a very
flourishing condition. It was, however, rather odd that we should have
encamped here, as the horses had to be led back to Áfagé for water.

I had scarcely pitched my tent, when that cruel minister of police,
Lamíno, a man whose character my friend Háj Edrís used significantly to
describe in the few words, “kárgo díbbi, kíndi díbbi” (bad in heart, and
bad in deed), brought into my presence a famous cut-throat of the name
of Barka-ngólo, whose neck was secured in a large machine called “bégo,”
consisting of two pieces of wood from four to five feet in length, and
very heavy, so that every movement was accompanied with the greatest
pain. Nevertheless my mischievous friend persuaded himself that it would
gratify me to see this miserable wretch fight with another culprit
secured in the same manner, by giving to each of them a long whip of
hippopotamus-hide, and forcing them by threats to flog each other. It
was a horrible sight; and I had great difficulty in convincing my cruel
friend that such a scene was far from being agreeable to me. In order to
get rid of him, I presented him with a quantity of cloves to give to his
beloved ʿAáisha, of whose culinary powers we had already had several
proofs. He was greatly pleased with my present; and with an amorous
smile he described to me how deeply he was in love with his darling,
saying that he loved her, and she loved him also: “and,” added he in a
very sentimental way, “such a mutual love is the greatest bliss on
earth.” Europeans must not fancy that there is no such feeling among
these Africans as love, although it is not quite so ethereal as it
sometimes seems to be with us. Notwithstanding these amorous
declarations, which sounded very ridiculous coming from such a mass of
flesh as he was, I was glad when he was gone.

We were now approaching hostile territory, and in the evening a
“gangéma,” or proclamation accompanied by beat of drum, was made
throughout the whole encampment, to the effect that the train of camels
and pack-oxen, which previously had greatly hemmed in the cavalry,
should not start until after the former had moved on. Zógoma is the
farthest town of the Bórnu territory in this direction; and the
following day we encamped in a district of the name of Mása, close to a
swamp, thickly covered with water-plants, principally the _Pistia
stratiotes_. Several Shúwa villages were lying about at short distances
from each other.

On the road we passed some cotton-plantations and stubble-fields. The
chief agricultural produce of Mása consisted of “sábade,” the sweet
sorghum or _Sorghum saccharatum_. This sort of grain I had not yet seen
in the course of my journey; but in Díkowa my friend Malá Ibrám had sent
me a large quantity of it, in order that I might indulge in this African
luxury. At that period I was surprised at the great length of these
stalks, some of which measured fourteen feet; but how astonished was I
afterwards, when, in the course of my travels, in the luxuriant valleys
of Kébbi I found specimens of twice that length! This evening the vizier
treated us with the marrow of the “sábade,” which in snow-white pieces
of about eight inches in length, were neatly placed upon a straw cover
or “féfe,” such as are used in the country. While indulging in this
simple African dainty, our conversation, very naturally, turned upon the
cultivation as well as the preparation of sugar, which is one of those
articles of European industry that most excites the admiration of the
natives of this country. But when they learn in what a filthy manner it
is refined, they become horrified, and hesitate whether they shall say
farewell to this indulgence, or overcome the scruples and prejudices of
their creed.

There is no doubt that the “sábade” would yield a rich produce of sugar;
but it is not necessary to have recourse to this expedient, as the
sugar-cane itself grows wild in several regions of Negroland, and we
shall actually find a small plantation of it, and boiling-houses, on a
small scale, carried on by a native in the neighbourhood of Sókoto. Our
conversation at these African _soirées_ with the vizier became sometimes
so learned, that even Ptolemy with his “_Mandros oros_” was quoted. But,
sad as it must seem to all who, like myself, delight in going back into
remote antiquity, this famous mountain, which at the first sight seems
to be an ancient memorial of the Mándará mountains, of some 1700 years
standing, appears to belong entirely to Western Africa. Our kind host
always found great delight in every kind of information; it was only a
pity he was wanting in manly energy to carry out his good projects.

[Sidenote: Monday, December 8th.]

Woe to those regions through which an army takes its march in these
parts of the world, were it even their own country. We passed this
morning some very extensive corn-fields, the crops of which were of the
most luxuriant growth; but notwithstanding the piteous clamours, and
even the threats of the slaves who were watching on the highly-raised
platforms in order to keep away the birds from the corn, the rich ears
fell a prey to the hungry horsemen, for their own sustenance and that of
their animals. These raised platforms are here called “górgo;” and the
ropes which were fastened between them and the trees were provided with
small hollow gourds, “káre,” filled with stones, which, when set in
motion, were intended to frighten away the birds.

After a tolerable march, we took up our encampment near the straggling
hamlet Delhé, a locality touched at by Major Denham, on his unfortunate
expedition to Mándará, but placed by him much too far southward.

All the cottages in these Shúwa villages have a conical roof rising to a
great elevation, and tapering like a sugar-loaf,—the thatch being put on
in a very irregular way, and fastened with ropes, though it is
pleasantly and cheerfully adorned by the climbers of the “ságade” or
“kubéwa,” a species of the _Cucurbita melopepo_ (squash gourd), if not
identical with it, the fruit of which, when boiled, has a very pleasant
taste, and in some regions of Negroland, as far as Timbúktu, forms the
principal vegetable for seasoning food.

The long duration of the rainy season here, as well as in Ádamáwa,
renders sheds for the cattle necessary; and these consist of huts
constructed similarly to the dwellings of man, but more spacious, with
the exception that the walls consist merely of trunks of trees. The
Shúwa of this village, as well as those of a neighbouring one, which
after the name of a chief is called Háj Ámaka, belong to the tribe of
the Bulgówa, or ʿAwisíya. The place where we encamped was full of
brushwood; and it took us a long time to pitch our tents.

The variation of the temperature was so great, that I caught a severe
cold; it was therefore agreeable to me that we remained here the
following day: for while, during the greatest heat, at two o’clock,
P.M., the thermometer in the ventilated tent showed often from 93° to
96° F., during the night it generally fell to between 50° and 53°. The
vizier was kind enough, when I did not come to his _soirée_, to send one
of his young slaves with a censer; but I was so unfortunate as to excite
the anger of the little tyrannical messenger, who wanted me to imitate
their own custom, which is, to place the censer under their wide shirt,
and, by drawing the opening close over the head, to concentrate the
fumes arising from the incense under their shirt, and receive it into
the face, while I, thinking this rather too much, was satisfied with
holding my face over it.

[Sidenote: Wednesday, Dec. 10th.]

We made a short march in advance, and transferred our encampment to
Díggera, through a country where wilderness and cultivated ground
alternated. Here we remained the five following days; and I had
sufficient leisure to regret that I was not better provided with books.
Anxious to employ my time usefully, I began, with the assistance of two
Mándará, or rather Wándalá slaves, to write down a vocabulary of the
language of that country, which by the natives themselves is called
“Ára-Wándalá,” as they call their country “Khakh-Wándalá,” or “Khákh-
Úndalá.”

The cold which we experienced during our stay here we considered very
severe—at least from an African point of view and feeling; for in Europe
it would have been thought very moderate. Fortunately our encampment was
more comfortable than it had been at Delhé, and presented features of
considerable interest; for here we saw the first complete example of
those shallow stagnant watercourses which are so highly characteristic
of the equatorial regions of this continent, and explain at the same
time the conflicting statements with regard to the direction of so many
watercourses in these regions. However, there are two different kinds of
these shallow waters: first, such as are in immediate connection with
larger rivers, and often run parallel to them, and which most
appropriately deserve to be called backwaters; and, secondly, those
which are quite independent, and form a small water-system by
themselves. To the latter kind seems to belong this swampy sheet of
water, or “ngáljam,” of Díggera, although I heard some Shúwa affirm that
it extended to the Tsád.

I first turned my steps eastward, where the encampment extended to the
very foot of the beautiful trees which, forming a rich border of the
finest embroidery from the hand of nature, girt the water. Most of them
were either fig (sycamore) or tamarind-trees. The aspect of the scenery
was most interesting, and under almost every tamarind-tree a group of
people was encamped.

The cavity where this sheet of water had collected formed a very slight
depression in the meadow-ground, it being almost flat; the water, to all
appearance, had already decreased considerably, and only in a few places
presented an open sheet, being in general closely overgrown with rank
grass and tall reeds. I followed it to a considerable distance towards
the N.N.W., till I was obliged by the thick covert to retrace my steps,
and then turned westward. The far larger extension of the water during
the rainy season was sufficiently indicated by the luxuriant growth of
trees. I crossed it at a spot where it was not so extensive, and found
the bottom of it extremely muddy, which made the passage rather
difficult, though the water was only two and a half feet deep. The
indented outlines of its shores greatly distinguished it from those more
complete and regular-shaped ngáljams which, in the course of time, I had
an opportunity of visiting, not only in those extensive plains between
the river Bénuwé and Shári, but also in the regions of the middle course
of the so-called Niger; for, in the quarters just mentioned, these
shallow waters, or meadow-waters, often stretch out, in a straight or
regularly-sweeping line, like artificial canals, to an immense
distance,—especially that most interesting sheet of water three days
west of Timbúktu, the “Áraf-n-áman,” or Rás el má.

Of quite a different nature is the character of the famous Bahar el
Ghazál, which joins the Tsád on the north-eastern side, being a broad
sandy valley girt by a rich border of vegetation. This peculiar valley,
which it was not our destiny to become acquainted with by ocular
inspection, formed the subject of conversation with the vizier on Sunday
evening; and a disputation arose, of so scientific a character that it
might have silenced all those who scoff at the uncivilized state of the
population of these regions. To be sure, the two principal persons in
this conversation were Arabs; but their forefathers had been settled in
these regions for at least ten generations.

Here in Díggera, where we were only one good day’s march distant from
the capital of Mándará, our friends were obliged to come to a decision
upon the future destination of the expedition. After the news which had
arrived some days previously, that the petty chief of Mándará, whose
ancestor had once completely defeated a countless host of the Bórnu
people, had decided upon making resistance, they had been very silent
and dejected, and were therefore extremely delighted when at length, to-
day, a servant of the obstinate vassal made his appearance with a
present of ten beautiful female slaves, and the offer of complete
submission. So at least we were told; but the affair seemed very
doubtful, and a native of Mándará, or, as they say, Ár-Wándalá,
afterwards assured me that his master, the powerful “Tuksé” of
Khakhúndala, had been so far from making his submission to the insolent
“Móthaké” (by this name they call the Bórnu people), that, on the
contrary, he had treated them with contempt. Which of the two assertions
was correct I do not know; but it is probable that the chief of Mándará
thought it prudent to consent to some sort of compromise—perhaps through
the intermediation of ʿAbd e’ Rahmán, the sheikh’s brother.

Whatever may have been the case, the vizier informed us in the evening,
in a very cheerful manner, that the affair with Mándará had taken the
most favourable turn, and that in consequence the sheikh, with a small
part of the army, was to retrace his steps, while he himself, with the
far larger portion, was to undertake an expedition into the Músgu
country, and that we, of course, were to accompany him. Now we were well
aware that the object of this expedition was partly to make slaves, and
that, in our character as messengers of the British government, we ought
to endeavour to keep aloof from anything connected with the infamous
subject of slavery; but as we could not hinder it if we kept back, and
as by accompanying the expedition we might prevent a deal of mischief,
and might likewise have a fair opportunity of convincing ourselves
whether what was related of the cruelty of the Mohammedans in these
expeditions was true or exaggerated, we decided upon accompanying the
vizier. At the same time it was of the utmost importance to visit that
very region which was the object of the expedition, as it was the only
way to decide upon the relation between the central basin of the Tsád
and the great western river, with its eastern branch, while there was no
possibility of visiting it by ourselves. We had already convinced
ourselves that the country of the Músgu is not, as Major Denham has
represented it, a mountainous, inaccessible tract; but we were puzzled
at the number of watercourses of which our informants had spoken, and we
could not have the least idea how fertile a country it was, and how far
remote its inhabitants were from that state of barbarism which had been
imputed to them. We therefore, although reluctantly, and not without
scruple, at length determined upon accompanying the expedition; and I
hope that every considerate person who takes into account all the
circumstances in which we were placed, will approve of our resolution.

[Sidenote: Wednesday, December 17th.]

At length we proceeded onwards, entering new regions never trodden by
European foot. Our departure having been delayed in the morning, owing
to the separating of the army, we started rather late, leaving the
sheikh, with the rest of the “kebú,” behind. The country at once
presented a new and interesting feature. Already in Bórnu a considerable
proportion of our diet had consisted of native rice, and we had been
rather astonished at its black colour and bad quality. We had heard that
it grew wild in the southern provinces of the country; but we had never
yet seen it, and it was only this morning, after we had left Díggera and
had traversed extensive stubble-fields of millet intermixed with beans,
that we obtained a first view of a “shinkáfaram,” or wild rice-field, in
the midst of the forest. We were then no longer surprised at the quality
of the rice brought to the market in Kúkawa being so bad, as we felt
justified in presuming that the elephant would have sense enough to take
the best for himself, and leave the rest for the people. As we proceeded
we found the whole wilderness, although not thickly wooded, full of
pools of water and dense rice-fields.

The country to-day presented a truly tropical aspect; and our
encampment, lying near an extensive pond, or small lagoon, surrounded
with a luxuriant growth of rice and a dense border of spreading trees,
was so full of the footprints of the elephant, that scarcely a level
spot of two or three feet in diameter could be found. This was by no
means pleasant, in our present mode of living, as we were without a
camp-stool, or anything to sit or lie upon; for the argillaceous soil is
so excessively hard, that the borders of these holes produced by the
unwieldy foot of the elephant cause a great deal of pain to a person
lying on the ground with nothing but a mat or carpet.

The most essential instrument on this whole journey was the “láteram,”
the digging-instrument (from “langin,” “I dig”), consisting of a large
piece of wood about three feet long, with a heavy iron point; for
without the láteram it would have been impossible to fix the dáteram
(from “dangin,” “I fasten, stop”), or the pole to which the horses are
fastened during the night. In general, every horseman digs the hole in
which the pole is fastened with his own spear; but this soil was so hard
that it was scarcely possible to make the smallest hole in it. Of course
during the rainy season it is just as soft and muddy as it is hard in
the dry season, and scarcely passable in consequence.

A giraffe was caught to-day. I had been of opinion that this timorous
animal was not found in the thickly inhabited regions near the equator;
but I soon learned from experience that it is not at all rare in the
wildernesses which alternate with the densely populated regions of these
districts. The elephant, however, is the predominant animal of these
quarters; and the large market-place, Fátawel, which I have mentioned on
my journey to Ádamáwa, and the Logón town Jéna, or rather Jínna, seem to
be of considerable importance for their ivory-trade.

In the evening I had the misfortune to be stung by a scorpion, which had
got into my bernús. As I had not noticed the animal in the dark, and
thinking that it was nothing but one of the formidable black ants, the
bite of which is very painful, I neglected the wound at first, so that
the poison penetrated to the shoulder, and rendered my right arm useless
for two days.

[Sidenote: Thursday, December 18th.]

Seeing that we were now entirely in the hands of the vizier, my
companion and I used to present ourselves at his tent every morning, and
to ride for some time near him. I, however, soon found it pleasanter to
keep more in the rear of the army, a little in advance of his female
slaves; and in the narrow paths in the midst of the forest, where the
crowding became very disagreeable, I used to keep behind his led-horses.
Of female slaves on horseback and led-horses the vizier had with him the
moderate number of eight of each kind, while the sheikh had twelve; but
this appeared to me a small number when I afterwards saw the king of
Bagírmi returning from the expedition with a string of forty-five
mounted female partners. These black damsels were all clothed in white
woollen bernúses, with their faces completely veiled, and were closely
watched.

To-day we had a more complete specimen of that peculiar kind of shallow
water which I have mentioned above; and the army, while they were
winding around it, on the fresh green meadow-lands, closely hemmed in on
their left by a grove of fine trees, presented a highly interesting
scene. From thence, passing through a thick covert, we entered the
beautiful open district of Wolóje, which comprises several hamlets. Here
I was amused at seeing the head man of a village successfully putting to
flight, with a large branch of a tree, a troop of pilfering horsemen. A
little beyond these hamlets the encampment was chosen, at some little
distance from a very extensive “ngáljam.”

Our conversation with the vizier in the evening again took a
geographical turn, owing to the presence of his spy or scout, who had
just returned from delivering his message to the Músgu prince Ádishén.
The vizier was as yet undecided in which direction to turn his steps;
and we heard a native chief, of the name of Puss, or Fuss, mentioned in
a manner that assured us our friends were afraid to attack him. Ádishén,
the chief just mentioned, was in a certain degree subject to the rulers
of Bórnu; but it seemed rather an ironical assertion that this prince
would be pleased with the arrival of the expedition. While describing
his reception at the court of the chief, the scout indulged in a lively
description of the customs prevalent among these people, whose chief had
only outwardly adopted Islám. His Majesty, he said, used to indulge in
amorous intercourse with his female slaves, of whom he had two hundred,
before the eyes of his people; an account which was rather confirmed by
Kashélla Belál, who had been his host several times. Belál, who was a
very jovial old fellow, also stated that this little prince was not
jealous of the favours bestowed by his female partners upon his guests;
but, on the contrary, that he himself voluntarily gave them up to them.
Such a degrading custom may indeed be followed by this petty chief, who
has betrayed his country in order that, by the influence of his more
powerful neighbours, he might rule over his countrymen; but we need not
draw a conclusion from him as to the customs of the whole tribe,
although, of course, they regard the relation of the sexes in a simpler
point of view than we do.

[Sidenote: Friday, December 19th.]

The country through which we passed, on leaving our encampment in the
morning, was most charming, and of a most expansive bound, and exactly
suited for pastoral tribes like the Shúwa and Fúlbe; but traces of
cultivation also, and even of cotton-fields, were not wanting; while
further on, the dúm-bush appeared, and was after a while succeeded by
the tall fan-shaped dúm-palm itself. The country being open, and without
any obstruction whatever, the “kibú,” or army, marched in an extended
line of battle, “báta,” separated into groups of the most varied
description in attire and appearance: the heavy cavalry, clad in thick
wadded clothing, others in their coats of mail, with their tin helmets
glittering in the sun, and mounted on large heavy chargers, which
appeared almost oppressed by the weight of their riders and their own
warlike accoutrements; the light Shúwa horsemen, clad only in a loose
shirt, and mounted upon their weak unseemly nags; the self-conceited
slaves, decked out gaudily in red bernúses or silken dresses of various
colours; the Kánembú spearmen, almost naked, with their large wooden
shields, their half-torn aprons round their loins, their barbarous head-
dresses, and their bundles of spears; then, in the distance behind, the
continuous train of camels and pack-oxen: all the people full of
spirits, and in the expectation of rich booty, pressing onward to the
unknown regions towards the south-east.

It was an exalted feeling of unrestrained liberty which animated me
while, mounted on my noble charger, I rode silently along at the side of
this motley host, contemplating now the fine, beautiful country, now the
rich scenes of human life, which were illumined by a bright morning sun.
As yet no blood had been shed by this army, and neither misery,
devastation, nor the horrors of people torn from their homes, cried out
against it. Every one seemed to think only of sport and amusement. Now
and then a stir would be raised in the whole army when a gazelle started
forth from the thicket, endeavouring to escape from her pursuers, but
soon found herself hemmed in on every side, while Shúwa horsemen and
Kánembú spearmen, each endeavouring to possess himself of the prize,
cried out to his rivals in the pursuit, “kólle, kólle!” “leave off,
leave off!” as if the prey was already his own, while others animated
their companions by shouting out, “góne, góne!” “chase, chase!” the
sounds re-echoing from one troop to another; or when a fat guinea-fowl,
“káji,” or a partridge, “kwíye,” roused from its secure covert, took to
its wings, but, trying to fly over those widely-scattered troops of
hostile men, and frightened by their cries, was soon obliged to look for
a moment’s respite, and, after a vain struggle, fell a prey to its
pursuers, who often, while they laid hold of it, tore it actually into
pieces.

The wide open country seemed to invite the traveller into the far
distance; but to-day our march was only of short duration, and before
eight o’clock in the morning a new encampment, upon a fresh spot, was
again springing up. This whole country is still included in the
extensive district of Wolóje; but the water, which was close to the side
of the encampment, has the peculiar name of Kodásalé. The whole of the
inhabitants of the district belong to the Shúwa tribe of the Bénesé. To
the east of Kodásalé lies the place Lawári, towards the west Súggemé,
beyond Úlba, and south-west of the latter Memé, and north-west Momó. All
these villages are inhabited by Shúwa and Kanúri in common; beyond is
the wilderness or karága.

I, too, had my little daily “nógona,” or divan, in which Kashélla
Bíllama, my friend from Ádamáwa, and Háj Edrís, formed my principal
courtiers, or “kokanáwa,” though occasionally other people attended. All
these people I kept attached to me by presents of a few needles, with
which they supplied their wants in the neighbouring villages. Bíllama
informed me to-day that for three needles he had bought sufficient
provision for his horse for one day; for two he had bought a wooden
bowl, or “búkuru;” and for six more a good supply of meat. Thus this
insignificant production of European industry became of the highest
value to me; and it obtained still more value and importance, in the
course of my journey to Bagírmi, when it constituted my only wealth, and
in consequence procured me the noble title of “needle-prince,”
“malaríbra.”

We remained here the following day, as the army had to provide itself
with corn, or rather Negro grain, as we were told that we should enter
upon a wild uncultivated tract, the border-region between the seats of
the Mohammedans and those of the pagan tribes, which, as is generally
the case in these parts of the world, has been reduced to desolation.

Each of the surrounding villages had to send two ox-loads of grain,
which, however, did not benefit the army in general, but fell entirely
to the share of the friends and followers of Lamíno, the remainder of
this immense host being thrown upon their own resources. All the grain
was carried on asses. It was in this encampment that the vizier made a
present to Mr. Overweg of a small lion. He had given him, on a former
occasion, a “súmmoli.” This is a very ferocious cat, of rather rare
occurrence, which is said not only to attack gazelles, but young cattle
or calves. It was of a light brown colour, the hind part, however, being
black, and had very pointed upright ears, “súmmo,” a circumstance from
which the name has been derived. The ears, moreover, are ornamented with
a black stripe. A great many curious stories are related by the people
with regard to the ferocity of this animal, and from what we ourselves
had an opportunity of observing, it seems to be a marvellous little
creature: for, though still very young and small, it was nevertheless
extremely fierce, and was quite master of the young lion. Both animals
were fed with boiled milk, of which they were very fond; but the
continual swinging motion which they had to endure on the back of the
camels in the heat of the day, caused their death very soon.

[Sidenote: Sunday, December 21st.]

The crowding and thronging was excessive when we started in order to
pursue our march. The wilderness at first was tolerably clear, being at
times evidently a place of resort for numerous herds of elephants, as
the quantity of dung, and the uninterrupted tracks of deep footprints,
which gave to the soil the appearance of a colossal chessboard, amply
testified. After a march of about six miles the wilderness became more
thickly overgrown, and presented a fine forest scenery; but, as is
generally the case on such warlike expeditions, there is no leisure to
pay attention to special phenomena, especially as the Bórnu horses are
in general very wild and vicious, and in the throng everybody was
continually liable to come into collision with his neighbour’s horse,
which, perchance, might be a furious kicker.

The general character of this jungle was this. The ground was covered
with dúm-bush, which formed a thick brushwood, and here and there with
rank grass, while the forest in general consisted of middle-sized trees,
chiefly mimosas and kálgos, though there were other specimens,
especially the kókia-tree, which I had first seen on my journey from
Gezáwa to Kátsena, the trees of smaller size being separated into groups
by large spreading specimens of the vegetable kingdom, mostly of the
ficus kind; for monkey-bread trees seemed to be wanting entirely, and
altogether I saw few specimens of this tree in the Músgu country. Very
remarkable nests of birds, suspended from the branches, were observed,
not unlike a purse, with a long narrow neck hanging down and forming the
entrance; or rather like a chemist’s retort suspended from the head, the
shank being several inches long, and the whole beautifully fabricated
with the most surprising skill. Of the skilful manufacturers of these
fine dwellings we did not obtain a sight; but probably it is a species
of _loxia_. In this thick covert, several young elephants were hunted
down, and even the giraffe seemed frequent.

The place which we chose for our encampment was adorned by numerous fan-
palms, which, although in general identical with the species called
_Chamærops humilis_, nevertheless by their height appeared to be a
distinct variety, and gave to the encampment a very picturesque
appearance. The forest was here so dense, that only the spot where the
vizier himself encamped together with his own followers was free from
brushwood, while all the other people were first obliged to clear the
ground with much trouble. This was the first day, since our setting out,
that we made a tolerable march. The whole manner in which the expedition
was conducted was an unmistakable proof of an effeminate court,
especially if we take into account the principle of carrying on war in
these countries, where only sudden inroads can insure any great success.
In the evening there arrived a small complimentary present from Ádishén,
the tributary Músgu chief, consisting of five horses and twenty oxen.
But while in this manner the more influential men in the army were well
supplied with food, the greater part were very badly off, and most of
them were reduced to the core of the dúm-bush or ngílle, which by the
Bórnu people is facetiously called “kúmbu bíllabe,” “the food of the
country town.” But a good sportsman might have obtained better food for
himself, and we even got a small ostrich-egg from the vizier.

It was a great pity that we had purposely avoided the more frequented
and general road, which passes by several settlements of the Fúlbe or
Felláta, in order not to give any trouble to the latter; for no doubt
that track would have been far more interesting, as well from a natural
point of view, as with regard to the political state of the country, as
it would have given us the clearest insight into the way in which that
enterprising and restless people is pushing on every day more and more,
and strangling, as it were, the little kingdom of Mándará.

[Sidenote: Monday, December 22nd.]

Dense forest continued to prevail during the first five miles of our
march. It then cleared, and was succeeded by considerable fields of wild
rice, most of which was burnt down; for, as I have repeatedly had
occasion to mention, all these wildernesses of Central Africa are set on
fire after the rainy season. The whole ground in this district was one
uninterrupted succession of holes made by the foot of the elephant,
which obstructed the march of the army very considerably, and was the
reason of several horses being lamed. Sálah, a younger brother of the
vizier, a very intelligent man, broke his arm. A herd of six elephants
was in the neighbourhood, and after a great deal of confusion, one
animal, which got between the horsemen, was killed. It is no wonder that
these regions are so frequented by them, as they find here plenty of the
choicest food. The jungles of wild rice were only interrupted for a
short time by a tract covered with dúm-bush. Water was plentiful, every
now and then a considerable pond appearing, girt by beautiful trees, and
at present enlivened by groups of horsemen, who were watering their
animals.

After a march of about fifteen miles we encamped close to a larger sheet
of water, which was full of fish of the species called “bégeli,” and
enabled us to give to our food that day more variety, the forest, as
well as the water, contributing its share; for, besides the fish, we had
roast hare and elephant’s flesh, which was very palatable, and much like
pork.

[Sidenote: Tuesday, December 23rd.]

Three heavy strokes upon the drum, at the dawn of day, set our motley
host once more in motion. It was an important day, and many of the
principal people had exchanged their common dress for a more splendid
attire. We entered the Músgu country, and at the same time came into
contact with fragments of that nation, who, having spread from the far
west over the one half of Africa, are restlessly pushing forward and
overwhelming the pagan tribes in the interior. These are the Fúlbe or
Felláta, the most interesting of all African tribes, who, having been
driven from Bórnu, have here laid the foundation of a new empire.

Twice on our march we were obliged to make a halt: the first time owing
to the arrival of Ádishén, the Músgu chief, with a troop of naked
horsemen mounted on a breed of small, unseemly, but strong ponies,
without saddles and bridles, and presenting altogether a most barbarous
and savage spectacle. The second halt was caused by the appearance of a
Púllo or Felláta chief, with two hundred horsemen of his nation, who, by
their shirts and shawls, their saddles and bridles, certainly claimed a
higher degree of civilization, but who, nevertheless, were far from
exhibiting a grand appearance. This chief was an officer of Khúrsu, the
ruler of the town or principality of Fétte or Pétte, which we had left
at a short distance to the west. He came to join this expedition, the
object of which was to weaken the Músgu tribes, who, behind their
natural defences of rivers and swamps, had hitherto been able to
maintain their independence.

Of course, on this occasion the policy of these Fúlbe chiefs went hand
in hand with that of the Bórnu people, although it is not a little
remarkable, and serves to show the slight political unity existing
between the integral parts of these empires, that while the governor of
Ádamáwa was at present on a hostile footing with the ruler of Bórnu, one
of his vassals was allowed to enter into an alliance with the latter.

After these interruptions we pursued our march, and reached, about half
an hour before noon, the northernmost of the Músgu villages, which is
called Gábari, surrounded by rich fields of native grain; but everything
presented a sad appearance of pillage and desolation. None of the
inhabitants were to be seen; for, although subjects of Ádishén, who
enjoyed the friendship and protection of the rulers of Bórnu, they had
thought it more prudent to take care of their own safety by flight than
to trust themselves to the discretion of the undisciplined army of their
friends and protectors. The preceding evening the order had been issued
through the encampment that all the property in the villages of Ádishén
should be respected, and nothing touched, from a cow to a fowl, grain
only excepted, which was declared to be at the disposal of everybody.

It was rather remarkable that the greatest part of the crops were still
standing, although we had been lingering so long on our road, and had
given sufficient time to the people to secure them for themselves. All
the grain consisted of the red species of holcus, called by the Bórnu
people “ngáberi kemé,” which grows here to the exclusion of the white
species and that of millet. All the people of the army were busy in
threshing the grain which they had just gathered at the expense of their
friends, and loading their horses with it. Even the fine nutritive grass
from the borders of the swamp, which, woven into long festoons, the
natives had stored up in the trees as a provision against the dry
season, was carried off, and, notwithstanding the express order to the
contrary, many a goat, fowl, and even articles of furniture which had
been left behind by the natives, fell a prey to the greedy host.

The spectacle of this pillage was the more saddening, as the village not
only presented an appearance of comfort, but exhibited in a certain
degree the industry of its inhabitants. In general each courtyard
contained a group of from three to six huts, according to the number of
wives of the owner. The walls of the dwellings, without a single
exception, were built of clay, which in the courtyards of the richer
people even formed the building-material of the fences. The roofs of the
cottages were thatched with great care, and at least as well as in any
house or village in Bórnu, and far superior to the thatching of the
Shúwa. The roofs even exhibited traces of various styles, and perhaps a
certain gradation in the scale of society.

[Illustration]

Almost every courtyard enclosed a shed, besides the huts, and one
granary built of clay and from twelve to fifteen feet high, with an
arched roof, likewise of clay, there being an opening at the top, which
was protected by a small cover of thatching, as the accompanying woodcut
shows. The way in which the natives had stored up their supply of hay
for the dry season was very remarkable, the rank grass being woven into
festoons of about fifteen feet in length, and hung up in the kórna-trees
which adorned the fields.

Having roved about at my leisure, I pursued my march, and, emerging from
the corn-fields, entered upon open meadow-grounds, partly under water,
which spread out to a considerable extent, and which, with their fresh
green turf, formed a beautiful contrast to the tall yellow crops which I
had just left behind. Ascending a little, we kept straight towards a
group of splendid trees which adorned the fields in front of another
village. The village was called Kórom, and belonged to a chief under the
authority of Ádishén, while Kadé, the residence of the latter, was only
at a short distance. In these fields the vizier had dismounted and
chosen the place for the encampment; and it was with a sad, sympathetic
feeling that I witnessed the lopping of the rich branches of the fine
trees, which were without doubt the most splendid specimens of the
karáge-tree which I had seen in Negroland, not excepting those in the
Marghí country. The largest among them measured not less than eighty
feet in height, and the diameter of their crown could scarcely be less;
but the foliage of this tree is by no means so dense and so regularly
shaped as that of the fig or tamarind-tree. None of these fine trees,
which had adorned the landscape, escaped destruction, in order to
provide fences for the larger tents; but the few monkey-bread trees
which here appeared, owing to the scanty foliage with which their
gigantic branches were decked out, escaped unhurt.

Here we remained the two following days, and the encampment became very
confined, the more so as the ground was rather uneven. The delay could
scarcely be defended in a strategetical point of view, as it could not
but serve to put all the neighbouring chiefs, who were hostile to
Ádishén, on their guard against any sudden inroad. But it was well that
they did so, as by a sudden inroad the poor persecuted natives might
have been totally annihilated.

In order to employ my leisure hours, I looked about for information
respecting the country we had just entered, and was fortunate enough to
collect some valuable data.[15]

The Músgu, or Músekú, are a division of the great nation of the
Mása[16], which comprises the Kótoko, or Mákari, the people of Logón, or
Lógone, the Mándará, or Úr Wándalá, with the Gámerghú, and the large
tribe of the Bátta, and probably even that of the Mbána. Of these tribes
the most intimately related to the Músgu are the people of Logón, who,
as we shall soon have occasion to show, are nothing but a section which
has quite recently separated from the parent stock, and constituted
itself as a distinct community, owing to its higher state of
civilization. Amongst the various divisions of the Kótoko, Ngála and
Klésem seem to be most nearly related to the Músgu.

However insignificant the tribe of the Músgu may appear in the eyes of
the European, the dialects of the various communities into which it is
split, owing to the hostile manner in which they are opposed to one
another, and their entire want of friendly intercourse, differ so much
that, as I was assured, the people of Lúggoy have great difficulty in
understanding those of Wúliya and Démmo. Unfortunately, I had no
opportunity of collecting specimens of the other dialects besides that
spoken by the people of Lúggoy. Their principal “sáfi,” or fetish,
consists in a long spear-like pole, similar to that of the Marghí; but
nevertheless there seems to be a considerable difference in their
superstitious worship, for, while with the Marghí the pole appears to be
rather a symbol than an image of the deity, and the real worship is
attached to the sacred locality, with the Músgu tribes I did not see a
single specimen of a sacred grove. The Músgu call their fetish “kefé.”

In the afternoon I attended some time at the vizier’s, and here made the
acquaintance of an interesting and adventurous old man of the name of
Mʿallem Jémme, or Jýmma, who took the principal part in the
conversation. The history of this man is highly characteristic, as
showing what a large field is open to the ambition of enterprising
Mohammedans in the pagan states to the south. Threatened with capital
punishment by the old sheikh, that is to say, Mohammed el Amín el
Kánemi, on account of his disobedience, this Shúwa chieftain had fled to
the pagans, and had there succeeded in establishing gradually, by his
own energy and mental superiority, a small principality; but at present,
for some reason or other, he had been expelled and had recourse to the
vizier of Bórnu for assistance to recover his former power. His great
knowledge of the country and the different tribes which inhabited it,
made him a welcome guest; but as for himself, he did not succeed in his
ambitious projects. In reference to my expedition to Ádamáwa, I have
already made use of the authority of this man, in giving an account of
the route which connects the southernmost point on our expedition to
Músgu with the places fixed by me along the river Bénuwé.

The mʿallem was not very communicative; and unfortunately I had no
handsome present to make him, or else I might have learned from him an
immense deal with regard to the geography and character of these
countries, which I have no doubt, not long hence, will become of
considerable importance to Europeans. For while these regions, situated
between the rivers Bénuwé and Shári, seem to be extremely rich and
fertile, and capable—on account of the uniform level of their unbroken
plains—of the highest state of cultivation, they are the most
accessible, on account of the extensive water-communication, which,
rendered available by the application of a very small degree of art and
industry, will open an easy access into the heart of Central Africa. Of
course, after the rainy season, when all these countless watercourses,
which intersect the country in every direction, and without any apparent
inclination, inundate the country, the climate in the plains cannot be
very healthy; but isolated mountains and hills are scattered by the hand
of nature through these luxuriant plains, capable of affording more
healthy localities for settlements.

Owing to the presence of the adventurer just mentioned, the conversation
that evening was very animated, till at length the courtiers, or
“kokanáwa,” withdrew behind the curtains of the vizier’s tent, in order
to take a little refreshment. I then took my leave; but I had only gone
a short distance when I was called back, being informed that it would no
doubt be interesting to me to witness an audience of Ádishén, the Músgu
chief, who was just about to pay his respects to the commander-in-chief.
I therefore returned to the vizier’s tent, where the courtiers had again
taken their post, according to their rank and station, on each side of
their leader.

After a short time the Músgu chief arrived, accompanied by his three
brothers, mounted, as is their custom, upon horses without saddle or
bridle. Great numbers of people had collected in front of the tent, and
saluted him with scoffs and importunities; but the pagan chief did not
allow himself to be put out of countenance by the insolence of the
slaves, but preserved his princely dignity. At length the curtains of
the spacious tent were drawn back, and in came the native prince. He was
of a short stout figure, and rather mild, but not very prepossessing
features, and apparently between fifty and sixty years of age. He wore a
black tobe, but no trowsers, and was bareheaded. Kneeling on the ground,
and clapping his hands, while he repeated the complimentary words, “Alla
ngúbberu degá” (God give you long life)! according to the custom of the
“katí gótsin,” he took up sand and sprinkled it upon his head; but as
soon as he had gone through this form of abject submission, he assumed
his character as a native chief. Thus, at once he complained of his
western neighbours, the Fúlbe or Felláta, or, as the Músgu people call
them, Chógchogo; for they, he said, had anticipated the vizier of Bórnu,
carrying off cattle and other things from his territory. The Bórnu chief
assured him that for the future he should not be exposed to such
injustice, but that he was entirely under the protection of Bórnu. He
then made a sign, and some parcels were opened, and Ádishén was
officially installed as a vassal and officer of Bórnu. First, he was
dressed in an elephant-shirt—the large black shirt from Núfe,—over which
a rich silk tobe was thrown, and over all an Egyptian shawl, while the
self-conceited courtiers, in their proud consciousness of a higher state
of civilization, treated him with contempt and scorn. My cheerful old
friend Kashélla Belál, who had decked him out in this finery, paid him
the usual compliments, exclaiming “ngúbberu degá maína, ngúbberu degá
maína,” maína being the title of the governor of a province.

Thus this petty pagan chief had become, in an official style, a kind of
officer of Bórnu, and in this manner was alone capable of preserving his
unenviable existence, at what sacrifices we shall soon see. The Músgu
nation is situated so unfavourably, surrounded by enemies on all sides,
that, even if they were linked together by the strictest unity, they
would scarcely be able to preserve their independence. How, then, should
they be able to withstand their enemies, separated as they are into
numerous petty dominions, and having no further object than to enslave
and pillage their neighbours and kinsmen? Nothing but the number of
swampy watercourses which intersect the country in all directions, and
during the greater part of the year render it impassable for hostile
armies, while even during the remaining part the principal rivers afford
natural lines of defence, behind which the inhabitants may seek refuge,
can explain how the country is so well peopled as it is, although the
intervening tracts have been already laid waste.

Towards the north there are the Kanúri, powerful by their numerous
cavalry and the advantage of firearms; towards the west and south-west
the restless Fúlbe continually advancing; towards the north-east the
people of Logón, originally their near kinsmen, but at present opposed
to them by difference of religion; towards the east, the wild Bágrimma
people, proud of their supposed preeminence in religion, and eager for
the profits of the slave-trade. All these people hunting them down from
every quarter, and carrying away yearly hundreds, nay even thousands of
slaves, must in the course of time exterminate this unfortunate tribe.

To-day was Christmas-day; and my companion and I, in conformity with a
custom of our native town, tried in vain to procure some fish for a more
luxurious entertainment in the evening. The meat of giraffes, which
formed the greatest of our African luxuries, was not to be obtained; and
as for elephant’s flesh, which we _were_ able to get, although we both
liked it, we had too sadly experienced its bad effect upon the weak
state of our bowels to try it again. Hence, in order to celebrate the
evening, we were reduced to coffee and milk, with which we regaled
ourselves.

We remained here the following day, under the pretext that the Fúlbe,
who had joined us, had not yet had an audience; but although the
effeminate courtiers were averse to any great exertion, the bulk of the
army, who had neither pay, nor were allowed to plunder in order to
obtain their necessary supplies, were not very well pleased with this
delay, and caused a great uproar while marching in battle-order before
the tents of their chiefs, and giving vent to their feelings by shaking
and beating their shields. On former expeditions the light troops of the
Shúwa and Kánembú had always been allowed to march some distance in
advance of the army in order to supply their wants; but on this occasion
a strict order had been issued that no one should go in advance.

In the afternoon Mr. Overweg went to pay a visit to Ádishén at his
residence in Kadé, which was about half an hour’s march distant towards
the south. He returned in the evening with a present of a goat, but did
not seem to be greatly pleased with his excursion; and it could scarcely
be otherwise, for while these pagans, who were obliged to disown all
national feeling, could scarcely show themselves in their true
character, and unreserved in their national manners, in the presence of
such an army, it could not but lower us in the eyes of our companions to
have too many dealings with these pagans, as they were apt to confound
us with them. To be regarded as a “kerdi” my companion cared little
about; but I was not much inclined to be identified as such, and it
could certainly reflect no honour on the character of our mission.


[Footnote 15: I here give a list of the chief principalities and places
of the Músgu country. First, at a short distance east from Kadé, the
residence of Ádishén, there is a place called Máyum; then a small place
called Mága; then Bárka, at present deserted; Masánafa, residence of the
prince Asánafay, after whom the whole principality is called; Márabná;
Íka; Búlno; Mákalné, probably originally the residence of a prince
Akalné, but at present the residence of the powerful chief Kábishmé;
Surán; Mázaga, the residence of a powerful chief who generally, after
the name of the whole principality, is named Fúss, but whose real name
seems to be Ngoimáta; Lúggoy; Bárea; Búgunla, with a chief Hyyúm;
Mbogtám; Boiboy; Kubásemí, with a prince Márgo; Kalán; Ngelmóng; Mórom,
with a chief Saderánza; Búllum; Bége; Mádalang; Kásway, which on our
farther march we left a little to the east; the principality Kákala;
Dwán or Adwán, towards the south-west; Gemáy, a large place, south-east;
Wúliya; Démmo, Áudege; Agsé. Some of these places are districts, which
we shall touch at in the course of the expedition; the position of the
others I am not able to fix with certainty.]

[Footnote 16: The Bagírmi people, even at the present day, call the
Músgu by the name Mása Músekú.]




                              CHAP. XLIV.

 THE COUNTRY OF THE SHALLOW RIVERS. — WATER-PARTING BETWEEN THE RIVERS
                           BÉNUWÉ AND SHÁRI.


[Sidenote: Friday, December 26th.]

At length we went onward to pursue our march, turning considerably out
of our road towards the east, in order to avoid the residence of
Ádishén, and to prevent its being pillaged. The army, proceeding in
several large detachments, presented an interesting aspect. Here also
green crops of the winter corn, or “másakwá,” were still standing in
the fields. Further on we came to open pasture-grounds, and after a
march of about ten miles we reached a village called Bógo, where we
encamped. All the inhabitants had made their escape, although their
chief, whose name is Bakshámi, was an ally and friend of Ádishén. The
cottages were well built, but there was a great scarcity of trees.
Amongst the furniture was a fishing-basket, or, as the Kanúri call it,
“káyan;” and some of them were filled with dried paste of the red
species of holcus, which however the people were afraid to touch, lest
it might be poisoned. On a former expedition several people had been
poisoned by a pot of honey which had been left behind, on purpose, by
the natives in their flight. Already on this day’s march we had
observed, in the distance towards the west, an isolated rocky mount;
and here we saw it in more distinct outlines, while beyond, at a
greater distance, the continuous mountain-chain of Mándará became
slightly visible.

[Sidenote: Saturday, December 27th.]

Our march at first led through a dense forest, after which we emerged
upon more open swampy meadow-lands covered with rank grass, and full of
holes caused by the footprints of the elephant. Great quantities of
Guinea fowl were caught. Only here and there an isolated mimosa
interrupted the unbroken line of the savanna.

It was after a march of six miles that we obtained a sight of the first
deléb-palm in the Músgu country. Already repeatedly in the narrative of
my travels I have called the attention of the reader to this beautiful
fan-palm; but in all the localities where I had before observed it, it
was rather isolated. Even in Ádamáwa it is limited to peculiarly
favoured localities, while in some extensive provinces of that country,
such as Búban-jídda, it is wanting entirely. But here we had reached the
country where this beautiful and useful tree, probably only a variety of
the famous _Borassus flabelliformis_, is the most common and predominant
representative of the vegetable kingdom. The Músgu call it in their
language “úray.” From the Músgu country it seems to spread in an almost
uninterrupted and unbroken line through the southern provinces of
Bagírmi and Wadáÿ, as far as Kordofán, sending a few scouts and
forerunners to adorn the capital of Bagírmi and the watercourse of the
Bat-há.

We chose our encampment in a village called Bárëa, consisting of
scattered huts, and surrounded by rich stubble-fields, which were shaded
by large wide-spreading karáge trees, presenting a most cheerful and
comfortable scene. But we soon became aware that the fertility and
beauty of this district were due to the neighbourhood of a large sheet
of water full of crocodiles and river horses or “ngurútu,” and enlivened
even by a few small canoes. It had been indicated already on our march
by the flight of numerous waterfowl passing over our heads. Beautiful as
the country was, however, the place was deserted, the inhabitants having
given up their cheerful homes, and left the tombs of their worshipped
ancestors to the discretion of the hostile army, in order to seek safety
in flight. The village is the residence of a chieftain of the name of
Musíkko, who acknowledges Kábishmé, the chief mentioned above, as his
sovereign lord.

In the afternoon I received a short visit from a rather shabby sort of
man, the chief of a place called Médebé, but who was an object of
interest to me, as he had been sent as a messenger to the prince of
Mándará, and had just arrived in the encampment from the capital of that
little country. Travelling at a comfortable rate, he had arrived in
three days from Morá, sleeping the first night in the place called
Mókoshi, the second in Fétte, the place above-mentioned, and from thence
to-day had reached this place; but the whole journey, in an expeditious
march, may easily be accomplished in two days. Difficult as it would be
to me to impart to the reader the delight which I always felt in tracing
my routes from one point to another, and joining two places with which I
had become acquainted, by new itineraries, he may forgive me for
sometimes troubling him with these geographical details.

[Sidenote: Sunday, December 28th.]

We did not spend our Sunday in a quiet contemplative manner; but
nevertheless we spent it worthily, employing it in a good day’s march,
which opened out to us new and important features of the character of
the new region we had just entered. It was a pity we were not allowed by
circumstances to proceed in our real character of peaceful travellers,
anxious to befriend all the people with whom we came in contact, instead
of being obliged to join this host of merciless and sanguinary slave-
hunters, who, regardless of the beauty of the country and the cheerful
happiness of the natives, were only intent upon enriching themselves
with the spoil of the inhabitants.

After a march of a little less than five miles, we emerged from the
thick forest, and entered upon stubble-fields with numerous groups of
huts and wide-spreading trees, whose branches were all used for storing
up the ranks of nutritious grass of these swampy grounds, for a supply
in the dry season. The country was pleasant in the extreme. Several
artificial ponds enlivened the hamlet, and called to mind similar scenes
in my native country, except that ducks and geese were wanting. The only
scenes of active life which were at present to be seen were those of
pillage and destruction.

[Illustration: Drawn by J. M. Bernatz, from a Sketch by Dr. Barth.

M. & N. Hanhart, lith. et impt.

MÚSGU.

Decr. 28th. 1851.]

The architecture of the huts, and the whole arrangement of the yards,
was very similar to that of the village we had first seen on entering
the country. But the tops of the granaries in general were here provided
with a sort of “fennel,” covered in by a roof of straw. Broad well-
trodden paths, lined by thick fences of a peculiar bush called “mágara”
in Kanúri, which I have mentioned in another locality[17], were winding
along through the fields in every direction. But there was one object
which attracted my attention in particular, as it testified to a certain
degree of civilization, which might have shamed the proud Mohammedan
inhabitants of these countries. For while the latter are extremely
negligent in burying their dead, leaving them without any sufficient
protection against the wild beasts, so that most of them are devoured in
a few days by the hyænas, here we had regular sepulchres, covered in
with large well-rounded vaults, the tops of which were adorned by a
couple of beams cross-laid, or by an earthen urn. The same sort of
worship as paid by these pagans to their ancestors prevails in a great
part of Africa, and however greatly the peculiar customs attached to the
mode of worship may vary, the principle is the same; but I nowhere more
regretted having no one at hand to explain to me the customs of these
people, than I did on this occasion. The urn most probably contains the
head of the deceased; but what is indicated by the cross-laid beams I
cannot say.

I was so absorbed in contemplating this interesting scene, that I
entirely forgot my own personal safety; for the vizier, without my
becoming aware of it, had pursued the track on his powerful charger at
an uncommonly quick rate, and was far in advance. Looking around me, I
found only a small number of Shúwa horsemen near me, and keeping close
to them pursued the path; but when we emerged from the thick forest, and
entered another well-cultivated and thickly-peopled district, every
trace of a trodden footpath ceased, and I became aware that I was
entirely cut off from the main body of the army. A scene of wild
disorder here presented itself. Single horsemen were roving about to and
fro between the fences of the villages; here a poor native, pursued by
sanguinary foes, running for his life in wild despair; there another
dragged from his place of refuge; while a third was observed in the
thick covert of a ficus, and soon became a mark for numerous arrows and
balls. A small troop of Shúwa horsemen were collected under the shade of
a tree, trying to keep together a drove of cattle, which they had taken.
In vain did I address Shúwa and Kanúri, anxiously inquiring what
direction the commander-in-chief had taken; nobody was able to give me
any information with regard to his whereabouts. I therefore scoured the
village in all directions, to see if I could find by myself the track of
the army; but the traces ran in every direction.

Here I fell in with several troops of horsemen, in the same state of
uncertainty as myself, and joined one of them, where there were some
heavy cavalry; neither the attendants of the vizier, nor the man who
carried his carpet, could tell which direction he had taken. While
anxiously looking about, I suddenly heard behind us the beating of a
drum or “gánga,” and following the sound found a considerable number of
horsemen, of every description, collected on an open area; and here I
received the exciting news that the pagans had broken through the line
of march at the weakest point, and that while the vizier had pursued his
track, the rear had been dispersed. If these poor pagans, who certainly
are not wanting in courage, were led on by experienced chieftains, and
waited for the proper opportunity, they would be able in these dense
forests, where cavalry is scarcely of any use, to do an immense deal of
damage to this cowardly host, and might easily disperse them altogether.
But the principal reason of the weakness of these Músgu tribes is, that
they have only spears and the “góliyó,” and no arrows; else they would
certainly be able to keep these troublesome neighbours at a respectful
distance. Of what little use even the firelock is to the latter, I had
ample opportunity of judging, several musketeers having come to me
anxiously entreating me to provide them with flints, as their own had
been lost or had proved useless.

At length the motley host moved on without order or array; but their
irresolution and fear, owing to a few pagans who were concealed in a
thicket, were so great, that after a while we retraced our steps. Having
then taken a more easterly direction, we reached, through a thick
forest, a large swampy piece of water in low meadow-grounds, not less
than a mile in breadth, covered with rank grass, the dry ground in some
places intervening. Here I found a considerable part of the cavalry,
drawn up in a long line and watering their horses, and I learned that
the encampment was near. It would have been very unsatisfactory to be
exposed to a serious attack in the company of the disorderly host in
which I had lately found myself.

Having watered my horse, I followed the deep sound of the big drum of
the vizier, and found the body of the army a few hundred yards from the
eastern border of this ngáljam, in rich stubble-fields shaded by
beautiful trees; but as yet no tent was pitched, and a great deal of
anxiety prevailed, the first camels having arrived without their loads,
which they had thrown off, their drivers having taken to flight: but
this circumstance ensured the safety of the greater part of the train,
as the commander immediately despatched two officers with their
squadrons to bring up the rear. To this circumstance we were indebted
for the safety of our own camels, which had been in imminent danger, the
pagans having collected again in the rear of the principal body of the
army.

The Bórnu camels are half mehára, and, while they surpass in strength
the camels of the desert, possess a great deal of their swiftness. Not
only does the camel which carries the war-drum always follow close
behind the commander, at whatever rate he may pursue his march, but even
his other camels generally keep at a very short distance, and the best
camels of the courtiers follow close behind.

The village we had just reached was named Kákalá, and is one of the most
considerable places in the Músgu country. A large number of slaves had
been caught this day; and in the course of the evening, after some
skirmishing, in which three Bórnu horsemen were killed, a great many
more were brought in: altogether they were said to have taken one
thousand, and there were certainly not less than five hundred. To our
utmost horror, not less than one hundred and seventy full-grown men were
mercilessly slaughtered in cold blood, the greater part of them being
allowed to bleed to death, a leg having been severed from the body. Most
of them were tall men, with not very pleasing features. Their forehead,
instead of shelving backwards, was generally very high, and the line of
the face straight; but their thick eyelashes, wide, open nostrils, thick
lips, high cheekbones, and coarse bushy hair, gave them a very wild
appearance. The proportions of the legs, with the knee-bone bent inward,
were particularly ugly; and on the whole they were more bony than the
Marghí. They were all of a dirty black colour, very far from that glossy
lustre which is observed in other tribes. Most of them wore a short
beard. The ears of several were adorned with small copper rings, while
almost all of them wore round their necks a thick rope made of the dúm-
bush or ngílle, coarsely twisted, as a sort of ornament.

[Sidenote: Monday, December 29th.]

Soon after setting out from the place of encampment, we had to cross the
ngáljam, which here also was thickly overgrown with rank grass, and the
passage of which was very difficult, owing to the countless holes caused
by the footprints of the elephant. We then entered a dense forest, where
I saw again, for the first time, my old Háusa acquaintance, the kókia, a
middle-sized tree with large leaves and with a fruit of the size of an
apple, which at present was green, but even when ripe is not edible.
This tree, in the course of the expedition, I found to be very common in
the wilds of this country.

The unwarlike spirit of our large army became more apparent than ever by
to-day’s proceedings: for a vigorous commander would certainly have
accelerated his march through this forest, in order to take the enemy
unawares; but long before noon a halt was ordered in the midst of the
forest—certainly against the inclination of the majority. There was a
great deal of indecision; and in truth there seemed to be many who
wished rather that the enemy should have time to escape, than to incite
him to make a desperate struggle for his safety. The neighbouring pond
(where, on our arrival, a herdsman who had come to water his cattle had
been slain), we were told, did not contain a sufficient supply of water
for the wants of the whole army; and when at length we had fairly
dismounted, the rank grass being burnt down in order to clear the
ground, and the fire being fed by a strong wind, a terrible
conflagration ensued, which threw us into the greatest confusion, and
obliged us to seek our safety in a hasty retreat. Nevertheless, after a
great deal of hesitation, it was at length determined to encamp here.
There was no scarcity of water—for the pond proved to be very spacious
and of great depth; but the grass having been burned, the whole ground
was covered with a layer of hot ashes, which blackened everything.

By and by the camels arrived, the encampment was formed, and every one
had given himself up to repose of mind and body, when suddenly the
alarm-drums were beaten, and everybody hastened to arms, and mounted his
horse. It seemed incredible that an enemy whose movements were
uncombined, and not directed by any good leaders, should attack such an
army, of more than 10,000 cavalry, and a still greater number of foot,
although I am persuaded that a resolute attack of a few hundred brave
men would have defeated the whole of this vain and cowardly host. The
alarm, as was to be expected, proved unfounded; but it showed the small
degree of confidence which the people had in their own strength. Three
pagan women had been seen endeavouring to reach the water by stealth;
and this gave rise to the conclusion that the enemy was near, for the
dense forest all around hemmed in the view entirely.

[Illustration: Drawn by J. M. Bernatz, from a Sketch by Dr. Barth.

M. & N. Hanhart, lith. et impt.

ENCAMPMENT IN THE FOREST.

Jany. 1852.]

When at length the encampment had resumed its former state of
tranquillity, the prince Ádishén, with a numerous suite of naked
followers, came to my tent, and I requested him to enter; there was,
however, nothing attractive or interesting about him, and I was glad to
get rid of him with a few presents. The difference between the Marghí
and Músgu, notwithstanding the affinity indicated by their language and
some of their manners, is indeed great, and is, as I have already
intimated above, rather to the disadvantage of the latter, whose forms
exhibit less of symmetry, and whose features have a very wild and savage
appearance. Neither in these Músgu courtiers, nor in the common people,
had I observed any of those becoming ornaments, especially those iron
arm-rings, which I have mentioned in describing the Marghí.

Ádishén had shaved his head, in order to give to himself the appearance
of a Moslim, and wore a tobe; but of his companions, only one had
adopted this foreign garment, all the others having their loins girt
with a leather apron. In order to keep themselves on horseback, they
have recourse to a most barbarous expedient. They make a broad open
wound on the back of their small sturdy ponies, in order to keep their
seat; and when they want to ride at full speed, they often scratch or
cut their legs in order to glue themselves to the horse’s flanks by
means of the blood which oozes from the wounds: for as I have stated
above, they have neither saddle, stirrups, nor bridle, and they use
nothing but a simple rope to guide their animals. They generally carry
only one spear, but several “góliyó”s or hand-bills, the latter being
evidently their best weapon, not only in close fight, but even at a
distance, as they are very expert in throwing this sharp and double-
pointed iron sideways, and frequently inflict severe wounds on the legs
of horses as well as of men. Some of their chiefs protect their persons
with a strong doublet made of buffalo’s hide, with the hair inside.[18]

[Sidenote: Tuesday, Dec. 30th.]

This was the last day’s march which our expedition was to make towards
the south, or rather south-east. For the first ten or eleven miles we
kept through dense forest, the thick covert of which rendered it
difficult for us to make our way, while the restless and vicious Bórnu
horses, crowded together and hemmed in by the thicket, repeatedly came
into most unpleasant collision; and here again I was much indebted to my
massive stirrups, which bravely kept their ground against bush and man.
The whole forest consisted of middle-sized trees, the kókia being
predominant, while scarcely a single tree of larger size was to be seen.
It seemed very natural that all the wild animals should flee before such
a host of people; but I was astonished at the scarcity of ant-hills,
notwithstanding the great degree of moisture which prevails in these
extensive levels, and which is so favourable to the existence of this
insect.

Our march the whole morning had been straight for Dáwa, the village of
the Túfuri or Túburi, a section of the great tribe of the Farí or Falí,
of which I have spoken in a former part of my narrative.

There had been a great deal of discussion in the last day’s council as
to the expediency of attacking this place, the subjection, or rather
destruction of which was of great importance, not only to Mʿallem Jýmma,
but even to the Fúlbe settled in the eastern districts of Ádamáwa in
general. This party at last had gained the upper hand over the greater
part of the cowardly Kanúri courtiers; but at present, when we
approached the seat of this tribe, who are well known to be warlike, and
when the question arose whether we should engage in battle with these
people in three or four hours’ time, it became rather a serious affair.
When, therefore, after a march of four hours we reached a beautiful
fresh meadow-water or “ngáljam” overgrown with rank grass, surrounded by
large spreading ngábbore trees, which pleasantly diversified the
monotonous forest, we made a halt, and while the horsemen watered their
animals, an animated “nógona,” or council, was held in the shade of a
beautiful fig-tree. Here it was decided that, at least to-day, we should
not march against Dáwa and the Túburi, but were to change our course
more to the eastward in the direction of Démmo. It is probable that the
vizier on this occasion promised to his friends, that after he had taken
up his head-quarters at Démmo, and deposited safely, in the fortified
encampment, the spoil that he had already made in slaves and cattle, he
would march against Dáwa; but unfortunately, or rather luckily for the
inhabitants, it was not our destiny to visit that interesting and
important place, as I shall soon have occasion to mention.

During our halt here I contemplated, with the most lively and intense
interest, the rich and animated scene which presented itself before my
eyes,—a mass of some thousand horsemen, dressed in the most varied
manner and in the most glowing colours, with their spirited chargers of
every size, description, and colour, crowded together along the green
margin of a narrow sheet of water, skirted by a dense border of large
trees of the finest foliage.

After a halt of about a quarter of an hour we were again in the saddle,
and pursued our march, but now in an entirely different direction,
keeping almost due east, and crossing the shallow watercourse, which
stretched from north to south a little below our halting-place, the
place where we crossed it being quite dry and full of holes caused by
the footsteps of the elephant. The wilderness for a while was clearer;
but after a march of about two miles we reached a very thick covert,
where it was found necessary to send out scouts, in order to see if the
enemy was lying in ambush. It is a great pity that these poor natives do
not know how to avail themselves, against their cruel and cowardly
enemies, of the fastnesses with which nature has endowed these regions.
Of course, these immense forests, which separate one principality, and I
might say one village, from another, are themselves a consequence of the
want of intelligence and of the barbarous blindness of these pagan
tribes, who, destitute of any common bond of national unity, live
entirely separated from, and even carry on war against each other.

Scarcely had we made ourselves a path through the thicket, when we
reached another meadow-water, which at present, however, looked rather
like a bog, and offered some difficulties to the passage of the horses.
Having then for some time kept upon dry ground, about noon we had to
cross another swamp; but beyond this the country became open.

Having now reached the place of our destination, the banners were
unfolded, the drums beaten, and the greater part of the cavalry hurried
on in advance ready for fighting, or rather for pillage, for no enemy
was to be seen. Immediately afterwards we reached the village of Démmo,
and marched slowly along, looking out for the best place for encamping.
Numerous deléb-palms became visible behind the shady acacias, when
suddenly we obtained sight of a broad shallow watercourse, larger than
any we had yet seen in this country—more than two miles in width, with a
considerable sheet of open water, where two pagan canoes were seen
moving about.

Greatly interested in the scene, we closely approached the edge of the
water, which seemed to be of considerable depth, although a number of
hungry Kánembú had passed the first open sheet, and were fishing in its
more shallow part, which divided the open water into two branches. From
beyond the opposite shore a whole forest of deléb-palms were towering
over the other vegetation of lower growth, as if enticing us to come and
enjoy their picturesque shade. The direction of the watercourse at this
spot was from S.W. to N.E.; and, according to the unanimous statement of
those who had any knowledge of these regions, it joins the Serbéwuel,
that is to say the upper course of the river or “éré” of Logón.

Here we stood awhile, and looked with longing eyes towards the opposite
shore; it was a most interesting and peculiar scenery, highly
characteristic of these level equatorial regions of Africa. What an
erroneous idea had been entertained of these regions in former times!
Instead of the massive Mountain-range of the Moon, we had discovered
only a few isolated mounts; instead of a dry desolate plateau, we had
found wide and extremely fertile plains, less than one thousand feet
above the level of the sea, and intersected by innumerable broad
watercourses with scarcely any inclination. Only towards the south-west,
at the distance of about sixteen miles, the low rocky mount of the
Túburi was seen.

[Illustration: Drawn by J. M. Bernatz, from a Sketch by Dr. Barth.

M. & N. Hanhart, lith. et impt.

THE NGÁLJAM AT DÉMMO.

Decr. 31st. 1851.]

But not less interesting than the scenery of the landscape was the
aspect of the host of our companions, who were here crowded together at
the border of the water. Only very few of them had penetrated as far
before; and they looked with curiosity and astonishment upon this
landscape, while most of them were rather disappointed that the water
prevented them from pursuing the poor pagans, the full-grown amongst
whom, with few exceptions, had just had time to escape. But a
considerable number of female slaves and young children were captured;
for the men did not take to flight till they became aware, from the
thick clouds of dust which were raised by the army, that it was not one
of the small expeditions which they were accustomed to resist, that was
coming to attack them. Besides the spoil in human beings, a considerable
number of colts and cattle were brought in.

Having indulged in the aspect of this rich scene which formed such a
contrast to the monotonous neighbourhood of Kúkawa, we retraced our
steps, in order to encamp at some distance from the water, which of
course gives life to millions of mosquitoes, and encamped amongst the
smouldering ruins of the huts. The whole village, which only a few
moments before had been the abode of comfort and happiness, was
destroyed by fire and made desolate. Slaughtered men, with their limbs
severed from their bodies, were lying about in all directions, and made
the passer-by shudder with horror. Such is the course of human affairs
in these regions! Small troops of light cavalry tried to pursue the
enemy; and there was some fighting in the course of the afternoon, when
a few men of the Bórnu army were killed.

[Sidenote: Wednesday, December 31st.]

We remained here this and the following day, it being the intention of
the Bórnu people, according to their own statement, to reduce this
country to subjection; and I deeply regretted that the circumstances
under which we visited this region did not allow me to collect all the
information I wished. But roving about the encampment, I endeavoured to
pick up what I could.

All the huts had clay walls, which were from four to six inches thick,
and had resisted the conflagration, the roofs, consisting of beams and
reed, having fallen in. The diameter of the huts varied from eight to
twelve feet. Each hut contained a large jar for holding water, and some
had a peculiar fire-place, inclosed by separate walls, and not unlike an
oven; but, although in general the arrangement of the huts was
comfortable, I found the dwellings in other villages of this country far
superior, nor did I observe here such large courtyards as I had seen
elsewhere. In the centre of the village there were some extensive tanks,
or pools of water, which seemed to be made by the hand of man.

The whole encampment, or “ngáufate,” was surrounded with a strong fence
of thorny bushes, rather for the purpose of preventing the slaves from
escaping, than to defend the encampment against an enemy. Having
wandered about amidst this scene of destruction, I went in the afternoon
to the border of the “ngáljam,” which was enlivened by horses and cattle
grazing, and people quietly reclining here and there or bathing in the
water.[19] I then wandered along the bank to some distance, where the
sheet of open water on this side was entirely interrupted, while on the
other shore a considerable strip of water stretched out before the view.

Here, in Démmo, the year 1852 opened to me, in the course of which I at
that time entertained a hope of returning homewards, not fancying that I
was to remain three years more in these barbarous countries, amidst
constantly varying impressions of discovery, of disappointment, of
friendly and hostile treatment, and under all sorts of affliction,
distress, and sickness.

Our stay here was varied by a few interesting incidents, one of which I
will relate. The intriguing Shúwa chief Mʿallem Jýmma, whose ambitious
designs did not allow him any rest, had not only persuaded the head man
of Démmo, who had made his escape, but even the chief of the nearest
village on the other side of the ngáljam, to make his subjection
publicly, and to seek the protection of Bórnu. They were therefore
introduced this day into the nógona or council, and threw dust upon
their heads. But when they had to confirm their subjection by an oath,
the pagan prince of Démmo indeed took an oath, raising a handful of
earth, and allowing it to glide through his fingers, but the chief from
the other side of the ngáljam refused to take the oath, under the
pretext that this earth was not fit for his vow, not being his own soil;
he said he must first bring a handful of earth from his own country. An
oath taken upon earth that belonged to their native soil was also common
among the ancients.

Both chiefs had made their appearance in their native attire, that is to
say, quite naked with the exception of a narrow leather strip round
their loins; and it caused great merriment to the courtiers, that when,
in consequence of their subjection, they were officially dressed in
black tobes as a sort of investiture, the chief of Démmo drew his shirt
over his head, reckless whether the lower parts were covered or not. In
order to amuse the assemblage, they also blew their little horn, an
instrument which every Músgu grandee carries with him, and which bears a
great resemblance to a bugle; but in this accomplishment a priest who
accompanied them was more clever than themselves, producing melodious
and sonorous sounds from this simple and uncouth instrument.

This was the first and only time that I became aware that these pagan
tribes had separate priests; and I felt greatly disappointed that I did
not come into closer contact with them, nor was able to learn from other
people what were their peculiar duties. But, in general, I think I am
not mistaken in supposing that the sacerdotal functions with these
tribes of the interior are less developed than those on the coast; for
as yet I had seen very little of real fetishism. In general the office
of priest seems to be connected with that of chief.

This man also received a shirt as a present; but it was only a white one
of inferior quality, and I do not think he kept it very long after he
had left the assemblage of these civilized people.

As the price of the benevolent reception which the prince of Démmo had
experienced, he, as is generally the case in these distracted
communities, betrayed the interests of his countrymen, promising that he
would lead the army to a large walled town (so, at least, he was
understood to say), where they were to find plenty of booty and spoil.
Accordingly an expedition on a large scale, which was to be led by the
vizier in person, was fixed for the next day.

[Sidenote: Friday, January 2nd.]

Having remained quiet for some hours in the morning, probably to make
the neighbouring chieftains believe that we had no intention of moving,
we suddenly set out, with almost the whole of the cavalry and a portion
of the Kánembú spearmen, led on by our new ally the chief of Démmo, who,
mounted on a little pony, clad in his new black garment, presented a
very awkward and ridiculous appearance.

The first village which we reached, after about an hour’s march through
a clear forest, was quite deserted; and it was but natural that all the
people around should be upon their guard. The landscape was exceedingly
beautiful, richly irrigated and finely wooded, while, to our great
astonishment, the ground was so carefully cultivated that even manure
had been put upon the fields in a regular manner, being spread over the
ground to a great extent—the first example of such careful tillage that
I had as yet observed in Central Africa, both among Mohammedans and
pagans. The inhabitants had had so much leisure to make their escape,
that they had left very little behind to satisfy the greediness of the
enemy; and we therefore continued our march without delay, in a north-
easterly direction. This whole fertile district bears the name of
Wúliya; but I did not learn the peculiar name of this village.

After a march of about four miles, we crossed another watercourse, at
present only from ten to fifteen inches deep, and surrounded by
beautiful pasture-grounds, which during part of the year are inundated,
and must then present the appearance of an extensive lake. This fresh
green basin was adorned all around by luxuriant fig and “karáge” trees,
and slender detached dúm-palms towered picturesquely above the green
foliage, but no deléb-palms were to be seen. Then followed another
village, likewise deserted by its unfortunate inhabitants, and then
again open meadow-lands, intersected by a narrow channel-like
watercourse, in a direction from S.W. to N.E.

The watercourse was from sixty to seventy yards broad, and inclosed so
regularly between its banks, which were about ten feet high, that it had
quite the appearance of an artificial canal,—a peculiarity which in the
course of time I frequently observed, not only here, but also in the
similar watercourses along the Niger. At the point where we crossed it,
the sheet of water was entirely broken by a small sandbank, so that we
went over without wetting our feet. However, I conjectured that this was
an artificial dyke thrown up by the persecuted natives, in order to keep
open an easy connection with the river, on which alone their safety
depended. Without any delay the expedition pushed on, in the hope of
overtaking the fugitives before they had crossed the river; for here we
were quite close to the western shore of the river of Logón, which is
generally, but erroneously, called Shári, while this name, which belongs
to the language of the Kótokó, and means “river” in general, applies
more properly to the larger eastern branch below Klésem, which is
inhabited by Kótokó, and to the united stream lower down below the
junction of the two branches. In this place the river, or “éré,” is
called Serbéwuel, I think, in the Músgu language; higher up, where we
shall make its acquaintance in the course of our further researches, it
is called Bá-Gun and Bá-Bay, “bá” being the general name for river in
the language of Bagírmi and the native tribes of the Sóm-ray, as well as
in the language of the Manding or Mandingoes.

After a short time we stood on the banks of the stream. It was a
considerable river even at the present moment, although it was greatly
below its highest level, and probably represented the mean depth of the
whole year. At present it was about four hundred yards wide, and so deep
that six Shúwa horsemen, who, in their eager desire for spoil, had
ventured to enter it, were carried away by the stream, and fell an easy
prey to about a dozen courageous pagans, who, in a couple of canoes,
were gliding up and down the river to see what they could lay their
hands upon. They felt that we were unable to follow them without canoes,
although for any active body of men it would have been an easy affair to
construct a few rafts for crossing over, there being a plentiful supply
of timber.

The banks of the river on this side were at present about twenty-five
feet high. The opposite shore was not so steep, and from its rich
vegetation had a very inviting appearance; but I was glad, for the sake
of the poor natives, that we were unable to reach it, and I think even
our friend the Háj Beshír looked at this interesting landscape rather
with a degree of scientific interest than with anger and disappointment.
Unfortunately, on this occasion I had not taken my telescope with me,
but I was so fortunate as still to get a sight of this river a little
lower down.

Having stood here for a few minutes on the steep bank, looking down into
the stream, which rolled unceasingly along, cutting off our further
progress, we turned our horses’ heads in the direction from which we had
come, while our friends endeavoured to soothe their disappointment by
saying, that if the pagans had escaped from their hands, they would
certainly not fail to fall into the power of their enemies, viz. the
pagans who lived on the other side of the river under the protection of
Bagírmi.

We thus turned our backs upon the river, my European companion and I
greatly satisfied with our day’s work, which had afforded us a sight of
this fine stream, but our companions, in sullen silence and
disappointment, on account of the expected spoil having escaped from
their hands. Indeed, where they had expected to find that “El Dorado,”
that walled town full of male and female slaves, I never succeeded in
ascertaining. The whole day’s spoil was limited to a handful of
slaves—unfortunate creatures whom sickness or ill-advised courage
prevented from leaving their native villages,—besides a couple of
cattle, a few goats, fowls, and a little corn, but principally
groundnuts, of which large quantities were carried off by the hungry
Kánembú spearmen.

The whole army was in such a mood as to be glad to find any object on
which to vent its anger; and such a one soon presented itself, for when
we again reached that channel-like watercourse which I have mentioned
above, and were watering our horses, four natives were seen, who,
evidently confiding in their courage and their skill in swimming, had
here taken refuge in the deepest part of the water, in order to give
information to their countrymen of the retreat of the enemy. As soon as
our friends caught sight of this little troop of heroes, they determined
to sacrifice them to their vengeance. With this view, the whole of the
cavalry arranged themselves in close lines on each side of the water.
But the task was not so easy as it appeared at first; and all the firing
of the bad marksmen was in vain, the Músgu diving with remarkable
agility. When the vizier saw that in this way these heroes could not be
overpowered, he ordered some Kánembú to enter the water; and a very
singular kind of combat arose, the like of which I had never seen
before, and which required an immense deal of energy, for, while these
people had to sustain themselves above the water with the help of their
feet, they had at the same time to jump up, throw the spear, and parry
the thrusts of their adversaries. The poor Músgu people, on their side,
were not only fighting for their lives, but even, as it were, for their
national honour. They were of large and muscular frame, single-handed
far superior to the Kánembú; but at length, after a protracted struggle,
the superior numbers of the Kánembú got the upper hand, and the corpses
of three of the Músgu were seen swimming on the surface of the water.
But the fourth and last appeared to be invincible, and the Kánembú, who
had lost two of their companions, gave him up in despair.

After this inglorious victory we pursued our march homewards, keeping a
little more to the north than when we came. This part of the country
exhibited the same fertile and pleasant character as that we had seen
before. It was densely inhabited and well cultivated, even tobacco being
grown to a great extent. As for the villages themselves, they afforded
the same appearance of comfort and cheerfulness which we had observed in
the others. But all these abodes of human happiness were destroyed by
fire.

After having accomplished these great deeds, we returned to our
encampment. Here we remained during the two following days, while the
most important business was transacted. This was the partition of the
slaves who had been taken during the expedition; and the proceeding was
accompanied by the most heartrending scenes, caused by the number of
young children, and even infants, who were to be distributed, many of
these poor creatures being mercilessly torn away from their mothers,
never to see them again. There were scarcely any full-grown men.

More interesting to me than this horrible affair was the sending of a
messenger to Kúkawa; and it was doubly so on account of the roundabout
way which this man had to pursue, the track by which we had come being
at present greatly infested by the desperate pagans, who very recently
had massacred a whole troop of horse and foot who had come from Kúkawa,
with the exception of one, who had succeeded in making his escape. The
messengers, therefore, who were now sent, were obliged to take the road
leading past the villages of the Fúlbe, going from Démmo to Káfta, the
place mentioned in the preceding volume, and from thence to Bógo, whence
they were to follow the general track, which I have described on a
former occasion. An escort of fifteen Kanúri and two Fúlbe accompanied
the two messengers, as their first day’s march was very dangerous.

For the last few days there had been a great talk of an expedition, on a
large scale, against the Túburi, whither it was said we were to transfer
the whole encampment; and I and my companion already anticipated a great
deal of delight, as the isolated rocky mount which we had seen on the
day of our arrival seemed to be well worthy of notice. But, as I have
already stated, the Bórnu people were greatly afraid of this place, the
real reason probably being, that they apprehended the pagans might
retire upon the top of the mountain, and, having abundance of water in
the neighbourhood, offer a successful resistance, although we were told
that, on a former occasion, a single kashélla, ʿAlí Fugomámi, had
extended his expedition as far as that place.

The Fúlbe, by whom this free pagan community was regarded with great
hatred, urged the expedition with the greatest energy; but the cunning
vizier pretended afterwards, in a conversation which he had with Overweg
and me, that it was purposely, from motives of policy, that he did not
accede to this scheme, as he did not want to exterminate this tribe,
being unwilling to pull down with his own hands this last barrier to the
restless spirit of conquest which the Fúlbe or Felláta displayed. The
usurper ʿAbd e’ Rahmán, evidently from a motive of ambition, in order to
be enabled to say that he had penetrated further than his late rival the
vizier, whom he had successfully crushed, in the beginning of the rainy
season of 1854 pushed on into the very country of the Túburi, and thus
enabled Dr. Vogel to lay down that most interesting point by
astronomical observation, although the great lake which my friend
thought to find there was apparently nothing but a widening of that
stagnant watercourse which forms the north-eastern branch of the Bénuwé,
namely the máyo Kébbi, and was laid down by me in the map of Central
Africa, which I sent home from Kúkawa.

[Sidenote: January 5th, 1852.]

It was at a very early hour on Monday morning, a little after midnight,
when the guide of the expedition came to my tent, and, while I was just
dreaming of the rocky mountain of the Túburi, whispered in my ear that a
distant expedition was to be undertaken that very day, but not into the
country of the Túburi, and that the baggage was to remain here. Although
I should rather have preferred visiting the latter tract, situated at
the north-eastern branch of the basin of the Niger, I nevertheless was
determined not to let any opportunity pass by of extending my
geographical knowledge as much as possible, and therefore ordered my
horse to be saddled. Mr. Overweg meanwhile, when he heard that the
vizier was not to lead the expedition in person, but that the young Bú-
Bakr, son of the sheikh, was to take the command, remained behind; and
as I had no mounted servant, and could not expect that a man on foot
would accompany me to a great distance, I was obliged to go quite alone.

Meanwhile the bugles of Bú-Bakr called the warriors together with a
soft, subdued sound, in order not to allow treachery to spread the news
of their plan beforehand. Having passed with some difficulty the narrow
gate of the stockade, the expeditionary army formed outside, when we
pushed on in a north-easterly direction. But nature has provided so well
for the defence of these poor pagans, that they are not easily taken by
surprise.

We succeeded, with the dawn of day, in passing the first broad sheet of
water of the wide “ngáljam” of Wúliya, but found great difficulty in
passing another water with a deep, argillaceous soil of so boggy a
nature that several of the horses fell, even those whose riders had
dismounted; and I felt not a little anxiety on account of my own
restless and fiery horse, which was snorting like a hippopotamus. At
length we left also this morass behind us, and indulged in the hope of
having overcome every difficulty, when suddenly we had before us another
and far deeper water, which delayed us for a long time. But bad as was
our situation whilst we were thus sticking fast in the mud, I could
scarcely help laughing heartily, as this very delay enabled the poor
pagans to escape with their wives and property to a place of safety. As
for most of the horses, the water went over their backs, while I on my
stately charger had the water three inches above my knee. A courageous
enemy, led on by a clever commander, might at this moment have easily
captured most of the horses, and put all the host to flight.

At length, after two hours’ exertion, we emerged from this broad sheet
of water, which, when full, must present the appearance of an extensive
central lake three or four miles in breadth, and many more in length,
and now entered upon green pasture-ground, which, however, during the
highest state of the inundation is itself under water. Here the army
divided into three bodies, and pushed on vigorously, although a great
many had retraced their steps upon seeing the deep water.

Proceeding in this way, we reached the first hamlets, and here formed a
regular line of battle, while the greater part of the army rushed on in
advance, at the sound of the drum and the horns of the kashéllas, to see
if there was anything left for them; but all the inhabitants had made
their escape. Another delay occurred owing to one of the followers of
Bú-Bakr falling into a ditch or hollow twelve feet in depth and the same
in breadth, from which he was extricated with some difficulty, while the
horse died on the spot. But there was plenty of leisure, the pagans
having long ago had sufficient time to make their escape beyond the
river. If those simple people had followed the same stratagem which the
Bórnu people employ against the Tawárek, digging a quantity of holes and
covering them over with bushes, they might have done a great deal of
mischief to the cavalry.

This whole tract of country still belongs to the extensive district of
Wúliya; but the villages have separate names, which, owing to the
unfortunate circumstances under which I visited the country, I was not
able to learn. Having passed a considerable village, we reached, a
little before eleven o’clock, the furthermost line which the waters of
the river Serbéwuel attain during its highest state of inundation, while
when they recede they leave extensive ponds of stagnant water behind,
which nourish a rich supply of the most succulent herbage. The shore was
here about eight feet high, while at the other point, where we had
visited the river a few days previously, it was not so well marked. Of
course, where the inner shore consists of steeper banks, so that the
river does not rise over the higher level to a considerable height, the
outward shore cannot be marked so distinctly.

About thirteen hundred yards beyond this grassy outward shore we reached
the inner bank of the river, which consisted of sand, and was here only
ten feet high. The river at present was confined to this bank, running
at this spot from S. 25° E.; but a little lower down it changed its
direction, running W. by N. Higher up, the opposite shore was richly
overgrown with trees, among which deléb- and dúm-palms were conspicuous;
but no villages were to be seen, although a place named Kár is said to
lie on the eastern shore. The reason we had directed our march to this
point seemed to be, that the river is here rather broad, being about
eight hundred yards across, and forming a large sandbank, so that my
friends had entertained the hope that they would be enabled to ford it,
which in some years, when the rains have not been very considerable, may
be possible at this season, and even this year might probably be
effected in two months’ time. But at present this was not the case, and
the rapacious Shúwa Arabs were hurrying about in despair, to and fro,
between the island and the western shore.

I too took the direction of the island, as the most interesting point,
although I became aware that it was not possible to penetrate further
on. The first branch of the river on this side of the island, which was
the broader of the two, was not more than from eighteen to nineteen
inches deep, and could not but become dry in a short time, when the
island, or rather sandbank, should form the knee of the bend of the
river; but the eastern branch, though apparently only about 120 or 130
yards broad, seemed to be of considerable depth, running along with a
strong current, and my old friend Abú Dáúd, one of the principal Shúwa
chiefs, whom I encountered at the southern point of the sandbank, with a
sad countenance, indicated the whole nature of this stream with the
laconic and significant expression, “yákul” (it eats),—that is to say,
it is not fordable.

It would have been the more dangerous to attempt to force the passage,
as the opposite shore, which was so near, and only four feet high, was
occupied by a number of stalwart pagans, who mocked at our inability to
cross the river, and seemed to be quite ready to receive in a
satisfactory manner anybody who should make the attempt. It would have
been easy to have blown away these people, and thus to clear the place
of descent; but for such an undertaking my friends had not sufficient
courage or energy. I did not see a single Kanúri on the island, but only
Shúwa, who always expose themselves to the greatest risk, and push on
the furthest. The pagans had not only occupied the opposite bank, but
even kept afloat four canoes at some distance above the island, in order
to run down, with the assistance of the current, any one who should dare
to cross the river. Three of these canoes were small; but the fourth was
of a larger size, and manned by ten Músgu.

These canoes were the only craft visible on the river, and probably
constituted the whole naval force of these pagans. Of course in a
country politically rent into so many petty principalities, where every
little community, as in ancient times in Latium and Greece, forms a
separate little state in opposition to its neighbours, no considerable
intercourse is possible, and those natural highroads with which nature
has provided these countries, and the immense field therefore which is
open in these regions to human industry and activity, must remain
unproductive under such circumstances; but it will be turned to account
as soon as the restless spirit of the European shall bring these
countries within the sphere of his activity. This period must come.
Indeed I am persuaded that in less than fifty years European boats will
keep up a regular annual intercourse between the great basin of the Tsád
and the Bay of Biyáfra.

An almost uninterrupted communication has been opened by Nature herself;
for, from the mouth of the Kwára to the confluence of the river Bénuwé
with the máyo Kébbi, there is a natural passage navigable without
further obstruction for boats of about four feet in depth, and the máyo
Kébbi itself, in its present shallow state, seems to be navigable for
canoes, or flat-bottomed boats like those of the natives, which I have
no doubt may, during the highest state of the inundation, go as far as
Dáwa in the Túburi country, where Dr. Vogel was struck by that large
sheet of water which to him seemed to be an independent central lake,
but which is in reality nothing but a widening of the upper part of the
máyo Kébbi.

It is very probable that from this place there may be some other shallow
watercourse, proceeding to join the large ngáljam of Démmo, so that
there would exist a real bifurcation between the basin of the Niger and
that of the Tsád. But even if this should not be the case, the breadth
of the water-parting between these two basins at the utmost cannot
exceed twenty miles, consisting of an entirely level flat, and probably
of alluvial soil, while the granitic region attached to that isolated
rocky mountain which I have mentioned above may, most probably, be
turned without difficulty. The level of the Tsád and that of the river
Bénuwé near Géwe, where it is joined by the máyo Kébbi, seem to be
almost identical; at least, according to all appearance, the Bénuwé at
the place mentioned is not more than 850 or 900 feet above the level of
the sea. All this bounty of nature will, I trust, one day be turned to
account, though many changes must take place in this country before a
regular and peaceful intercourse can be established. The very scenes
which I witnessed are an unmistakable proof of the misery into which
these regions are plunged.

But, as I have carried away the reader’s attention from the thread of
the narrative, so I myself had almost forgotten where I was, and it
required an admonition from my friend Abú Dáúd to induce me to look
after my own safety; for already the greater part of the Shúwa had
returned to the western shore, and threatened to leave us alone, and it
did not seem very agreeable to be taken in the rear by the pagans, and
perhaps even to be cut off by the boats. I therefore returned to the
western shore, where the army was scattered about, not knowing what to
do, being rather disinclined to retrace their steps without having
enriched themselves with booty of some kind.

Following then the course of the river, I witnessed an interesting and
animated scene,—a dozen courageous natives occupying a small elevated
island, with steep banks, separated from the shore by a narrow but deep
channel, setting at defiance a countless host of enemies, many of whom
were armed with firearms. But African muskets are not exactly like Minié
rifles, and a musketeer very often misses his aim at a distance of
thirty or forty yards. It was astonishing to see that none of this small
band of heroes was wounded, notwithstanding the repeated firing of a
number of Kanúri people. Either the balls missed their aim entirely, or
else, striking upon the shields of these poor pagans, which consisted of
nothing but wickerwork, were unable to pierce this slight defence; for
not only was the powder of a bad quality, making a great deal of noise
without possessing any strength, but even the balls were of extremely
light weight, consisting of pewter, as is generally the case here.

However, it was not prudent for me to witness this scene (which was so
little flattering to my friends) for too long a time; for when they saw
that I had my gun with me, they called upon me urgently to fire at these
scoffers, and when I refused to do so, reproached me in terms which very
often fell to my lot—“ʿAbd el Kerím fáida nsé bágo,” meaning that I was
a useless sort of person.

It is a remarkable fact that in almost the whole of the Músgu country,
except near a few isolated granite mountains, there is not a single
stone, else it would have been almost more profitable to have thrown
stones at these people, than to fire at them with the pewter balls. With
regard to those peculiar shields of wickerwork with which these
courageous Músgu people managed to protect themselves so adroitly, I had
afterwards an opportunity of examining them, and found them to be about
sixteen inches broad at the top, twenty-two at the bottom, and about
forty in length, but hollow. The material consists of the same kind of
reed with which their huts are thatched.

About noon the army began its march homewards. Certainly it was not
overburdened with spoil; for scarcely fifteen slaves had been taken,
mostly decrepit old women, who either could not or would not leave their
comfortable cottages. The anger and disappointment of the army was
vented upon the habitations of these people; and all the cheerful
dwellings which we passed were destroyed by fire. This certainly was a
heavy loss to the inhabitants, not so much on account of the huts, which
they might easily rebuild, as on account of the granaries, the grain
having been harvested some time previously; and, as far as I became
aware, there being no subterranean magazines or catamores, as I had
observed with the Marghí, and the fugitives in the hurry of their escape
most probably having only been able to save a small portion of their
store. In estimating, therefore, the miseries of these slave-hunts, we
ought not only to take into account the prisoners led into slavery, and
the full-grown men who are slaughtered, but also the famine and distress
consequent upon these expeditions, although nature has provided this
peculiar tribe with innumerable shallow watercourses swarming with fish,
which must tend greatly to alleviate their sufferings under such
circumstances.

The forest intervening between these villages consisted almost
exclusively of “kindín” or talha-trees, which were just in flower,
diffusing a very pleasant fragrance, while here and there they were
overshadowed by isolated dúm-palms. As for deléb-palms, I did not
observe a single specimen in the whole of this district; but beyond the
river to the south-east, as I have mentioned above, I had seen several
in the distance.

After a march of four hours, we again reached the broad ngáljam of
Démmo, but at a different point from where we had crossed it in the
morning with so much delay. It seemed almost providential that we had
not taken this route in the morning, as the poor Músgu people would have
had less time to make their escape. Leaving the main body of the cavalry
behind me, I pursued my march towards my homely tent without delay; for
having been on horseback for more than twelve hours without anything to
eat, I was quite ready for some repose and refreshment. But it took me
full an hour and a half to cross this peculiar basin, which at present
was dry in most places, and overgrown with tall rank grass, but swampy
in some parts, and intersected by holes caused by the footprints of the
elephant. A mile further along the north-western border of this swamp
brought me to my tent, and to the several dishes which awaited me; and
this was one of those rare occasions, during my travels in Negroland, on
which I dined with a truly European appetite.

The vizier was very gracious, and praised my courage in having
accompanied this distant expedition quite by myself; but the Kanúri, who
had taken part in it, detracted from my praise, using the very terms
which I have mentioned above—“fáida nsé bágo.” Indeed this became one of
my nicknames during my stay in Bórnu, and was the reason why I was less
popular with most of the people than my companion. It is very natural
that the motto “afí fáida nsé” (“of what use is he?”) should be the
guiding principle, not only of Europeans, but barbarians and semi-
barbarians.

The following day we remained on the same spot, probably for no other
purpose than to give some repose to the people who had accompanied the
expedition the preceding day; and the vizier, who was fully aware of my
ardent desire to push further southward, at least as far as the equator,
took occasion to make merry at my expense, and, to the great horror of
the effeminate courtiers, suddenly proclaimed that it was his firm
intention to lead the expedition into those unknown regions in the
interior. At times, indeed, he could be exceedingly amiable; and he was
clever enough to conceive how Europeans could be induced to undertake
such hazardous journeys, although he was scarcely able to appreciate the
amount of courage which such an undertaking is able to inspire. He had
often spoken with me concerning my project of pushing on towards the
east coast; and he thought that a troop of ten Europeans would be able
to accomplish it, although he anticipated great obstructions from the
quantity of watercourses in those equatorial regions, and there can be
no doubt that this would be one of the greatest obstacles to such an
undertaking.

In order to console me, and soothe my disappointment on finding that
this was to be the furthest point of the expedition, and that we should
retrace our steps from hence without even visiting the country of the
Túburi, he ordered Mʿallem Jýmma to be called, in order to inform me how
far the enterprising Púllo conqueror Búba had penetrated beyond
Búbanjídda; but he found that I was already fully acquainted with this
fact from other sources. The very interesting route of the mʿallem Jýmma
from Démmo, by the village of the Túburi to Láka and Láme, I have
already communicated on a former occasion.[20] It is to be hoped that
these regions will soon become better known, when English steamers shall
go annually up the river Bénuwé, and enable travellers to start afresh
from thence for those inland regions.


[Footnote 17: In the view of this scenery which the artist has made from
my sketch, it has been thought fit not to represent the moment of
destruction, but a preceding one of the quiet life of the natives; the
approaching misfortune being only indicated by the column of smoke in
the background. The man sitting on the sepulchre is meant to represent
the first glimmer of Islám brought to these people by some wandering
mʿallem.]

[Footnote 18: A chief dressed in this manner is represented in Plate No.
30.]

[Footnote 19: It was here that I made the sketch from which the artist
has taken the interesting view of this locality.]

[Footnote 20: I will here only observe with what exactitude I have laid
down, on my map which was published by Mr. Petermann, the district of
the Túburi, which exactly corresponds with the latitude ascertained by
Dr. Vogel. As to the longitude assigned by me to this place, it is
dependent on the meridian of Kúkawa.]




                               CHAP. XLV.

                            RETURN TO BÓRNU.


[Sidenote: January 7th, 1852.]

This was the day when we were to bid farewell to all projects of
penetrating further towards the south or south-east. It was rather
remarkable, that early in the morning, at the very moment when the
drum was beating, the moon was eclipsed; but our commander-in-chief
was too much enlightened to be frightened at such a phenomenon, like the
Athenian general before Syracuse. He requested Mr. Overweg to explain it
to him; but otherwise he was not much concerned about it.

We this time kept a little more towards the east than on our outward
march, approaching closer to the river of Logón. Only a short tract of
clear forest separated the cultivated grounds of Démmo from another
village, where, besides Negro corn, we found tobacco and cotton in
friendly community on the same piece of ground. We had already seen much
cultivation of tobacco in this country, and were impressed with the
opinion, however strange it may seem, that it was an indigenous plant,
and not introduced at a recent period; we had moreover been informed
that not only the men, but even the women in this country, are
passionately fond of smoking. But as for cotton, we had not yet seen any
in the whole tract of the Músgu country which we had travelled over; and
its appearance here seemed to be a step in advance towards civilization,
caused, probably, by the influence of the neighbouring town of Logón.

After a short interruption, there followed another village, which was
succeeded by forest, and then another swamp, at present dry, and
overgrown with tall rank grass, but difficult to pass on account of
innumerable holes. Shortly afterwards the country on our right assumed
an open and very pleasant appearance, a river with a clear sheet of
water, but apparently without a current, winding through it in tortuous
meanderings, and closely approaching the higher ground along which the
numerous host was pursuing its march. The slope was adorned with wild
fig-trees and acacias, which were overshadowed by two fine deléb-palms.
This open country was succeeded by the well-cultivated and shaded
fields, which lay stretched out between the scattered courtyards of
another village; and here we encamped, my companion and I pitching our
tents near a beautiful sort of fig-tree, of the species called “báure”
by the Háusa, and “kágo” by the Kanúri, or at least the Mánga.

The whole village was deserted; only a few neglected members of the
poultry tribe were running about, endeavouring to escape from the hands
of their greedy pursuers.

It was a very hot day, the hottest we had on this expedition, the
thermometer at half-past one in the afternoon indicating 100° in the
cool shade of our fine fig-tree.

The encampment was cheerful and pleasant; but in the evening a frightful
alarm arose—the rumour being spread that the pagans were attacking the
“ngáufate,”—the great drum of the commander-in-chief keeping up a
tremendous din, and all the people hurrying along in every direction.
The alarm was so great that my companion gave up his tent, and retreated
with his people to that of the vizier; and I found myself obliged to
allow my two servants to follow him also. As for myself, I remained
where I was, for I felt little inclination to have my tent once more
plundered, as had been the case on our expedition to Kánem. It soon
proved to be nothing but a false alarm.

In these predatory incursions, the rapacious Shúwa suffer the greatest
loss, as it is they who always push on furthest, and run the greatest
risk; but, on the other hand, they also succeed in carrying off secretly
a great deal of spoil to their native villages without its becoming
subject to the general partition. None of them have firelocks, being
only armed with missiles usually consisting of one large spear, or
kasákka, and four small javelins, or bállem; very few of them have
shields.

[Sidenote: Thursday, January 8th.]

The country through which we passed was extremely fertile and beautiful,
the scenery during the first part of our march preserving in general the
same features which it exhibited on the preceding day. We ourselves kept
along the high ground, at the foot of which a clear open sheet of water
was meandering along, while beyond, towards the east, an unbounded
grassy plain stretched out, with a scanty growth of trees in the back-
ground, and only broken towards the south-east by a low chain of hills,
as represented in the plate opposite. At the distance of a mile we
reached some hamlets where dúm- and deléb-palms were grouped together in
a remarkable manner, starting forth from, and illuminated by the sea of
flames which was devouring the village, the whole forming a very
picturesque spectacle.

[Illustration: Drawn by J. M. Bernatz, from a Sketch by Dr. Barth.

M. & N. Hanhart, lith. et impt.

WÚLIA.

Jany. 8th. 1852.]

Further on we made a halt on the slope of the rising ground, the various
troops, distinguished by the diversity of colours of their dresses,
grouping themselves around some buildings which were almost consumed by
the flames, while I found leisure to sketch the fertile country before
us. The people themselves were struck with its beauty; and when we
continued our march, I took an opportunity to enter into a conversation
with our friend the vizier, with regard to the policy which they pursued
with these people, and the way in which they desolated these regions;
and I asked him whether they would not act more prudently in allowing
the natives to cultivate their fertile country in tranquillity, only
levying a considerable tribute upon them. But the vizier answered me,
that it was only by the most violent means that they were able to crush
these pagans, who cherished their independence and liberty above
everything, and that this was the reason why he burnt all the granaries,
in order to subdue them by famine; and he added that even of famine they
were less sensible than he could wish, as the water in this region
afforded them an unlimited supply of fish.

Slaves are the only articles which the conquerors want from the
subjected tribes; by carrying into slavery great numbers of them they
force them into subjection, and even the tribute which they levy, after
having subdued them, consists of slaves. All this will be changed as
soon as a regular and legitimate intercourse has been opened along the
river Bénuwé into the heart of these regions, when the natural produce
of the soil will be in constant request—such as cotton, indigo,
vegetable butter, ground-nuts, ivory, rhinoceros’ horns, wax, hides, and
many other articles. The vizier himself, although a strict Moslim, was
too enlightened to lay much stress upon the spreading of Islám; but
nevertheless the idea that these unfortunate creatures fully deserve
such treatment, in their character as pagans (kofár or “kérdi”), blunted
his feelings to their sufferings.

Further on we crossed the water where it was shallower, and, a little
beyond, another meadow-water of greater breadth but not so deep, and
then entered a fine undulating country, while an arm of the water
remained on our left. The whole country was extremely well cultivated,
and densely inhabited, village succeeding village, while large trees,
mostly of the ngábbore and karáge kind, enveloped the whole in the
finest vegetation. Some of the huts were distinguished by a natural
ornamental net-work or covering, formed by that kind of _Cucurbitacea_
which I have mentioned before as named “ságade” by the natives, and
which is probably identical with the species called _Melopepo_. The
aspect of the country was the more pleasing, and left the impression of
a certain degree of industry, owing to the tobacco-plants just standing
in flower.

Amidst such scenery, we took up our encampment at an early hour in the
morning, a beautifully-winding watercourse, which was bordered by a fine
grassy slope about twenty feet high, closely approaching on our right.
The watercourse was about sixty yards broad, but of considerable depth,
at least in this place, and full of clear fresh water, which was gently
gliding along, and disappeared further down in the plain. Here I lay
down for an hour in the cool shade of a large karáge-tree, and allowed
myself to be carried away by the recollections caused by the ever-
varying impressions of such a wandering life, which repays the traveller
fully for all the hardships and privations which he has to endure, and
endows him with renewed energy to encounter fresh dangers.

I have before observed what trouble the hard alluvial soil caused us in
pitching our tents; but here the argillaceous soil was succeeded by
loose sand, which forms the border of the river. The light troops, soon
after our arrival to-day, had dispersed in all directions, and brought a
considerable quantity of cattle from the neighbouring villages; the
cattle, however, hereabouts are only of middle size, and the cows yield
little milk, and that of very poor quality.

It seems remarkable that the Músgu, as well as the Marghí, and several
divisions of the kindred Kótokó, call the cattle by a name which closely
approaches that given to it by the Háusa people, while the Bátta call it
by a name which is certainly derived from the Fulfúlde, or the language
of the Fúlbe. Such linguistic relations are not without interest, as
they afford some little insight into the history of the civilization of
these regions.

A little variety was given to the monotonous proceedings of our rather
inglorious expedition, by the fact of one of the Shúwa, who was supposed
to have been killed a few days previously, being found under a tree in
the forest, severely wounded but still alive after having undergone
great hardships and privations.

[Sidenote: January 9th.]

The whole district in which we had been roving about since the 30th
December belongs to Wúliya, which is decidedly one of the most fertile
and best-irrigated regions in the world.

A desolate border-district, consisting at times of green swampy ground
uprooted by the footprints of the elephant, and on this account
affording a very difficult passage for cavalry, at others of dense
forest, the one following the other in rapid succession, separated
Wúliya from another principality of the name of Bárea, and inhabited by
a tribe of the Músgu of the name of Ábare. It was characteristic of the
little peaceful intercourse which exists among these various petty
tribes, that the Ábare did not seem to have had the slightest
information of the approach of the expedition, till we suddenly came
upon them through the dense forest, so that they had scarcely time to
escape with their families from the village, and endeavour to hide
themselves in the dense covert of the forest towards the east. They were
pursued and overpowered, after a short resistance, by the continually
increasing numbers of the enemy; and the booty of that day, chiefly in
cattle, was rather considerable. Slaves were also brought in in
considerable numbers, principally young boys and girls. The distance of
the field of battle spared us the sight of the slaughter of the full-
grown men.

[Illustration]

We chose our camping-ground on the stubble-fields between the straggling
groups of the village, which were beautifully adorned by some fine
specimens of the deléb-palm; and I took the opportunity of making a
sketch of this scene of natural fertility and wanton destruction of
human happiness. The huts in general were of the same construction and
arrangement as those described above; but in one of them I found a kind
of three-pointed harpoon or spear very similar to a hay-fork, with this
difference, that the middle point was rather longer. The handle also was
rather long, measuring about eight feet. It probably was used for
catching fish rather than as a weapon, otherwise it would scarcely have
been left behind; but it may easily have served both purposes.

[Illustration: Drawn by J. M. Bernatz, from a Sketch by Dr. Barth.

M. & N. Hanhart, lith. et impt.

BÁRËA.

Jany. 9th. 1852.]

Thus by very short marches we again approached Bórnu, keeping mostly at
a short distance eastward from our former route, and encamped the
following day in the midst of another straggling village, the fields of
which were especially shaded by fine bíto-trees (_Balanites Ægyptiaca_),
the soil being as hard as iron. I had scarcely pitched my tent when
Hámed, the son of Ibrahím Wadáy, one of the courtiers with whom I was on
friendly terms, sent to me, begging I would pay him a visit; and upon
complying with his wish, he introduced into my presence a female slave
who had been taken the day before, telling me that I might make a
drawing of her: for he knew that I was making strict inquiries after the
origin and customs of these tribes, and that I was making occasional
sketches. This female slave was certainly worthy of a sketch, as she was
one of the most stately women I saw here. But I entertained some
suspicion that she was not of Músgu origin, but belonged to the Marghí;
for in the whole of the Músgu country I had not observed a single
individual of red colour, but all were of the same dirty black,
approaching to what the French call _café au lait_, while this woman was
of a red complexion. She certainly wore in her under lip the large bone,
the national emblem of the Músgu females; but this custom she might have
adopted. As for herself, she would neither give me any information with
respect to her origin, nor sit still in order to allow me to finish my
sketch. She was tall and well-grown, with the exception of the legs,
which were rather crooked; and being still a young woman, her breasts
had not yet attained that bag-like shape which is so disgusting in the
elder females of this country. Her features were only a little
disfigured by the bone in the under lip. Her neck was richly ornamented
with strings of beads; but these were as little peculiar to her as the
cotton cloth round her loins, having been given her by the new master
into whose hands she had fallen. The national dress of the Músgu females
consists of nothing but a narrow bandage, formed of bast, twisted like a
rope, which is fastened between the legs and round the waist like a T
bandage.

A circumstance happened here which caused a great sensation,
particularly among the courtiers. The last messengers who had been sent
from Kúkawa with despatches for the commander-in-chief, as I have
observed, had been destroyed by the pagans; and it was on this day, and
in this place, that, while all the cottages were being pillaged and
ransacked, three of the letters of which those messengers had been the
bearers, were found in the pocket of a shirt which had been hid in a
clay jar. This was evidently the shirt of the messenger himself; and the
blood with which it had been stained had been washed out without taking
the letters out of the pocket. Devoid as the expedition was of feats of
valour and interest, the greatest importance was attached to this little
incident.

[Sidenote: Sunday, January 11th.]

When we left this place our friends just barely escaped punishment for
their barbarous proceeding of burning the villages in which we had
encamped as soon as we left them; for the conflagration spread before we
had gained the open country, and a most horrible crushing took place
among the burning huts. Had there been any wind, great part of the army
might have been severely scorched.

The country which we passed to-day was intersected by numerous
watercourses; and we had to cross and recross them several times. Here
we passed a place where the poor natives, in the consciousness of their
weakness, seemed to have been aroused to new and unwonted energy for
building a large fortification, but had been obliged to leave it half
finished. Our march was extremely short, and scarcely extended to three
miles, when we encamped in a village which seemed to have been ransacked
at a former period. It lay straggling over a wide extent of ground, in
separate groups of cottages, which were surrounded by stubble-fields
shaded by karáge-trees of a richness and exuberance which I had not seen
before, and surpassing even those fine trees of the same species which I
have described near the village Kadé.

Of course, every one was desirous of having his tent pitched in the
shade of one of these beautiful trees, when suddenly the intruders were
attacked by swarms of large bees, which, settling behind their ears,
tormented them to the utmost, as if they wanted to take revenge for the
mischief that had been done to their masters, and to defend their
favourite resting-places against these cruel intruders. It is well known
that swarms of bees had almost caused the destruction of Mungo Park’s,
as well as Major Gray’s expedition; but here a whole army was running
away from these little creatures. Even those who had encamped at a
greater distance were only able to protect themselves by the large
volumes of smoke which issued from the fires they had lighted. Before
this, we had not observed the rearing of bees in this country; but here
the larger trees were full of beehives, made of large-sized blocks. Even
flocks of turtle-doves were not wanting in this fertile region, so rich
in water and vegetation.

In this pleasant spot we remained encamped the following day, while part
of the army was sent out in a southerly direction towards our former
encampment, Kákala, which was only at a few miles distance, in order to
try their fortune thereabouts; but the pagans being upon their guard,
they returned empty-handed in the evening. Our food to-day was varied,
to our great satisfaction, by an excellent fish of considerable size,
which we obtained from the neighbouring pond.

Fish seems to be plentiful in this quarter; but whether the number of
small ridges and channels which we observed on our march the following
day were intended for catching fish, which might enter them at the
highest level of the inundation, or for preparing the fields for
cultivation, I am not quite sure; but the former seemed to be the case,
there being no signs whatever of the fields being brought under labour.
Dense forest and open pasture-ground alternated, the forest, consisting
of middle-sized acacias, interrupted now and then by the kálgo-tree,
with its ash-coloured leaves and its dark red pods, or by the kókia.

The country, however, became exceedingly interesting and pleasant when
we reached one of the numerous watercourses of these African
Netherlands, an open and clear river about seventy yards broad, which
being fringed on each bank with a border of slender deléb-palms, or
kamelútu, in the clear magnificent morning sky, afforded a most
picturesque view. We here crossed this water, and passed a village on
our left, and, keeping along the fresh turf of the western bank a mile
further on, reached a spot where another branch, running eastward
apparently, though no current is visible, and fringed likewise by palms
of the same description, joins the main channel. The country being
without any perceptible inclination, it is extremely difficult, nay
almost impossible, to decide about the direction of these watercourses,
except during the period of their highest inundation. But the fertile
and picturesque landscape beyond this narrow sheet of water, which
stretched along in a regular line like an artificial canal, did not seem
at all to be deserted, natives being seen in every direction. The
commander of the expedition therefore ordered a short halt, the army
presenting their front to the enemy, and preventing the stragglers from
crossing the river, which, owing to their greediness for spoil, they
seemed to have not a little inclination to do.

But the great men of Bórnu at the present day do not like any unusual
exertion; and it was decided to await the arrival of the camels, to
encamp at ease, and to take luncheon. We then turned off a little to the
westward, entered a village, and encamped in the stubble-fields.

Suddenly, just about noon, without my having any previous knowledge of
it, the vizier and his officers mounted on horseback, in order to attack
the pagans on the other side of the water; but these poor people, to
whom had been given full opportunity of estimating the strength of the
army, had thought it prudent to make use of the leisure thus afforded
them, not by the mercy, but by the cowardly disposition of their
enemies, to convey their families and property into a place of safety;
for the river of Logón passed at a distance of only four miles from this
place, and in its present state was capable of affording perfect
security to the persecuted natives, their pursuers having no boats. But
although the army did not go to a great distance, and returned after an
absence of three hours, I was rather sorry for having neglected this
opportunity of obtaining a sight of the river of Logón again at another
place, and likewise of visiting once more that picturesque district, so
rich in deléb-palms, which was evidently one of the finest in the whole
country. Mr. Overweg, who had received previous information of the
intention of the vizier, was this time more fortunate than myself, and
afterwards informed me that they had been obliged to keep first along
the smaller river, in order to reach the ford where we had crossed it in
the morning. The great river, which they reached about three miles
beyond, exhibited a single bed, and was not fordable.

While remaining behind in the empty encampment, I lamented the misery of
accompanying such an expedition; for nothing can be more disheartening
to the feelings of a traveller who is desirous of knowledge, than to
visit these beautiful countries under such circumstances, when the
original inhabitants are either exterminated, or obliged to seek their
safety in flight, when all traces of their cheerful life are destroyed,
and the abodes of human happiness converted into desolation, when no one
is left to acquaint him with all the significant names which the various
characteristic features of the country must necessarily bear, especially
those numberless creeks, swamps, and rivers which intersect this country
in all directions. The stranger who intrudes upon the natives in this
hostile manner is scarcely able to make out a few dry names of the
principal dwelling-places, and, being placed under such disadvantageous
circumstances, is at least justified in speaking more emphatically of
the endless misery into which the finest and most populous regions of
this continent are plunged by these slave-hunting expeditions of their
merciless Mohammedan neighbours. This fertile district, which is
inclosed by the river of Logón on the east, and by the narrow channel-
like watercourse on the west side, seems to be that very dominion of
“Fúss,” the power of which, as I have related before, was greatly
dreaded by our friends.

This was the coolest day we had as yet experienced on our expedition,
the thermometer, in the cool shade of a tree, at half-past one o’clock
in the afternoon indicating only 84°. This was probably attributable to
the fresh northerly breeze which sprung up about noon; for during the
night it was not so cold as we felt it afterwards, the thermometer
during this time indicating, at sunrise, between 56° and 59°, and at
sunset between 74° and 77°.

[Sidenote: Wednesday, January 14th.]

We made a longer march than usual, while the character of the country
changed entirely, and not, as it seemed, to its advantage; for instead
of a fertile landscape, clothed with rich verdure, we entered upon bleak
alluvial plains, scantily overgrown with stunted mimosas, and to all
appearance almost unfit for producing grain. It was one of those
remarkable days in January which, in the whole of Central Africa, form a
distinct season by themselves. A thick fog enveloped the whole country,
and excluded any distant view, and, while subsequently it helped to
increase the dismal character of the country, in the beginning of our
march it prevented us from enjoying once more the rich scenery of the
preceding day; for we had first to return to the bank of that beautiful
clear sheet of water along which our march had led the day before. Its
banks here also were quite flat, but the sheet of water was wider than
at the place where we had seen it before. Proceeding a little in advance
of the army, I obtained a sight of a riverhorse just at the moment when
it raised its immense head above the surface of the watery element.

But as soon as we left this fine clear sheet of water the character of
the country changed entirely, assuming an exceedingly sombre aspect, and
we passed a hamlet more cheerless and miserable than any I had seen in
the whole of this country. Not a single trace of cultivation was seen on
the bleak, black, argillaceous soil; and it was evident that the
inhabitants of this hamlet subsisted solely on the fish which they were
able to catch; and these may be abundant, as the whole configuration of
the ground evidently shows that this entire tract is reached by the
inundation during the rainy season.

The country preserved the same aspect as we proceeded onwards; and the
hamlets which we passed were not of a more inviting appearance than the
first. Only now and then an isolated deléb-palm, or kamelútu, raised its
magnificent tuft into the air, and served, by the contrast it afforded,
to make this spot appear more gloomy. A large piece of ground was
entirely covered with aghúl (_Hedysarus alhajji_) which seemed to me not
a little remarkable, as I did not remember to have seen this plant,
which is so much liked by the camel, since I had left Taganáma.

The country assumed more and more the appearance of a swamp at present
dry; and we were even obliged to change our direction frequently, in
order to avoid spots where the bog had not dried up, while everywhere we
observed the same kind of small ridges which I have mentioned before.
Further on, the ground became a little drier, but presented only a
monotonous waste, with detached bunches of rank grass, overshadowed now
and then by scanty and stunted karáge trees scarcely fifteen feet high,
while we had been accustomed, in the Músgu country, to see this kind of
tree assume the size of the most magnificent specimens of the vegetable
kingdom, with an elevation of from seventy to eighty feet, and a crown
of not less diameter. As far as the eye could reach, the character of
the country presented the same poor appearance; but, as I have mentioned
before, the sky was not very clear, and the view was therefore rather
limited. The bush of the fan-palm seemed to be quite solitary, without
there being a full-grown specimen to be seen.

At length this swampy ground seemed to have an end; but nothing but poor
stubble-fields, where the crop had failed, took its place, with here and
there a few detached poor-looking huts, the few trees which were visible
exhibiting the same scanty growth that we had observed in the district
through which we had just passed. At last the eye, fatigued by the
length of this gloomy tract, was refreshed by the sight of a field with
a fresh crop of másakuwá, or _Holcus cernuus_, though it was far from
being a rich one. Already here, besides the huts common in this country,
others, of a remarkable and peculiar style, became visible, such as I
shall describe further on, and as only the most excellent clay soil can
enable the natives to build.

Entering for a while a grassy plain, we reached an open water, such as
the Kanúri people call komádugu, about thirty yards broad, but
apparently of considerable depth, being inclosed by banks ten feet high,
and winding through the plain in a fine meandering course. The water, at
present, had no current; and we found a spot where it was totally
broken, and were enabled to cross it with dry feet.

A few hundred yards on the other side of this watercourse were the ruins
of Bága, the residence of the chief Kábishmé (or, as the Kanúri call
him, Kabshimé), which had been ransacked last year by Kashélla ʿAlí
Fúgomámi. Among these ruins the vizier, by the advice of Ádishén, who
wanted to keep the undisciplined host from his own fertile territory,
had chosen the encampment. Thither I directed my steps, while the main
body of the cavalry were scattered about the corn-fields, in order to
gather the half-ripe ears of grain for themselves and their half-starved
horses; and he was lucky who arrived first, those who came afterwards
either finding nothing at all, or only green, unwholesome corn.

The whole district where the encampment was chosen was bare and desolate
in the extreme, especially on the eastern side, where it was only
bordered by stunted mimosas a considerable distance off. But the village
itself, and particularly the dwelling of the chief Kábishmé, was
calculated to create a great deal of interest, as well on account of the
finished and careful execution of the buildings as owing to a certain
degree of comfort and homeliness which was evident in the whole
arrangement; and in this respect it was very fortunate that, immediately
after our arrival, before the train came up, I directed my attention
towards these buildings, for afterwards the deserted palace of the Músgu
chief became a harím, or prohibited spot, the vizier finding its
architectural arrangements very useful and convenient for his own
domestic purposes.

The palace must have afforded a very different spectacle in former
times, when it was inhabited, it being at present in such a state of
ruin that several features in its arrangement could not be distinctly
made out, almost everything that was liable to take fire having been
destroyed, and especially the sheds and inner courtyards, which are so
characteristic of the domestic life of these people. At present it was
an empty courtyard of a tolerably round shape, and of large
circumference, surrounded by huts more or less destroyed, and adorned at
the four corners, if we may speak of corners in a building of almost
round shape, by buildings of a very peculiar and remarkable character,
which at once attracted my attention, as they bore testimony to a degree
of order, and even of art, which I had not expected to find among these
tribes.

[Illustration]

They were small round rumbú, about eight feet in diameter, and at least
twelve feet high to the apex of the cupola, the clay walls of which were
very neatly polished; the entrance formed a projecting portal about six
feet high, four feet deep, and not more than fourteen inches wide. The
exterior, to the very top of the cupola, was ornamented in a very
peculiar manner by regular lines of projecting ribs running round the
building in the way represented in the woodcut. These very remarkable
rooms, although at present empty, from their analogy with several
buildings described above, and according to the statements of the
people, were nothing but well protected granaries, although they might
have served occasionally in the cold season as bed-rooms or sleeping-
rooms. They were exactly the same at each of the four corners; but the
north-east corner of the yard claimed particular attention, owing to
another very remarkable apartment being there joined to the granary,
which, as it is best adapted to give a clear idea of the homely comfort
of these people, however low the scale of their civilization may be, has
been made use of to represent, in the plate opposite, a scene of the
domestic life of these people, besides that its ground-plan is given in
the accompanying woodcut.

[Illustration]

It was a round uncovered apartment of about twenty-four feet in
diameter, inclosed by a clay wall of about seven feet high, and a foot
in thickness, and carefully polished at the corners. The doorway was
about four feet high by about two feet wide; entering through this you
had on your left a bank of clay running parallel with the wall, and
inclosing a space of about two and a half feet in breadth. It was a foot
and a quarter high, and one foot broad, and ran round more than half the
circumference of the room, but, in order to afford easy access to the
narrow space between it and the wall, had an opening in the centre, both
ends of the banks thus formed having a regularly-shaped projection. The
space included between the bank and the wall formed a sort of stable, as
was evident from three stakes placed in the ground at equal distances
from each other. Probably it was the place for three head of cattle or
goats. The clay bank, therefore, served two purposes, partly as a
separation of the stable from the inner apartment, and partly as a seat.
The centre of the apartment was formed by a shed about eight feet by
six, and consisting of a roof of reeds and grass, supported by four
stakes, and furnishing an evident proof that the apartment had never
been covered in, but formed an open little courtyard _sub dio_.

[Illustration: Drawn by J. M. Bernatz, from a Sketch by Dr. Barth.

M. & N. Hanhart, lith. et impt.

INTERIOR OF A MÚSGU DWELLING.]

On the right of this shed was the cooking-place or kitchen, inclosed by
two very low clay walls, and formed by four projections of clay in the
shape of large round stones, which in a very simple manner formed two
fire-places, each of which, if detached, would have required three
stones. Between the kitchen, the shed, and one end of the clay bank, and
divided from the former by a separate wall, appeared a broad entrance to
the adjoining building, which we have recognized as a granary; but at
present it was walled up, and formed a recess for some purpose or other.
Between the kitchen and the gateway was another place inclosed between
two thin clay walls, which was most probably destined to contain the
water-jar.

The four well-built and well-secluded rooms, which had been intended
originally as granaries, seemed very desirable to the vizier in the cold
weather, as he was able to lodge there, very comfortably, himself and
his female slaves; for the cold in this open spot, which was not
protected either by vegetation or by any rising of the ground, was so
severe that not only the whole black world, but the two whites also,
that is to say Mr. Overweg and myself, natives of the north of Europe,
suffered severely from its intensity. Indeed it was most distressing
during the night to hear the shrieks of the poor naked Músgu slaves, who
had been torn from their warm huts; and it was not till about noon that
they seemed to revive a little. Nevertheless the thermometer, at six
o’clock in the morning of the 15th, indicated as much as 51°, which was
the greatest amount of cold we had during this expedition, and at noon
it even rose to 87°.

We were obliged to remain in this uncomfortable place several days,
owing to the circumstance that the whole of the spoil was to be divided
here before we left the hostile territory; for an undisciplined host
like this, of course, cannot be controlled except by fear, and if the
people were allowed to regain their own territory with what they had
taken in slaves and cattle, they would go to their own homes without
contributing anything to the common share of the army. This is also the
custom in Wádáy as well as in Dár Fúr, the spoil being divided before
the expedition re-enters the friendly territory. Although on the present
occasion the expedition had not been eminently successful in the
different places, nevertheless the whole booty, besides about 10,000
head of cattle, amounted to a considerable number of slaves. The leaders
boasted that they had taken not less than 10,000 slaves; and, although I
was glad to find that this number was exaggerated, I convinced myself
that they numbered not less than 3000.

By far the largest proportion of this number consisted of aged women,
who had not been able to join in the hasty flight, and of children under
eight years of age. There were some women so decrepit that they were
scarcely able to walk—mere skeletons, who, in their almost total
nakedness, presented a horrible sight. All the full-grown men who had
been taken prisoners, with the exception of a few cowards who had not
made any resistance, had been slaughtered; but their number scarcely
exceeded 300, almost the whole full-grown male population of the country
having had time to escape. Of these 3000 slaves, the commander-in-chief
received a third part; but he also claimed for himself the whole amount
of the slave-hunt which was made into the territory of Ádishén, and
which constituted a sort of tribute.

In the afternoon of the 17th, two officers had left the encampment,
under the pretext of gathering fodder from the neighbouring villages,
but in the evening returned with about eight hundred slaves, and a
considerable number of cattle; and we were given to understand that this
foray was executed with the consent of the chief himself,—to such
degrading means did this despicable chief resort in order to preserve
his authority, however precarious it was. Of course he selects as a
sacrifice such of his subjects as are not his zealous followers; but it
is almost incredible how such a government can exist, as his dominion
scarcely extends over a tract of country more than fifteen miles in
every direction. At any rate his subjects seem to be fully justified in
taking care of themselves; and they had succeeded, in the darkness, in
getting back part of the spoil which had been taken from them.

The vizier himself pretended to behave in a very gracious manner towards
the submissive vassal, returning to him about 200 of the oldest and most
decrepit women, who, he most probably thought, would succumb to the
fatigues of the march, observing, in a tone of friendly irony, that they
were to cultivate the country, and that when he should return he would
eat of the produce of their labour. On other occasions the vizier had
expressed himself to me to the effect that he wished Ádishén strong and
powerful in order that, as a faithful vassal, he might oppose the
progress of the Felláta in these regions; for in his heart he was the
most inveterate enemy of that enterprising nation, and certainly he had
ample reason to be so. It was on this occasion I heard that this
renegade Músgu chief had never been rebellious to his Bórnu sovereign
(which, from information I had received previously, I concluded to have
been the case), but that occasionally he was obliged to make reprisals
against the Shúwa, who were making plundering expeditions into his
territory.

We have already noticed the peculiar situation of this Músgu chief,
separated from the interests of his countrymen, and opposed to them in a
hostile manner. He has to defend his position against all the people
around him, while his rear is very badly protected by his very friends
the Bórnu people, even the Shúwa Arabs, who are subjected to the former,
infesting his territory. Only with his kinsmen, the people of Logón, he
seemed to be at the time on friendly terms.

[Sidenote: Monday, January 19th.]

We at length set out on our return to Kúkawa. We first returned to the
ford of shallow water, and then continued through a fine grassy plain,
passing one or two hamlets and a few fields of native corn. We then
encamped, after a march of about ten miles. Already this day, in the
distance towards the west, we had observed some small elevations; but,
proceeding at a slow rate, and making very short days’ marches, we did
not reach the district of Wáza, which is distinguished by its rocky
mounts, till the 22nd, when after a march of about fifteen miles we
encamped between those two rocky eminences which form the most
characteristic feature of this locality.

It gave us extraordinary pleasure, after having traversed the flat
alluvial plains of Bórnu and Músgu, to find ourselves once more opposite
to some elevation of even a moderate altitude. These eminences assumed a
very picturesque appearance. The valley between the two rocky mountains
where we were encamped was rather bare of trees; but there were some
beautiful wild fig-trees at the north-eastern foot of the western
eminence, where a pond was formed in a deep hollow. To this spot I
turned my steps immediately after our arrival, before the camels had
joined us, and spent here a delightful hour, all the horses belonging to
the army being brought here to be watered, and forming a varied and
highly interesting scene, with the rich verdure of the trees around and
the steep rocky cliffs above them, while fresh parties were continually
arriving from the camp.

Having made a sketch of this locality, which is represented in the
accompanying plate, I went to join my companion, and we decided upon
ascending the more elevated of the two eminences; but having attained to
the height of some hundred feet, I felt quite exhausted, especially as I
had a severe cold, and gave it up; but Mr. Overweg ascended to the top,
which rises to about 700 feet above the plain.[21] These rocky mounts
abound with a species of black monkey, while even beasts of prey
generally have their haunts here. The crevices formed by the granite
blocks are adorned with small trees and shrubs. The view from here, over
the immense plain towards the south, girt as it was by a continuous band
of middle-sized timber, was very characteristic, the uniform line being
relieved in the foreground by the other rocky mount.

[Illustration: Drawn by J. M. Bernatz, from a Sketch by Dr. Barth.

M. & N. Hanhart, lith. et impt.

ENCAMPMENT AT WÁZA.

Jany. 22nd. 1852.]

This place belongs already to the territory of Logón, and consists of
several small hamlets inhabited by Shúwa, but governed by a chief, or
“lawán,” who belongs to the tribe of the Fúlbe.

It was here that we received the news that a courier had arrived from
Fezzán, but that he had been plundered, by the Tawárek, of the letters
and articles which he was carrying for us. This, of course, was sad
news, although we did not expect to receive money, or anything of great
value, at the time.

[Sidenote: January 22nd.]

After a long delay, caused by the straying of the vizier’s favourite
horse, which he rode every day, and which had most mysteriously
disappeared during the night, from the midst of the encampment, we left
this interesting spot, and after a good ride over a very rich though
insufficiently cultivated tract of country, encamped at a short distance
from a broad shallow water adorned with the finest trees; it is called
Zéngiri. From here we reached Díggera, and took up our quarters in our
old camp, pitching our tents on the very spot where they had stood two
months previously; and from this point onwards, we stopped each day at
the same place where we had encamped on our outward journey.

[Sidenote: February 1st.]

On our re-entering the capital there was a good deal of ceremony and
etiquette observed, when the whole army[22], at least that part which
had not yet been disbanded, was formed into one compact line of battle,
in order to receive in a suitable manner the military salutes which
were paid to the commander-in-chief on his successful return.
Distinguished above all those who came to meet us and pay their
compliments to the commander, was Ghét, the chief of the Welád Slimán,
who, a few days previously, had arrived from Kánem, where we left him,
and from whence he had made a successful expedition against the Kúnkuna
in Kárká. Galloping up with the utmost speed, at the head of his
little band of from twenty to thirty horsemen clad in their picturesque
attire, this petty Arab chief exhibited an interesting and animated
specimen of horsemanship, which presented a remarkable contrast to
the unwieldy movements of the clumsy and sluggish figures of the
negroes. Returning to our old quarters in the town, we were treated
with a peculiar dainty of the Kanúri, consisting of the fresh seeds of
the grain called masr (_Zea maïs_), which are roasted in a peculiar way.

Thus ended this expedition, which opened to us a slight glimpse into
the richly-watered zone of the equatorial regions, which had been
supposed to form an insurmountable barrier of a high mountain-chain,
and brought us into contact with tribes, whose character had been
represented as almost approaching to that of wild beasts. We had
certainly not entered those regions under such circumstances as were
most desirable to us; but on the contrary, we had been obliged to
associate ourselves with an army whose only purpose was to spread
devastation and misery over them. Nevertheless, situated as we were,
while we could not prevent this mischief, we were glad that we had been
enabled to see so much. We were without any means, no further supplies
having arrived; but I did not despair, and in order still to be able
to try my fortune once more in another direction before I returned
home, besides other articles, I even sold my large tent, and employed
part of the proceeds to line my small tent, which was fast wearing out
and neither excluded rain nor sun.


[Footnote 21: Mr. Vogel, who likewise visited this spot in 1854, found
the plain elevated 920 feet above the level of the sea, while the two
mounts attained the respective heights of 1300 and 1600 feet.]

[Footnote 22: For a list of the several detachments which constituted
the army, at least the cavalry, on this expedition, see Appendix III.]




[Illustration: DR. BARTH’S TRAVELS IN NORTH AND CENTRAL AFRICA Sheet No.
11.

MAP OF THE ROUTE from KÚKAWA TO MÁSEÑÁ 5 March-21 August 1850.

Constructed and drawn by A. Petermann.

Engraved by E. Weller, _Duke Strt. Bloomsbury._

_London, Longman & Co._]


                              CHAP. XLVI.

           SETTING OUT FOR BAGÍRMI. — THE COUNTRY OF KÓTOKÓ.


I had returned to the town on the 1st of February, 1852; on the 4th of
March I again set out on a journey to Bagírmi. However, I did not feel
very confident as to the success of my enterprise. The sultan of Bagírmi
was reported as being absent from his capital on an expedition to the
south-east of his dominions; but I was given to understand that there
would be no great difficulty in addressing myself to the lieutenant-
governor, whom he had left to represent him in his absence, in order to
be allowed to join him, and to be thus enabled to explore those more
southern regions which by myself I had no prospect of visiting. I
introduced myself, accordingly, to the agent of that prince, who resides
in Kúkawa. This man is a eunuch, who was made prisoner by the Kanúri in
the second battle of Ngála, and had risen to the dignity of mestréma, or
first eunuch, of the sultan of Bórnu. But although I made him a small
present, he received me rather coolly, and did not inspire me with much
confidence as to my ultimate success.

I had exhausted my means entirely, having been obliged to purchase at
high prices, for credit, even the very small supply of presents which I
was able to take with me. I had only two very indifferent servants,
Mohammed ben Habíb and Mohammed ben Áhmed, both young lads from Fezzán,
as limited in their intelligence as they were conceited in their
pretensions as Moslemín, and not possessing the least knowledge of the
country which we were about to visit.

The only animals I had for my conveyance were a horse and a she-camel.
Hence I did not set out with that spirit of confidence which ensures
success; but, having determined to return to Europe if new supplies did
not very soon arrive, I resolved to make a last desperate attempt to
accomplish something before I finally left the country.

Mr. Overweg accompanied me as far as Ngórnu, where we took up our
quarters with my friend the kashélla Kótokó. Here, in my present
destitute condition, I was greatly delighted at receiving, by private
message from the vizier, a small parcel of coffee, and from the mʿallem
Mohammed, a loaf of sugar. Such tokens of disinterested friendship are
very gratifying to the traveller in a foreign land.

[Sidenote: Friday, March 5th.]

At the beginning of the cotton-plantation I took leave of my European
companion. He was to make an excursion, accompanied by Kótokó, along the
shores of the lake towards Máduwári—the very place where, in the course
of a few months, he was destined to succumb.

I had received from the mestréma a trooper as escort; but he was not the
kind of man I should have liked. If phrenologists had taken his features
as the general type of the Negro race, they would have felt themselves
authorized in assigning to them a more intimate affinity with monkeys
than with men; and his cheerless but self-conceited disposition was in
perfect harmony with his exterior.

The waters of the lagoon had already considerably decreased, laying bare
fine fresh pasture-grounds, on which numerous herds of cattle were
grazing, while small pools of stagnant water, left behind by the
retiring inundation, afforded some relief to the monotony of the plain.
A great deal of cotton is cultivated on these fertile grounds, and an
immense deal more might be cultivated. The people were busy in all
directions in the labours of the field, while, on those grounds which
were not cultivated, the luxuriant weed of the _Asclepias_ was re-
assuming its ordinary domain. Scarcely a single tree was to be seen; and
only as we proceeded onwards a few specimens gradually appeared.

Thus we passed the village of Kúkiya, where we had taken up our first
night’s quarters on the expedition to Músgu. Here the deep sandy soil
was at times enlivened by isolated clusters of the dúm-bush; and people
were digging, here and there, for the rush-nut (“hab el ʿazíz” or
“nefú,” _Cyperus esculentus_) which I have mentioned on former
occasions. A tract of indifferent cultivation was relieved by a fine
field of wheat, belonging to several of the great men or kokanáwa of
Kúkawa. Having here watered our horses, we wanted to make a halt during
the heat of the day, at a hamlet belonging to Háj Ibrahím; but we were
rather inhospitably received, and stretched ourselves therefore under
the shade of a caoutchouc-tree at some distance from the village. The
tree was remarkable on account of a peculiar “sáfi” or charm, which
testified to the many remains of pagan rites still lingering in these
countries. It consisted of two earthern pots placed one upon the other,
and filled with a peculiar substance, and was supposed to guarantee
prolificness to the mares of the village. The ground being an ordinary
resting-place for travellers, swarmed with insects, principally that
large kind of “karí” common to the cattle in this country.

When we started again in the afternoon, we met a caravan, consisting of
camels and pack-oxen laden with Guinea corn, which one of our friend
Lamíno’s people was taking to town from his master’s plantation. At an
early hour we reached Yédi, which we had also touched at on our
expedition to Músgu. I intended to have taken up my quarters inside the
town; but the streets were so narrow that I preferred encamping outside.
A young Shúwa lad here offered his services to me. At the well where we
had watered our horses he had rendered us gratuitous assistance; and I
had given him a few needles in return. Being in want of a servant, I
accepted his offer, and had strong reason in the course of my travels to
be glad of having done so; for although in the beginning he caused me
some trouble, and behaved at times rather awkwardly, he proved on the
whole a very useful servant.

I was hospitably treated in the evening by a young man of the name of
Degéji, who had accompanied Mr. Overweg on his voyage on the lake. He
was a barber and a musician, and rather a gay sort of person.

[Sidenote: Saturday, March 6th.]

We followed the direct route for Ngála. The country, open at the
commencement, became gradually covered by the dúm-bush, and further on
by middle-sized trees of various kinds. Besides the wife of my escort
trooper, who was to pay a visit to her father in Bagírmi, and who was at
least a degree better than her husband, a very cheerful man of the name
of Kágo had attached himself to our little troop. He had been acquainted
with the members of the former expedition, and was anxious to give me
all possible information with regard to the qualities of the various
trees and bushes which adorned the wilderness, especially the kári,
karáwa, and látram; and on this occasion I learnt that a kind of
disease, which would seem to be the stigma of a closely-packed
civilization, is not at all rare in these countries: it is here called
“dun.” Everything testifies to the richness of this country, which is
now left to utter neglect. The population of the small villages which
dot the landscape is mixed, consisting one half of Kanúri, and the other
of Shúwa; and I was not a little surprised to find in one of them, which
belongs to a man named Mʿallem Tálbay Sámi, Felláta or Fúlbe mixed with
the Kanúri. Most of the Shúwa had already deserted their villages for
temporary residences in other quarters.

At an early hour we halted in the village Kostári, the inhabitants of
which had seen me on a former occasion. They seem to be very poor, which
may however be attributed to their laziness. According to their own
account, they were living almost entirely upon the waterfowl which
frequent the shores of the lagoon in countless numbers; and indeed the
whole village was full of wild geese and ducks. However, I succeeded in
getting a little milk, some honey, and kréb, or kashá,—a kind of seed,
probably identical with the _Poa Abyssinica_, but of which there are
different species: here in Bórnu there are principally two species,
called “kashá ngórgo” and “kashá magáya,” while in Wádáy there are three
or four, called “denáng,” “líliyák,” “shorók,” and tanfáfanáng, besides
a collateral species called “felé.”

It is very remarkable that, while the waters of the lake are fresh, most
of the water which is obtained hereabouts, at a very short distance from
its shore, is full of natron. The water of this place was so impregnated
with that mineral, that it was scarcely drinkable, which was felt the
more as the air was oppressive in the extreme; and I felt so exhausted
at the commencement of my journey, and after a long stay in the town,
that I was obliged to recruit my strength with a small remnant of
_mastico_ which I had with me. The heat was so intense that I felt very
grateful when, later in the afternoon, a slight breeze sprung up. My
poor animals, however, fared still worse than myself, being tormented by
a large blood-sucking fly.

Major Denham travelled, on this route, along the south side of the lake:
but the road which he took is now entirely given up, on account of the
insecurity of the country, and the place or rather district Keskári
mentioned by him, lying from three to four hours’ march north-east from
this place, is entirely deserted; we therefore followed a more southerly
road.

The first object which attracted our attention here was a herd of wild
hogs, an animal which I had very rarely seen in these regions, but which
I afterwards found frequenting in great numbers the country bordering on
the river Shári; it even seems to form a substantial part of the food of
the natives, not excepting the Mohammedans.

While we were winding along the narrow path leading through the forest,
the vegetation all at once exhibited an entirely new and very remarkable
feature; for here, all on a sudden, I saw a group of perhaps ten or
twelve large trees of arborescent _Euphorbiaceæ_. I have mentioned small
specimens of euphorbia, on my journey through Dámerghú, and even in
Háusa; but I had afterwards almost entirely lost sight of it in
Negroland. Here, however, this plant grows to a height of certainly not
less than from thirty to thirty-five feet, its succulent, luxuriant,
cactus-like leaves contrasting in a very remarkable manner with the
monotonous and dry vegetation of the mimosas around. There must be
something very peculiar in the soil in this tract; for I never
afterwards, in the whole of my travels, beheld the euphorbia attain to
such an altitude, the greatest height which I saw it reach being twenty
feet. This was in the country of Músgu, in an entirely isolated
instance; and even on the journey to Bagírmi I did not meet with a
single specimen of this plant, however small.

Proceeding through a part of the forest which exhibited a fresher
appearance, and which was enlivened by a troop of horsemen whom we met,
we reached the village of Dábuwa at five o’clock in the afternoon. Here
we were hospitably received, in consequence of the persuasive manners of
my cheerful companion Kágo, while the apish grimaces of the trooper who
formed my official escort were quite disregarded. Poultry, milk, and
negro corn were given to us for our supper in the evening. In this place
the people are not so badly off for water, the well measuring not more
than five fathoms.

[Sidenote: Sunday, March 7th.]

When we started, we entered a very dense part of the forest (“karága
tsílim,” as the Kanúri say), with a rich variety of trees, but all of
middle size, and not a single tamarind- or monkey-bread tree was to be
seen. As we proceeded, however, the country became a little more open,
the “karága tsílim” giving way to the “dírridé,” or clear forest, and
signs of cultivation were seen. Here I observed that the clayey soil, or
“ánge,” was intersected by small ridges, in order to retain the water,
during the rainy season, for the cultivation of the másakuwá. Cotton
also seemed to be cultivated to some extent. In this district too the
villages contained a mixed population of Shúwa and Kanúri. The village
Gujári, which we passed further on, was distinguished by an extensive
pottery. Here the road was enlivened by a numerous caravan of pack-oxen
laden with grain, on their way to Díkowa, the town described on my
expedition to the Músgu country; for, as I have there stated, the
cultivation of that place is almost entirely limited to cotton, while
all the corn which is required for the consumption of the inhabitants is
imported. The cotton is not carried by beasts of burden, but on the
heads of the natives; and a little further on we met a numerous train of
these people, whose appearance imparted some idea of industry. Passing
on our road many patches of that black boggy soil, called “fírki” or
“ánge,” which I have described on a former occasion, we reached the
small village of Hókkum at about half-past eight in the morning.

We had expressly chosen this road in order to avoid the wells of bitter
water in the village Jémage, which lies on the southern road; but here
we fared worse, for there was no water at all in the village, and we had
to send to a great distance to get a small supply, the quality of which
was anything but agreeable. This scarcity of water, however, seemed to
arise only from the laziness of the inhabitants; for the wells are not
more than three fathoms deep, and the floods of the lake themselves
occasionally approach so near that it has been found necessary to
protect the village on its north side by a dyke. Here we passed the heat
of the day in the shade of a kórna-tree, the fruit of which, being just
ripe, in want of some better indulgence, we did not despise.

I was greatly surprised to observe here that salt is obtained by burning
the dung of cattle. It is indeed very remarkable how the poorer people
in Negroland endeavour to supply their want of this article, which in
every stage of society has become such an essential ingredient of common
diet.

About half an hour after starting in the afternoon, we reached a
considerable watercourse, which, bordered by fine spreading trees, had a
very pleasant appearance. It is called Komádugu Ímbulú, or Mbulú. This
watercourse was asserted by my companion Kágo to be entirely distinct
from the Yálowe, or komádugu of Díkowa; and from the experience I had on
my return-journey I think he was correct. The banks of the watercourse
were twelve feet high; its breadth was from twenty to twenty-five yards;
but the depth of the water was only a foot and a half. No current was
then perceptible. The trees of the forest, after we left this
watercourse, were of a greater variety, but all of rather stunted
growth. We observed here great quantities of the grass called kréb or
kashá, which I have before mentioned, and which constitutes a
considerable part of the food of the poorer inhabitants. We passed
several towns in a state of the utmost decay and entirely deserted; and
traversing a dense underwood, which we scarcely expected to see in the
neighbourhood of a large town, reached at five o’clock the clay walls of
Ngála.

The interior of this town has a very peculiar character, and nothing
similar to it is seen in any part of Negroland, although the place at
present is in a great state of decay; for all the ancient quarter of the
town consists of clay houses, built on an imposing and elevated terrace.
The palace of the governor is indeed something quite stupendous for
these regions, having, with its immense substructure, and its large and
towering walls, the appearance of a large citadel. We were quartered in
the extensive mansion of the gedádo or delátu, in which Mr. Tully died;
but it, as well as the whole of the town, was in the utmost state of
decay. The times of Méram, the beloved wife of the sheikh Mohammed el
Amín el Kánemy, had gone by; and the wealth of Ngála had been consumed
by the slaves of the present sheikh and his vizier. The once magnificent
palace of Méram itself is nothing but a large, desolate heap of ruins.

The quarters, however, which were assigned to me were in a tolerable
state of repair, consisting, as they did, of an upper story, which
afforded me sufficient protection against the numbers of mosquitoes
which infest the place. We remained here the following day, when I went
to pay a visit to the governor at his residence; but I felt rather sorry
for it, as the good impression which the imposing exterior of the palace
had made upon me, was destroyed by the ruinous and desolate state of the
interior. The whole province is now in a very neglected condition, such
as would indicate that the ruler of the country himself acknowledged his
incapability of defending his subjects against another inroad of the
Wádáy.

The governor was not a very intelligent man; but it was he who first
called my attention to the fact that the town of Ngála has its own
peculiar idiom, quite distinct from the Kanúri, and I afterwards found
that it is even different from the dialects of the other principal
places in the province of Kótokó, though it is very closely related to
the idioms spoken by the islanders of the Tsád (the so-called Búdduma,
but whose real name is Yédiná) on the one side, and to that of the Músgu
on the other. At some distance from Ngála is the town of Ndíffu, or
Ndifú, which is said to have been one of the latest strongholds of the
tribe of the Soy, or Só, whom I have repeatedly mentioned in my
historical sketch of the empire of Bórnu; and sundry remarkable
ornaments are said to be dug up frequently in that place.

[Sidenote: Tuesday, March 9th.]

I had seen scarcely any traces of cultivation on the western side of the
town; and when we set out again I found as little on the other sides.
Nevertheless the environs of Ngála, especially the north-east side, are
of great interest in the eyes of the Bórnu people, as having been the
scene of two important battles fought with the Bagírmi, in the first of
which, in the year of the Hejra 1233, the sultan Dúnama was slain; and
my companions, who remembered all the incidents of that struggle,
pointed out with patriotic enthusiasm the various positions which each
body of the combatants had occupied.

The country, however, became very monotonous, extending in an almost
unbounded plain of black argillaceous soil of the description mentioned
above, although after the rainy season, when the whole ground has become
inundated, it is changed into one vast field of cultivation, producing
that peculiar variety of sorghum or holcus which is called másakuwá; but
at that season the whole of this country is scarcely passable for
horses, and still less so for camels. Several small villages, inhabited
by Shúwa, were to be seen at some distance to the south. We lost a great
deal of time through having missed our way in a forest of small mimosas
which surround this plain, till we at length reached a village called
Síttahe, where we rested during the heat of the day. The village
consists of two separate groups, one of which contains large conical
huts for the rainy season, while the other is formed of light oblong
dwellings adapted for the dry season, constructed entirely of mats. Here
we were entertained by a mʿallem who had formerly possessed considerable
property, but who had suffered greatly from the contributions levied
upon him by the slaves of his liege lord. It is these impudent slaves of
the court, who, having no interest in the welfare of the inhabitants,
inflict so much evil on the country. With regard to the settlements of
the Arabs in this district of Kótokó, I think that they are not more
than two hundred years old. Most of these Arabs belong to the numerous
tribe of the Sálamát.

In the afternoon, after travelling about four miles, we reached the town
of Rén. This was formerly a considerable place, but it is now almost
deserted, and the wall has fallen to ruins; the aspect of the place,
however, is very picturesque,—beautiful and wide-spreading fig-trees
shading the ruins of high, well-built clay houses. My quarters were
better than I had expected,—an excellently-built hut, provided with all
the comfort which such a building is capable of affording; but the
comfortable repose which the neat appearance of my hut promised me was
greatly disturbed by swarms of mosquitoes, that owe their existence to a
large swamp at the northern side of the wall. The town of Rén was
formerly the centre of a petty kingdom, but it is at present reduced to
utter ruin. Its inhabitants have a peculiar dialect of their own. But
although the governor was very eloquent in his description of the misery
to which his people were at present reduced, yet he treated me very
hospitably.

[Sidenote: March 10th.]

Leaving the swamp abovementioned on one side, we pursued our march
through a fertile and well-inhabited district full of open hamlets,
while the corn-fields were enlivened with numbers of kórna-trees, at
present laden with fruit. I was pleased to see that the inhabitants of
this district follow the same custom as the Músgu people, storing their
provision of herbage for the dry season on the branches of the trees.
All the inhabitants are Arabs, and belong to the tribe called Welád
Megébel, whose chief is called Ísa Áshe; the name of the district is
Ránganá. At a considerable distance towards the south there is a walled
town called Déma, belonging to the sheikh Abba. The Arabs are either
cattle-breeders or corn-growers; but further on we saw some cotton under
cultivation, after which we again entered upon fírki ground, where my
companion called my attention to a new variety of grass called “útutú,”
the seeds of which, besides the kréb above-mentioned, constitute a great
part of the food of the poorer people of this district.

Dense rows of fine tamarind-trees indicated the neighbourhood of a
watercourse, which even at present was of some importance, being about
35 yards broad, and 3 feet 9 inches in depth, but without a perceptible
current; a small canoe, however, lying on its border, justified the
opinion that occasionally it is not fordable, of which I myself received
a proof on my return-journey, when I crossed it lower down, near Legári.
This watercourse, which in the rainy season conveys towards the lake a
considerable quantity of water, is called Komádugu Lebé. There was
formerly a considerable town, called Suló, on the other side of the
watercourse; but this at present is deserted, and its ruins are
overgrown by thick forest. A little distance further on, the site of
another ancient town testified to the former importance of this
district. We were now approaching the largest town of Kótokó; but
scarcely any signs of industry were to be seen, with the exception of a
young plantation of cotton, and thick forest approached close to the
wall of the town, which is very extensive, but fast falling to ruins.

The whole interior of the town of Áfadé is one vast heap of rubbish,
from which only here and there a building in tolerable repair starts
forth, the greatest ornament of the place at present being a most
magnificent fig-tree of the species called “búske,” identical, I think,
with the tree called duwé by the Arabs near Timbúktu. I scarcely
remember ever to have seen such a noble and luxuriant specimen of this
family of the vegetable kingdom. Spreading its vast impenetrable canopy
of the freshest and most beautiful green over a great part of the square
in front of the lofty ruins of the governor’s palace, it formed the
chief lounging-place or “fagé” for the idle loiterers in this once
industrious and wealthy town.

My quarters, in the upper story of a house, were very tolerable, and,
besides being airy, afforded me a view over the nearest part of the
town, from whence I had an opportunity of admiring the excellent quality
of the clay with which these houses are built. Clay, indeed, seems to
have entirely excluded, in ancient times, from the country of Kótokó the
lighter buildings of reed and straw; and I observed that even many of
the round huts were of considerable elevation, being furnished with a
roof of clay, which formed a neat terrace surrounded by a low parapet.

There seems to have been a considerable degree of civilization in former
times in this little kingdom of Kótokó, or rather in this group of
distinct principalities, the independent character of which is clearly
shown by the great diversity of its dialects, which vary with every
large town: viz. Klésem, Gulfé and Kúsuri, Mákari and Máfaté, Áfadé,
Rén, and Ngála. When we consider that this country is not mentioned
among the list of the Negro countries by Ébn Sʿaíd (A.D. 1283) which is
preserved by Ébn Khaldún[23], where even the Kúrí are not forgotten,
while it is evidently mentioned by Makrízi[24], it appears that it rose
into importance in the course of the 14th century. Although we are not
able to explain fully the circumstances under which this happened, we
may conclude that it was due in some degree to the struggle between the
two powerful dynasties of Bórnu and Bulála.

As for the dialect of Áfadé, of which I made a short vocabulary, it
appears to form a link between the idiom of the Yédiná[25], the
islanders of the Tsád, on the one side, and the Músgu people on the
other.

In the province of Áfadé a great proportion of the population consists
of Shúwa, principally of the tribes E’ Nejaíme, and Welád Abú Khodhaír.
The governor was absent just at the time, on a small expedition to
chastise some of these people, who are very unsettled in their habits,
and often refractory. Notwithstanding his absence, however, we were very
hospitably treated, our supper consisting, besides a sheep, and numerous
bowls of Negro corn, of a dish of well-dressed fish, very palatable,
from the river Lebé; there was likewise no scarcity of milk.

[Sidenote: March 11th.]

It would certainly have been very interesting to have made a few days’
stay here, in order to obtain a clearer insight into the peculiar
characteristics of this province; but as the more distant object of my
enterprise did not allow of a longer delay, I pursued my march. All
these towns are very inconvenient for travellers, their gates not being
large enough for loaded camels to pass through. When we had reached the
great road, where the forest is interrupted by a little cultivation of
cotton, I saw two beautiful specimens of that species of antelope which
is here called “tigdim,” of grey colour and very low in body; I think it
is identical with, or nearly related to, the _Antilope annulipes_.

This was the only time I observed this species of antelope during my
travels in Negroland. Great numbers of Guinea fowl, such I had never
observed before, enlivened the underwood further on, the ground
consisting of a hard soil called by the natives kabé, and covered with
only a scanty growth of stunted mimosas. I was much interested in
observing here the red species of Negro corn, which seems not to be
cultivated by the more civilized tribes of Negroland, but which forms
the principal food of the pagan races towards the south. Having passed a
Shúwa hamlet—berí Shúwabe,—the country became more diversified. A
considerable pond, at present dry, and bordered by beautiful trees,
spread out on our left, while our right was bordered by the ruins of a
large town called Sú, a name which seems to be a remnant of the ancient
tribe of the Só or Soy, which formerly ruled over the whole of this
region as far as Kála. A poor old woman, incapacitated by age from
reaching the market-town, was sitting in front of the ruined wall,
offering to the passers-by the little cotton which she had been able to
clean. The country is at present in such a state, principally owing to
the turbulent spirit of the Shúwa Arabs, that even this road is regarded
as unsafe; and we were therefore obliged to keep together, several
inhabitants of Logón having attached themselves to my little caravan.
The road divides here, the more considerable path leading to the town of
Kúsuri, and the smaller southern one, which we followed, leading to
Logón bírni, or Kárnak Lógone.

We passed two villages called Debábe Gezáwa and Debábe Ngáya, but the
latter of which still bears the very remarkable name of Krénik, and is
stated by the inhabitants of the neighbourhood to have been the capital,
or one of the capitals, of the once powerful tribe of the Soy. The exact
period when this town was destroyed I could not ascertain; but probably
it happened during the reign of the great Kanúri king Edrís Alawóma,
about the beginning of the seventeenth century. More recently this
neighbourhood was saturated with the blood of numbers of Bórnu people,
in the sanguinary struggle with their neighbours, the Bagírmi or
Bágrimma; and it was in one of these conflicts, near the walled town of
Míltam, about forty years ago (A.H. 1232), that the sheikh Mohammed el
Kánemí lost his eldest and most-beloved son.

Having watered our animals at a shallow stream, spreading out in the
meadow-ground, we continued our march, and about half an hour before
noon had to cross a very difficult swamp, with boggy ground, where
several of our people stuck fast. The whole of this region is subject to
partial inundations; but it seems very remarkable that they do not
attain their greatest height in, or at the end of, the rainy season, but
several months later; and I found afterwards, when I traversed this
country again towards the end of August, in the very height of the rainy
season, that not only this but the other swamps were considerably lower
than they were in March. This circumstance depends on the peculiar
nature of the Tsád, which reaches its highest level in November, when
all the waters carried down by the several rivers and torrents have
spread over the whole surface of the lagoon, while the loss from
evaporation is then much less than during the hot months.

Continuing through a very thick forest full of herds of wild hogs, which
seem greatly to delight in these low, swampy, and densely overgrown
grounds on either side of the (river) Shárí, and having passed another
swamp, and the forest at length clearing, we obtained a sight of the
high clay walls of the town of Kála, starting forth from a beautiful
grove of fig-trees, and overtowered by a very lofty, but slightly
inclined solitary palm-tree.


[Footnote 23: Ébn Khaldún, texte Arabe, vol. i. p. 200.; trad. S.
Macguckin de Slane, vol. ii. p. 116.]

[Footnote 24: Makrízi, in Hamaker, Spec. Catal. p. 206., كاتكوا.]

[Footnote 25: I repeat here what I have stated, I think, in another
place, that in my opinion the Yédiná are meant by Makrízi’s اتعنا.]




                              CHAP. XLVII.

                   PROVINCE OF LOGÓN. — LOGÓN BÍRNI.


Kála is the first town of the territory of Logón or Lógone, the boundary
of which we had crossed a short time before. Having entered the town
through an extremely narrow gate, which scarcely allowed my bare and
slender she-camel to pass through, after having taken from her back the
whole load, I was struck with the very different aspect it exhibited
from the regions we had just left; for while the dwellings testified to
a certain degree of civilization, the inhabitants themselves seemed to
approach nearer to the pagans than to the Mohammedans. We had scarcely
entered the town when we were surrounded by a troop of boys and young
lads from seven to twelve years of age, tall and well built, and in a
state of entire nudity, a thing hardly ever seen in the country of
Bórnu, even with slaves. The type of their features, however, was very
different from the general type observed in the Bórnu people, and seemed
to indicate more intelligence and cunning. I have already observed, in
the country of Músgu, how the state of the dwellings contrasts with the
apparel, or rather the want of apparel, of the people themselves; but
here it seemed more remarkable, for the dwellings in general did not
consist of round conical huts, but of spacious oblong houses of clay, of
considerable elevation. I was quartered in one of these structures, but
found it rather close, and full of dust.

The town presented an appearance of the utmost decay, only a few
dwellings remaining in the centre of it; and the only remarkable objects
were two palm-trees, one of which I had already observed from without:
and I now assured myself that they were not date-trees, but belonged to
the fan-shaped group of palms. But they were not bifurcated, and seemed
not to belong to the _Cucifera Thebaïca_, nor were they identical with
the deléb-palm. At any rate they were the tallest specimens which I ever
remember to have seen of the fan-shaped tribe, their height appearing
more extraordinary on account of the small tuft of leaves, which was
confined to the very top. The town itself presenting no very interesting
features, I went out in the afternoon, and lay down for an hour or two,
in the shade of one of those beautiful fig-trees which, fed by a large
and deep swamp, surround the town on all sides; but, the more pleasant
was my day’s repose, the more disagreeable was my night’s rest, for,
owing to these stagnant pools, the town is full of mosquitoes, and
neither I myself nor any of my companions were able to get any sleep the
whole of the ensuing night.

We therefore rose very early in the following morning, long before day-
break, and at four o’clock had already left the gate of the town behind
us. There is still a great deal of cultivation of cotton to be seen,
even in the present state of decay to which this province is reduced;
but an immense deal more might be cultivated. Then followed fields of
sorghum; and further on, the lowing of cattle and the cackling of hens
indicated the presence of a Shúwa village at some distance on our left.
Cultivated ground and forest alternately succeeded each other, the wild
hog being seen in every direction, while numerous villages were lying
about here and there, but at present all deserted, the inhabitants, who
belong to the Shúwa, migrating during the dry season towards a large
shallow watercourse in the south-west, where they find fresher pasture-
grounds for their cattle. This watercourse or ngáljam is famous under
several names, being called Bawísh, Madéf, and Burbéde. We then passed
on our left the town Úlluf, Húlluf, or Hélib, surrounded by a high clay
wall, and almost hidden behind wide-spreading fig-trees, just as is the
case with Kála. This town, the name of which is pronounced “Elf” by the
Arabs, and of the origin of which they give very absurd accounts, is
ill-famed for the presumed witchcraft and sorcery of its inhabitants;
and this was the only reason which prevented my companions from staying
here during the heat of the day.

We therefore continued our march; and, having passed another swamp,
entered a well-cultivated district, where a great deal of sorghum was
grown. I was however surprised at seeing the stacks of grain, or, as
they are called in Kanúri, bágga argúmbe, still standing in the fields.

We encamped a little beyond the temporary village of Sheikh el Khasés,
close to an extensive sheet of water, under the shade of a beautiful
tamarind-tree. This piece of water, as the people assured me, only dries
up annually for a short time, when the rainy season again fills it. All
these native Arabs, as I have already had occasion to remark, are very
inhospitable; and the people here, where we had encamped, did not offer
us any refreshment. However I succeeded in buying from them a little
honey, for a few needles.

When we started again in the afternoon, we had great difficulty in
avoiding the swamps. The country at times was well cultivated,
producing, besides sorghum, a quantity of beans of the speckled kind;
but I was not a little astonished to see, in the midst of the stubble-
fields, young crops of that variety of sorghum called “másakuwá.” This
is a very rare sight in these countries in the month of March, as in
general this winter corn is got in during December or January. We then
entered a forest, and, following a winding path, reached the rather
considerable village Múnke, which belongs to Logón, but is inhabited
chiefly by Kanúri. Here I pitched my tent in the market-place, and was
not a little pestered by numbers of inquisitive people.

[Sidenote: Saturday, March 13th.]

The country through which we passed as we drew nearer the capital of
Logón, was of a rich and fertile character, but insufficiently
cultivated. Besides grain, there was a great deal of cotton; and numbers
of trees of various species gave it a charming appearance, the
beautifully rich foliage of several of them relieving entirely the
monotony which is usual in these Central African forests. Amongst the
underwood the dúm-bush was predominant; gradually, however, the “harás”
or “karáge” tree began to prevail. The pods of this tree, which contain
the seeds, are not only much liked by camels, but also by monkeys and
hogs, both of which seemed to be very numerous, and lived together in
the greatest harmony. Numerous holes of the earth-hog (_Orycteropus
Æthiopiensis_) were likewise to be seen.

We met a number of native travellers and people going to market, who
saluted us in a cheerful manner, and bore testimony to the fact that we
were drawing near a larger place; and the neighbourhood of the town was
still further indicated by women who had come out to gather wood for the
supply of the market. Here I was agreeably surprised to see again my
noble old acquaintance of the Músgu country, the deléb-palm or “uray.”
At first a single specimen appeared towering with its proud fanlike
foliage over the numerous karáge-trees that still continued to retain
their predominant position in the vegetable kingdom; but when the clayey
soil gave way to sand, a large group met the eye, in close array, and
full of fruit. It was, however, entirely limited to this locality, and I
did not meet another specimen between this place and the town.

When we arrived in sight of the wall, my horseman changed his dress, and
put on a new glittering black Núpe tobe, in order to make his entrance
with greater _éclat_, while I was not a little pleased to meet again
here some travelling companions of mine, in whose company I had crossed
the Bénuwé on my journey to Ádamáwa, and who were once more on their way
to the east. We then entered the capital of Logón—Logón Bírni, or Kárnak
Lóggon, as it is called by the Shúwa, or Kárnak Lógone or Lóggene, as it
is called by the Kanúri. The town on this side (the north-western) has
only one gate; and it was so narrow that we were obliged to unload the
camel before we were able to pass through. The energy and activity of
this place is naturally concentrated on the eastern side towards the
river, where it has seven gates.

The interior of the town, where we entered it, had not a very animated
appearance. The cottages, belonging evidently to the poorer classes of
people, are in a wretched condition; and the only animation which the
scenery presented was due to a group of dúm-palms, towering over this
poor quarter from the north side. The character of the place improved,
however, as we advanced; the streets were tolerably large, and I was
struck with the appearance of the principal street, or déndal, which is
formed by the palace of the sultan or míyará, towards the south, and the
house of the Keghámma or Ibálaghwán, towards the north.

The entrance to the palace of the sultan—the “raána míyará” in the
kélakú Logón or language of Logón,—is towards the east, where there is
an open square, shaded by a few trees; here I was obliged to wait a long
time on horseback, while my quarters were getting ready, for etiquette
did not allow me to dismount. The sun was very powerful, and my
situation not exactly pleasant; but it afforded me some amusement to
observe the flights of falcons and other birds, who were nestling in the
top of a group of tall dúm-palms which towered above the walls of the
mosque opposite the palace.

I had also the pleasure of recognizing an old friend of Major Denham’s,
namely, Belál, the man who accompanied him as well on his expedition to
the Shárí as to Kánem. This man, whose real name was Mʿadi, and who was
an extremely amiable and good-humoured personage, with a disposition
akin to the character of Europeans, continued my friend during the
remainder of my stay in Bórnu. His errand here at present was to collect
the annual tribute which the ruler of the country of Logón has to pay to
the sheikh of Bórnu.

The quarters assigned to me were situated in the upper story of the
palace of the Ibálaghwán, which surprised me not a little by the
superior and even grand style of its architecture. This very spacious
palace consists of a number of wings inclosing small quadrangular
courtyards, and having an upper story of extensive apartments. The only
part which did not correspond with the magnificence of the rest of the
building, was the staircase, which was rather dark and inconvenient. My
own apartment was not less than thirty-five feet long, by fifteen wide,
and as many high, and received sufficient light from two semicircular
windows, which, of course, had no glass, but could be closed by means of
a shutter of reed. The ceiling was gable-shaped—rather a remarkable
phenomenon in these countries; it was filled out with thatchwork.

But not only were my quarters excellent, but the treatment I received
also was hospitable in the extreme; for I had scarcely taken possession
of my lodgings when a bowl of very excellent pudding made its
appearance. The thievish propensities of the people of Logón are very
remarkable; and the first intimation which I received of it was an
official caution given to me to beware of the slaves of my house.

Having recruited my strength a little, I went with Kashélla Mʿadi to pay
my compliments to the Ibálaghwán or Keghámma. We found him in the
apartment marked _a_ in the ground-plan. At first he was invisible,
sitting behind his matting curtain, “parpar” or “farfar,” which the
Háusa people, in humorous mood, call by the name of “munáfekí” (the
sinner), and which is made of a fine species of reed-grass; but he soon
allowed me to approach him. He was a tall, elderly man, of a cheerful
disposition, and smiling countenance, with nothing in his behaviour to
intimate that he was not a free-born man; and certainly his position was
an eminent one, as he was the second person in this little kingdom, and
held an office corresponding to that of a prime minister or vizier. His
name is Herdége. Having made him a small present for himself, which was
rather insignificant, but which, as it consisted of a quantity of
articles, seemed to satisfy him, I showed him the present I intended to
make to his master. Poor as I was at the time, and destitute of means, I
had determined to give away my Turkish trowsers, of very fine brown
cloth, which I had scarcely ever worn, in order to pave my way in
advance; for besides this article I had only some small trifles to give,
such as shawls, knives, scissors, frankincense, and a few spices. The
keghámma having approved of my present, I immediately went with Mʿadi
Belál to pay my respects to the sultan, or rather Míyará himself.

The palace of the sultan is a very extensive building surrounded by a
wall fourteen feet in height, and corresponding to the height of the
house of the keghámma.

The public part of the building consists of very large courtyards,
separated from each other by covered apartments. In the first courtyard,
marked _a_ on the ground-plan, in a sort of shed, the eunuchs (or, as
the people of Logón say, the “bille-melágem”) were assembled. I was not
a little surprised to find here two cannons of iron, certainly of not
very good workmanship, and very old, but furnished with frames. Having
waited here some time, till my arrival was announced, I proceeded to
another antechamber, marked _b_, the whole of the building looking very
neat and orderly. The courtyard probably measured not less than one
hundred feet in length, by about thirty feet in width. Having then
traversed another antechamber and courtyard of about the same
dimensions, we reached the public court of audience, furnished with a
raised platform, on which stood the royal throne,—a rough kind of seat
covered with a baldachin of planks, and painted red. The sultan however,
at present, was not here, but was sitting in his private room _e_,
behind a matting curtain; and I was desired to address him without
seeing him. I therefore paid him my compliments, addressing Kashélla
Mʿadi in Kanúri, and he interpreting what I said into the language of
the country. I begged to inform the Míyará that the sultan Inglíz, who,
during the reign of the former chief of Logón (the míyará Sále), had
sent Khalílu (Major Denham), had now instructed me to pay my respects to
him. He was greatly delighted at this compliment, and inquired
repeatedly after the health of the sultan of the nasára Inglíz. Having
made use of the opportunity afforded by the matting of observing me
without being himself observed, and seeing that I was something like a
human being, and evidently of an innoxious kind, and the present having
been carried into his presence, he called me inside his room, saluted me
in a very friendly manner, and shook hands with me. He then begged me to
explain to him the presents, taking extreme delight in the articles of
English manufacture, including even the large darning needles; for,
small and insignificant as these articles were, he had never seen their
like. He even counted the needles one by one, and assigned them their
respective owners in the harím. The principal favour which I had to beg
of him was to allow me to navigate the river to some distance; and
having granted my request, he dismissed me very graciously.

On the next page are ground-plans of the houses of the sultan and
keghámma.

[Illustration:

A. HOUSE OF SULTAN.—_a._ Great Courtyard. _b._ Second Courtyard, about
100 feet long by 30 wide. _c._ Third Courtyard. _d._ Inner Courtyard,
with shed and throne. _e._ Room of Sultan. _f._ Stabling.

B. HOUSE OF KEGHÁMMA.—1. Large Court. 2. Staircase leading to the
upper apartments. 3. Courtyard. 4. Second Courtyard. 5. Room of
Keghámma, with two couches, that in the background being raised above
the floor.

6. Shed built of mats and poles in front of the palace.

7. Caoutchouc-tree.

8. Mosque or “Dabáldemá,” shaded by some fan-palms, or as the people
of Logón say, “gurúru.”]

Yúsuf, or, as the people of Logón say, Ýsuf (this is the name of the
present sultan), is a tall, stout, and well-built man, apparently about
forty years of age, with large features and a rather melancholy
expression of countenance, which I attribute to his peculiar and
precarious political situation, being the ruler of a small kingdom
placed between two predominant neighbours, who harass him incessantly.
He has been sultan about nineteen years, and was a young man at the time
of Denham’s visit, when his father Sále and his elder brother ʿAbd el
Kerím shared or rather disputed the government with each other. He had
two more elder brothers of the names of Chiróma and Marúfi, both of whom
died before him. Just at or shortly before the beginning of his reign,
as it would seem, owing to an expedition into the country by Dáúd, one
of the war-slaves of the sheikh Mohammed el Kánemí, Logón became a
tributary province of Bórnu, being subjected to an annual tribute of one
hundred slaves, and the same number of shirts or tobes. Previous to that
time, the ruler of this little country is said to have made an annual
present of only two slaves.

Our treatment was hospitable in the extreme; and it seemed almost as if
our host had a mind to kill us with excess of kindness, for in the
evening he sent us four enormous bowls of well-prepared pudding of
sorghum, together with meat and broth, and early the next morning a
large bowl of gruel seasoned with honey, and a few moments afterwards
three or four bowls of hasty-pudding. Fortunately there were people
enough to consume this plenteous supply of food; for there was a large
party of Bagírmi people returning to their country from Kúkawa, and to
them I gave up these luxuries, but afterwards they repaid my kindness
with ingratitude. Being desirous of having a look at the town, I sallied
forth in the afternoon with a well-mounted trooper, who was attached to
my friend Kashélla Mʿadi, by the western gate, and then turning round
towards the east, proceeded in the direction of the river.

At this corner the river bends away from the wall to the distance of
about an English mile, being from 350 to 400 yards across; the western
shore was low at this point, but on the opposite side it rose to the
height of from 12 to 15 feet. It was enlivened by about 40 or 50 boats,
most of them about 4 feet at the bottom, and 6 feet at the top, and
remarkable for their formidable prows. All these boats are built in the
same way as those of the Búdduma, with this exception, that the planks
consist of stronger wood, mostly bírgim, and are generally of larger
size, while those of the Búdduma consist of the frailest material, viz.
the wood of the fógo. The joints of the planks are provided with holes
through which ropes are passed, overlaid with bands of reed, and are
tightly fastened upon them by smaller ropes, which are again passed
through small holes stuffed with grass. Their elevated prow seems to
indicate the shallowness of the water as well as the vehemence of the
current which in certain seasons of the year sweeps down the river, and
which I experienced on my return when it was full. At present, the water
was rather shallow, and several sand banks were to be seen. My principal
attention was attracted by the fishing boats, which were furnished with
large nets suspended from the poop by two immensely long poles, called
“the two hands,” “músko ndí,” by the Kanúri people, and “sémi” by the
people of Logón.

We then continued along the shore, which becomes gradually more and more
compressed between the wall and the river. Where the latter approaches
nearest the wall there are corn-fields, which are continually irrigated
from the river. The stalks of the corn at present were 1½ foot high. As
I have observed in another place, wheat has only recently been
introduced into Negroland, and wherever a little is grown it is only
known by the Arabic name “el kámeh.” The generality of the inhabitants
do not relish it, but it is esteemed a princely food. Of course, corn is
also dearer where it does not grow spontaneously, the tropical rains
being too powerful for the tender plant, so that it can only be grown in
the dry or rather the cold season, near the rivers or swamps, by
artificial irrigation.

Delighted with the view which the scenery of the river exhibited, we
reached the most eastern gate on the south side of the town, when
suddenly an old man with an imperious air forbade me to survey the
river, and ordered me to retrace my steps directly. I was rather
startled and confounded, as, having the permission of the sultan, I
could not imagine who besides himself had such authority in the place,
and could forbid me to do what he had allowed me; but my companion
informed me that he was the king of the waters, the “maráleghá,” and
that he had full command over the river or “lagham.” I had heard and
read a great deal of the authority of the king of the waters, the
“serkí-n-rúwa,” in the countries on the Niger, but I was not aware that
a similar custom prevailed here. Confused, and rather ashamed, I re-
entered the town through the next gate.

Close to this gate was the house of the Ghaladíma, or Malághwán; and I
was induced to pay him a visit. He seemed to be rather an effeminate
person, living in a dark and well-perfumed room. The visit was of no
other interest than that it gave me some further insight into the
ceremonial of the court of this little kingdom, the very existence of
which was denied by so eminent a man as M. Fresnel a few years ago.[26]

The first thing I did on returning to my quarters was to expostulate
with the keghámma on the authority exercised by his colleague, the king
of the waters; and he promised me that the next day I should visit the
river, and even navigate it, without the least hindrance. However, there
was so much talk in the town about my surveying the stream, that I was
obliged in the course of the afternoon to pay the vizier another visit.
He was very anxious to know whether if once embarked in a boat upon the
water I might not jump out in order to search for gold; when I told him
I was rather afraid of the crocodiles. This expression of my fear
contributed a great deal to alleviate his suspicions, for it seemed that
until then he had supposed Europeans to be a sort of supernatural
beings, and exempt from every kind of fear.

Our treatment was hospitable in the extreme,—so much so that two hundred
persons might have feasted upon the dishes that were sent to me. But
besides all these dishes of native food, my hospitable host sent for my
own private consumption a large fat sheep, and an enormous jar of milk.
This very splendid treatment, however, created a great deal of jealous
and envious feeling in the breasts of those Bagírmi people whom I have
before mentioned, although they themselves reaped the greatest benefit
from the liberality of the sultan towards me. From what I observed, I
think I may draw the conclusion that it is the general policy of the
ruler of this little tributary kingdom to treat his guests well, and
certainly it is a wise one; but I dare say I was especially favoured by
the sultan.

[Sidenote: March 15th.]

With extreme delight I had cherished the plan of navigating the river,
although, of course, from the very beginning I could not expect to
achieve great things, for the means which were at my disposal at the
time did not allow me to overcome any serious obstacles which might be
thrown in my way; but besides this, the authority of this little prince
of Logón extends only a short distance along the shores of the river.

At eight o’clock I was aboard of my little boat or “wöam.”[27] I thought
that I should have got one of the largest size; but none was to be
obtained. The boat, however, which was finally assigned to me, though
measuring only twenty-five feet in length by about four feet in the
middle, was tolerably strong, the planks of which it consisted being
recently sewn and stuffed in the way above described; but, of course,
this method of shipbuilding is far from rendering the vessel watertight.
The boats being without seats, large bundles of reeds are placed at the
bottom for the passengers to sit upon, with nothing to prevent them from
being drenched with water.

While we crossed to the other side of the river, passing numerous
sandbanks which at present had been laid bare, the town presented quite
an interesting prospect, the wall being overtopped by dúm-palms, or
“gurúru,” a pair of deléb-palms, “murgúm,” and an isolated date-tree,
“díffino,”[28] these three species of palms growing together in this
place in a very remarkable manner; for it is a rare thing to find them
in one and the same spot.

The river, while skirting the town, forms a bend, and changes its course
from a west-easterly to a northerly direction. While gliding along the
eastern shore my companions called my attention to a species of very
tall reed, which they call korókoró, but which is nothing else than the
papyrus, which, as I have observed, grows on the shores of the Tsád, and
which we shall find in several smaller lakes. But it was highly
interesting to me to hear that the natives in this country prepare a
peculiar sort of cloth or “gábagá” from it, which I think must be
identical with the cloth mentioned by Arab writers under the name
“wórzi” or “berdí,” being the Egyptian name for papyrus. However, I did
not observe here several other species of the reed which grows on the
Tsád, principally the bolé; and on inquiring for that beautiful variety
from which the fine matting “kasár” or “farfar” is made, and for which
the people of Logón are so celebrated, I was informed by my companions
that it only grows near the large market-town Jínna, of which I shall
have occasion to say something more further on. I was very anxious to
know how the natives called this river, to which, by Major Denham, the
name of Shárí or Sháry has been given, and I was confirmed in the
opinion which I had previously formed, that this river is not the Shárí,
but a small branch of it; Major Denham, during the short stay which he
made here, not being able to ascertain that this river, which he saw at
the town of Logón, was not the same as that which he saw at Kúsuri, but
only a branch of it, and the smaller one. However, all the names given
to rivers by the various tribes of Negroland have no other signification
than that general one of “water,” “river,” from the western great “Bá,”
of the Mandingoes by the Ísa of the Sónghay, Eghírrëu of the Imóshagh,
“Máyo” of the Fúlbe, Gulbí of the Háusa, Kwára of the Yóruba, Bénuwé of
the Bátta, Komádugu of the Kanúri, the eastern “Bá” of the Bagírmi, the
Fittrí of the Kúka, the Bat-há of the Arabs of Wádáy. Thus the name
“Shárí” also signifies nothing more than “the river,” that is to say,
the river of the Kótokó, to whose language this word belongs, and the
word “tsáde,” or rather “tsádhe,” seems nothing but a different
pronunciation of this same name, the original form of which is probably
“sáre” or “sághe.”

This smaller western branch of the Shárí the natives of Logón call
“Lághame na Lógone,” that is to say, the river (“lágham”) of Logón; but
higher up it has different names, according to the places which it
passes by, being called by the Músgu people in their own language “Éré,”
or “Arré,” a name which itself means nothing else but river; while in
another place, where I reached it on my expedition to the Músgu country,
it bears the peculiar name “Serbéwuël,” I do not know exactly for what
reason. Meanwhile we were passing by the village Hónkel, which lies on
the western side of the river, and which as I shall soon have occasion
to observe, was of great importance in the former history of this
country. The river changing its direction here, we again approached the
western shore, and saw that at least half the inhabitants of the town
had come out to see what the Christian was doing on the river; for they
could scarcely imagine that I had embarked for any other purpose than to
search for gold. In the midst of the crowd some horsemen in a very showy
dress were observed, and I was informed that they were people from
Ádishén the Músgu chief, just arrived with a message; and I soon
observed that they were priding themselves on a dress which they had
received from their oppressors, on the expedition in which I and Mr.
Overweg accompanied the latter.

Seeing a crocodile raising its head just above the water close to the
other side of the river, I could not resist firing at it, when the crowd
burst out in loud cheers of acclamation. The servants of the sultan,
however, who had accompanied me in the boat, had been for some time
uneasy, and wished me to return; and on reaching a beautiful solitary
deléb-palm, or “margúm,” as they are called by the people of Logón, I
could no longer resist the pleadings of my companions to abstain from
proceeding further. We had here an extensive view over the river, its
principal direction being from south 20° east. All these large and
splendid streams with which nature has endowed these regions are now
scarcely of any use to the people living on their banks; and no traffic,
except between the nearest places, is kept up.[29] A wide field for
improvement is here open to the energy of man when these regions have
been brought under the notice and the influence of Europe.

Turning our boat, we allowed it to go along with the current. The
surface of the water was so smooth and pleasant, that I was tempted to
take a bath, and there was a great shouting amongst the crowd on the
shore when they saw the white man jump overboard; but their surprise was
great when, after having splashed about for some time in the river, the
current of which was too strong for my weakened frame, they saw me come
out empty-handed, and they cried out that they had been cheated,—the
people having told them that I was searching for gold. However, when I
disembarked, the crowd of spectators was so immense, that my companions
could only open me a passage with their whips; and I was really glad
when I again reached the house of the Keghámma or Ibálaghwán.

This little excursion, however, cost me dear; for those people of
Bagírmi whom I have mentioned before, the principal among whom was
called Háj Áhmed, seeing me creating such an uproar, felt inclined to
suppose that, if I should enter their own country in the absence of the
ruler, I might create a disturbance in the kingdom. The prince of Logón,
likewise, had formed far too high an idea of my capacity, and begged me
most earnestly to stay some time with him, thinking that he might derive
some profit by making himself more independent of his neighbours.
Amongst other things, he wanted me to fire off those two guns which I
have mentioned before; but their whole appearance inspired me with too
little confidence to do so.

As it was, I had a great deal of trouble in persuading the sultan to
allow me to pursue my journey eastward; but seeing that if I were to
stay here a few days longer I should spend the little I had left, I was
firm in my purpose of extending my discoveries beyond my predecessors,
Major Denham having already succeeded in reaching this place, although
he has only very insufficiently described it, and entirely failed in
fixing its right position. I therefore proceeded to take leave of Míyará
Ýsuf the next morning, when I found him in the courtyard numbered _f_ in
the woodcut, which he seemed to use as stables. His whole stud, however,
appeared to consist of only three or four horses of tolerable
appearance. He himself was sitting on a raised platform of clay (segáge)
dressed very simply, and wearing a red woollen shawl round his head. He
was very kind and friendly, and begged me most urgently not to make a
long stay in Bagírmi, but to return as soon as possible. Our
conversation this time, as well as on the former occasion, was in
Kanúri, which he understood perfectly well.

Logón is, it seems, not a national, but a political name, although I
have not been able to make out its exact meaning.[30] The inhabitants
belong to that great race of the Mása whom I have mentioned on a former
occasion, being the brethren of the Músgu, and the kinsmen of the
inhabitants of Mándará (the Ur-wándalá) and the Kótokó. Their political
existence as people of Logón (or, as they call themselves, Lógodé Logón)
is quite recent[31], and their Islám is of still more recent origin.
Their country also, like that of the Músgu, was formerly split into a
number of small principalities, the chief of Hónkel being the most
powerful among them, till about a century and a half ago, when Bruwá,
the predecessor of Míyará Mása, is said to have founded the town of
Logón, and to have removed the seat of his principality to the present
capital (“bírni,” or “kárnak”) of the country. But this ruler, as well
as his immediate successors, was a pagan, and probably at that time
there were only a few Mohammedans in the place; and Míyará Sále, the old
prince whom Denham visited, the father of the present ruler Yúsuf, is
said to have been the first among the petty princes of this country who
were converted to Islám. Others assert that an older king, Mógha Jénna,
was the first Moslim; and this is not at all improbable as the names of
some of the kings who preceded Sále evidently show that the influence of
Islamism, at least to outward appearance, was felt at a much earlier
date.

With regard to the order of succession from Mása down to Sále, it seems
that Mása was succeeded by a prince of the name of Úngo Aná-smadú, who
was followed by Úngo Aná-logón, the prince to whom, possibly, the
present name of the country Logón is to be referred; he was succeeded by
Mógha ʿAlí, then followed Mógha Káder, and then the predecessor of Sále,
namely, Má Sálikwá. Hence, at the very utmost the Mohammedan religion is
not above sixty years old in this country; and many of the younger
inhabitants of the place are well aware that their fathers were pagans
by birth, and afterwards turned Mohammedans. Of course their Islám, even
at present, is of a poor character; and the whole knowledge of religious
matters which they possess, with the exception of a few elevated
persons, consists of a few phrases which they learn by heart without
understanding their meaning, and the practice of circumcision. In the
country towns, however, even at present, most of the people are pagans.

The inhabitants of Logón fought repeatedly with their neighbours and
kindred of Mándará, and seem to have been successful in that direction.
They are also said to have once destroyed the town of Mélé, which lies
on the eastern side of the river Shárí, and to have killed all the male
inhabitants. The former sultans of Bórnu seem to have left the people of
Logón in enjoyment of tolerable tranquillity, being content with a small
tribute which they made them pay as a mark of subjection. But at present
the tribute is considerable, considering the small extent of the
country, and moreover the unfortunate petty prince of this small kingdom
is compelled to pay another tribute to the sultan of Bagírmi, whose
people harass him continually.

The name which the people of Logón give to their western neighbours is
interesting, as its origin seems to go back into a remote age; for they
call them Billangáre, or rather, “bílle Ngáre,” a name which was
probably derived from Ngarú, the ancient capital of the Gháladí, or the
western provinces of the Bórnu empire, which I have mentioned on a
former occasion; “bílle” means people in general. As for their eastern
neighbours, the Bagírmi people, they call them by the name of Mókkode,
which might seem to have some connection with Makada, a name often
applied to the country west of Abyssinia, and which I think is
erroneously stated to mean Christian.

From the south-west the Fúlbe or Felláta press heavily upon them; and,
as we have seen on the expedition to Músgu, the elderman in the village
of Wáze, which belongs to the territory of Logón, is himself a Púllo or
Felláta.

The people of Logón in former times seem to have made frequent inroads
into the country of their neighbours and kinsmen the Músgu, in order to
supply their want of slaves; but about eight years previous to my visit
they seem to have suffered so severe a check in that quarter, as to make
them desist from undertaking any further expeditions. Upon that occasion
they lost their commander-in-chief, Keghámma or Ibálaghwán Yáhia[32],
the same who built the really imposing palace where I was lodged. This
commander undertook an expedition into the Músgu country, not, as usual,
by land, but by water, and having gone on shore near a village called
Gúmmel, was taken by surprise, and together with the most valiant of his
companions, was slain by the natives of the country.

The government seems to be a limited monarchy, the sovereign being
surrounded by a number of high functionaries, who form the divan or
“tálubá,” identical with the nógoná of the Bórnu people. The first of
these high functionaries is the Ibálaghwán, next follows the Málaghwán
or Gháladíma, then the Mairáy, then the Madám, the Mará-leghá or king of
the water, the Wulangháy or Chiróma (the claimant to the succession),
the Maraymarbá, the Madamátiyá, the Madám ukhsám, the Intháwa, the
Mághawén akhthám, the Másaghé akhthám, and the Mághalé-muté.

The territory of Logón is most advantageously situated near the point of
junction of two considerable rivers; the river of Logón, the Lágham, or
Éré towards the west, and the Shárí or Bá towards the east; and it might
be a most happy little kingdom if it were not overwhelmed and oppressed
by its more powerful neighbours, who, as we have just seen, encroach
upon it on all sides. But while the Bórnu people levy a more regular
tribute, the people of Bagírmi seem to treat the poor inhabitants of the
districts nearest their borders with the greatest injustice, subjecting
them, in a very anomalous manner, to all sorts of contributions.
Nevertheless, from the list of the places which I shall subjoin in the
Appendix[33], it will be seen that the country is still tolerably well
inhabited, though certainly it cannot now be said to be in a very
flourishing condition.

As for the food of the natives, fish (“kíyi”) in which the river is
extremely rich, constitutes a great proportion of their live stock; but
cattle (“nthá”) as well as sheep (“wúfu”) seem to be extremely rare, and
it has the appearance as if their neighbours had deprived them entirely
of this article of wealth and comfort. The native Arabs however are
tolerably well supplied with both. Poultry also seems not to be very
numerous; but the hog (“sése”) abounds in immense quantities, and seems
to be often resorted to by the natives as an article of food. Besides
sorghum or, as they call it, “mákalá,” and millet, “víyo” (the “fíyo” of
the Kótokó and Yédiná—rice I did not observe), a great deal of cotton,
“mpátakí,” is grown in the country; and weaving constitutes one of the
principal employments of the people. Indeed their shirts (“labú”) are of
very excellent manufacture; but their indigo (“mógoné”) is not very
good, nor are they expert in dyeing.[34]

In addition to their cotton, which ought to be cultivated to an
unbounded extent in these low and richly irrigated regions, the
beautiful lattice-work of cane before mentioned, the common sort being
called “parpar” or “farfar,” while a better kind is called “móman,”
constitutes one of their most famous manufactures; their wooden bowls
(“dalgwam”) likewise, and the round straw covers (“killé”), are
remarkable; for the bowls are of very good workmanship, much better than
they are seen in Kúkawa, although they do not attain to that excellency
which is observed in the manufactures of Dár Fúr.

Altogether the inhabitants of this country seem to be a clever race, and
are in general handsomer than the Bórnu people, the women in particular.
It is remarkable that they use almost the same sort of tattooing as the
Kanúri, consisting of sundry curved lines along the cheek, generally
six, running from the outer angle of the eye down to the mouth; it is
also curious that they have the same word for it[35] as the Kanúri,
although their languages are so entirely different in other respects.

My stay in the country, of course, was too short to allow me to speak
more decidedly respecting their moral qualities. The currency of pieces
of iron as money, which Denham observed in his time[36], has long been
abolished; and at present the standard money of the place is cotton
strips of from two to three inches in width.

With regard to the language of the people of Logón, Denham has committed
a great mistake in supposing that it was identical with the language of
Bagírmi; for though what he heard was really the language of Bagírmi,
which is spoken to a great extent by the natives, yet their original
language, which is spoken exclusively, among the people themselves, is
quite distinct, being nearly related to that of the people of Músgu.
They call their language kélakú Lógone. As far as I became acquainted
with it, the pronunciation is very difficult, on account of the many
aspirated sounds, especially that of “kh” or “th;” and in this respect
it has some resemblance to the English.


[Footnote 26: Bulletin de la Société de Géogr. de Paris, s. III. vol.
xi. p. 30; vol. xiv. p. 159.]

[Footnote 27: This word is only another form of the name which the
Yédiná give to the boat, viz. “pum.”]

[Footnote 28: It is very remarkable and interesting that the date-palm,
in all these countries as far as Bagírmi, goes by the Háusa name
“debíno,” from which circumstance it is plain that it was first
introduced into that part of Negroland. Even the Fúlbe of Sókoto have no
other name for it, while those of Ádamáwa call it after the tree of the
native date, viz. the addwa or _Balanites Ægyptiaca_. But the Sónghay
and Mába or Wadáy languages have quite independent names for this palm.]

[Footnote 29: I have however to observe that the Kúrí sometimes bring
native corn as far as Búgomán.]

[Footnote 30: I think it has no connection with the river or lágham,
else they could not call it “lághame Lógone.”]

[Footnote 31: The name is not mentioned in the annals of Edrís Alawóma.]

[Footnote 32: I will here give a list of the Ibálaghwáns, as far as they
came to my knowledge. Íba-Gáre, Íba-Kyári, Íba-ʿOthmán, Íba-Káder, Íba-
Abú, Íba-Ádem, Íba-Sʿaíde, Íba-Yáhia, Íba-Herdége.]

[Footnote 33: Appendix III., No. II.]

[Footnote 34: The reader will see that my judgment in this respect is
very different from that which Denham passed on them (_Travels and
Discoveries_, i., p. 237.); but Denham never visited Kanó, and had no
standard for judging what was good and what was not.]

[Footnote 35: The Kanúri call it “béli,” the lógodé Lógone “bél.”]

[Footnote 36: Denham, i. p. 238.]




[Illustration: Drawn by J. M. Bernatz, from a Sketch by Dr. Barth.

M. & N. Hanhart, lith. et impt.

LOGÓN BÍRNI.

August, 17th. 1852.]


                             CHAP. XLVIII.

                THE TWO RIVERS. — ENTRANCE INTO BAGÍRMI.


[Sidenote: March 16th.]

It was ten o’clock in the morning when I left Kárnak Logón in order
to penetrate into unknown regions, never before trodden by European
foot; and a short time afterwards I was sitting in the boat, while
our horses, the camel, and the bullock were partly swimming across
and partly fording the river. The water was in general shallow, though
in the deepest place it measured eight feet and a half. The current was
about three miles an hour. The country at that period had a very
different appearance from what it presented on my return from Bagírmi.
At present all those low grounds, which later in the season are entirely
inundated, had a swampy, cheerless aspect, and I hastened onwards in
order to escape from the unhealthy locality, heated by the rays of the
mid-day sun. Only now and then a small patch of cotton-ground was seen
between the tall jungle. Close to the river there is scarcely a single
tree; but further on, where the country becomes more cultivated,
isolated karáge-trees, together with straggling groups of cottages, were
seen here and there. Not having exposed myself to the mid-day sun during
the last few days, and the heat being very great, I looked for a place
to pass the hottest hours of the day; and to the disappointment of my
companions, who were anxious for a good dinner, I dismounted under the
cool shade of a beautiful wide-spreading fig-tree, “ngábbere,” or
“zérra,” as the people of Logón call it, at some distance from a little
village called Sóso, situated towards the north, while on our right
there was a watercourse winding along through a shallow depression in
the green meadow grounds, without any visible inclination. These shallow
watercourses are, as I have already had occasion to mention on my
journey to Músgu, one of the most characteristic features in this part
of Central Africa, which formerly was thought to be a dry elevated
waste. Naked young lads were splashing and playing about in the water,
together with wild hogs, in the greatest harmony; never in any part of
Negroland have I seen this animal in such numbers as here about the
Shárí. Calves and goats were pasturing in the fields, with wild hogs in
the midst of them.

When we pursued our march at two o’clock in the afternoon, I was greatly
pleased to see numbers of fine horses round the groups of Shúwa villages
which bordered the watercourse; while the whole scenery was enlivened by
the rich foliage of wide-spreading trees. Onions likewise were
cultivated here in considerable quantities. On the right of our path
were very extensive fields, of a peculiar kind of winter-corn, called
“sáffará” by the people of Logón, and “kérirám” by the Kanúri. This
belongs to the ruler of the country; but in general very little grain is
seen in this part of Logón, the inhabitants being afraid of the people
of Bagírmi, who used to gather the harvest of what they themselves have
sown. But small cotton grounds are occasionally observed.

After a march of about nine miles we reached a place called Báta, half
deserted, and surrounded by a clay wall, in a very decayed state.
Nevertheless, the few cottages that remained, simple and unpretending
though they were, testified to some degree of industry and cleanliness.
Of hospitality, however, we received no proof; and the authority of the
Míyará Ýsuf seemed to be nought indeed, these poor people affirming,
with some show of reason, that as the ruler did not protect them against
the unjust exactions of their neighbours, they need not respect his
commands. There was, therefore, little necessity for the servant of the
sultan accompanying me any further, for if they did not respect his
orders here, they would certainly not do so further on.

[Sidenote: Wednesday, March 17th.]

We continued our march alone. On the east side of the town a little
cultivation was to be seen, the country here being very swampy, and
inundated during the rainy season. It is covered with a dense jungle;
and wild beasts are in great numbers. Water is close under the surface
of the ground, and the well that we passed near a Shúwa village was only
three fathoms deep. Near the village of Atmarchári, which we left on our
right, there were traces of cultivation, trees being cut down and the
ground cleared to make room for corn-fields; the village is inhabited by
Kanúri people. Soon after, the forest became denser than before,
climbing plants running up the trees, and hanging down in festoons from
the branches. Here it was that I first saw the footprints of the
rhinoceros, an animal which is unheard of in all the western parts of
Negroland. The people of this part of Logón call the animal “bírní,” the
name usual in Bagírmi, while the real name in the language of the
country is “ngirmé.” The Kanúri call it “kárgadán,” or “bárkaján”—the
very name mentioned already by El Edrísi.[37] It is greatly feared by
the inhabitants, who sometimes encounter these ferocious animals on the
narrow footpaths which wind through the thick forests of their country.

I had gone on a little in advance, when suddenly I beheld, through the
branches of the trees, the splendid sheet of a large river, far larger
than that of Logón. All was silence! and the pellucid surface of the
water undisturbed by the slightest breeze; no vestiges of human or
animal life were to be seen, with the exception of two riverhorses
(called “niyé” by the people of Logón), which, having been basking in
the sun on the shore, plunged into the water at our approach. This,
then, was the real Shárí, that is to say the great river of the Kótokó
(for Shárí, as I have said before, means nothing else but river), which,
augmented by the smaller but very considerable river of Logón, forms
that large basin which gives to this part of Negroland its
characteristic feature. The river at this spot runs from S. 30° W. to N.
30° E., but its general course is rather winding, coming further upwards
from the south, and beyond forming a reach from E. 38° N.

The shore, where I stood enjoying the tranquil but beautiful scenery, is
closely approached by the forest, and has an elevation of about fifteen
feet. No human habitation was to be seen, with the exception of a small
village on the other side. The surface of the water was undisturbed,
except now and then by a fish leaping up; no waterfowl enlivened the
banks; not a single boat was to be seen, till at length we observed the
ferrymen on the opposite shore, where it formed a flat and sandy beach,
making us a sign that we were to proceed a little higher up the river,
in order not to miss the landing-place when carried down by the current.
We therefore went about 800 yards further up; and I made myself
comfortable under the shade of a tree, awaiting the boat, and indulging
in the thought that I was soon to enter a new country, never before
trodden by European foot.

At length the boat came; but the ferrymen, as soon as they saw who we
were, behaved in a strange and mysterious manner, and told us that they
could not take us across the river before they had informed their
master. However uncommon such a precaution seemed to be, I had as yet no
idea of the real state of affairs. We therefore sat down patiently to
await the answer, which we thought a mere matter of form. The atmosphere
was very sultry, and the sky overcast; clouds were hanging over the
river, as forerunners of the rainy season. In order to keep off the
deadly stings of the blood-flies from our horses, we made a large fire.
The sting of this fly is almost as fatal as that of the “tsetse” in the
southern parts of this continent; and many travellers lose all their
horses on the shore of this river.

I was suddenly aroused from my tranquil repose by the arrival of a
numerous troop of pilgrims on their way to Mekka; all of them belonged
to the tribe of the Fúlbe or Felláta, mostly from the western parts of
Negroland, and some from Góttokó, the little-known country between
Bámbara and Kong. Amongst them were also the people who had accompanied
me on my journey to Ádamáwa, and whom I had again met a second time near
the town of Logón. I made them a present of needles, in order to assist
them in their praiseworthy undertaking. While we were chatting together,
the boatmen returned, bringing with them the astounding answer that the
chief of the village, Ásu, would not allow me to cross the river.

We could at first scarcely imagine what was the reason of this
unforeseen obstacle, when the boatmen informed us that Háj Áhmed, the
head man of those Bagírmi people whom I have mentioned as returning from
Kúkawa to their native country, had assured them that I was a most
dangerous person, and that the vizier of Bórnu himself had told them
there was great danger that, if I should enter the country of Bagírmi in
the absence of the sultan, I might upset his throne, and ruin his
kingdom. As there were some of the chief men of the village in the boat,
we used every means to convince them of the absurdity of such calumnies;
but all was in vain, and it became evident that we should certainly not
be allowed to cross the river at this spot.

For a moment I hesitated whether I should retrace my steps to Logón
bírni, there to await the return of a messenger whom I might send to the
sultan of Bagírmi, or whether I should try my fortune at some other
point of the river. I could not well perceive from whence the obstacle
proceeded; whether it was really the vizier of Bórnu who was the cause
of these intrigues, as he knew that it was my earnest desire, if
possible, to penetrate into Wádáy; or whether it was the Sultan of
Logón, who, by compelling me in this way to retrace my steps, might
think to persuade me to stay longer in his company. The Bagírmi man, I
had, as far as I knew, never offended in my life—on the contrary, in the
town of Logón I had treated his whole troop, and given besides some
small presents to himself; but he might have been jealous of me, seeing
that the sultan of Logón honoured me in so remarkable a manner. He had
been to Kúkawa, in order to purchase there some articles of manufacture
which were not to be had in Bagírmi, and which he hoped to sell to
advantage to the sultan of his country. Perhaps he thought that I was
also a merchant, and might spoil his market. Considering therefore all
these points, I at length decided upon trying to cross the river at
another place.

Having in consequence retraced our steps a little more than two miles,
along the path we had come, in order to make the people believe that we
were returning to Logón, we turned off from our track to the northward,
and winding along in a north-easterly direction, at times through a
dense forest, at others, passing small villages or hamlets, where
scarcely any corn was cultivated, though cotton was grown to some
extent, and evidently employed the activity of the inhabitants in
weaving and dyeing, we reached the larger village Búgarí. Here the
inhabitants, who, like those of most of the villages hereabouts, belong
to the Kanúri race, received us with great kindness and hospitality, and
without delay assigned us quarters in a large courtyard. My companions
told the people that we had missed the direct road to Mélé, and tried
even to pass me off as a “sheríf;” but unfortunately there was a person
who had seen me at the ferry of Ásu, so that the hope of crossing the
river at some other place without further obstacle was not very great.

Nevertheless, I was resolved to try every means in my power in order not
to miss the opportunity of exploring a new country; and for a dóra, or
small shirt, I was promised by the “bíllama” of the village a guide, who
early the next morning should conduct me to the ferry of Mélé.

[Sidenote: Thursday, March 18th.]

Before daybreak we began our stealthy enterprise, and entered the woods,
led on by a tall, well-made, muscular, and half-naked lad, well armed
with bow and battle-axe. Passing through a district where, besides
cotton, a great deal of native corn was cultivated, all belonging to the
inhabitants of the village where we had passed the night, and following
our narrow unbeaten footpath, we at length emerged upon the direct well-
trodden track which leads straight from Logón to Mélé, although it is
very winding. At first underwood was greatly intermixed with dúm-bush or
ngílle; but after a while the aspect of the country suddenly changed,
the lower ground on our left expanding in fine meadow lands interspersed
with pools of stagnant water, the deposit of the last year’s inundation,
while on our right we had the site of a former town, called Yesínekí,
densely overgrown with forest.

Here we came again in sight of that fine river which forms the western
boundary of the kingdom of Bagírmi, and which intriguing men wished to
prevent me from crossing. The slope of the bank is here broken, forming
a small terrace before it descends to the edge of the water, the upper
slope being at present covered with a green turf, while the lower one,
which rose fifteen feet above the surface of the river, consists of
loose sand. Here again we disturbed some crocodiles which had been
quietly basking in the sun, and lost no time in making signs to the
ferrymen opposite, that we wished to cross, while I hastened to the rear
of the rushes growing on the shore to make a slight sketch of the
interesting scenery of the river, with the village on the other side. We
were delighted when, after a short delay, we saw a boat leaving the
village, going round the sandbank which stretched out in the middle of
the river, and coming towards us. All our success now depended on a few
minutes; and as soon as the ferrymen touched the shore we satisfied
their claims, and entered the boat, which was large and commodious.

[Illustration: Drawn by J. M. Bernatz, from a Sketch by Dr. Barth.

M. & N. Hanhart, lith. et impt.

THE SHÁRY AT MÉLÉ.

March 18th 1852.]

It was with very satisfactory feelings, although mingled with some
degree of uneasiness, that I found myself floating on this noble river,
which was here certainly not less than 600 yards across. The sandbank is
a little nearer to the eastern shore, and the whole current (“ngáda” in
Kanúri, “ámma-wá” in Lógone) keeps along that side, while on the western
shore the river sweeps slowly along, and in general appears not to be
very deep. In the channel, the poles of the ferrymen indicated a depth
of fifteen feet. Our camel, horses, and bullock had to cross the river
by swimming alongside the boat, till we reached the northern end of the
sandbank, when they walked along the sandy beach; the sandbank being at
present about 250 yards in length. The current between the sandbank and
the eastern shore was very strong, and the water deep, though
fortunately the distance was only about 200 yards.

Having crossed this imposing stream, we entered the small harbour of
Mélé, and as soon as we reached the shore were saluted by a “chiróma,”
or squirrel, which, running about freely, and wagging its tail, seemed
to offer a good omen for a happy arrival in this country. The
inhabitants also, who were employed in various ways at a small wharf
used for building the common craft of the river, received us in a
friendly way, more especially as I made a small present to a sort of
official personage who has the title of “Kashélla,” and added a few
needles in addition to the fare paid to the boatmen. I was agreeably
struck by the fine figures of the females, their comely appearance and
very becoming head-dress distinguishing them most advantageously, not
only from the Kanúri, but even from the people of Logón.

Having here spent a few minutes re-loading our camel and exchanging
compliments, we hastened on, ascending the higher bank, which here rises
to about twenty-five feet, and leaving the village to the left, close to
the steep slope overhanging the river. But we had only proceeded about a
mile, delighted at the idea that, notwithstanding the obstacles thrown
in our way, we had succeeded in entering this country, when we saw a
person advancing towards us, whom my horseman recognized as a servant of
the chief of Ásu. This incident could not but fail to lessen our hopes
of success considerably. Had the chief of Ásu been more careful in
discharging his duty, and sent a messenger the evening before, or early
the same morning, I should never have entered Bagírmi.

As it was, having allowed the man to proceed on his mischievous errand,
we consulted together a moment, and thought it best to leave the path,
and strike across into the stubble-fields; for there is much cultivated
ground belonging to Mélé, which, although lying close to the river, is
more of a farming than a fishing village. New ground was being cleared.
Trees were being cut down, nothing but the trunks being left, in order
to protect the dresses of the labourers from the ants. The whole country
was well cultivated, and, being shaded by numerous trees, presented a
very interesting appearance. After about half an hour’s march across the
stubble-fields, without any direct track, we reached a well-trodden path
coming from Klésem, a considerable village lying lower down the river,
and still belonging to Kótokó, with a peculiar idiom of its own.
Following then this track, we reached a shallow watercourse of the same
nature as those mentioned on former occasions. The Bagírmi people call
them “kámané” or “gúgulí.” It was enlivened by a settlement of Shúwa
cattle-breeders of the tribe of the ʿAgaífe, and stretched out in great
length from S.S.W. to N.N.E., forming a very peculiar feature in this
part of the country; it is called “Ambusáda” or Mbusáda. Where we
crossed it the water was only a foot deep, the whole of the bottom of
the shallow bed being covered with the richest verdure.

We then kept close along its eastern side, having a rising ground on our
left, with a most splendid border of beautiful trees, chiefly of the fig
kind. It was a scenery which reminded me of the Músgu country, with this
exception, that the watercourse was not so broad, and the rich foliage
of the trees was not occasionally broken and diversified by the deléb-
palm. An almost uninterrupted line of hamlets skirted this narrow strip
of verdant fertility, and now and then groups of people were seen
issuing from the thick foliage, while numerous herds of cattle were
spread over the green swampy meadow-lands, some half-immersed in the
water, and nipping off the fresh shoots of the young grass, while others
were roaming about on the dry herbage near the border. Amongst the
cattle, birds of the most beautiful plumage, and of every description
and size, were sporting and playing about: there was the gigantic
pelican dashing down occasionally from some neighbouring tree; the
maraboo (_Ciconia M._), standing like an old man, its head between its
shoulders; the large-sized azure-feathered “dédegamí,” strutting proudly
along after its prey, the plotus, with its long snake-like neck; the
white ibis, eagerly searching for its food, with various species of
ducks (geddégabú, or “dabá”), and numerous other lesser birds in larger
or smaller flights. Now and then a wild hog suddenly started forth from
the covert of the forest, accompanied by a litter of young ones, and
plunged eagerly into the water. There was here a rich and inexhaustible
field for the sportsman; but I could not think of sport, for I was
conscious that something was going on to stop my progress.

Perhaps it would have been more prudent to have gone on without
stopping; but I felt the heat of the sun very much, and, seeing that I
could not traverse the country by force, preferred resting during the
heat of the day under the shade of a fine wide-spreading ngábbore or
ngáto (fig-tree) at the side of a Shúwa village. I here endeavoured in
vain to barter a few things with the inhabitants; but, to my great
astonishment, neither milk nor anything else was to be had, though
cattle were seen grazing in every direction. But the people told me that
the great number of cattle collected together on so narrow a slip of
pasture-ground was the very reason they had so little milk. These Shúwa
people, who belong to the tribe of the Welád ʿAlí, call this shallow
water Msél el Háj ʿAlí, after the name of their principal chief.

I was quietly reclining in the cool shade, although not without some sad
forebodings, when the head man of Mélé, accompanied by seven or eight
armed Shúwa, was seen approaching. They first addressed themselves to my
horseman Gréma, who had made himself comfortable in the shade of another
tree a short distance off. Having finished their business with him, they
came to me, protesting that they could not allow me to continue my
journey, as they were compelled to wait for an order from the capital,
when I did not hesitate to declare on my part that I was willing to wait
any reasonable time, on condition of their assigning me a residence, and
the means of supplying my wants. They expressed their satisfaction at my
compliance, telling me that in case of my refusal they would have sent
all the Shúwa in the neighbourhood to harass me on the road. The head
man of Mélé then promised me that, if I would return to his village, he
would take care that I should be supplied with everything I wanted,
particularly fowls and milk.

I therefore allowed Gréma to proceed alone, in order to take my letters
to the capital, while I slowly retraced my steps. An hour and a half’s
march along a more direct path brought me back to the village where I
had first entered this country.

The position of Mélé is not without interest, situated as it is upon a
steep bank overhanging a large and beautiful navigable river, which here
changes its course from a west-easterly to a south-northerly direction;
and here I might have indulged a few days in contemplating the
interesting scenery, if my future progress had allowed me more
tranquillity. As it was, the six or seven days I passed here were spent
in rather a dull manner; for the inhabitants became very suspicious when
they observed that my favourite place was the shade of a fine tree at
the very brink of the shore, from whence I had a view over the river to
a great extent north and west. Of course there was but little
communication; and very rarely a boat was seen proceeding in either
direction. Now and then the sand-bank became enlivened by a crocodile
coming out of the water to bask in the sun, or by the frolics of the
boys of the village, who occasionally crossed over to look after their
fishing-tackle, or dry their nets. Both fish as well as crocodiles are
extremely plentiful in the river; and the meat of the latter forms a
great delicacy to the natives. But there is also in this river a very
large animal, which, I think, must be identical with the ayú of the
Bénuwé and Niger—the _Manatus Vogelii_.[38]

To the north-east the village was bordered by thick forest, which at a
little distance was traversed by the lower course of the Ambusáda, which
was here extremely rich in verdure, and full of the favourite haunts of
the hog. I here, also, observed a considerable number of monkeys. It was
during my residence in this place, likewise, that I first obtained a
clear knowledge of the nature of the Shárí, and its relation with that
of Logón, the point of junction of the two rivers being a little below
Kúsuri, at a place called Síña Fácha, while I obtained a great deal of
information—certainly not quite clear and distinct—of the towns and
principalities on the upper courses of these rivers. I also learned that
last year the river had overflowed its banks, and entered the very huts
of the natives. Nevertheless, at this spot the banks were at present
more than forty feet high.

As for the name of the river, the name which is generally given to it,
viz. Sháry or Shárí, belongs, as I have mentioned on a former occasion,
to the language of the Kótokó. The Bagírmi people call it only Bá,
distinguishing it in the various parts of its course by the names of the
different villages which are situated on its banks, as Bá-Mélé, Bá-Busó,
Bá-Gún, while the Arabs call it at this place Bahr-Mélé, and a little
higher up from the other village, Bahr-Ásu. When the whole river,
therefore, is sometimes called Ásu, the relation is quite the same as
the komádugu Wáúbe being called Yeou or Yó.

But while I was thus able to employ my time not quite unprofitably, my
comforts were not quite so good as I had been led to expect, neither
fowl nor milk being procurable, and the fresh fish of the river, which I
was occasionally able to procure for a handsome present, not agreeing
with the weak state of my stomach; although it was excellent and very
palatable. There is a small market held at a village about five miles
distant, of the name of Édiye, and every Wednesday another market, a
little more important, near a village of the name of Chínge.

My impatience was augmented by the unmistakable signs of the approach of
the rainy season, while the numbers of mosquitoes allowed me but little
rest during the night. The sky was usually overcast, and occasionally
early in the morning the whole country was enveloped in a dense fog.
Though rather cool in the morning, the weather became sultry towards the
middle of the day, and heavy squalls of wind sometimes set in in the
afternoon. I would willingly have shared the company of the sultan in
the expedition, although the news which arrived from the camp was not
altogether of a satisfactory character. The pagan inhabitants of Gógomí,
against whom he was waging war, were reported to have descended from
their mountain strongholds, and to have slain a considerable number of
his people, and amongst them a well-known Arab from Morocco, who
accompanied him on this expedition.

[Sidenote: Thursday, March 25th.]

It was about noon, when to my great delight my trooper Gréma ʿAbdú
returned from his errand. He was accompanied by two attendants of the
Zérma, or rather Kadamánge, the lieutenant-governor whom the sultan had
left during his absence in command of the capital. I was disappointed,
however, in my expectation that I should now be allowed, without further
delay, to reach the capital myself, for the messengers produced a
document provided with a large black seal, to the effect that I was to
await the answer of the sultan in Búgomán, a place higher up the river,
the inhabitants of which, together with those of a neighbouring town,
called Mískin, were to provide me with fresh fish and milk during my
stay there. Although anxious to join the sultan himself, I had nothing
to object to such an arrangement, and was glad to move on, if it were
only a little. Our path on leaving the village kept along the steep
north-easterly bank of the river, which here separates into two
branches, of which the eastern one has more the nature of a creek. The
island thus formed was thickly wooded, and with the exception of a small
hamlet of fishermen, seemed to be left entirely to the possession of
wild animals; for while we clearly distinguished a flock of about a
dozen large antelopes of the species called “mohor,” or “hímraye”
(_Antilope Soemmeringii_), we were not a little surprised at seeing a
string of not less than twenty-two crocodiles all lying quietly on their
backs on the sandy beach, and basking in the sun. None of them, however,
were remarkable for their size, the largest measuring apparently from
twelve to fifteen feet.

Our march was rather short, my companions taking up quarters for us in
the small village called Límshi, situated two miles and a half higher up
the river, or rather creek.

Here there was a tolerable degree of activity, and several boats were
lying near the banks. Having just before observed such numbers of
crocodiles, I was not a little astonished at seeing the women, who were
fetching water, bathing without apprehension in the river. The island
opposite, at this spot also, was densely covered with wood, but a little
higher up there is a village of the name of Ódiyó. Our reception in the
village was very inhospitable, and gave me a bad idea of the authority
of the lieutenant-governor, under whose protection I was travelling.

[Sidenote: Friday, March 26th.]

Our march for the first mile and a half led through stubble fields,
after which we entered a dense forest filled with numerous creeping
plants, but otherwise of a rather uniform character; awaiting the
reviving power of the rainy season. The shallow watercourse Mbusáda, or
Msél el Háj ʿAlí, was all the time close on our left, till we crossed
it, at a distance of about five miles. We then pursued our march through
cultivated grounds, where, besides millet, a little cotton also was
raised, at other times proceeding through clearer forest, and soon
reached the village Mustafají, which was the native place of the wife of
my escort Gréma ʿAbdú.

Here we were quartered without delay; but the huts were not remarkable
either for their size or architecture, consisting entirely of thatch and
reed, the lower part being only slightly touched with clay, and during
the hot hours of the day the heat of them was really suffocating. The
inhabitants are all Kanúri, who, having emigrated from Bórnu during the
time of the decay of that empire, have settled here as well as in other
parts of Bagírmi, where they have introduced the little civilization
which at present is seen, especially weaving and dyeing, which is here
carried on to a considerable extent. The Shárí or Bá, in a direct line,
is only about seven miles distant towards the west, and the inundation
even approaches the very village by means of the shallow depressions and
watercourses which intersect the country. A great extent of ground was
under cultivation.

The inhabitants of the village behaved very hospitably, and my
horseman’s father-in-law, a very jovial and decent looking man, made me
a present of a fat sheep. The only difficulty was the water, the well,
notwithstanding its depth of fifteen fathoms, containing only a very
small supply. Scarcity of water seems, indeed, to be one of the great
disadvantages of Bagírmi.

We remained here the whole of the forenoon of the following day, and did
not start until half-past two in the afternoon. The country which we
traversed was well inhabited, and a good deal of cotton was to be seen;
and it was here that I first beheld it cultivated in ridges and furrows,
a manner of culture which, I think, is constantly adhered to in America
as well as in India, but in Negroland very rarely; the cotton plants
growing on the ridges, but being at present quite bare of leaves. All
the cotton plantations which I had seen previously in Negroland were
left to themselves, and were rather in a wild state; but here they
seemed to be well kept and taken care of. At a village called Mútkomí my
attention was drawn to the great numbers of asses; here the ground was
full of the holes of the fének or _Megalotis_, called by the native
Shúwa population “bú hassén.”

Further on, a firm and dry clay soil succeeded. Having then passed a
large village of the name of Búgarí, we took up our quarters a little
before sunset in a village called Matuwárí, which belongs to a wealthy
and learned man called Legári Bú-Músa, and were very hospitably
received. These people were also Kanúri, and I was delighted to observe
some signs of industry in the shape of a small dyeing place, which
contained two pits.

[Sidenote: March 28th.]

At an early hour we pursued our march, approaching the town of Búgomán,
where I was to await further orders from the sultan. The country
exhibited signs of considerable cultivation, and numerous farming
hamlets, called “yówëó” by the Bagírmi people, were spread about; at
present, however, they were tenantless, being only inhabited during the
rainy season by the “field hands,” as an American would say.

After a march of about four miles, and having passed a swampy meadow
ground with numerous traces of the rhinoceros, we again stood on the
banks of the great river of Bagírmi, the Shárí or Bá, which here, where
at present it formed a wide flat sandy beach[39], at first sight seemed
very inconsiderable, compared with that noble character which it had
exhibited lower down, so that I almost supposed it to be nothing but a
branch of the principal river, although my people repeatedly assured me
this was not the case; that small branch which higher up, a little above
the town of Míltu, separates from it, passing by Busó and Báchikám, a
few miles to the south of Máseñá, having just rejoined it near the town
of Mískin, of which the taller trees, if not the houses, were visible
from hence. The river here forms a long reach from south to north, but
higher up, beyond Mískin, comes from S.S.E. The bank on this side was
very low, which is the reason that the river during the inundation
spreads over a greater extent of country. The ground shelves very
gradually, and the river seemed shallow at a considerable distance from
the beach, but its depth on the other side may be the more considerable,
the opposite bank on which the town of Búgomán stands being rather
steep.

The town, seen from this distance, seemed to be rather in a state of
decay,—at least as regarded the wall; but it was pleasantly adorned with
a variety of trees, among which deléb- and dúm-palms were the most
conspicuous. It was market-day, and in the cool of the morning numbers
of people were collected on the south-eastern beach, where we had
arrived, awaiting the return of the ferry-boats: so that altogether it
exhibited quite an interesting scene. But gradually the bustle subsided,
and the heat of the sun on the sandy beach became almost insupportable;
for, notwithstanding my warning, we had left the green border of trees
and herbage far behind us, and had advanced along the broad sandy beach,
which at present was dry, to the very edge of the water. My escort,
together with the two servants of Zérma, had gone into the town to
announce my arrival, and to inform the head man of the order of the
lieutenant-governor, that I was to await here the commands of the
sultan: but no answer came. In vain did I endeavour to protect myself
from the burning rays of the sun by forming a temporary shelter of my
carpet; for the sun in these climes is never more severe than just
before the setting-in of the rainy season, and we had generally at two
o’clock between 106° and 110°. As noon passed by, I grew impatient,
especially as I had nothing to eat, there being no firewood, even for
cooking a very simple dinner.

At length, a little before three o’clock, my messengers returned, and
their countenances indicated that they were not the bearers of
satisfactory news. The governor of Búgomán refused obedience to the
direct order of his lord the sultan of Bagírmi, and declined receiving
me into the town. Nothing was left but to retrace our steps to the
village Matuwárí, where we had been so hospitably entertained. Dragging
therefore behind us the sheep which we had not yet been able to
slaughter, we returned by the same road we had come.

Here we remained the following morning, and I had sufficient time to
reflect on my condition in this country. There could not be the least
doubt that the greater part of the inhabitants were unfavourably
inclined towards the stranger; and I was persuaded that the best course
for me to pursue would be to return to Logón, and there quietly await
the answer of the sultan; but my companions were not of my opinion, and
assured me I was not at liberty to leave the country after I had once
entered it. It was therefore decided that we should proceed in the
direction of the capital, and make our further proceedings dependent
upon circumstances. The reason we did not start at once was because my
companions wanted to pass the extensive forest which lay before us in
the night-time, as there was no water for a whole day’s march, and our
people were unprovided with water-skins.

In order to employ my leisure time, I took a walk to Búgarí, the village
above mentioned, it being market-day; and I was glad, considering the
little civilization which is to be met with in these regions, to find a
good deal of traffic going on in the market. There were about twenty
head of cattle, between sixty and eighty sheep, and about a dozen asses
to be sold; there were, moreover, a good assortment of black and white
tobes, a tolerable supply of butter and honey, besides millet, beans,
and ground-nuts; the latter, especially, were very plentiful, and bore
ample testimony to the fact, that in these regions, also, this valuable
article of commerce grows in great quantities, and forms a considerable
portion of the diet of the natives; but as for cotton, the supply was
rather limited.

The staple commodity of the market were tobes, half-tobes, and single
strips of cotton, or fárda, about three inches wide, and from three to
four drʿa in length. Unfortunately, I was destitute of this kind of
money, the people rejecting with contempt those miserable little shirts,
or dóra, which I had brought with me from Bórnu; so that,
notwithstanding the good supply of the market, I might have remained
unprovided. I however succeeded in buying a few fárda for some needles,
paying four needles for each fárda. I bought also a little butter for
some beads.

The whole of this district is very scantily supplied with water; and the
well in Matuwárí, which is only two fathoms and a half deep, contained
very little. The wells in Búgarí were three fathoms deep, but were no
better supplied. Of course, by digging to a greater depth, and
constructing the wells in a proper way, the people might secure a
sufficient supply; but they prefer walking every day to a far distant
village for a little water rather than employ a few weeks industriously
in making a durable well.

After a cordial parting from the male and female inhabitants of the
village, we started about three o’clock in the afternoon; and with the
exception of a short halt, about sunset, in a small hamlet called “Búru-
nyígo,” or “hyænas’ den,” we continued our march without interruption
till past eleven o’clock at night. The village just mentioned lies at
the border of the wilderness; and here we had not only to water our
horses and to lay in a supply of water for ourselves, but I had also to
give medicine to some people who had followed me all the way from
Búgarí.

Having rested for a little more than five hours in the midst of a
forest, without being molested by man or beast, we continued our march
through the dense jungle full of trees and thick underwood, while larger
trees became more and more scanty. Gradually the forest became clearer,
and flocks of turtle-doves seemed to indicate that there was water in
the neighbourhood, although such a conclusion drawn from the presence of
this bird is sometimes liable to error.

After the rainy season the character presented by this forest must be
very different, and a little further on, evident signs of former
cultivation began to be visible, even of sesamum (“márrashi,” as the
Kanúri, “kárru,” as the Bagírmi people call it), as was evident from the
deep furrows which intersected the ground. The inhabitants of two or
three small hamlets dragged on a miserable existence even during the
drought which at present prevailed; and we met a large body of women and
children, who preferred fetching every night and morning their supply of
this most essential element from a distance of several miles rather than
desert their native village.

Having passed another hamlet, likewise destitute of water, and left
several villages at a greater distance surrounded by a tract of
cultivated ground, we at length reached the longed-for El Dorado where
water was to be found; and, as may be presumed, there was a great bustle
round the well, which had to supply the whole thirsty neighbourhood.
Numbers of people, camels, and asses were thronging around, longing for
the moment when they might come in for their share; and as the well was
ten fathoms deep, a considerable time would necessarily elapse before
they were all supplied. Being saluted in a friendly way by the people, I
pitched my tent in the shade of a large chédia or caoutchouc-tree,
which, however, was very scanty, as the young leaves had not come out,
and afforded very little relief from the heat of the sun.

Here it was for the first time that I tasted a dish of sesamum, which
was prepared in the same manner as millet, in the form of a large hasty
pudding, but, being insufficiently seasoned by the common African sauce
of the leaves of the kúka or monkey-bread tree, did not appear to me to
be a very dainty dish. The village, the name of which is Mókorí, had a
comfortable appearance; and the pounding of indigo in the dyeing-pits
went on without interruption, even during the heat of the day. Some
Fúlbe or Felláta shepherds live in the neighbourhood; and I was
fortunate enough to barter a little butter for glass beads, as well as a
small supply of rice—that is to say, wild rice, for rice is not
cultivated here, but only gathered in the jungles from what the elephant
and rhinoceros have left. Altogether I might have been very comfortable,
if my uncertain situation in the country had not caused me some anxiety.

When we pursued our march in the afternoon, our road lay through a
fertile country, where the cultivation was divided between millet and
sesamum, till we reached the first group of the village of Bákadá, which
consists of four distinct hamlets. Here my companions wanted to procure
quarters for me; but fortunately the head man of the village refused
them admittance, so that they were obliged to seek for hospitality in
another hamlet, and it was my good luck to obtain quarters in the house
of a man who forms one of the most pleasing recollections of my journey.
This was Háj Bú-Bakr Sadík, a spare old man, of very amiable
temperament, to whom I became indebted for a great deal of kindness and
valuable information.

While I pitched my tent in his small courtyard, he was sitting close by,
and was informing me in very good Arabic, that he had thrice made the
pilgrimage to Mekka, and seen the great ships of the Christians on the
Sea of Jedda. He remembered minutely all the different localities which
he had visited in the course of his long wanderings.

Delighted that by chance I had fallen in with such a man, I sent away
the next morning my horseman Gréma ʿAbdú, and the two messengers, to the
capital, in order to inform the lieutenant-governor that the chief of
Búgomán had refused obedience to his direct order and denied me
admittance into the town, and to ask him what was to become of me now.
Sending him at the same time a present, I begged him urgently to allow
me either to enter the capital or to retrace my steps to Bórnu. Gréma
promised me that he would return the next morning with a decisive
answer. However, he did not keep his promise, but remained absent full
seven days, although the distance from the capital was only about ten
miles. It was therefore very fortunate that I had the company of Bú-Bakr
Sadík, for no other person would have been able to give me such an
insight into the character and the history of these regions as this man.

He drew a spirited picture of the great national struggle which his
countrymen had been carrying on against Bórnu, he himself having taken
part in several battles. He boasted, and with reason, that slaves of his
master had twice beaten the sheikh Mohammed el Kánemí, and that the
sheikh had only gained the victory by calling to his assistance Mústapha
el Áhmar and Mukní, the two succeeding sultans of Fezzán, when, by
destroying the towns of Babáliyá and Gáwi, and by taking possession of
the capital, he made himself temporary master of the country. He
described to me with delight how his countrymen had driven back the
Felláta who were endeavouring to establish the Jemmára in their country,
and that they had undertaken afterwards a successful expedition against
Bógo, one of the settlements of that nation.

Bú-Bakr indeed might have been called a patriot in every sense of the
word. Although a loyal subject, and humbly devoted to his sultan,
nevertheless he beheld with the deepest mortification the decline of his
native country from the former wealth and importance it had enjoyed
previous to the time when ʿAbd el Kerím Sabún, the sultan of Wádáy,
conquered it, plundered its treasures, made the king tributary, and led
numbers of the inhabitants into slavery. Thus the whole well-being of
the country had been annihilated, and not only their wealth in silver
and cattle had disappeared, but the ruin and decay extended even, as he
considered, in his melancholy frame of mind, to nature,—whole districts
which had been formerly under cultivation and covered with villages
being now changed to a wilderness, and regions which had formerly been
well supplied with water suffering now the extreme of drought. Worms, he
told me, were devouring their crops and vegetables, dooming them to
starvation.

All this was true as far as regarded the present state of the country;
for though I cannot say whether its physical condition was ever much
more favourable, still as to its government and political importance
there certainly was a time when Bagírmi enjoyed greater prosperity. It
might seem indeed as if the country was visited by Divine chastisement,
as a punishment for the offences of their ancestors and the ungodly life
of their former ruler. In no country in the whole extent of Negroland
which I have travelled over have I seen such vast numbers of destructive
worms, and such a predominance of ants, as in Bagírmi. There is
especially a large black worm called “hallu-wéndi,” as long as the
largest grub, but much bigger, which, swarming in millions, consumes an
immense proportion of the produce of the natives. Bú-Bakr showed me also
another far smaller, but not less voracious insect, which they call
“kunjungjúdu,” a beetle about half an inch long, and of a yellow colour;
but the poor natives, like the inhabitants of other countries in the
case of the locust, do not fail to take their revenge, for when the
insect has grown fat and big at their expense, they devour it
themselves,—a habit which may be one of the numerous relics of their
former pagan existence, it being still a general custom with the Sókoró
to eat a large species of beetle called “dernána.”

Of other species of worms I shall have occasion to speak further on; but
with the white and black ants I myself waged repeatedly a relentless but
unsuccessful war during my residence in the country. Already, the second
day of my stay in Bákadá, I observed that the white ant (_termes
fatalis_) was threatening my couch, which I had spread upon a very
coarse mat, or “síggedí” as the Kanúri, “lába” as the Bagírmi people
call it, made of the thickest reed, with total destruction. I therefore,
for want of a better protection, contrived an expedient which I thought
would guarantee my berth against the further attacks of those cruel
intruders, placing my couch upon three very large poles; but I soon had
cause to discover that those ferocious insects were not to be deterred
by such means, for two days afterwards, I found that they had not only
built their entrenchments along the poles, and reached the top, but had
eaten through both the coarse mats, finished a large piece of my
Stambúli carpet, and destroyed several other articles. And during my
further stay here I had the greatest trouble in preventing these insects
from destroying all my things; for their voracity and destructive powers
seem to increase towards the beginning of the rainy season, which was
fast setting in.

The weather was exceedingly sultry, and we had the first thunder-storm
on the 3rd of April; and from that time we experienced a tornado almost
every day, although in general there was not much rain.

The village itself, of course, afforded very little entertainment. In
former times it had been nothing but a slave or farming village, or
“yóweó,” while the masters of the field-hands resided at another place
called Kústiya; and it was only a few years previously that they had
taken up their residence at this place; nevertheless even at present it
is nothing better than a farming village, grain being the only produce
of the place, while the inhabitants do not possess a single cow, so that
milk and butter are great luxuries, and even a fowl quite out of the
question. But as for grain, Bákadá is not without importance; on the
contrary, it is one of the chief corn-growing places in the country,
especially for sorghum (“ngáberí,” or, as they call it, “wá”), while
millet (“chéngo”) is not so extensively grown.

A market is held every Sunday, near the western hamlet; but it is very
miserable indeed, and it was all the worse for me, as the people refused
to accept in payment any of those small articles of which I was still
possessed, all my property at the time consisting of 3000 shells—that is
to say, little more than a Spanish dollar,—a small assortment of beads,
and a few looking-glasses, but principally needles, while here also the
people required what I had not, namely, the cotton strips which I have
mentioned above. The only luxury offered for sale in the market was a
miserable lean sheep; and, as a representative of foreign civilization,
there was half a sheet of common paper.

This was the sole attraction of the place, with the exception of my
amiable, intelligent, and kind host Bú-Bakr Sadík. The poor old man was
extremely indignant at the negligent manner in which I was treated; but
he was feeble and timorous, and had no authority in higher spheres. The
information which from time to time I collected from him during my
monotonous stay in this place shall be given in the appendix, in the
several places to which the subjects refer. It was very amusing for me
to observe that the good old man, all the time that he was conversing
with me, was not a moment idle; but he would either sew, not only for
himself, but even articles of dress for another wife of his, whom he had
in the capital, and soon intended to visit, or he would scrape some root
to use as medicine, or else select some indigo, for dyeing his tobe, or,
if he had nothing better to do, he would gather the single grains of
corn which had fallen to the ground,—for in his pious frame of mind he
thought it a sin that so valuable a proof of the bounty of the Almighty
should be wasted.

The other inhabitants of the place were rather uninteresting; and I had
a great deal of trouble with the same man who on our arrival had refused
us hospitality, for, as he was sick and wanted a cooling medicine, I
found the common remedies with which I was provided too weak for his
herculean frame, till at length, with a dose of half a dozen ounces of
Epsom salts, mixed up with three or four drachms of worm-powder, I
succeeded in making him acknowledge the efficacy of my medicines.

In general the Bagírmi people are much better made than the Bórnu, the
men excelling them in size, as well as in muscular strength, as they do
also in courage and energy of mind, while the women are far superior.
The Bagírmi females in general are very well made, taller and less
square than the ugly Bórnu women, but with beautifully-proportioned
limbs, while their features have a great deal of regularity and a
pleasing expression; some of them might even be called handsome, with
their large dark beautiful eyes. The broad nostrils of the Bórnu
females, which are still more disfigured by the ugly coral on the left
side of the nose, are entirely foreign to them. While the Bórnu females
in general endeavour only to excel by the quantity of fat or butter
which they put upon their hair, the Bagírmi women bestow considerable
care upon its arrangement; and the way in which they wear it, imitating
exactly the shape of the crest of a helmet, is very becoming, as it
harmonizes exceedingly well with their tall and well-proportioned
figures. It is therefore not without reason that the Bagírmi females are
celebrated over a great part of Negroland. Their dress is very simple,
similar to that of the Bórnu, namely, the black “túrkedí,” which is
fastened across the breast, while the wealthier among them usually throw
a second one over the shoulder.

The women in general seemed to be very healthy; but the men suffer much
from a peculiar sickness which they themselves call “mukárdam,” while
the Arabs call it by the same name as the “Guinea-worm,” namely,
“ferentít,” or “ʿarúk,” although it seems to be a very different thing;
it is a sort of worm which dwells in the little toe, and eats it
gradually away, beginning at the joint, so that the limb has the
appearance of being tied up with a thread. I think this insect is
identical with the _Malis Americana_ or _Sauvagesii_, or, as it is more
generally called, _pulex penetrans_, a very small black insect well
known in America. This disease is so general hereabouts, that amongst
ten people you will find at least one who has only four toes.

At times the village was enlivened by some little intercourse,—now a
caravan of pilgrims, then a troop of native merchants, tugúrchi or
fatáki. The pilgrims were some of them on their home-journey, with the
impressions which they had received of things scarcely intelligible to
themselves, others going eastward with the narrow prejudices which they
had brought from their distant homes. There were people from every
region of Negroland; but unfortunately I had scarcely anything to offer
them besides needles, with which article I gladly assisted them on their
arduous journey, for nothing is of so much importance to the traveller
as to gain the goodwill of these people, who are the bearers of public
opinion in these regions. Thus my liberality of making presents of
needles, and nothing but needles, procured me the title among these
witty people, of the Needle-Prince, “maláríbra;” and although it was
useful, in order to convince them of my friendly disposition, it was
scarcely sufficient to open an intimate intercourse with them. But there
was one amongst these distant wanderers, a native of Kébbi, a very
intelligent man, from whom I derived my first information about the
populousness of that fine and beautiful country which I was soon to
visit myself.

A numerous troop of pilgrims from Wándalá or Mándará also created a
considerable interest; and I entered with them into lively polemics
concerning the relation of their prince, or “tuksé-malé,” with the ruler
of Bórnu, for they denied positively that their chief had tendered his
subjection in order to avert from his own country that numerous host
which we had accompanied a few months previously to the Músgu country.
The poorer members of the caravan went round about the hamlets beating
their drums, in order to collect alms to supply their wants during their
meritorious journey, while the wealthier among them came to my host in
order to buy from him their supply of native corn.

The commercial intercourse also which took place in the little village
where I was obliged to make so long a stay, exhibited some more
interesting features, notwithstanding the dulness of the market; for
among the merchants there appeared occasionally a small troop of Háusa
people—dangarúnfa, slender active fellows, accustomed to fatigue, and
content with little profit, who were carrying on their heads, all the
way from Kanó to Bagírmi, small parcels of indigo-dyed shirts, and other
commodities, in order to barter them for the fine asses of Dár-Fúr,
which are brought hither by the travellers from the east.

Not less interesting was the arrival of a portion of a numerous caravan
of Jellába, from Nimró in Wádáy, who had come to Más-eñá; it consisted
of about a dozen people, with about twenty pack-oxen and asses. As for
the principal part of the caravan, the chief commodity imported by them
was copper, which they were bringing from the great copper-mine, or el
hofra, situated to the south of Dár-Fúr, carrying it as far as Kanó
towards the west, where this fine eastern copper rivals the old copper
which is brought by the Arab caravans from Tripoli. But these people who
had arrived in Bákadá were the poorer members of the troop; and their
wealth and exclusive article of commerce was a very excellent quality of
rock salt, which the Tebu-Gurʿaán bring from the Burrum or Bahr el
Ghazál to Wára, where it is bought in great quantities by the Jellába,
who sell it in small parcels, carrying it as far as Logón and Kúsuri. I
bought a little for a sheet of paper, and found it excellent, with the
exception of its having decidedly a fishy taste.

It was but very rarely that I mounted my horse, as I purposely avoided
everything which was likely to attract attention, or create envious and
jealous feelings; but on the 10th of the month, I was obliged by
circumstances to take a long ride, as my she-camel, which at the time
was my only beast of burden, was missing, and not a trace of her could
be found. On the south-east side of the village there is much forest of
a very uniform character, interspersed with tall reed-grass; but on the
other sides a great deal of cultivation was to be seen, shaded by
hájilíj (or “jánga,” as it is called here), nebek or “kírna,”[40] and
talha-trees, here called “keláya.” I found it very remarkable that
almost all the fields, even those where millet and sorghum were grown,
were laid out in deep furrows, called derába,—a system of tillage which,
in the case of any sort of grain, I had not before observed in
Negroland. Besides grain, a good deal of sesamum (“kárru”), cotton
(“nyére”), and indigo (“alíni”) was cultivated, the plants being from
two and a half to three feet in height, and bare of leaves at the
present season. On the north-east side, also, there was a great deal of
forest; but it was adorned by some groups of fine trees. It was
enlivened by numbers of Guinea fowl and gazelles; and a great number of
“kálgo” trees, with their wide-spreading branches, were observed here.
The soil had been already tolerably saturated with moisture, fine tufts
of succulent grass were springing up here and there, and I was enabled
to water my horse at a small pool; but this abundance of the watery
element, of course, was only temporary, in consequence of the heavy rain
which had fallen the previous night, and the poor inhabitants were still
to suffer most severely from drought, their deep well being almost dry.
This was the only point in regard to which I had continual disputes with
the inhabitants, who would scarcely allow my horse to get his sufficient
_quantum_, although I had to pay a considerable sum for it.

Meanwhile I waxed impatient. At length, on the evening of the 6th of
April, my escort Gréma (whom on the last day of March I had sent to the
capital to bring me a decisive answer without delay) returned with a
messenger of the lieutenant-governor,—not, however, to grant either of
my requests, but rather to induce me to wait patiently till an answer
should arrive from the sultan himself. In order that I might not starve
in the meanwhile, they brought me a sheep and a shirt, with which I
might buy provision in some neighbouring village; but as there was
nothing to be got besides millet and sorghum, I declared it to be
absolutely necessary for me either to be admitted into the capital, or
to retrace my steps. I requested Gréma to stay with me; but he pretended
he was obliged to return to the town, where his servant lay sick. Not
suspecting that he wanted to leave me alone, and to join the Sultan on
the expedition, I allowed him to go, and resolved to wait a few days in
patience. But, restless and impatient as I was, the delay pressed
heavily upon me; and when on the 13th my kind and amiable host Bú-Bakr
Sadík himself went to the capital, I had nothing to calm my disquietude.
Through my host, I had once more addressed myself to the lieutenant-
governor, requesting to be admitted into the capital without further
delay; and Bú-Bakr had promised me, in the most distinct terms, that
before Thursday night, which was the 15th, I should have a decisive
answer. Having only one weak camel to carry my luggage, I had taken
scarcely any books with me on this excursion to Bagírmi, and the little
information which I had been able to gather was not sufficient to give
my restless spirit its proper nourishment; and I felt, therefore,
mentally depressed. The consequence was, that when Thursday night passed
away, and neither Bú-Bakr himself arrived, nor any message from him, I
determined to put my threat into execution, and to retrace my steps the
following morning.


[Footnote 37: Sheríf el Edrísi, trad. Jaubert, vol. i. p. 72. كركدان]

[Footnote 38: I think it is this animal which is mentioned by Burckhardt
(Travels in Nubia, Appendix I., p. 433.) as the ام قرغي. This name must
be given to it by the Shúwa, but I did not hear it.]

[Footnote 39: Before coming to the main river I had to traverse a small
stream of very cold and limpid water, running in the opposite direction
to the river; but I do not know whence it may proceed.]

[Footnote 40: The name of this tree, which is so common all over this
part of the world—in the forms kórna, kúrna, kúrnahí, kúrru, kírna—is
one of the most widely-spread of all those names indicating objects
possessing properties useful to man; and this would seem to indicate
that it is not indigenous in the various regions where it is at present
found, but introduced from one and the same quarter. However, on nearer
inspection, this argument does not seem to be conclusive. It has
certainly not been introduced into Negroland from a more northern
climate, as little as the _Balanites_ and the _Cucifera_, which is
erroneously called _Thebaica_, instead of _Nigritia_.]




                              CHAP. XLIX.

 ENDEAVOUR TO LEAVE THE COUNTRY. — ARRESTED. — FINAL ENTRANCE INTO
                MÁS-EÑÁ. — ITS CHARACTERISTIC FEATURES.


[Sidenote: Friday, April 16th.]

As soon as day dawned, I arose to prepare for my departure. The sky
was overcast, and a little rain fell, which caused some delay; but as
soon as it ceased I got my camel ready and my horse saddled. Several
of the relations and friends of Bú-Bakr endeavoured to persuade me to
remain; but my determination was too fixed, and, pointing at the
disgraceful manner in which I had been treated in this country, I
mounted my horse and rode off. My three servants, themselves
dissatisfied with the treatment they had received, followed sullenly.

We retraced the path by which we had come; but the rains had made it
almost undiscernible, and we had some difficulty to make out the right
track. The sun was very powerful after the rain which had fallen during
the night, as is very often the case in tropical climates; and it not
being my design to abscond secretly, I decided upon halting, during the
hot hours, in Mókorí, and quietly pitched my tent—for I firmly expected
that, if my presence was required, it was here they would seek for me.
After the bad fare which I had received in Bákadá for so long a time, I
was delighted to be able to procure here a fowl, some butter, and a
little milk; and it was a sort of holiday for me to indulge in these
simple luxuries. The manner in which I obtained these supplies was
rather circuitous, a long bartering taking place with beads, needles,
and a little natron which I was provided with from Kúkawa. The price of
the fowl was three darning-needles; and I may here state the obligation
under which I am to Mr. Charles Beke, the Abyssinian traveller, upon
whose advice I had provided myself in London with a small assortment of
these articles. In Middle Sudán their value was not appreciated; but
here, in Bagírmi, I found them extremely useful, and it was to them that
I partly owed my subsistence in this country.

I quietly conversed with the people on my situation; and they behaved
very friendly towards me, and advised me, if no news should arrive from
the capital in the course of the day, to take the road by Kólle-Kólle,
Márga, and Jógodé, a place which they represented as of considerable
size, and thus to reach the river near the village of Klésem, from
whence I might cross over to Kúsuri. I even obtained here some valuable
information with regard to the river-system of Wádáy, from a
Felláta[41], or Púllo, of the name of ʿAbd el Káder. I should have
passed the day very comfortably, if a strong gale had not arisen about
noon, and filled my tent with dust and sand. The sky was overcast; but
there was no rain.

A little after sunset, when the busy scene at the well had subsided, I
measured the temperature of the water, and found it to be 86°·4 Fahr.,
which, if we consider it as nearly the mean temperature of the country,
would give a very high standard for Bagírmi. The well was fifteen
fathoms deep, the present temperature of the air being then 86°; at one
o’clock P.M. it had been 99°·7.

[Sidenote: April 17th.]

Having passed rather an unpleasant night, the ground swarming with black
ants (_termes mordax_), so that my camel, as well as my horse, moved
restlessly about and disturbed our own slumber frequently, I set out
early in the morning with confidence on my journey westward. Forest and
cultivated ground alternately succeeded each other, the cultivation
consisting, besides millet, of cotton and sesamum. Women were collecting
the leaves of the hájilíj, from which, in the absence of the more
esteemed leaves of the monkey-bread tree, to prepare the tasteless sauce
used for their daily pudding. The hájilíj was the most predominant tree;
besides it there was the tree called homaín by the Shúwa, which was at
present leafless, but was covered with fruit about the size of an
apricot, which, when ripe, is eaten by the natives. The tsáda also, with
its cherry-like fruit, called by the Shúwa people ábú-déje, was
frequent.

My young Shúwa companion here called my attention to the honey-bird
(_cuculus indicator_), called by his countrymen “shnéter,” and said to
be a metamorphosed old woman searching after her young son, and calling
him by name, “Shnéter, Shnéter!” All over Africa this little bird has
given rise to a variety of the most curious tales, from the Hottentot
country to the Somaul, and from the Somaul to the Jolóf.

Having gone about five miles, we wanted to obtain a supply of water from
a small hamlet of the name of Bagáwu, which we saw on one side of our
track; but as soon as we approached the well, a decrepit old man rushed
furiously out of his hut, as if we were about to steal his most valuable
property, and ordered us away with the most threatening attitude. Such
is the value of water in this dry region! We therefore continued our
march, and could only account for the existence of this miserable
village, by the extensive tract of cultivated ground which was spread
about.

We then entered a thick forest or jungle, with tall reeds, and showing
numerous footprints of the giraffe, an animal not at all frequent in the
populous districts of Negroland. Further on, the path exhibited various
signs of being a common thoroughfare for elephants. This animal further
westward had not made itself remarkable, while its inveterate enemy the
rhinoceros had already, close to the river, given sufficient proof of
its presence.

At half-past eight o’clock in the morning we approached another village,
of the name of Kólle-Kólle, which from a distance exhibited a most noble
appearance, adorned as it was by two stately deléb-palms, here called
káwe, and a group of most beautiful tamarind-trees; but as for water,
this village was not much better provided than that from which we had
just been driven, being dependent for this necessary element upon a
sister village at little less than a mile distance. Nevertheless, the
dry tract which lay before me obliged me to make a halt here, in order
to procure a supply of water.

While we were quietly reclining in the shade of the tamarind-trees, a
party of people arrived from a village which we had passed on our road,
in order to obtain some medicines; and the way in which they
acknowledged my trouble was so delicate and becoming, that I could not
decline it, though in general I did not accept any remuneration for my
cures. On taking leave they tied a fat sheep, which they had brought
with them, to the branches of the tree under which we were reclining,
merely informing my servants that it was a present for me.

Notwithstanding the great heat during the mid-day hours, I thought it
prudent to pursue my journey without long delay; for all my informants
agreed in representing the tract before us as an extensive wilderness,
entirely destitute of water. There were, however, evident traces that
during the rainy season this dry forest is occasionally changed into an
extensive swamp, and frequented by herds of giraffes and other wild
beasts. At first the forest was clear; but as we proceeded it became
enlivened and interwoven by a profusion of creeping plants called
“sellʿa” by the Arab inhabitants of this country, but “gheláf” in the
dialect of the western Arabs. In many spots a peculiar kind of reed was
seen, called “hál” by the Shúwa, who make from it writing-pens; and here
and there fresh tufts of grass, called forth by the productive power of
the rains, were springing up. It is this young succulent herbage which
especially attracts the rhinoceros. Desolate as this wilderness was at
present, there were evident signs that at times it becomes the scene of
a considerable degree of human industry; and besides sesamum, even
fields of indigo were seen.

After a march of about thirteen miles, we reached a hamlet which was
evidently identical with the village Márga, with regard to which our
informants had not been sure whether we should find inhabitants there or
not. We entered it; but not a single human being was to be seen, it was
lifeless, deserted, and half in ruins. Nevertheless there were some
houses which evidently contained property, though, the doors not being
sufficiently secured, its safety was left to the honesty of the passers-
by.

Here the path divided, and it was apparent that, in order to prosecute
my journey by way of Jógodé, we must pursue the northern one; but
unluckily, while no recent traces were to be seen along this path, the
southerly track seemed to be well-trodden, and my poor servants, who
before had silently though sullenly followed me, broke out into the most
mournful lamentations when they saw that I wanted to take the path which
showed no signs of intercourse, saying that I was going to destroy their
lives as well as my own in this desolate wilderness. At length, after
having in vain remonstrated with them, telling them that they were
frustrating my projects, I allowed myself to be overruled by their
piteous supplications, although with a sad foreboding, and pursued the
southerly track.

The sun was just setting when we reached another hamlet, consisting of
large decent-looking huts, and filling us with almost confident hope
that we might there find comfortable quarters; but we soon convinced
ourselves that here also not a human being was left behind. Only a group
of five antelopes (_oryx_), called here “tétel,” with their erect horns,
were fearlessly standing at a little distance, and staring at us. It was
the first time I had seen this handsome animal in a wild state, though I
afterwards found it to be very frequent in this country, and even fell
in with it along the komádugu of Bórnu.

Having convinced ourselves that the well was dry, and not thinking
quarters in a desolate village very safe in such a country, we pursued
our march, entering again a dense forest where a great deal of rain
seemed to have fallen, so that I was even enabled to water the horse,
although the danger from wild beasts could not but be greatly increased
by the presence of the aqueous element. After a march of two miles more,
the evening being very dark, we thought it more prudent to halt for the
night; we therefore chose a small place free from wood, put our luggage,
camel, horse, and sheep in the middle, and assigned to each of ourselves
one of the corners, where we were to keep up a fire. We had, however,
scarcely begun to look around the neighbourhood for dry firewood, when
the tumultuous cries of wild beasts broke forth from different quarters
of the dense forest; and I was obliged to fire some shots before we were
able to light a moderate fire, when, throwing the firebrands before us
as we proceeded, we were enabled to collect a tolerable quantity of dry
wood. However, it was with some difficulty that I prevailed upon my
young and inexperienced companions to make up their minds to keep
alternate watches during the night, and keep up the fires, more
especially as, on account of a north-east wind which sprung up about
midnight, the wood was rapidly consumed.

I had prudently provided myself with a number of cartridges, when I was
suddenly startled by the rushing in of two hyænas, which seemed to have
silently approached under cover of the wood, and almost succeeded in
carrying off our sheep. But one of them paid with its life for its
audacity; and now throwing firebrands, then firing a shot, we succeeded
in keeping the wild beasts at a respectful distance during the remainder
of our restless halt here.

Early in the morning we arose in order to pursue our march, when, on
removing our luggage, we found five scorpions under our leather bags;
they had, most probably, been attracted by the heat of our fires, as in
general this animal is not so frequent after the ground has been wetted
by the rains. As we proceeded, the forest became clearer, and my Shúwa
lad called my attention to the curious circumstance that the “díb,”
which is very frequent in these regions, always deposits its excrements
on the clean white spot of an ant-hill. The rain appeared to have been
very considerable; and about a mile further on we passed a good sized
pond, and a little further another of still larger size, producing all
around a profusion of grass of the richest verdure. The soil here
consisted of hard clay, and the vegetation was varied; but gradually the
forest was succeeded by extensive cultivation, which announced our
approach to a considerable place.

I had been well aware myself that we had left the road to Jógodé a long
distance on our right; but I was greatly annoyed when I heard from the
people who met us on the path that this village was Kókoroché, the very
place which we had passed on our road from Mélé to Búgomán. Convinced,
therefore, that I should be obliged to touch once more at the former
village, I had a sad foreboding that I should meet with some unpleasant
occurrence, and that it might not be my destiny to leave this country as
yet. However, I made up my mind, and prepared myself for whatever might
happen.

The country assumed a more genial aspect; and we reached a very
extensive sheet of water, apparently of considerable depth, and adorned
all around by fine spreading trees. Numbers of women were proceeding
from the neighbouring village to fetch water. Having provided ourselves
with a supply, we proceeded onwards, and halted in the shade of a fine
“hájilíj,” in sight of the village. Numbers of cattle and asses were
seen all around, and testified to the prosperity of the inhabitants.
Kókoroché is an important place in the economy of this country; for it
is this place, together with Búgomán, which furnishes the capital with
the greatest supply of millet.

Determined to put a bold face upon matters, I ordered my people to
slaughter the sheep, and made myself as comfortable as possible,
spreading my carpet, damaged as it was by the ants in Bákadá, upon the
ground, and assuming the appearance of being quite at my ease. At that
time I was not aware that in this country none but the sultan and a few
high dignitaries were allowed to sit on a carpet. While the meat was
cooking on the fire, and holding out the promise of some unwonted
luxury, I received a visit from the father-in-law of Gréma ʿAbdú, my
host in Mústafají; and his appearance and hints confirmed my
unfavourable anticipations. I related to him what had happened to me
since I left him,—that the governor of Búgomán had refused to receive me
into his town, and that I had remained eighteen days in Bákadá, waiting
in vain for an order to be allowed to enter the capital. I showed him my
carpet, and told him how it had been half devoured by the ants, and how
we had suffered from want of sufficient food and shelter in the
beginning of the rainy season. He was very sorry that I had not been
treated with more regard; but he expressed his opinion that the
lieutenant-governor would not allow me to leave the country in such a
way.

Unfortunately this man was not open enough to confess to me that
messengers from the capital had already arrived; neither did the
bíllama, or rather “gollennánge” or “gar,” as he is here called—the head
man of the village, who arrived with a numerous host of people just as I
was about to start—give me any hint about it. Whether he came with the
intention of keeping me back, and was afraid of executing his design, I
do not know. In any case it would have been far more agreeable to me, if
my fate had been decided here instead of at Mélé. As it was, he sent one
of his people with me to show me the track to the river; and I started
about an hour after noon.

Considerable showers, which had fallen here seven days previously, had
changed the dry character of the country, and revived its luxuriant
nature. The whole district presented the cheerful aspect of spring.
Fresh meadow-lands spread out; and we passed some extensive sheets of
water, bordered by undulating banks in the freshest verdure. We passed
several villages, among which one called Mái-Dalá, was distinguished by
its neat appearance, most of the huts having been recently thatched, to
protect them against the rains. In the forest which intervened, dúm-
bushes and dúm-palms, here called “kolóngo,” attracted my attention, on
account of the wide range this plant occupies in Central Africa, while
it was erroneously believed to belong exclusively to Upper Egypt. Having
passed the shallow water of Ambusáda, where numbers of the blue-
feathered bird here called “dellúk,” with red feet, were splashing
about, we again approached the inauspicious village where I had first
set my foot in this country.

Here also, during the short time I had been absent, a great change had
taken place. The ground was being cleared, in order to prepare it for
the labours of the rainy season; and the bushes and trunks of trees were
burnt, in order to render the soil more productive by means of the
fertilizing power of the ashes. We had not before passed so closely to
the river; and I was astonished at the immense size of the ant-hills,
which were not of the ordinary kind, such as they are seen in general,
rising in steep conical peaks, but rather like those which I had seen
near the Bénuwé—but of larger proportions and rising to an elevation of
from 30 to 40 feet, and sloping very gradually, so that their
circumference at the base in some cases measured more than 200 feet. The
village itself had meanwhile changed its character, owing to the number
of new huts which had been erected on account of the approach of the
rainy season, and the old ones having received a new thatching. All
these new structures consisted of reed and matting; but nevertheless it
had a neat and cheerful appearance. As I entered the village, I was
saluted by the inhabitants as an old acquaintance, and pitched my tent
quietly on the former spot.

[Sidenote: April 19th.]

This was a memorable day to me, destined to teach me a larger share of
stubborn endurance. Having passed a quiet night, I began early to speak
to the head man of the village about crossing the river, making him at
the same time a small present. In Bagírmi also, as well as in Logón and
other parts of Negroland, there is a separate officer for the river-
communication. This officer, who in Bagírmi bears the title of alífa-bá
(“kemán-komádugubé” or “officer of the river”), has an agent or kashélla
in every village on the banks of the river where there is a ferry; and
this agent was absent at the time. Meanwhile I was conversing with
several of my former friends, and, among others, met an inhabitant of
Jógodé, who regretted extremely that I had missed my road to that place,
as I should have been well treated there, and forwarded on my journey
without obstacle, almost all of the inhabitants being Kanúri. The
governor of that place, who, like that of Moító, bears the title of
“alífa,” had left, as this man informed me, in order to join the sultan
on the expedition.

While I was thus conversing, the head man of the village suddenly came
to my tent, and informed me that messengers had arrived from the
lieutenant-governor, in order to prevent my proceeding; and upon his
asking me what I intended to do, I told him that I would divide the time
which I should be obliged to wait between this place, Jógodé, and
Klésem, but that, if I should be compelled to wait too long, I should
feel rather inclined to return to Logón. They rejected my proposal, and
requested that I should stay in Mélé, saying that the inhabitants of the
village had promised to supply me with rice and fish, and that I ought
not to stir from here. While I was quietly expostulating with him upon
this treatment, telling him that this was almost impossible, the place
being too badly provided, and that they might at least allow me to
remain half the time in the neighbouring village of Klésem, gradually
more and more people entered my tent, and, suddenly seizing me, put my
feet in irons.

Perhaps the unexpectedness of such an occurrence was rather fortunate;
for if I had in the least divined their purpose, I might have made use
of my arms. But taken by surprise and overpowered as I was, I resigned
myself in patience, and did not speak a word. The people not only
carried away my arms, but also all my luggage; and, what grieved me
most, they even seized my chronometer, compass, and journal. Having then
taken down my tent, they carried me to an open shed, where I was guarded
by two servants of the lieutenant-governor.

After all this trying treatment, I had still to hear a moral lecture
given me by one of these half pagans, who exhorted me to bear my fate
with patience, for all came from God.

Even my servants at first were put in irons; but when they protested
that if they were not set at liberty I should have nobody to serve me,
their fetters were taken off, and they came faithfully to me to soothe
my misfortune. In the evening the slave of the alífa-bá mounted my
horse, and, taking one of my pistols with him, rode off to Más-eñá.

Having remained silently in the place assigned to me till the evening, I
ordered my servants to demand my tent back, and to pitch it in the old
place; and to my great satisfaction my request was granted. Thus I
passed the four following days quietly in my tent, and, although
fettered like a slave, resigned to my fate. Fortunately I had Mungo
Park’s first journey with me; and I could never have enjoyed the account
of his sufferings among the Ludamar (Welád-Ammer) better than I did in
such a situation, and did not fail to derive from his example a great
share of patience.

It was in this situation that, while reflecting on the possibility of
Europeans civilizing these countries, I came to the conclusion that it
would be absolutely necessary, in order to obtain the desired end, to
colonize the most favourable tract of the country inclosed by the Kwára,
the Bénuwé, and the river Kadúna, and thus to spread commerce and
civilization in all directions into the very heart of the continent.
Thus I wrote in my journal: “This is the only means to answer the
desired end; everything else is vain.”

[Sidenote: April 23rd.]

While lying in my tent in the course of the evening, my friend from
Bákadá, Háj Bú-Bakr Sadík, arrived on my horse, and, being seized with
indignation at the sight of my fetters, ordered them to be taken off
without delay. I begged him to forgive me for having regarded myself as
a free man, and not as a slave, not being aware of the real nature of my
situation in this country. He, however, praised my conduct very highly,
saying that I could not have acted otherwise than I did, and promising
that I should now enter the capital without further delay of any kind.

Remaining cool and quiet under the favourable change of my
circumstances, I thanked Providence for having freed me from this
unpleasant situation, regarding it in the light of a useful lesson for
future occasions. All my property was restored to me, even my arms, with
the exception of the pistol which had been taken to the capital.
However, the following day I had still to resign myself to patience, the
chief servant of the lieutenant-governor not having yet arrived, and my
horse, which had made the journey to the capital and back with great
speed, wanting a little rest.

[Sidenote: Sunday, April 25th.]

Early in the morning we entered upon our march once more, in an easterly
direction; and although I had not yet experienced very kind treatment in
this country, I was prepared to endure everything rather than to forego
seeing the capital; but my poor servants were very differently disposed,
for, having no mental interest, they felt the material privations more
heavily. While they viewed with horror our projected journey eastward,
they cast a melancholy look on the opposite bank of the river, which
promised them freedom from privation as well as from vexation.

It was now for the fourth time that I was passing along the banks of the
stream. It was at present at its very lowest (“bá nedónge,” as the
Bagírmi people say), having sunk a foot or two since I first saw it, and
having laid bare a much larger part of the sandbank. People in Europe
have no idea of the situation of a solitary traveller in these regions.
If I had been able to proceed according to my wishes, my road, from the
very first moment when I entered the country, would have lain straight
along the course of this mighty river towards its sources; but a
traveller in these countries is no better than a slave, dependent upon
the caprice of people without intelligence and full of suspicion. All
that I could expect to be able still to accomplish, under present
circumstances, was to obtain distinct information concerning the upper
course of the river; for, ardent as had been my desire to join the
sultan on his expedition, from all that I had seen I could scarcely
expect that the people would allow me to go to any distance.

Our march the first day was rather short, for, having rested almost six
hours, during the heat of the day, in a village called “Káda-bákaláy,”
we went only three miles further, when we encamped in another village
called “Káda-márga,” recently built, where the inhabitants of the
deserted village of the same name, which on our return-journey from the
capital we passed in the forest, had taken refuge. The village had a
neat appearance, there being even a dyeing-place or “búkko alínbe;” it
was also enlivened by several tame ostriches. The well, with a depth of
from ten to twelve fathoms, contained a rich supply of water, but of bad
quality.

The next day we made up for our loss of time, and only stopped for the
night, about a couple of miles beyond Bákadá; for, notwithstanding my
esteem for Bú-Bakr Sadík, I refused to make any stay in, or even to
enter the place where I had been kept back so long a time. The wooded
wilderness had become prepared by the rains to receive its temporary
inhabitants the Shúwa; and the well of Bákadá, for the use of which I
had been obliged to pay so many needles, was left to decay.

[Sidenote: Tuesday, April 27th.]

We set out early in the morning, in order to reach at length the final
object of our journey before the heat of the day. The country was well
cultivated; and the fields of native corn were here also laid out in
ridges, or “derába.” Trees were scattered in all directions, principally
talha and hájilíj. The soil consisted of sand, but was succeeded further
on by clay, forming several large basins, where, later in the rainy
season, extensive ponds are formed. Here the country was enlivened by
fine tamarind-trees, besides a few specimens of the dúm-palm. We then
entered a district rich in herbage, and well adapted for cattle-
breeding. Shúwa and Felláta foreigners were living here (as they
generally do) together on friendly terms, as the similarity of the
manners of these two distinct tribes, notwithstanding their different
origin and totally distinct language, has brought them everywhere into
the closest connection, and has facilitated in a remarkable manner the
spreading of the latter race over so large an extent of Central Africa.
The huts of these cattle-breeders are very different from those of the
native settlers, being far more spacious, in order to admit the cattle,
and having the roofs thatched in a very light and negligent manner, as
they usually change their dwelling-places with the season, and therefore
do not choose to bestow much labour upon them.

As we were proceeding onwards we suddenly obtained a view over a green
open depression clad with the finest verdure, and interspersed with the
ruins of clay houses. This, then, was Más-eñá, the capital. It presented
the same ruined appearance as the rest of the country.

The town was formerly much larger; and the wall had been carried back,
but it was still far too large for the town, and in the utmost state of
decay. Ruined by a most disastrous civil war, and trodden down by its
neighbours, the country of Bagírmi seems to linger till it is destined
either to rise again, or to fall a prey to the first invader.

However, I was not allowed to enter the holy precinct of this ruined
capital without further annoyance; for, being obliged to send a message
to the lieutenant-governor, announcing my arrival, I was made to wait
more than an hour and a half outside the gate, although there was not
the least shade. I was then allowed to make my humble entrance. Only a
few human beings were to be seen; and open pasture-grounds extended to a
considerable distance, principally on the right side towards the south.
We then entered the inhabited quarter; and I was lodged in a clay house
standing in an open courtyard, which was likewise fenced by a low clay
wall. The house contained an airy front room well suited to my taste,
and four small chambers at the back, which were certainly not very airy,
but were useful for stowing away luggage and provisions.

I had scarcely taken possession of my quarters, when numbers of people
came to salute me on the part of the lieutenant-governor; and a short
time afterwards a confidential slave of his made his appearance, to whom
I delivered my presents, consisting of a piece of printed Manchester
cotton sufficient for a tobe, an Egyptian shawl, several kinds of
odoriferous essences, such as “makhbíl,” the fruit of a species of
_tilia_, “lubán” or benzoin, and a considerable quantity of sandal-wood,
which is greatly esteemed in the countries of Negroland east of Bórnu.
While delivering these presents, and presenting my humble compliments, I
declared myself unable to pay my respects personally to the lieutenant-
governor, unless he restored my pistol, which was all that was wanting
of the things which had been taken from me at Mélé; and after some
negotiation, it was agreed upon that he should deliver to me the pistol
as soon as I presented myself, without my even saying a word about it.

I therefore went in the afternoon with Bú-Bakr to see him, and found a
rather affable man, a little beyond middle age, simply dressed in a
dark-blue tobe, which had lost a good deal of its former lustre. Having
saluted him, I explained to him how improper treatment and want of
sufficient food had induced me to retrace my steps, after having
convinced myself that I was not welcome in the country; for I assured
him that it was our utmost desire to be friends with all the princes of
the earth, and to make them acquainted with us, and that, although I had
known that the ruler of the country himself was absent, I had not
hesitated in paying them a visit, as I had been given to understand that
it would be possible to join him in the expedition. He excused his
countrymen on the ground that they, not being acquainted with our
character, had treated me as they would have done a person belonging to
their own tribe who had transgressed the rules of the country. He then
restored me my pistol before all the people, and desired me to await
patiently the arrival of the sultan.

The ruler of the country, together with the principal men, being absent,
the place presented at that time a more quiet or rather dull appearance
than it does in general; and when I took my first walk through the town,
I was struck with the aspect of solitude which presented itself to the
eye on all sides. Fortunately there was one man in the town whose
society and conversation were a relief to my mind.

I was reclining in the afternoon upon my simple couch, occupied in
reading, when I received a visit from three persons. One of them was a
man of apparently Negro origin, showing, by his wrinkled countenance, a
career of trouble and misfortune, but having otherwise nothing very
remarkable about him. It was Háj Áhmed, of Bámbara origin, and formerly
an inhabitant of Tawát, but who after a number of vicissitudes, having
first been employed in the gold diggings of Bambúk, and afterwards been
engaged on small trading expeditions from Tawát to Timbúktu (where he
had been twice robbed by the Tawárek), and from the same place to Ágades
and Kanó, had at last settled at Medína. From thence he had accompanied
the warlike expedition of Íbrahím Bashá, had fought in the battles of
ʿAkká and Deraije, and had been sent on several journeys as far as Basra
and Baghdád, and at present being employed as servant at the great
Mosque, had been dispatched to this country in order to obtain from its
sultan a present of eunuchs for the temple of Medína. The second was a
venerable-looking man, with a fine countenance, and a bushy half-silvery
beard. This man was the religious chief of Bídderí, a place of which I
shall speak hereafter.

The third visitor was Fáki Sámbo, a very tall and slender Púllo, with a
scanty beard, and an expressive countenance, except that it lacked the
most important feature which enlivens the human face, he being totally
blind. At that time, however, I did not know him, although, when I heard
him convey a considerable degree of knowledge in a lively and impressive
manner, I almost suspected he might be the man of whom I had heard so
much. I was puzzled, however, at his first question, which was, whether
the Christians did not belong to the Bení Ísrʿayíl; that is to say, to
the Jews.

This was the first conversation I had with this man, who alone
contributed to make my stay in the place endurable. I could scarcely
have expected to find in this out-of-the-way place a man not only versed
in all the branches of Arabic literature, but who had even read (nay,
possessed a manuscript of) those portions of Aristotle and Plato which
had been translated into, or rather Mohammedanized in Arabic, and who
possessed the most intimate knowledge of the countries which he had
visited. His forefathers, belonging to that tribe of the Fúlbe which is
called Fittobe, had emigrated into the southern parts of Wádáy, where
they settled in the village of Bárek-alla. When he was a young man, his
father, who himself possessed a good deal of learning, and who had
written a work on Háusa, had sent him to Egypt, where he had studied
many years in the mosque of El Ázhar. It had then been his intention to
go to the town of Zebíd in Yemen, which is famous amongst the Arabs on
account of the science of logarithms, or el hesáb; but when he had
reached Gunfúda, the war which was raging between the Turks and the
Wahábíye had thwarted his projects, and he had returned to Dár Fúr,
where he had settled down some time, and had accompanied a memorable
expedition to the south-west as far as the borders of a large river, of
which I shall have another occasion to speak. Having then returned to
Wádáy, he had played a considerable part as courtier in that country,
especially during the reign of ʿAbd el ʿAzíz, till the present king,
Mohammed e’ Sheríf, on account of his intimate relation with the prince
just mentioned, had driven him from his court and banished him from the
country.

After having once made the acquaintance of this man, I used to visit him
daily; and he was always delighted to see, or rather to hear me, for he
had nobody with whom he could talk about the splendour and achievements
of the Khalifat, from Baghdád to Ándalos (Spain)—particularly of the
latter country, with the history of whose towns, kings, and literary men
he was intimately acquainted. He listened with delight when I once
mentioned the astrolabe or sextant; and he informed me with pride that
his father had been in possession of such an instrument, but that for
the last twenty years he had not met a single person who knew what sort
of thing an astrolabe was.

He was a very enlightened man, and in his inmost soul a Wahábi; and he
gave me the same name, on account of my principles. I shall never forget
the hours I passed in cheerful and instructive conversation with this
man; for the more unexpected the gratification was, the greater,
naturally, was the impression which it made upon me. Unluckily he died
about a year after I left the country. In general it was I who called
upon him, when he used to treat me with a very good cold rice pudding,
and with dates from Kánem, which were rather of an inferior description;
but when he came to me, I used to regale him with a cup of coffee, which
was a great treat to him, carrying him back to more civilized regions,
and he never omitted to press the cup to each of his temples. The only
drawback to my intercourse with this man was, that he was as anxious to
obtain information from me with regard to the countries of the
Christians, and those parts of the world with which he was less
acquainted, as I was to be instructed by him; besides that, he had a
great deal of business, being occupied with the Sheríyʿa or Mohammedan
law. He had a singular predilection for emetics; and he begged me so
urgently to favour him with this treat, that in the course of a few
weeks I gave him more than half a dozen for himself, besides those I was
obliged to supply to his family. He suffered from bilious affections,
and thought that emetics were the best remedies in the world.

Besides this man and Háj Áhmed, the man with whom I had most frequent
intercourse during my stay in this country was Slímán, a travelling Arab
sheríf, as he called himself, but in reality a Felláh, a native of
Egypt, at present settled in Mekka, who had roved about a great deal,
was very polite in his manners, and, although not a very learned man,
possessed a certain degree of general information, especially with
regard to the countries of Wádáy and Dár Fúr (where he had made a longer
stay), and, having been assisted on his journey to Constantinople by Mr.
Brand, Her Majesty’s consul at Smyrna, had a certain degree of
attachment to Europeans.

But the greatest amount of information which I obtained, principally
with regard to the country of Wádáy, proceeded from a young native of
that country of the name of Íbrahím (the fáki Íbrahím), of the tribe of
the Ábú-Shárib, with whom I passed several hours every day very
pleasantly and usefully, and who attached himself so much to my person
that I would freely have taken him with me to Sókoto, where he wanted to
go in order to improve his learning under the tuition of the Fúlbe.

My relations with the lieutenant-governor were rather cool; and after he
had given me a first treat, he left me for some days without any sign of
hospitality, except that he once sent me a quantity of the fruit of the
bíto tree or hájilíj, which I returned. He was a man without much
intelligence, and had no idea of the scientific researches of a
European.

Having but little exercise, I became very ill towards the end of this
month, so that I thought it prudent to abstain entirely from food for
five days, living exclusively upon an infusion of the fruit of the
tamarind-tree and onions seasoned with some honey and a strong dose of
black pepper,—a sort of drink which must appear abominable to the
European, but which is a delightful treat to the feverish traveller in
those hot regions. Convinced that my stay in this place, if I were not
allowed to travel about, would be too trying for my constitution, I
requested the lieutenant-governor to allow me to retrace my steps
westward; but he would not consent, upon any condition whatever, that I
should stir from the place.

This unfavourable disposition towards me assumed by degrees a more
serious character, as, being unable to understand my pursuits, he could
not but become suspicious of what I was doing. On the 21st of June when
I was quietly sitting in my house, one of his servants, Agíd Músa, who
was well disposed towards me, and who used to call occasionally,
suddenly made his appearance with a very serious countenance, and after
some hesitation, and a few introductory remarks, delivered a message
from the governor to the following effect. He wanted to know from me
whether it was true (as was rumoured in the town, and as the people had
told him) that, as soon as a thunderstorm was gathering, and when the
clouds appeared in the sky, I went out of my house and made the clouds
withdraw; for they had assured him that they had repeatedly noticed
that, as soon as I looked at the clouds with a certain air of command,
they passed by without bringing a single drop of rain.

However serious the countenance of the messenger was, the purport of his
message was so absurdly ridiculous that I could not help breaking out
into a loud laugh, highly amused at the really pagan character of these
_soi-disant_ Mohammedans; but my friend begged me to regard the matter
in a more serious light, and to take care what sort of answer I sent to
his master. I then begged him to tell the governor that no man either by
charm or by prayer was able either to prevent or to cause rain, but that
God sent rain wherever and whenever it pleased him. I added, however,
that if he believed my presence in the country was causing mischief, he
might allow me to go, that I did not desire anything better than that,
and should then pray night and day for rain, but that at present I
myself could not wish for much rain, as I was afraid lest it should cut
off my retreat, by swelling the river to too great a height.

The messenger departed with my answer, and returned after a while with
the _ultimatum_ of the governor, to the effect that it was his own
opinion that no human being was able to prevent rain, but that all of us
were servants of the Almighty, and that as they were praying for rain, I
myself should add my prayer to theirs; I should then be allowed, at the
proper time, to depart from them in safety, but that if I was ill-
disposed towards them he likewise would do me evil, informing me at the
same time that, for a similar reason, they had once killed two great
religious chiefs from Bídderí.

Such was the character of the people with whom I had to deal, although
they regarded themselves as enlightened Mohammedans. In order to show
his good disposition, or most probably rather in order to see whether
his good treatment of me would have any effect upon the amount of rain
(as he seemed to take me for a “king of the high regions”), he sent me
in the evening a dish of an excellent pudding, with plenty of butter,
and a small pot of medíde, or gruel seasoned with the fruit of the dúm-
palm, and even promised me corn for my horse; but as I did not send him
rain in return, as he seemed to have expected, his hospitality did not
extend further.

It had been my custom, when a thunderstorm was gathering, to look out,
in order to see from what quarter it was proceeding, which is a question
of great interest in these regions; but the absurd superstition of these
people so alarmed me, that I scarcely dared to do so again. With regard
to the superstition of the natives I must here mention a case which
happened to my friend Sámbo. One day while I was engaged in earnest talk
with him respecting the many sects of Islám, our conversation was
suddenly interrupted by one of the daughters of the sultan entering
abruptly, and accusing my friend, in the most offensive terms, of having
abstracted from her, by his witchcraft, one of her slaves. But it was
rather astonishing that a man with so vast an amount of learning was
allowed to live at all, in the midst of such barbarians as these,
without being continually suspected of sorcery and witchcraft. I shall
not forget the day when I went to call on my friend, and found the
unfortunate blind old man, sitting in his courtyard, in the midst of a
heap of manuscripts which he could then only enjoy by touching them with
his hands. Involuntarily I was reminded of a saying of Jackson’s, that
the time would come when the texts of the classics would be emendated
from manuscripts brought from the interior of Negroland.[42] From the
very beginning, when I became aware of the character of these people, I
had taken the greatest precautions; and hearing that the privilege of
using a carpet was restricted to certain officers, I had stowed my old
carpet away, although my couch, being on the bare ground, was not very
soft.

The market, or “kaskú,”[43] occupied a great deal of my time and of my
thoughts during my monotonous stay in this place, not so much on account
of its importance as of my own poverty, as I was compelled to become a
retail dealer on the smallest scale; for, hardly possessing anything
except a small quantity of needles, I was obliged to send one of my
servants daily to the market, in order to endeavour, by means of that
very trifling article of European industry, to obtain the currency of
the country. The currency of Bagírmi consists in strips of cotton, or
fárda, like those which I have described on my journey to Ádamáwa—of
very irregular measures, longer or shorter, in general of two “drʿa”
length, and a hand in width—but of very different quality. Larger
articles are bought and sold with shirts, “khalag (_pl._ kholgán”), as
they are called by the Arabs, “bol,” as they are called by the natives,
the value of which, according to their size and quality, varies from 70
to 150 fárda. I obtained a fárda for one large English darning-needle,
or for four common German needles; but afterwards I doubled the price.
Besides these I had very little left, with the exception of a few
looking-glasses of that round kind which are sold in Lyons for one _sou_
each, and which I sold here for the high price of one shirt or “khalag,”
while a better sort of looking-glass, bought in London for eightpence,
brought four khalag or kholgán, which are worth about a dollar. As for
shells, called here “kemé-kemé,” they have no currency in the market,
but form a merchandise by themselves, as an article of export into the
pagan countries—at least those of larger size, which are in great
request with the inhabitants of those countries as well as with the
Welád Ráshid, it being said that 2,000 will fetch a young slave of the
kind called “khomási,” and 3,000 a “sedási;” for those simple people not
only wear these shells as ornaments, especially the women, who are said
to cover their hinder parts with them, but they make also caps of them,
with which they adorn the heads of their deceased relations, while the
Welád Ráshid adorn principally the heads of their camels and horses with
the favourite kemé-kemé, or “kémti,” as they are called in Wádáy.

Formerly there had been a market held only every Thursday; but a short
time previous to my arrival the people had found it advantageous to have
a market every day, so that there was a daily market from eight in the
morning till eleven in the forenoon, and from three in the afternoon
till sunset. Of course it was not very well supplied, and was confined
to the mere necessaries of life, the greatest luxury it contained
consisting of onions, an article which is not to be procured in every
part of Central Africa. At first they were very cheap, eight being sold
for a fárda; but with the approach of the rainy season they increased in
price, and I thought it prudent to lay in a supply, as I found this
article extremely conducive to my health. And I would advise every
traveller in these regions to be always provided with this vegetable;
for they may be either used for seasoning food, or cut in slices and
mixed with tamarinds, making, as I have stated, a cool and refreshing
drink. But the black natives, as I have already mentioned on another
occasion, do not in general make use of onions for seasoning their food,
their cultivation having been introduced into the country by the Arabs
from the north, together with wheat. But the native Arabs, or Shíwa, and
the Arabs from the coast, or Wáselí, use this vegetable to a great
extent, as well for seasoning their food as for medicine, especially in
case of fever, small-pox, and obstruction of urine, from which latter
inconvenience they suffer very much, in consequence of their marching
during the heat of the day.

Besides the articles above-mentioned, the commodity most plentiful in
the market was grain, especially Guinea grain or _Pennisetum
typhoïdeum_, the dealers in which had a special place assigned to them
in the northern part of the market, under a fine tamarind-tree, or
“más,”—the oldest part of the town,—which is even said to have given
origin to the name Más-eñá, as I shall have occasion to describe further
on. Besides beans (“mónjo”), and ground-nuts, called here “wúli” or
“búli,” salt too (“kása”), owing to the presence of the Jelába from
Wádáy, some of whom I had met on my road, was very plentiful; but it was
only sold in very small portions. The same people also sold natron
(“ngíllu”), which is brought by the Tebu from the border of the desert.
Milk (“sí”) and butter (“búgu”) were dear, but sour milk (“sí chále”) in
abundance—it is principally brought into the town by the daughters of
the Bení Hassan. Honey (“téji”), which in many countries is so
plentiful, is scarcely to be got at all. There were always a few head of
sheep and cattle, and sometimes a few fowls were to be seen;
occasionally also a horse of indifferent description made its
appearance. Cotton (“ñyíre”) was rather scarce; and I did not see any
indigo, “alíni.” Red pepper (“shíta”) formed a peculiar article of
commerce, which was retailed in small parcels by the Bórnu traders.

The most important and almost only article of European produce (“ngásan
Zaila”) consisted of beads, called “múnjo,” especially the small red
ones, which are sold here in great quantities, and exported to the pagan
countries. I also sold a few of the large species, called “nejúm,” of
which the Shúwa are very fond. Calico, called here “shóter,” is a great
rarity, and rather sold privately to the great men of the country. Kanó
manufactures, called here “kálkobángri” or “ngásan degó,” form a
prominent feature in the statistics of this market, especially túrkedí
(“bolné”), while the Kanó and Nyffi tobes, called “bol godáni,” can only
with difficulty compete with the native manufacture, the Bórnu people,
or rather the Mákarí or Kótokó, having introduced into the country the
art of dyeing. No slaves (“béli”) were brought into the market, all
being sold in the houses, a circumstance which seemed to indicate a
certain feeling of decency; but at a later period this article was by no
means wanting in the market.

Ivory is not brought into the market, but the little which is sold is
disposed of in the houses; but sometimes the Arabs who visit this
country do a very profitable business in this article. The price of
horses in general is estimated by slaves; and the value of the latter is
very low in this country, as may be inferred from what I have said above
respecting the small sum paid for them in the countries towards the
south: but slaves exported from here are not esteemed, as they are said
to be more subject to disease than those from other countries, and
generally die in a very short time. Female slaves certainly, natives of
the country of Bagírmi, are highly esteemed; but as almost all the
inhabitants of the country, at least outwardly, profess Islám, very few
are at present sold into slavery, while formerly they were scattered all
over the north of Africa, in consequence of the great slave-hunting
expeditions of the Bashá of Fezzán. The Shúwa or Shíwa generally effect
their purchases with cows.

Although my means when I undertook this journey were extremely small,
nevertheless I had not thought it impossible that I might succeed in
penetrating into Wádáy, or even in reaching the lands of the Nile; and I
often indulged in the pleasure of counting over my small stock of goods,
and conceived the idea how, by giving away everything I possessed, I
might accomplish such an enterprise; but I soon found that I was
compelled to give up all such plans, and although I think that a
traveller with sufficient means, and a great deal of patience and
endurance, might succeed in entering Wádáy from this side, I am sure
that the ruler of that country would certainly keep him back for a whole
year. I therefore only aspired at visiting some places in the
neighbourhood; and I was particularly anxious to obtain a sight of that
small branch of the river which, having separated from the principal
trunk near the town of Miltú, approaches to within about nine miles of
the capital. But the lieutenant-governor would not allow me to leave the
place, neither would he suffer me to visit Ábú-Gher, which is situated
at about the same distance in a N.N.W. direction, and where a
considerable market is held every Saturday, although I told him that it
was essential for me to go, in order to procure there my necessary
supplies; and I was therefore obliged to content myself with sending my
servants.

They found the market of Ábú-Gher of about the same importance as the
little market or durríya in Kúkawa, with this exception, that cattle
were more numerous in Ábú-Gher; and they counted about a hundred head of
large beasts, and about the same number of sheep. There was a great deal
of sorghum and cotton, but little Guinea corn or millet. Besides tobes,
hoes for field-labour, cowries, and natron from the Bahr el Ghazál form
the principal commodities. As a sort of curiosity, my servants mentioned
a kind of bread or tiggra made of the fruit of the hájilíj or _Balanites
Ægyptiaca_ (the “bíto” of the Kanúri), and called “sírne.” As a specimen
of the great diversity of individual manners which prevails in these
regions, I will here mention that the fárda in Ábú-Gher, which is the
standard currency of the market, is different from that used in Más-eñá,
measuring three drʿa in length and one hand in width. The village of
Ábú-Gher consists of two separate groups divided by a vale or
depression, where the market is held, and containing a considerable
proportion of Fúlbe or Felláta inhabitants, who were the founders of the
village.

Finding that I was not allowed to stir from the place where I was, I
resigned myself in patience, and tried to take occasionally a little
exercise round the town, when roving about, sometimes on foot, sometimes
on horseback, I made by degrees a general survey of the town, which I
have incorporated into the accompanying ground-plan, which, though very
imperfect, and not pretending in any way to absolute accuracy, will
nevertheless serve to give the reader a fair idea of the place.


[Footnote 41: I will here remark that I think this form, Felláta, which
is usual in Bórnu and the neighbouring countries, is in its origin a
plural, though it is continually employed also for the singular.]

[Footnote 42: Jackson’s Account of Morocco, p. 100.]

[Footnote 43: We have here an evident proof that a certain degree of
civilization spread from Bórnu over the countries to the east. Kaskú is
a slight variation of the Kanúri word “kásukú.”]




                                CHAP. L.

  DESCRIPTION OF THE TOWN. — ARRIVAL OF THE SULTAN. — FINAL DEPARTURE.


The town of Más-eñá extends over a considerable area, the circumference
of which measures about seven miles; but only about half of this area is
inhabited, the principal quarter being formed in the midst of the town
on the north and west sides of the palace of the sultan, while a few
detached quarters and isolated yards lie straggling about as outposts.
The most characteristic feature of the place consists in a deep trough-
like depression or bottom, stretching out to a great length, and
intersecting the town from east to west, in the same manner as the town
of Kanó is intersected by the Jákara; for this hollow of the capital of
Bagírmi, after the rainy season, is filled with water, and on this
account is called “bedá” by the natives, and “el bahr” by the Arabs,
while during part of the dry season it is clothed with the richest
verdure. It is remarkable that not only in this respect the town of Más-
eñá resembles that of Kanó, but, like the great market-place of Háusa,
its surface is also broken by many other hollows, which contain the
wells, and during the rainy season are changed into deep ponds, which,
by accumulating all the refuse of the town, cause a great deal of
insalubrity; but in general the soil, consisting of sand, dries very
quickly after a fall of rain.

[Illustration: _To face p._ 388. _of Vol. III._

PLAN OF THE TOWN OF MÁS-EÑA.

1. The house where I lodged, represented here also on a larger scale.

2. The palace of the sultan, surrounded by a strong wall 18 feet high,
and 10 feet thick, built of baked bricks, but at present in decay.

_a._ Public hall of audience.

_b._ Hut of kadamánge.

_c._ Entrance-hall, or hut used as a parlour.

_d._ Court-yard in which I had an audience with the king, while
he himself was in room _e_.

3. House of the fácha.

4. Mosque.

5. Open square in front of the palace, planted with trees.

6. House of zérma.

7. House of the fáki Sámbo.

8. House of the chiróma.

9. House of the máina Beládemí.

10. Market-place.

11. Tomb of ʿAlí Fenjár, the great chief of Miltú, who two years
previous to my visit to the place died here at an advanced age and
much respected. The tomb is well shaded by a kúrna-tree.

12. A large deep hollow with wells, but in the rainy season full of
water.

13. A seat or diván of clay—“dágalí” in Kanúri, “teláng” in tar
Bágrimma.

14. Huts for common strangers and pilgrims.

15. Hut of Fáki Íbrahím and his companion.

16. House of female patient.

17. Kitchen-gardens.]

The principal quarter of the town lies on the south side of the great
hollow or bedá; but even this very central quarter is far from being
densely inhabited, and was less so during the first month of my
residence, owing to the absence of the sultan. The central point of this
quarter, at least in regard to its importance, if not to its position,
is the palace of the sultan, the whole arrangement of which is in
general similar to the residences of the chiefs in other towns,
consisting of irregular clusters of clay buildings and huts. But there
is a remarkable feature in this palace, which distinguishes it in a very
conspicuous manner from all other buildings of the kind in these
countries. This difference consists in the wall which surrounds the
whole building being built, not of sun-dried, but of baked bricks. I
have had an opportunity of describing, on my journey from Kanó to
Kúkawa, the ruins of the town of Ghámbarú, which is built of the same
material; and I shall further on describe those of Bírni or Ghasréggomo,
the old capital of Bórnu, constructed in the same manner. But at present
the traveller looks in vain for such solid buildings in any of the towns
of Negroland; and I was therefore not a little surprised at finding it
here, in a place where one might least expect to see it.[44]

It was not, however, a building of recent date, but built at least
fifty, or perhaps a hundred years ago, or probably more, and was at
present in a considerable state of decay. It forms a quadrangle of a
somewhat oblong shape, the front looking towards the N.W., and measures
from 1500 to 1600 yards in circumference. It must once have been a very
strong building, the walls measuring about ten feet at the base, and
from fifteen to twenty feet in height, and the entrance-gate being
formed by thick wooden planks bound with iron. Upon entering, we first
got into an open courtyard, in the eastern part of which there was a
large oblong building or hall built of clay, which formed the public
place of audience. Adjoining this there was a hut, wherein the
kadamánge, or zérma—for he had lately risen in the service—who had been
installed as lieutenant-governor, had his official residence, while
further westward another hut formed the entrance-hall into the inner or
private apartments of the sultan, which I shall notice on the occasion
of my audience with the sovereign.

The whole south-eastern part of the palace, being inclosed by a separate
wall, is entirely devoted to the female portion of the royal household,
and is full of huts, the number of which, of course, I am not able to
tell, having had no access to this sacred and most secluded part of the
residence. According to report, at least, the sultan is said to have
from 300 to 400 wives. The huts are of various sizes and descriptions,
in conformity with the character of the tenant of each. In front of the
palace a spacious area or square is laid out, ornamented with six
karáge-trees, besides a fine tamarind-tree which grows a little on one
side of the entrance to the palace. Adjacent to the royal residence, on
the west side, is the large house of the fácha, or commander-in-chief,
and towards the east a mosque, of small dimensions, with a minaret at
the north-west corner. The other sides are occupied by the residences of
some of the principal courtiers, such as the mánja, the zérma, and the
bárma. The principal street of the town joins this area in the north-
west corner; and along it lie the dwellings of some of the other
principal men. At the spot where this road passes by the north side of
the deep hollow or concavity above described (12), it is crossed by
another principal street, which, in a straight line, proceeds from the
gate leading to Ábú-Gher, and intersects the market-place.

My own residence was situated at the south-western angle of the
inhabited quarter; and while it had the advantage of being in an open
and airy situation, it had also the disadvantage of being visible from
almost every part of the town, so that I could not step out of my room
without being seen by all the people around.

Dilapidated as was the appearance of the whole town, it had a rather
varied aspect, as all the open grounds were enlivened with fresh
pasture; but there is no appearance of industry, and the whole has the
character of a mere artificial residence of the people immediately
connected with the court. The market-place is rather small, and not
provided with a single stall, the people being obliged to protect
themselves as well as they can, by forming a new temporary shed every
market-day. The most interesting aspect is afforded by the bedá, or
bahr, which is bordered on the south-west side by a few picturesque
groups of dúm-palms and other trees of fine foliage, while at the
western end, near the market-place, there is a large extent of kitchen-
gardens, as well as near the south-eastern extremity. In consequence of
the peculiar nature of the bedá, the direct communication between the
northern and southern quarters, which during the dry season is kept up
by a good path, seems to be occasionally interrupted during the rains.

The construction of the houses in general is good, and the thatchwork of
the roofs formed with great care, and even with neatness; but the clay
is of rather a bad description for building, and the clay houses afford
so little security during the rainy season, that most people prefer
residing during that part of the year in the huts of reeds and straw:
and I myself had sufficient opportunity of becoming acquainted with the
frail character of these structures. There are, however, some pretty-
looking houses on the road to Ábú-Gher.

The walls of the town, in most places, are in a state of great decay, so
that the gates in reality have lost all importance; nevertheless there
are still nine gates, or rather openings, in use. Most of them lie on
the south side, while there is not a single gate towards the north, this
quarter of the town being so deserted that it is even overgrown with
dense underwood. All around the place, as well on the south side, where
a large pond is formed in the rainy season, as on the other sides, there
are villages inhabited by Shúwa or Shíwa (native Arabs), principally of
the tribe of the Bení Hassan, who supply the town with milk and butter.

Besides studying, roving about, paying now an official visit to the
lieutenant-governor, then a more interesting private one to my friend
Sámbo, much of my time was also occupied with giving medicine to the
people,—especially during the early period of my stay; for the small
stock of medicines which I brought with me was soon exhausted. But even
if I had possessed a much larger supply, I might perhaps have been
tempted to withhold occasionally the little aid I could afford, on
account of the inhospitable treatment which I received; and in the
beginning I was greatly pestered by the lieutenant, who sent me to some
decrepit old women, who had broken their limbs and in every respect were
quite fit for the grave. I then protested officially against being sent
in future to patients at least of the other sex, beyond a certain age.

But sometimes the patients proved rather interesting, particularly the
females; and I was greatly amused one morning when a handsome and well-
grown young person arrived with a servant of the lieutenant-governor,
and entreated me to call and see her mother, who was suffering from a
sore in her right ear. Thinking that her house was not far off, I
followed her on foot, but had to traverse the whole town, as she was
living near the gate leading to Ábú-Gher; and it caused some merriment
to my friends to see me strutting along with this young lady. But
afterwards, when I visited my patient, I used to mount my horse; and the
daughter was always greatly delighted when I came, and frequently put
some very pertinent questions to me, as to how I was going on with my
household, as I was staying quite alone. She was a very handsome person,
and would even have been regarded so in Europe, with the exception of
her skin, the glossy black of which I thought very becoming at the time,
and almost essential to female beauty.

The princesses also, or the daughters of the absent king, who in this
country too bear the title of “mairam” or “méram,” called upon me
occasionally, under the pretext of wanting some medicines. Amongst
others, there came one day a buxom young maiden, of very graceful but
rather coquettish demeanour, accompanied by an elder sister, of graver
manners and fuller proportions, and complained to me that she was
suffering from a sore in her eyes, begging me to see what it was; but
when, upon approaching her very gravely, and inspecting her eyes rather
attentively without being able to discover the least defect, I told her
that all was right, and that her eyes were sound and beautiful, she
burst out into a roar of laughter, and repeated, in a coquettish and
flippant manner, “beautiful eyes, beautiful eyes.”

There is a great difference between the Kanúri and Bagírmi females, the
advantage being entirely with the latter, who certainly rank among the
finest women in Negroland, and may well compete with the Fúlbe or
Felláta; for if they are excelled by them in slenderness of form and
lightness of colour, they far surpass them in their majestic growth and
their symmetrical and finely-shaped limbs, while the lustre and
blackness of their eyes are celebrated all over Negroland. Of their
domestic virtues, however, I cannot speak, as I had not sufficient
opportunity to enable me to give an opinion upon so difficult a
question. I will only say that on this subject I have heard much to
their disadvantage; and I must own that I think it was not all slander.
Divorce is very frequent among them as inclination changes. Indeed I
think that the Bagírmi people are more given to intrigues than their
neighbours; and among the young men sanguinary encounters in love
affairs are of frequent occurrence. The son of the lieutenant-governor
himself was at that time in prison on account of a severe wound which he
had inflicted upon one of his rivals. In this respect the Bágrimma very
nearly approach the character of the people of Wádáy, who are famous on
account of the furious quarrels in which they often become involved in
matters of love.

Occasionally there occurred some petty private affairs of my friends
which caused some little interruption in the uniform course of my life.
Now it was my old friend Bú-Bakr, from Bákadá, who complained of his
wife, who resided here in Más-eñá, and who did not keep his house as
well and economically as he desired, and, when he occasionally came into
the town, did not treat him so kindly as he thought she ought to do, so
that he came to the serious conclusion of divorcing her. Another time my
restless friend was in pursuit of a runaway slave, who had tried to
escape beyond the Báchikám.

Then it was my friend Háj Áhmed, who complained to me of his
disappointment, and how he had been overreached by his enemies and
rivals. He was certainly in an awkward position in this country; and I
could never get quite at the bottom of his story. For, as I have
mentioned above, he had been sent from Medína in order to obtain from
the king of Bagírmi a present of eunuchs; but now, after he had been
residing here about a year and a half, having been continually delayed
by the ruler of the country, another messenger had arrived, who, it
seemed, was to reap the fruits of my friend’s labours. Háj Áhmed had
accompanied the sultan on his expedition the previous year; but he had
almost lost his life, having received a severe wound in the head, from
one of those iron hand-bills which form the chief weapon of the pagan
tribes towards the south. He therefore thought it better this time to
remain behind; but he made no end of complaints, on account of the
miserly and inhospitable treatment of the lieutenant-governor. The
situation of my friend became the more lamentable when his female slave,
the only one he had at the time, managed to make her escape, having
thrown down her mistress, who had gone outside the town with her.

Scenes like these happened daily; and I had frequent opportunities of
demonstrating to my friends, how the vigour and strength of the
Christian empires of Europe were principally based upon their capability
of continually renewing their vitality from free native elements, and by
totally abstaining from slavery. And I further demonstrated to them that
slavery had been the principal cause of the speedy overthrow of all the
Mohammedan dynasties and empires that had ever flourished.

Another time it was my friend Slímán, who, besides topics of a more
serious nature, used to entertain me with stories from his domestic
life; for, being of a roving disposition, ever changing, and of rather
desultory habits, he was accustomed to contract temporary matches for a
month, which of course gave him a great insight into the habits of the
females of the countries which he traversed on his peregrinations.

At another time some natural phenomena gave me some occupation. Amongst
the nuisances with which the country of Bagírmi abounds, the large black
ant called “kingíbbu” and “kangífu” in Kanúri, “kíssino” in tar Bágrimma
(the language of Bagírmi)—_termes mordax_,—is one of the most
troublesome; and besides some smaller skirmishes with this insect, I had
to sustain, one day, a very desperate encounter with a numerous host of
these voracious little creatures, that were attacking my residence with
a stubborn pertinacity which would have been extremely amusing if it had
not too intimately affected my whole existence. In a thick uninterrupted
line, about an inch broad, they one morning suddenly came marching over
the wall of my court-yard, and entering the hall which formed my
residence by day and night, they made straight for my store-room; but
unfortunately, my couch being in their way, they attacked my own person
most fiercely, and soon obliged me to decamp. We then fell upon them,
killing those that were straggling about and foraging, and burning the
chief body of the army as it came marching along the path; but fresh
legions came up, and it took us at least two hours before we could
fairly break the lines and put the remainder of the hostile army to
flight.

On this occasion the insects seemed to have been attracted entirely by
the store of corn which I had laid in from Bákadá. In general their
hostile attacks have also a beneficial effect, for, as they invade the
huts of the natives, they destroy all sorts of vermin, mice included.
But while in some respects these black ants may be called the
“scavengers of the houses,” in many parts of Negroland they often become
also very useful by their very greediness in gathering what man wants
entirely for himself; for they lay in such a considerable store of corn,
that I have very often observed the poor natives, not only in these
regions, but even along the shores of the Niger, digging out their
holes, in order to possess themselves of their supplies.

Besides these large black ants, the small red ant, called in Bórnu
“kítta-kítta,” and in Bagírmi “kíssasé,” is found in great numbers, and
becomes often very troublesome by its very smallness, as it gets so
easily into all sorts of dresses without being observed. I was once
greatly amused in witnessing a battle between this small red ant and the
white ant, called “kanám” in Bórnu, and here “nyó” (_termes fatalis_),
when the latter were very soon vanquished by the warriors of the former
species, who, notwithstanding their smaller size, were carrying them off
with great speed and alacrity to their holes; for the white ant is
powerless as soon as it gets out of its subterranean passages, which
impart to them strength, as the earth did to Antæus.

The rains, which at first had set in with considerable violence, had
afterwards almost ceased, so that the herbage on the open uncultivated
grounds in the town became quite withered, and many of the people, who
upon the first appearance of rain had been induced to trust their seeds
to the soil, were sadly disappointed; and I have already had occasion to
relate that the natives, including their chief, attributed this state of
the weather to my malignant influence. However, I was delighted when I
sometimes made a little excursion on horseback in the environs of the
capital, to see that the open country was less dry than the inside of
the town, although even there as yet little cultivation was to be seen.
It seemed very remarkable to me that here, as well as in the other parts
of the country, especially Bákadá, the corn was generally cultivated in
deep furrows and ridges or “derába,” a mode of tillage which I had not
observed in any other country of Negroland through which I had
travelled. The people, however, were very suspicious whenever I mounted
on horseback; and the first time they saw me galloping off, they thought
I was going to make my escape, and were therefore all on the look-out.

All this time the sultan or “bánga” was absent, and the false news which
was repeatedly told of his whereabouts kept up a continual excitement.
When I first arrived in the country, he had gone a considerable distance
towards the south-east, and was besieging a place called Gógomi, which
was strongly fortified by nature, and made a long resistance, so that
the besieging army lost a great many of their best men, and among them
an Arab sheríf who had joined the expedition. But at length the place
was taken, and the courtiers prevailed upon the prince to retrace his
steps homewards, as they were suffering a great deal from famine; so
much so that the greatest part of the army were obliged to live upon the
fruit of the deléb-palm (_Borassus flabelliformis?_), which seems to be
the predominant tree in many of the southern provinces of Bagírmi.

[Sidenote: July 3rd.]

After false reports of the sultan’s approach had been spread repeatedly,
he at length really arrived. Of course, the excitement of the whole
population was very great, almost all the fighting men having been
absent from home for more than six months.

It was about nine o’clock in the morning when the army approached the
south side of the town, displaying a great deal of gorgeous pomp and
barbaric magnificence, although it was not very numerous, being reduced
to the mere number of the inhabitants of the capital, the remainder
having already dispersed in all directions, and returned to their
respective homes. Thus there were not more than from 700 to 800
horsemen, or “malásínda;” but my friend the sheríf Slimán (who,
exasperated at the bad treatment of the lieutenant-governor, had left
the capital to join the expedition, and who, as far as I had an
opportunity of trying him, was not inclined to exaggerate) assured me
that, even on their return, the army mustered at least 2000 horsemen.

At the head of the troop, as having supplied the place of his master
during his absence, in his character of lieutenant-governor, rode the
kadamánge, surrounded by a troop of horsemen. Then followed the bárma,
behind whom was carried a long spear of peculiar make, which in the
history of this country forms a very conspicuous object, being meant
originally to represent an idol, which is said to have been transplanted
from the parent state Kénga Matáya, and evidently bore a great
resemblance to the “féte” of the Marghí and Músgu. Just in front of the
sultan rode the fácha, or commander-in-chief, who is the second person
in the kingdom, similar to the keghámma in the old empire of Bórnu, and
who in former times possessed extraordinary power. The sultan himself
wore a yellow bernús, and was mounted upon a grey charger, the
excellence of which was scarcely to be distinguished, it being dressed
in war-cloth, or líbbedí, of various-coloured stripes, such as I have
described on my expedition to Músgu. Even the head of the sultan himself
was scarcely to be seen, not only on account of the horsemen riding in
front and around him, but more particularly owing to two umbrellas, the
one of green and the other of red colour, which a couple of slaves
carried on each side of him.

Six slaves, their right arm clad in iron, were fanning him with ostrich
feathers attached to long poles; and round about him rode five
chieftains, while on his right were seen the ghelétma and other
principal men of the country. This whole group round the prince formed
such a motley array, that it was impossible to distinguish all the
particular features with accuracy; but, as far as I was able to make out
from the description of the natives, there were about thirty individuals
clad in bernúses, while the others wore nothing but black or blue-
coloured shirts, and had their heads mostly uncovered. Close behind this
group followed the war-camel, upon which was mounted the drummer,
“kodgánga,” who was exerting his skill upon two kettle-drums which were
fastened on each side of the animal; and near him rode three musicians,
two of whom carried a bukí, “kája,” or small horn, and the third a jójo
or “zózo,” a sort of double derabúka.

However grotesque the appearance of the royal cavalcade, that part of
the procession which followed was more characteristic of the barbaric
magnificence, and whole manner of living, of these African courts. It
consisted of a long uniform train of forty-five favourite female slaves,
or concubines, “habbabát,” of the sultan, mounted on horseback, and
dressed from top to toe in black native cloth, each having a slave on
either side. The procession terminated in a train of eleven camels
carrying the luggage. The number of the infantry or “malajá” was also
limited, as most of them had returned to their respective homes. But, on
the other hand, almost all the people of the town had come out to see
the victorious army on their return.

This day, however, the sultan did not enter the capital, but, in
conformity with the sacred custom of the kings of this country on their
return from an expedition, was obliged to encamp among the ruins of the
oldest quarter on the west side of the town; and it was not until Sunday
the 4th day of July, about noon, that he made his solemn entry. This
time, however, the “habbabát” did not form part of the procession,
having entered the town early in the morning; but their absence was
atoned for by the presence of a greater number of horsemen, and behind
the drummer on camel’s back followed an interesting warlike train,
consisting of fifteen fiery chargers, all clad in líbbedí, and better
adapted, it would seem, to the serious game of Mars, than the train of
lovely damsels.

On this occasion, the bánga led in his triumphant procession seven pagan
chiefs, amongst whom that of Gógomi was the most conspicuous person, and
the greatest ornament of the triumph, being not less remarkable for his
tall, stately figure than on account of his having been the ruler of a
considerable pagan state, with a capital in an almost inaccessible
position. He excited the interest of the savage and witty Bagírmi
people, by submitting with a great deal of good humour to his fate,
which was certainly not very enviable, as it is the custom in this
country either to kill or to emasculate these princely prisoners, after
having conducted them for some time through all the court-yards of the
palace, while allowing the wives and female slaves of the sultan to
indulge their capricious and wanton dispositions in all sorts of fun
with them. The horrible custom of castration is perhaps in no country of
Central Negroland practised to such an extent as in Bagírmi.

The booty in slaves did not seem to have been very considerable,
although the prince had been absent from home for six months; and the
whole share of the sultan himself seemed to consist of about four
hundred individuals. The sultan passed slowly through the town, along
the principal road from the western gate, and, proceeding along the
“déndal,” or “bokó,” entered his palace amid the acclamations of the
people and the clapping of hands (the “kabéllo” or “tófaji,” as it is
here called) of the women.

[Illustration: Drawn by J. M. Bernatz, from a Sketch by Dr. Barth.

M. & N. Hanhart, lith. et impt.

MÁS-EÑA.

return of the Sultan from the expedition.July 4th. 1852.]

Although I had not yet paid my compliments to the bánga, he sent two
messengers in the afternoon to bid me welcome. These messengers were the
brother and son of one of the chief men of the country, with the title
or name “Máina Beládemí,” who was a sort of consul of Bórnu, and was
represented to me by all the people as one of the most intelligent men
in the country. However, he had returned in a bad state of health, and,
unfortunately for me, succumbed in a few days.

I informed the messengers of the prince how badly I had been treated,
when they assured me that the sultan did not know anything about it, and
that as soon as he had received the news of my arrival he had forwarded
orders to the lieutenant-governor to provide me with a milch-cow. The
messengers then went away, and soon returned with a sheep, some butter,
and a large supply of kréb, the seed of a sort of grass of which I have
spoken on former occasions.

The next morning I went to pay a visit to Máina, being accompanied by my
old runaway guide Gréma ʿAbdú, who, after having left me to my own fate
in Bákadá had gone to join the sultan in the expedition. However, the
place where the sick man was lying was so dark that, convinced as I was
of the seriousness of his illness, I found a pretext for not giving him
any medicine; and this was very lucky for me, as his death, which took
place a few days afterwards, would certainly have been attributed by
these savage people to my remedies.

The same evening I was informed that an express messenger had come from
Kúkawa with despatches for me, the caravan from Fezzán having at length
arrived. But having been repeatedly disappointed by similar reports, I
did not give myself up to vain expectation, and passed a very tranquil
night.

Thus arrived the 6th of July, one of the most lucky days of my life; for
having been more than a year without any means whatever, and struggling
with my fate, in the endeavour to do as much as possible before I
returned home, I suddenly found myself authorized to carry out the
objects of this expedition on a more extensive scale, and found
sufficient means placed at my disposal for attaining that object. The
messenger, however, managed his business very cleverly; for having two
large parcels of letters for me, one only containing despatches from the
Foreign Office, and the other containing a large amount of private
correspondence, he brought me first the former, which had been very
carefully packed up in Kúkawa, in a long strip of fine cotton (gábagá),
and then sewn in red and yellow leather, without saying a word about the
other parcel; but when I had read at my leisure the despatches which
honoured me with the confidence of Her Britannic Majesty’s government,
and had rewarded his zeal with a new shirt, he went away, and soon
returned with the second parcel, and a packet containing ten túrkedí,
native cotton cloth, from Kanó, which at Mr. Overweg’s request the
vizier of Bórnu had sent me, and three of which I immediately presented
to the messenger and his two companions.

The number of private letters from England, as well as from Germany, was
very considerable; and all of them contained the acknowledgment of what
I had done, the greatest recompense which a traveller in these regions
can ever aspire to. No doubt the responsibility also thus thrown upon me
was very great, and the conclusion at which I had arrived from former
experience, that I should not be able to fulfil the many exaggerated
expectations which were entertained of my future proceedings, was
oppressive; for, in almost all the letters from private individuals,
there was expressed the persuasion that I and my companion should be
able, without any great exertion, and in a short space of time, to cross
the whole of the unknown region of equatorial Africa, and reach the
south-eastern coast,—an undertaking the idea of which certainly I myself
had originated, but which, I had become convinced in the course of my
travels, was utterly impossible, except at the sacrifice of a great
number of years, for which I found the state of my health entirely
insufficient, besides a body of trustworthy and sincerely attached men,
and a considerable supply of means. Moreover I found, to my surprise and
regret, that the sum of 800_l._ placed at my disposal by Lord Palmerston
remained a dead letter, none of the money having been forwarded from
Tripoli,—a sum of about fifteen hundred dollars, which had been
previously sent, being regarded as sufficient.

In this perplexity, produced by nothing but goodwill and a
superabundance of friendly feeling, I was delighted to find that Her
Majesty’s government, and Lord Palmerston in particular[45], held out a
more practicable project by inviting me to endeavour to reach Timbúktu.
To this plan, therefore, I turned my full attention, and in my
imagination dwelt with delight upon the thought of succeeding in the
field of the glorious career of Mungo Park.

For the present, however, I was still in Bagírmi, that is to say, in a
country where, under the veil of Islám, a greater amount of
superstitious ideas prevail than in many of the pagan countries; and I
was revelling in the midst of my literary treasures, which had just
carried me back to the political and scientific domains of Europe, and
all the letters from those distant regions were lying scattered on my
simple couch, when all of a sudden one of my servants came running into
my room, and hastily informed me that a numerous _cortége_ of messengers
had just arrived from court.

I had scarcely time to conceal my treasure under my mat when the
courtiers arrived; and in a few moments my room was filled with black
people and black tobes. The messengers who had brought me the letters,
had likewise been the bearers of a letter addressed by the ruler of
Bórnu to the bánga of Bagírmi, who in a certain respect was tributary to
him, requesting him to allow me to return without delay to his country,
in the company of the messengers. There were some twenty persons,
besides the lieutenant-governor or kadamánge, and the two relations of
Máina; and the manner in which they behaved was so remarkable, that I
was almost afraid lest I should be made prisoner a second time. There
could be no doubt that they had heard of the large correspondence which
I had received. But there had been moreover a great deal of suspicion,
from my first arrival, that I was a Turkish spy. There was even a
pilgrim who, from his scanty stock of geographical and ethnological
knowledge, endeavoured to persuade the people that I was an “Arnaut,”
who, he said, were the only people in the world that wore stockings. Be
this as it may, the courtiers were afraid of coming forward abruptly
with the real object of their visit, and at first pretended they wished
to see the presents that I had brought for the sultan. These consisted
of a caftan of red cloth, of good quality, which I had bought in Tripoli
for nine dollars; a repeater watch, from Nuremberg, bought for ten
dollars, with a twisted silk guard of Tripolitan workmanship; a shawl,
with silk border; an English knife and pair of scissors; cloves, and a
few other things. The watch, of course, created the greatest
astonishment, as it was in good repair at the time, although it was a
pity that we had not been provided with good English manufactures, but
had been left to pick up what articles we might think suitable to our
purpose.

Having also asked to see my telescope, which of course could only
increase their surprise and astonishment, they then, after a great deal
of beckoning and whispering among each other, which made me feel rather
uneasy, requested to see the book in which I wrote down everything I saw
and heard. Without hesitation I took out my memorandum-book and showed
it to them; but I had first to assert its identity. In order to allay
their suspicions, I spontaneously read to them several passages from it
which referred to the geography and ethnography of the country; and I
succeeded in making them laugh and become merry, so that they even added
some names where my lists were deficient. They then begged me to allow
them to take the book to the sultan; and I granted their request without
hesitation.

This frankness of mine completely baffled the intrigues of my enemies,
and allayed the suspicions of the natives; for they felt sure that, if I
had any evil intention in writing down an account of the country, I
should endeavour to do all in my power to conceal what I had written.

Thus they departed, carrying with them my journal; and I was informed
afterwards that the sultan had then sent for all the learned men in the
town, in order to hear their opinion upon my book. And it was perhaps
fortunate for me that the principal among them was my friend Sámbo, who,
being well acquainted with my scientific pursuits, represented my notes
as a very innocent and merely scientific matter. My journal, which no
one was able to read, was consequently returned to me uninjured. In the
afternoon my friend Sámbo called upon me, and related to me the whole
story: he also informed me that the only reason why I had not obtained
an audience with the sultan this day was the above-mentioned letter of
the sheikh of Bórnu, which had in a certain degree offended their
feelings of independence; and in fact I did not obtain an audience until
the 8th.

[Sidenote: July 8th.]

I had just sent word to Sámbo, begging him to hasten my departure, and
had received a visit from some friends of mine, when Gréma ʿAbdú came,
with a servant of the sultan, in order to conduct me into his presence,
whereupon I sent to Sámbo, as well as to my host Bú-Bakr of Bákadá, who
was just then present in the town, inviting them to accompany me to the
prince. On arriving at the palace, I was led into an inner courtyard,
marked _d_ in the ground-plan, where the courtiers were sitting on
either side of a door which led into an inner apartment, the opening or
doorway of which was covered by a “kasár” or, as it is called here,
“párpara,” made of a fine species of reed, as I have mentioned in my
description of the capital of Logón. In front of the door, between the
two lines of the courtiers, I was desired to sit down, together with my
companions.

Being rather puzzled to whom to address myself, as no one was to be seen
who was in any way distinguished from the rest of the people, all the
courtiers being simply dressed in the most uniform style, in black, or
rather blue tobes, and all being bare-headed, I asked aloud, before
beginning my address, whether the sultan ʿAbd el Káder was present; and
an audible voice answered from behind the screen, that he was present.
Being then sure that it was the sultan whom I addressed, although I
should have liked better to have seen him face to face, I paid him my
respects and presented the compliments of Her Britannic Majesty’s
government, which, being one of the chief European powers, was very
desirous of making acquaintance with all the princes of the earth, and
of Negroland also, in order that their subjects, being the first traders
in the world, might extend their commerce in every direction. I told him
that we had friendship and treaties with almost all the nations of the
earth, and that I myself was come in order to make friendship with them;
for although they did not possess many articles of trade to offer,
especially as we abhorred the slave-trade, yet we were able to
appreciate their ivory, and even if they had nothing to trade with, we
wanted to be on good terms with all princes. I told him, moreover, that
we were the best of friends with the sultan of Stambúl, and that all who
were acquainted with us knew very well that we were excellent people,
trustworthy, and full of religious feelings, who had no other aim but
the welfare of mankind, universal intercourse, and peaceable interchange
of goods. I protested that we did not take notes of the countries which
we visited with any bad purpose, but merely in order to be well
acquainted with their government, manners, and customs, and to be fully
aware what articles we might buy from, and what articles we might sell
to them. Thus already “Ráís Khalíl” (Major Denham) had formed, I said,
the design of paying his compliments to his (the sultan’s) father, but
that the hostile relations which prevailed at that time between Bagírmi
and Bórnu had prevented him from executing his plan, when he had reached
Logón, and that, from the same motives, I had now come for no other
purpose than the benefit of his country; but that, nevertheless,
notwithstanding my best intentions, I had been illtreated by his own
people, as they had not been acquainted with my real character. I stated
that it had been my ardent desire to join him on the expedition, in
order to see him in the full exercise of his power, but that his people
had not allowed me to carry out my design.

The whole of my speech, which I made in Arabic, was translated, phrase
for phrase, by my blind friend Sámbo, who occasionally gave me a hint
when he thought I spoke in too strong terms. The parcel containing my
presents was then brought forward, and placed before me, in order that I
might open it myself and explain the use of each article.

While exhibiting the various articles, I did not neglect to make the
watch strike repeatedly, which created the greatest astonishment and
surprise among the spectators, who had never seen or heard anything like
it. I then added, in conclusion, that it was my sincere wish, after
having remained in this country nearly four months, confined and watched
like a prisoner, to return to Kúkawa without any further delay, as I had
a great deal of business there, and at the present moment was entirely
destitute of means; but that if he would guarantee me full security, and
if circumstances should permit, I myself, or my companion, would return
at a later period. Such a security having been promised to me, and the
whole of my speech having been approved of, I went away.

I had scarcely returned to my quarters when the two relations of Máina
Beládemí, Máina Kánadí and Sabún, called upon me, with a very mysterious
countenance, and, after some circumlocution, made known the grave errand
upon which they had been sent, which was to ask whether I had not a
cannon with me; and when I expressed my astonishment at their thinking I
was supplied with such an article, while my whole luggage was carried on
the back of one weak she-camel, they stated that the sultan was at least
anxious to know whether I was not able to manufacture one myself. Having
professed my inability to do so, they went away, but returned the next
day, with many compliments from their master, who, they said, was
anxious that I should accept from his hands a handsome female slave, of
whose charms they gave a very eloquent description, and that it was also
his intention to furnish me with a camel, and provide me with two
horsemen who should escort me back to Bórnu. I told them that, although
sensible of my solitary situation, I could not accept such a thing as a
slave from the sultan, and that I did not care about anything else but
permission to depart, except that I should feel obliged to him if he
would give me a few specimens of their manufactures. They then promised
that the next day I should have another audience with the sultan; and
they kept their word.

This time also I was only able to address the sultan without seeing him,
when I repeated my request that he would allow me to depart without any
further delay, as I had most urgent business in Kúkawa; but I received
the answer that, although the road was open to me, the sultan, as the
powerful ruler of a mighty kingdom, could not allow me to depart empty-
handed. I then, in order to further my request, presented him with a
small telescope, in the use of which I instructed his people. Having
returned to my quarters, I assured my friends, who came to inform me
that it was the sultan’s intention to make me a splendid present in
return for those I had given him, that I did not care for anything
except a speedy return to Bórnu, as there was no prospect that I should
be allowed to penetrate further eastward. But all my protests proved
useless, as these people were too little acquainted with the European
character, and there were too many individuals who, if I myself did not
care about getting anything, were anxious to obtain something for
themselves; I was therefore obliged to abandon myself to patience and
resignation.

Meanwhile I learnt that the sultan had at first entertained the fear
that I might poison him or kill him by a charm, and that he had
repeatedly consulted with his learned men and counsellors how he should
protect himself against my witchcraft. However, on the second day after
my first audience he gave me the satisfaction of sending the inspector
of the river, or the khalífa bá, together with that servant of his (or
kashélla) who had put me into chains at Mélé, in order to beg my pardon
officially, which of course I granted them most cordially, as I was too
well aware that a traveller in a new country cannot expect to be well
treated. As for that Púllo or Felláta individual, resident in Bagírmi,
who (by inspiring the ferry-men at the frontier with fear and suspicion
concerning my entering the country) had been the chief cause of the
injurious treatment which I had experienced, he had been introduced to
me some time previous to the arrival of the sultan, by my cheerful and
good-natured friend Bú-Bakr of Bákadá, when, against my wish, he
persisted in clearing himself by an oath that he had done me no harm.
This he managed rather cleverly, by swearing that he had never
instigated the ferry-men to drown me in the river, a crime which I was
very far from laying to his charge. However, it being my desire to be on
good terms with all the people, I expressed my satisfaction, and
dismissed him. On all these occasions I had full opportunity of
discovering the sincere friendship which Bú-Bakr felt for me, who, being
well aware of the impetuous character of Europeans, did not cease
exhorting me to patience,—“sabr, sabr,” “kánadí, kánadí”—certainly the
most momentous words for any traveller in these regions.

[Sidenote: July 19th.]

I had entertained the hope of being able to get off before the great
feast, or ʿAíd el kebír, here called “Ngúmre ngólo;” but it approached
without any preparation for my departure having been made. A general
custom prevails in this country, that, in order to celebrate this
holiday, all the people of the neighbouring places must come into the
town; and for the chief men of each place this is even a duty, by
neglecting which they would incur a severe penalty. But on the present
occasion the holiday was changed into a day of mourning; for at the dawn
of this very day, Máina Beládemí, who was generally esteemed as the most
excellent man in the country, died, causing a severe loss to the sultan
himself, whose confidence he enjoyed to the fullest extent, having saved
the life of his father when persecuted by his fácha.

According to his own request, the deceased was not buried in or near the
town, but was carried a distance of several miles, to a place called
Bídderí, which, as I shall have another occasion to explain, was the
first seat of Islám in this country, and is still the residence of some
highly respected religious chiefs.

This sad event, though it was not unforeseen, cast a gloom over the
whole festival; and it was not till about noon that the sultan left the
town in order to offer up his prayers in the old ruined quarter towards
the west—for, as I have already had repeated occasion to remark, it is a
sacred custom all over Negroland, that the sovereign of the country on
this day cannot say his prayers inside the town. Having remained in the
old dilapidated quarter, in a tent which had been pitched for the
occasion, till after “dhohor,” he returned into the town; but the day,
which had begun unfavourably, ended also with a bad omen, for in the
evening a storm broke out, of such violence that three apartments inside
the palace came down with a frightful crash, and caused a great uproar
in the whole quarter, as if the town had been taken by an enemy.

Fortunately, I myself had taken sufficient precaution to strengthen the
roof of my house, so that although the floor was entirely swamped, the
roof remained firm; for having observed, some days previously, that the
principal beam which supported the terrace was broken, and having
endeavoured in vain to persuade my host to have it repaired, I ordered
my servants to take away a large pole from a neighbouring courtyard, and
place it as a support for the roof.

Since the return of the sultan, the rainy season had set in with great
violence, and it rained almost daily. The consequence was, that the open
places and the wide uninhabited quarters of the town were again clad in
the freshest verdure, the whole affording a very pleasant aspect, while
the bedá, or bahr, was filling with water. There was now also much more
intercourse in the town, since the people had returned from the
expedition; but I did not stir about so much as before, not only on
account of the wet, but also owing to the effrontery of some of the
slaves: for these people, who are scarcely acquainted with any other
kind of dress than a black shirt, and who altogether occupy a low stage
in civilization, found constant fault with my dress, and, with a few
exceptions, were not on good terms with me.

On account of my poverty, which did not allow me to make many presents
except needles, I had certainly deserved the title of “Needle-prince” or
“Maláríbra,” which they had given me; but besides this the natives had
also given me another nickname, meaning “Father of the three,” which
originated in my wearing generally, besides stockings, a pair of thin
leather slippers, and thick overshoes; while these people usually go
barefoot, and do not even wear sandals, except when they go to a great
distance.

Occasionally, however, I visited the market, which although at present
in many respects better stocked, was not so regularly kept, owing to the
rains, and not so well attended on account of the labours which were
going on in the fields. Even slaves were now brought into the market,
sometimes as many as thirty, each being sold for from 25 to 30 khalágs,
or kholgán (“lebú”, common white shirts), a price equal to from six to
seven Spanish dollars. Cattle too were at present numerous, having not
only been brought in from the pagan tribes, who seem to possess only a
limited supply and of a small breed, but having been taken in far larger
numbers from the Shúwa tribe of the Deghághera, under pretext of their
disobedience. A good fat ox was sold for eight khalágs, or a little less
than two dollars. During my stay in Mélé, I had observed that sheep were
taken from Bagírmi to Bórnu, to be sold there.

In my expectation of being allowed to depart without further delay, I
was sadly disappointed; and day after day passed by without any
preparation for my departure. Besides, I had reason to complain of
inhospitable treatment, for, although I occasionally received a dish
from the sultan, far more frequently I remained without; but I was told,
upon inquiry, that the slaves who were ordered to bring me my food used
to keep it for themselves.

[Sidenote: August 1st.]

It was not till this day that I became convinced that my departure was
close at hand, from the fact that the slaves of my host began to dig up
the soil in my courtyard, in order to sow it with derába or bámiya
(_Hibiscus esculentus_); for if I had been going to stay longer, my
camel would soon have destroyed the seed. But nevertheless several days
elapsed before affairs were finally settled.

[Sidenote: August 6th.]

At length in the afternoon, there came a long _cortége_ from the sultan,
conducted by Zérma or Kadamánge, Sabún, and Kánadí, with a present of
fifty shirts of every kind, and which altogether might be valued at
about thirty dollars. Among the shirts were seven of a better sort, all
of which I sent to England, with the exception of one, which was very
light, consisting of silk and cotton, and which I kept for my own wear;
there were besides, twenty-three white ones of a better kind, and twenty
common market-tobes.

While presenting me with this royal gift, and explaining that the sultan
was sorry that I would not accept from his hands anything more valuable,
either slaves or ivory, Zérma announced to me officially that I might
now start when I thought proper; that hitherto neither the people of
Bagírmi had known me nor I them, but that if I were to return I might
regard Bagírmi as my own country. While expressing my thanks to the
sultan for his present, as well as for the permission to depart, I told
the messenger that, if they wished that either I or my brother
(companion) should ever visit their country again, the sultan ought to
give me a paper, testifying his permission by a special writ, sealed
with his own royal seal. This they promised, and moreover told me that a
man from the sultan should accompany me to the river, in order to
protect me against any further intrigues of the ferrymen, my great
enemies.

The sultan’s munificence, although not great, enabled me to reward my
friends and attendants. I had already divided the túrkedí which I had
received from Kúkawa, among those nearest to me, except two or three,
which I sold in the market in order to buy provisions. And of these
tobes likewise I divided thirty among the people of Zérma, my own
attendants, the fáki Sámbo, Bú-Bakr, and my other friends. The poor Háj
Áhmed, who sustained himself here with great difficulty, was very
grateful for my present, and offered up fervent prayers for my safe
arrival at home, although he would have liked better if I had
accompanied him on his journey eastward through Wádáy and Dár-Fúr.

But, although on my first arrival in this country I had entertained the
hope that it might be possible to accomplish such an undertaking, I had
convinced myself that, not taking into account my entire want of proper
means, it would be imprudent, under the present circumstances, to
attempt such a thing; for the state of affairs in the country of Wádáy
was exceedingly unfavourable at the time, a destructive civil war having
just raged, and matters not being yet settled. My own situation in this
country, moreover, was too uncertain to allow me to have sufficient
supplies sent after me, to embark in such a grand enterprise; and
besides, although I had become fully aware of the great interest which
attaches to the empire of Wádáy, as well owing to the considerable
extent of its political power, as on account of the great variety of
elements of which it is composed, and also on account of its lying on
the water-parting between the basin of the Tsád and that of the Nile, I
felt quite sure that the western part of Negroland, along the middle
course of the so-called Niger, was a far nobler and more fruitful field
for my exertions. However, there was one favourable circumstance for
attempting at that time a journey into Wádáy, as the messengers of the
sultan (or rather of Jérma or Zérma, one of the most powerful officers
in that country, who has the inspection of this province), were at
present here, in order to collect the tribute which Bagírmi, in its
present reduced state, has to pay to its mightier neighbour.

As for my friend the sheríf Slímán, he behaved like a gentleman on this
occasion, refusing my shirts, but begging for a little camphor and a
pair of English scissors.

[Sidenote: August 8th.]

After all the delay was overcome, I at length became aware what had been
the cause of it; for in the afternoon of that day my noble companion
Gréma ʿAbdú, who had left me so unceremoniously before I reached the
capital, and who altogether had been of so little use to me, came to
inform me that all was now ready for our departure, he having received
the five slaves whom he was to take to Kúkawa, partly for his own
benefit, and partly for the benefit of his master Mestréma, who, as I
have stated before, held a situation something like a consul of Bagírmi
in the capital of Bórnu. Indeed there were now unmistakable signs that I
was at length to leave this place, for the following day I was treated
with a large dish of rice and meat, swimming in a rich abundance of
butter, from the sultan, and another dish from my niggardly host the
zérma or kadamánge; and on the 10th of August I really left the capital
of Bagírmi, where I had certainly stayed much longer than I had desired,
as I was not allowed to move freely about in the country, but where,
nevertheless, I was enabled to collect a great deal of valuable
information, of which that part relating to the history and general
condition of the country I shall detail in the following chapter, in
order to inspire the reader with a greater degree of interest in these
little-known regions, while other matter will be given in the Appendix.


[Footnote 44: There is another ruin of baked bricks outside the town, on
the road to Ábú-Gher.]

[Footnote 45: See the Despatch in the Appendix, No. V.]




                               CHAP. LI.

HISTORICAL SURVEY OF BAGÍRMI. — GENERAL CONDITION OF THE COUNTRY AND ITS
                              INHABITANTS.


With regard to the history of the eastern part of Negroland, we are
still worse off than with regard to the western countries, however
scanty the documents relating to the latter regions may be, although I
may hope that, by my labours, a great deal more light has been shed upon
the history of these quarters than was even suspected to exist before.
But while for the kingdom of Songhay, with its celebrated towns Gógó and
Timbúktu, we have now obtained an almost continuous historical account,
by the taríkh of Áhmed Bábá, and while for Bórnu tolerably rich
materials have likewise come to our hands, by means of the chronicles of
that empire, and of the relation of Imám Áhmed, for this eastern part of
Negroland (which comprises the countries of Bagírmi, Wádáy, or Dár Suláy
and Dár-Fúr) no such documents have as yet been found, and, besides the
information to be gathered from the natives, only a few detached and
obscure statements have been handed down to us by the Arab writers of
the middle ages.

Those of the latter which relate in general to Kánem, and its capital
Njímí or Njímiye, I have already referred to in the historical sketch
which I have given of the empire of Bórnu; and the only circumstances
which these writers mention, with regard to the more eastern regions,
are the general names of tribes, such as the Zogháwa and the Bájó[46],
mentioned by Ébn Sʿaíd, and, on his authority, by Abú ’l Fedá, as
related tribes.[47]

The only author who distinctly speaks of these eastern regions is the
Spanish Moor generally known under the name of Leo Africanus; for it is
he who describes in this eastern quarter a large and powerful kingdom
which he calls Gaoga. This name, especially on account of its similarity
to the name of the Songhay capital, as the latter was generally written
by the Arabs, has caused a great deal of confusion, and has given rise
to numerous gratuitous conjectures. But if we compare Leo’s statements,
which are certainly very vague, and written down from memory after a
lapse of several years, but especially what he says about the political
relations of Gaoga with the empire of Bórnu, there cannot be the least
doubt that his Gaoga is identical with what the Bórnu people call the
empire of Bulála. And the reason why he called it Gaoga is obvious; for
the Bulála, who originally formed a branch of the princely family of
Kánem, guided by Jíl (surnamed Shíkomémi, from his mother Shíkoma),
founded their empire in the territory of the tribe of the Kúka[48], who
in former times were very powerful, occupying a great extent of country,
from the eastern part of Bagírmi as far as the interior of Dár-Fúr, the
place Shebína, on the shore of the Bat-há, being then the principal seat
of their power, while their head quarters at present are in the province
of Fittrí.[49] Here, owing to their introducing Islám, and a certain
degree of civilization, together with the Arabic alphabet called
“warash,” the Bulála soon appear to have obtained the sovereign power,
while they founded Yʿawó[50] as their new residence. While viewing the
relations of the countries on the east side of the Tsád in this light,
we get rid of every difficulty which may seem to be implied in the
statements relating to Gaoga; for, when Leo says that the language of
that country was identical with the idiom of Bórnu, he evidently only
speaks of the language then used by the dynasty and the ruling tribe of
the country, with whom on his visit to that kingdom he came into
contact, and who were of the same origin as the Bórnu people, while at
present, having intermingled and intermarried with the indigenous
population, the Bulála, who are still the ruling family in Fittrí,
appear to have forgotten their own language, and have adopted that of
the Kúka. At the time when Leo wrote his description of Africa, or
rather at the period when he visited Negroland (for of the events which
happened after he left the country he possessed only an imperfect
knowledge), the Bulála were just in the zenith of their power, being
masters of all Kánem, and (according to the information of Makrízí and
Ábú ’l Fedá) having in the latter half of the fourteenth century even
subjected to their dominion the large tribe of the Zogháwa, may well
have entered into the most intimate political relations with the rulers
of Egypt, as already, a century previous to the time of Leo, Makrízí
found ample opportunity in Egypt to collect all the latest news with
regard to the dynasty of Kánem.

On the other hand, we can easily imagine how Leo could call the prince
of Gaoga a Mohammedan, while the learned men of the country positively
affirm that the Islám in these regions dates no further back than the
eleventh century of the Hejra, the beginning of which exactly coincides
with that of the seventeenth century of our era, and consequently about
a century after Leo’s visit to Africa; for Leo speaks only of the rulers
themselves, whose religious creed, probably, had no influence upon the
people of the country in general. Leo’s statement entirely harmonizes
with the information gleaned from Makrízí; for the princes of Kánem in
the time of the latter historian were identical with the rulers of that
very kingdom which Leo calls Gaoga, although in Makrízí’s time they seem
to have established the capital of their empire in Njímiye, which they
had conquered from the Bórnu dynasty.[51]

Moreover this apparent discrepancy receives further explanation from the
fact, that soon after Leo visited these regions the pagan nation of the
Týnjur extended their empire from Dár-Fúr to the very borders of
Bagírmi, opposing a strong barrier to the propagation of Islám.
Respecting the name ʿOmár, by which Leo designates the king of the
Bulála in his time, I have already given an opinion on a former
occasion. The Týnjur, of whose original language I have not been able to
collect any specimens, and which seems to be almost extinct, are said to
have come from Dóngola, where they had separated from the Batálesa, the
well-known Egyptian tribe originally settled in Bénesé. Advancing from
Dóngola, the Týnjur are said to have vanquished first the Dájó, who, as
has been stated before, were at that period masters of Dár-Fúr, and in
course of time spread over the whole of Wádáy, and over part of Bagírmi,
making Kádama, a place situated about three days’ march to the S.W. of
Wára, and halfway between Malám and Kashémeré, the capital of their
extensive empire. They maintained their dominion, as far as regards
Wádáy, according to native tradition, ninety-nine lunar years, while the
eastern portion of this loosely-connected group of different
nationalities, which had been conquered at an earlier period, was
wrested from their hands much sooner, by Kúro vanquishing the Týnjur,
and founding the pagan kingdom of Dár-Fúr, some time before the general
introduction of Islám into these countries. This Kúro himself was the
third predecessor of Slímán, the first Moslim prince of Dár-Fúr. But as
for the centre of the empire of the Týnjur, it was overthrown by the
founder of the Mohammedan empire of Wádáy, viz. ʿAbd el Kerím the son of
Yáme,—according to tradition, in the year 1020 of the Hejra.

However, of the kings of Wádáy I shall not speak here, as their history
has not exactly reference to the country we are now describing.[52] Here
I will only introduce a few remarks concerning the kings of Bagírmi.

Bagírmi[53] is said to have emerged from the gloom of paganism
prevailing in the eastern regions of Sudán, a considerable time after
Western Sudán had been formed into mighty kingdoms—some years subsequent
to the introduction of Islám into Wádáy. But in the same manner as the
ruling dynasty which gave rise to this new kingdom had come from abroad,
so likewise the founders of Bagírmi seem to have immigrated into the
country; and from whence they immigrated can scarcely be doubtful,
though they themselves, like all the dominating tribes of Sudán, would
much rather connect their origin with the inhabitants of Yemen. But,
that the native inhabitants of Kénga, Kírsuwa, and Hírla are intimately
related to them, they are well aware, and acknowledge it without
hesitation; but they would try to make people believe that, in coming
from Yemen, their chief Dokkénge left at those places brethren of his as
governors. As for Hírla, they do not acknowledge its claims to entire
equality of birth, but derive the name of that place, as well as the
family of the kings of that district, from a slave of Dokkénge of the
name of Khérallah. But, on a close scrutiny, the people of Bagírmi
themselves confess that their origin is not to be sought for at a
greater distance than Kénga, or Kénga Matáya[54], and that this place,
distant five days east from Más-eñá and three long days S.S.E. from
Yʿawó, and distinguished by the strange form of its paganism[55], was
the original seat of their kings; for not only do the Bagírmaye regard
those of Kénga with solemn veneration, as being their ancestors, whom it
would be wrong to attack or to endeavour to subdue, but there are also
certain emblems which they exhibit on particular occasions, brought, as
they say, from Kénga. These consist of a rather long spear, borne on
certain occasions before the king of Bagírmi, a small sort of tympanum,
and the horn or bugle. The language Kénga is intimately connected with
that of Bagírmi, while it contains also some elements of a different
character; and these two dialects, together with the language of the
Kúka, constitute one idiom.

But, to proceed with our principal inquiry, the emigrants, led on by
their chief Dokkénge, penetrated, it would seem, towards the west by the
road marked by the sites of Hírla, Kírsuwa, and Naíromá—a place situated
near Más-eñá, on the Báchikám.

The state of the country where this pagan prince was to found the new
kingdom, at the time when this happened (that is to say, about 300 years
ago), was as follows. On the spot where the capital now stands, there is
said to have been nothing but a straggling settlement of Fúlbe cattle-
breeders; and the Bagírmaye themselves state that they named the place
from a large ʿardéb or tamarind-tree (“más” in the Bágrimma language),
under which a young Féllani girl of the name of Eñá was selling milk.
These Fúlbe (or Felláta, as they are called in all the eastern parts of
Sudán) are said to have been much oppressed by annual inroads of the
Bulála; and it was Dokkénge who undertook to protect them against these
invaders. With the exception of this Felláta settlement, a few Arab or
Shúwa tribes[56], who at that time had already begun to spread over the
country, principally the Bení Hassan, and the solitary settlement of a
Felláta sheikh, or holy man, in Bídderí, a place about nine miles east
from Más-eñá (who, however isolated he was, nevertheless exercised a
very remarkable influence over the introduction of Islamism into these
countries), all the rest of its inhabitants, as well as the chief
Dokkénge himself, were pagans.

In the centre of the country there were four petty kingdoms, all
situated on the small branch of the Shárí generally called Báchikám;
viz. that of Mátiya, Mábberát, Máriñé, and finally that of Meré or
Damré. Dokkénge, installing himself near the spot which was originally
called Más-eñá, and forming a small settlement, is said to have subdued
these four petty kings by stratagem, and, having driven back the Bulála,
to have formed in a short time a considerable dominion. He is reported
to have reigned a long time, and to have been succeeded by his brother,
of the name of Lubétko, to whom succeeded Delubírni, under whose
dominion the kingdom of Bagírmi spread considerably. The eldest son of
Delubírni was Maló, who ascended the throne, but was soon after engaged
in a desperate struggle with a younger brother of his, named ʿAbd-Allah,
who, it is said, had been converted to Islamism, and thought himself in
consequence better fitted to ascend the throne. After being defeated by
Delubírni on one occasion, ʿAbd-Allah is said to have vanquished his
brother with the assistance of the pagan tribes, and to have slain him
after a most sanguinary conflict in the midst of the town, which lasted
for several days.

Having thus ascended the throne, and consolidated his dominion by the
blood of all his kinsfolk, ʿAbd-Allah, the first Moslim prince of
Bagírmi, is said to have contributed largely to the prosperity of his
country, into which he introduced Islamism; and he is stated also to
have increased the capital to its present extent. The beginning of his
reign falls about ten years after the foundation of the empire of Wádáy
by ʿAbd el Kerím the son of Yáme. As to the order of his successors (all
the Moslim kings of Bagírmi numbering fourteen), it seems to be as
follows:—

To ʿAbd-Allah succeeded, as it seems, Wónja, who was succeeded by his
son Láwení, after whom followed Bugománda. Of these princes very little,
if anything, appears to be known. But then followed a glorious reign,
which marked another epoch in the history of Bagírmi—I mean the reign of
the king Mohammed el Amín, who, on account of his having performed a
pilgrimage to Mekka, is also called el Háj; for this prince not only
administered the government of his country with more justice than his
predecessors had done, and made it respected by his neighbours, but he
also considerably extended his dominion and sway, as he not only subdued
the formerly independent kingdom of Babáliyá, which at a former period
had belonged to Kánem, and whose king (of the name of Kábdu) he put to
death, but he is stated also to have extended his conquests in the
opposite direction as far as Gógomi, a strong and inaccessible
settlement, situated seven or eight days’ march to the south-east of the
capital, which the present sultan succeeded in subduing a second time
during my residence in the country, and which was thought a very great
achievement. It is even said that through the instrumentality of this
king a great majority of his countrymen adopted Islamism.

To this praiseworthy prince succeeded his son ʿAbd e’ Rahmán, whose
death can be fixed with approximative certainty, as it is connected with
the history of the neighbouring countries; for it was he against whom
the sheikh Mohammed el Kánemí solicited the assistance of ʿAbd el Kerím
Sabún the sultan of Wádáy, who died in the year 1815 for his having
thrown off the supremacy of Bórnu, which seems to have been established
during the reign of Láwení. The easy victory which the energetic and
unscrupulous ruler of Wádáy, who eagerly grasped at the offer made to
him, is said to have gained over the people of Bagírmi, is attributed to
the consequences of a severe plague, which had swept away the greater
part of the full-grown inhabitants of the country, and to the
circumstance of the fácha, or general of the army, not being on good
terms with his sovereign, whom he is stated to have deserted in the
battle, while he himself fled with his whole detachment. Sabún, after
having put to death ʿAbd e’ Rahmán, together with his favourite wife, or
ghúmsu, and having carried away a considerable portion of the
population, and all the riches of Bagírmi collected during the period of
their power, invested the younger son of ʿAbd e’ Rahmán, of the name of
Mʿallem Ngarmába Béri, with the title of king. However, as soon as Sabún
had retraced his steps, ʿOthmán, the eldest son of ʿAbd e’ Rahmán, with
the surname or nickname of Búgomán, who, as long as the king of Wádáy
was ravaging the country, had sought refuge behind the Shárí, in the
town of Búgomán (the same place the governor of which refused to receive
me), returned home, overcame his younger brother, and, having put out
his eyes, ascended the throne.

But the king of Wádáy, having received this unfavourable news, once more
returned to Bagírmi, vanquished ʿOthmán in a battle fought at Moító,
drove him out of the country, and reinstated his brother upon the
throne. But as soon as Sabún had turned his back, ʿOthmán appeared once
more, drowned his brother in the river, and again usurped the sovereign
power. However, he was not destined to enjoy his prize for a long time
in tranquillity; for, a quarrel having broken out between him and the
fácha (the same person who had been on bad terms with his father), this
man, of the name of Ruwéli, who by his personal character greatly
enhanced the power and influence originally united with his authority,
and who was supported by a strong party, deprived the sultan of his
dominion, and, having driven him out of the country, invested with
supreme authority a younger brother of his, called el Háj, who, in order
to distinguish him from the former sultan of that name, we may call Háj
II. ʿOthmán, having fled from Búgomán, his usual place of refuge, to
Gulfé the Kótokó town on the west side of the Shárí, where he was
collecting a force, the fácha marched against him and vanquished him.
ʿOthmán, however, having implored the assistance of the sheikh el
Kánemí, and being assisted by the Shúwa of Bórnu, succeeded in
collecting another army, with which he once more returned, but was again
beaten in a battle fought at Sháwí. He, however, succeeded in crossing
the river by a stratagem, and sought refuge with ʿAmanúk, that mighty
chief of the Dághana Shúwa well known from Major Denham’s adventures;
but being pursued by his adversary, he saw no other way of escape open
to him than to throw himself into the arms of his former enemy, the king
of Wádáy, and, in order to obtain his assistance, he found himself
compelled to stipulate, and to confirm by an oath sworn on the Kurán,
that he and his successors should pay a considerable tribute to the
prince of Wádáy. This tribute, to be paid every third year, consists of
a hundred ordinary male slaves, thirty handsome female slaves, one
hundred horses, and a thousand shirts or kholgán, called by the Wádáy
people “dérketú,” besides ten female slaves, four horses, and forty
shirts to Zérma or Jérma, who is the inspector of this province.

Having obtained protection in consequence of this treaty, which rendered
Bagírmi as much a tributary province of Wádáy as it had been, in more
ancient times, of Bórnu, ʿOthmán returned to his country, and succeeded
at length in crushing his powerful and hitherto successful rival, whom
he defeated in two battles,—the one fought near Kókoché, on the
Báchikám, the other near the village of Ásu, on the banks of the river
Shárí. The fácha, having sought and found refuge in Logón birni, fought
one more battle with ʿOthmán near a place called Díndor, where a great
many of the people of Wádáy who were with him are said to have fallen.
But the inhabitants of Logón, fearing that Ruwéli would not be able to
fight his quarrel out, and that they themselves might afterwards suffer
for having given him protection, thought it more prudent to deliver him
into the hands of his enemy, and succeeded in doing so by stratagem.
This ambitious man is stated to have died in Wádáy, ʿOthmán having
delivered him to Sabún.

The restless prince of Bagírmi obtained a little tranquillity as long as
Sabún lived; but Yúsuf, who succeeded the latter, dissatisfied with him,
put forth another pretender, of the name of Jariñílme, and ʿOthmán had
scarcely succeeded in overcoming this enemy, which he did without much
trouble, when he had to fight in another quarter. For Mohammed el
Kánemí, the sheikh of Bórnu (who had assisted him to reascend the throne
with the sole object of regaining the ancient supremacy which Bórnu had
exercised over Bagírmi), when he became aware that he had not attained
his object, commenced open hostilities against him, which gave rise to a
struggle carried on for a number of years with equal success on either
side, but without any great result, except the ruin of the provinces
near their respective frontiers. The sheikh of Bórnu, beset at the time
by other difficulties, and seeing that he should be unable by himself to
crush the power of Bagírmi, is then said to have called in the aid of
Yúsuf Bashá, of Tripoli, who in the year 1818 sent Mústafá el Áhmar, at
that time sultan of Fezzán, together with Mukní and the sheikh el Barúd,
to his assistance, who, laying waste the whole north-western part of
Bagírmi, and destroying its most considerable places, Babáliyá and Gáwi,
carried away a great number of slaves, among whom was Agíd Músa, one of
my principal informants in all that relates to Bagírmi.

This happened about the time of Captain Lyon’s expedition. At a later
period Mukní returned once more with ʿAbd el Jelíl, the celebrated chief
of the Welád Slimán, who had accompanied the former expedition in a
rather subordinate character; but, having quarrelled with this
distinguished chieftain, who discountenanced Mukní’s intention of
overrunning the country of Bórnu, he himself returned home, sending in
his stead Háj Íbrahím, who plundered and ransacked the town of Moító,
and carried its inhabitants into slavery, while ʿAbd el Jelíl did the
same with Kánem. Then followed, in the year 1824, the second battle of
Ngála, of which Major Denham has given an account in his Narrative.
However, notwithstanding his partial success, the sheikh of Bórnu was
not able to reduce entirely the inhabitants of Bagírmi, who, although
not so numerous, and much inferior to their neighbours in horsemanship,
are certainly superior to them in courage.

There was still another quarter from whence Bagírmi was threatened
during the restless reign of ʿOthmán, namely that of the Fúlbe or
Felláta, who, following their instinctive principle of perpetually
extending their dominion and sway, made an inroad also into Bagírmi
about thirty years ago; but they were driven back, and revenge was taken
by a successful expedition being made by the Bagírmaye against Bógo, one
of the principal Fúlbe settlements to the east of Wándalá or Mándará,
which I have mentioned on my journey to Ádamáwa and the expedition to
Músgu. In the meantime, while the country suffered severely from this
uninterrupted course of external and internal warfare, ʿOthmán seems to
have made an attempt to enter into communication with Kánem, probably in
order to open a road to the coast by the assistance of the Welád Slimán,
or, as they are called here, Mínne-mínne, who, by a sudden change of
circumstances, had been obliged to seek refuge in those very border-
districts of Negroland with which their chief ʿAbd el Jelíl had become
acquainted in the course of his former slave-hunting expeditions.

Altogether ʿOthmán Búgomán appears to have been a violent despot, who
did not scruple to plunder either strangers or his own people; and he
cared so little about any laws, human or divine, that it is credibly
asserted that he married his own daughter.[57] But he appears to have
been an energetic man, and at times even generous and liberal. He died
in the last month of the year 1260, or about the end of the year 1844 of
our era, and was succeeded by his eldest son ʿAbd el Káder, the present
ruler of Bagírmi, who had been on bad terms with his father during his
lifetime, and in consequence had spent several years in Gúrin, at that
time the capital of Ádamáwa.

This prince had a narrow escape from a great danger in the first month
of his reign, when Mohammed Sáleh, the ruler of Wádáy, advanced with his
army towards the west, so that ʿAbd el Káder thought it best to leave
his capital, carrying with him all his people and riches, and to
withdraw towards Mánkhfa, where he is said to have prepared for battle,
taking up his position behind the river, and placing all the boats on
his wings. But the sultan of Wádáy, seeing that he occupied a strong
position, sent him word that he would do him no harm as long as he
preserved the allegiance confirmed by the oath of his father; and he
really does not seem to have done any damage to the people of Bagírmi,
with the exception of depriving them of their dress, the common black
shirt, of which the people of Wádáy are very jealous, as they themselves
are not acquainted with the art of dyeing.

This danger having passed by, ʿAbd el Káder, who is described to me, by
all those who have had opportunities of closer intercourse with him, as
being a person of sound judgment, and who likes to do justice, though it
may be true he is not very liberal, thought it best to keep on good
terms also with his western neighbours the Kanúri; and his friendly
relations with the present ruler of that country were facilitated by the
circumstance that his mother was an aunt of the sheikh ʿOmár. The
Bagírmi people at least assert that it is more on account of this
relationship, than from fear, or a feeling of weakness, that their ruler
has consented to a sort of tribute to be paid to Bórnu, which consists
of a hundred slaves annually.

Having thus obtained peace with both his neighbours, ʿAbd el Káder has
employed his reign in strengthening himself on that side which alone
remained open to him, viz. the south side, towards the pagan countries;
and he has successfully extended his dominion, remaining in the field
personally for several months every year. He has thus subdued a great
many pagan chiefs, on whom he levies a fixed tribute,—a thing said to
have been unknown before his time. Of course this tribute consists
almost entirely in slaves, which the pagan chiefs in general can only
procure by waging war with their neighbours, and slaves are therefore
almost the only riches of the sultan; but by this means he is able to
procure what he is most in need of, namely horses and muskets, besides
articles of luxury.

It is only with a strong feeling of suppressed indignation that the
people of Bagírmi bear the sort of dependence in which they are placed
with regard to their neighbours on either side; and there is no doubt
that, if they are allowed to recruit their strength (although the
tribute which they have to pay to Wádáy bears heavily upon them), they
will make use of the first opportunity that offers to throw off the
yoke.

No doubt the central position of Bagírmi, as regards political
independence, is not very favourable; but the country has the great
advantage of being bordered on the west side by a mighty river, which,
while it forms a natural barrier against the western neighbour, may
serve at the same time as a safe retreat in case of an attack from the
powerful kingdom on the east side: and it has proved so repeatedly, for
Bagírmi in many places extends westward beyond that river. This is the
only advantage which the country at present derives from the great
bounty which nature has bestowed upon it[58], viz. a river navigable
during every season of the year, surrounding half the extent of the
country, and sending through the middle of it a branch, the Báchikám,
which is navigable during the greater part of the year, and might easily
be made so all the year round. This branch, which approaches to within
nine or ten miles of the capital, forms part of the southern provinces
into an island. The great disadvantage of Bagírmi is, that there is no
direct caravan-road to the northern coast, and that it is therefore
dependent, for its supply of European and Arab manufactures, upon the
limited importation by the circuitous road through Wádáy or Bórnu;
consequently the price of the merchandise is greatly enhanced, while the
road, in case of hostilities with these latter kingdoms, is entirely
interrupted.

If we now take a general view of the country, we find that in its
present state it is inclosed within very narrow limits, extending in its
greatest length, from north to south, to about 240 miles, while its
breadth at the widest part scarcely exceeds 150 miles. Such a petty
kingdom would be quite incapable of holding out against its two powerful
neighbours if it were not for the resources drawn continually from the
pagan countries towards the south.

This was the reason why the kingdom of the Bulála, or Leo’s Gaoga, rose
to such immense power as soon as it had taken possession of Kánem. The
people of Bagírmi themselves in former times, evidently after the zenith
of the Bórnu kingdom had passed away, and when the weak dominion of
devout but indolent kings succeeded to the dashing career of energetic
and enterprising princes, provided themselves with what they wanted in
this respect in a rather unceremonious manner, by making constant
predatory expeditions upon the caravan-road from Fezzán to Bórnu, and
carrying away a great amount of property, even a large supply of
silver,—this being said to have been the source from whence the treasure
which ʿAbd el Kerím Sabún king of Wádáy found in Más-eñá was derived. In
another direction they formerly extended their excursions into the Bátta
and Marghí country.

The whole country, as far as it constitutes Bagírmi Proper, forms a flat
level, with a very slight inclination towards the north, the general
elevation of the country being about 950 feet above the level of the
sea; only in the northernmost part of the country, north from a line
drawn through Moító, there are detached hills or mountains, which
constitute the water-parting between the Fittrí and the Tsád, the two
basins having no connection whatever with each other. But while Bagírmi
Proper appears to be a rather flat country, the outlying provinces to
the south-east seem to be rather mountainous, the mountains,
particularly the group called Gére, being so high that the cold is felt
very severely, and hail or snow falls occasionally during the cold
months. From the information of the natives, particularly when we take
into consideration the description given of Belél Kolé, it would seem
that in that direction there are some volcanic mountains. Towards the
south also there must be considerable mountains which give rise to the
three rivers the Bénuwé, the Shárí, and the river of Logón, and probably
several more; but they must be at a great distance, and lie entirely
beyond the range of my information. However, I am sure that there is no
idea of perpetual snow, or even snow remaining for any length of time,
in this part of the continent; and there seems to be no necessity
whatever for supposing such a thing, as the fall of rain near the
equator is fully sufficient to feed numbers of perennial sources, and to
increase the volume of the rivers to such an extent as to annually
overflow the country in so astonishing a manner. The time of the
inundation of those three rivers seems to coincide exactly, while with
regard to the currents, that of the river of Logón appears to be the
most rapid.

The soil consists partly of lime (“añé”) and partly of sand (“síñaka”),
and accordingly produces either Negro millet (_Pennisetum_, “chéngo”) or
sorghum (“wá”), which two species of grain, with their different
varieties, form the chief article of food not only of the people of
Bagírmi, but almost all over Negroland. But besides this, a great deal
of sesamum (“kárru”), is cultivated, which branch of cultivation imparts
quite a different aspect to this country, as well as to many of the
pagan countries, as numerous tribes seem to subsist chiefly upon this
article. In many other districts of Bagírmi, beans (“móngo”) form one of
the chief articles of food, but ground-nuts, or “búli,” seem to be
cultivated only to a very small extent.

Wheat is not cultivated at all, with the exception of a small patch in
the interior of the capital, for the private use of the sultan. Rice is
not cultivated, but collected, in great quantities after the rains, in
the forest, where it grows in the swamps and temporary ponds; indeed a
good dish of rice, with plenty of butter and meat, forms one of the few
culinary luxuries which I have observed in Bagírmi. Another article of
food in very general use, is afforded by several varieties of grass or
_Poa_, identical, I think, with the _Poa Abyssinica_, here called
“chénna” by the black, and “kréb” by the red natives (I mean the Shúwa).
The variety most common in Bagírmi is called “jójó,” and is not only
eaten by the poor people, but even by the rich; indeed I myself am fully
able to speak from experience concerning it, as, with the addition of a
little rice, I subsisted on it almost entirely during my long stay in
this country, and found it very palatable when prepared with plenty of
butter, or even boiled in milk. Of course it is a light food, and, while
it does not cause indigestion, it does not satisfy the appetite for a
long time, or impart much superfluous strength. As regards vegetables,
molukhíya (“goñérmo,” _Corchorius olitorius_) and derába or bámiya
(“gobálto” and “géddegír”) are mostly in use, besides the “góngo,” the
leaves of the monkey-bread tree (“kúka”), and occasionally that of the
hájilíj (“jánga”), which form the common palaver-sauce of the poor.
Water-melons (“gérlaka”?) also are grown to some extent, and that sort
of _Cucurbita_ called _melopepo_ (“kúrchi”?), which I have mentioned on
a former occasion. Inside the capital a great many onions (“bassal”) are
cultivated, but not so much for the use of the natives as of the
strangers who visit the place.

Of articles of industry, cotton (“nyére”) and indigo (“alíní”) are grown
to a sufficient extent to supply the wants of the natives; but both
articles are chiefly cultivated by the Bórnu people who have immigrated
into this country.

The soil in general seems to be of a good quality; but, as I have said
above, the country suffers greatly from drought, and ants and worms
contribute in a large measure to frustrate the exertions of the
husbandman. Of the trees most common in the country, and most useful to
mankind, I have principally to mention the tamarind-tree, or “ʿardéb,”
called “más” by the people of Bagírmi,—a tree as useful for its fruit,
as it is beautiful on account of its foliage. The tamarind-fruit, in my
opinion, constitutes the best and surest remedy for a variety of
diseases, on account of its refreshing and cooling character. Next in
order is the deléb-palm, here called “káwe,” which is very common in
several parts of the country, although far more so in the outlying
provinces towards the south; the dúm-palm (“kolóngo”), which, although
not so frequent, is nevertheless found in considerable numbers in many
parts of the country; the hájilíj, or _Balanites Ægyptiaca_ (“jánga”),
of which not only the fruit is eaten, but the leaves also are used as
vegetables, like those of the monkey-bread tree—the latter does not seem
to be very frequent; the kórna or _Cornus_ (“kírna”), and the sycamore
(“bíli”). Many trees very common in Háusa, such as the kadéña, or
_Bassia Parkii_, and the dorówa (_Parkia_), are never seen here, at
least not in those districts which I visited; but _Croton tiglium_
(“habb el melúk”) is frequent, and I myself took a supply of this
powerful purgative with me on my return from this country.

There are no mines. Even the iron is brought from the exterior
provinces, especially a place called Gúrgara, distant from twenty to
twenty-five miles from the river, where the sandstone seems to contain a
great deal of iron ore. Natron is brought from the Bahr el Ghazál.

With regard to the special features of the country, and the topography
of the towns and villages, they will be described in a separate
chapter[59]; here I will only say that the entire population of the
country seems scarcely to exceed a million and a half, and the whole
military force, in the present reduced state of the kingdom, can hardly
be more than 3000 horse, and 10,000 foot, including the Shúwa
population, who surpass the black natives in breeding horses, while the
cavalry of Wádáy may be most correctly estimated at from 5000 to 6000,
and that of Dár-Fúr at more than 10,000. The weapon most in use among
them is the spear (“nyíga”),—the bow (“ká-kesé”) and arrow (“kesé”)
being rare, not only with the inhabitants of Bagírmi Proper, but even
with those of the pagan states to the south. Scarcely a single person
has a shield; and they therefore use only the Kanúri name for this arm,
viz. “ngáwa.” Very few possess the more valuable coat of mail, or
“súllug;” and I scarcely observed a single fire-arm during my stay. But,
on the other hand, almost all the pagan inhabitants of these regions are
armed with that sort of weapon found in so many other countries which we
have touched on our journey, viz. the hand-bill, or, as the Kanúri call
it, the “góliyó” (here called “njíga,” the difference between the name
of this weapon and that of the spear consisting in one single letter).
Very few of the Bagírmi people are wealthy enough to purchase swords
(“káskara”), which they are not able to manufacture themselves; and few
even wear that sort of dagger (“kiyá”) on the left arm, which, in
imitation of the Tawárek, has been introduced into a great part of
Negroland.

As for their physical features, I have already touched on this subject
repeatedly. I will only say that they are a fine race of people,
distinct from the Kanúri, but intimately related, as their language
shows, to the tribe of the Kúka and several other tribes to the east.
Their language they themselves call “tar Bágrimma.” Their adoption of
Islám is very recent; and the greater part of them may, even at the
present day, with more justice be called pagans than Mohammedans. They
possess very little learning, only a few natives, who have performed the
pilgrimage, being well versed in Arabic, such as Bú-Bakr Sadík; but not
a single individual possesses any learning of a wider range. This exists
only among the Felláta, or foreigners from Wádáy. The only industrial
arts in which they have made a little progress are those of dyeing and
weaving, both of which they have also introduced into the kingdom of
Wádáy, although in their own country a great deal of the weaving and
dyeing is carried on by Kanúri people. Black tobes are worn by the men
to a much greater extent than in Bórnu, even the bólne or túrkedi, which
generally forms the only dress of the females, as well as the upper
garment or “debdaléna,” being dyed black. Tight shirts, or tarkíji,
which in Wádáy constitute the common female dress, are very rarely worn.

The government of the country is an absolute monarchy, being not
tempered, as it seems, by an aristocratical element, such as we have
found in Bórnu, nor even by such an assembly as we have met with in the
Háusa states. The duties of the chief offices of state are, it appears,
by no means distinctly defined, and are therefore left to the discretion
or abuse of each official, as we have seen that the fácha under the
reign of ʿOthmán had assumed such a degree of power that he was capable
of waging successful war for a long time against the king himself.

The title of the king is “bánga.” The office of the “fácha” corresponds
exactly with that of the “keghámma” in Bórnu. Then follows the office of
the “ngarmáne,” or the minister of the royal household; then that of the
“ghelétma”—a name which has originated in a corruption of the title
“ghaladíma.” Next comes the “gar-moyenmánge,” the governor of the open
pasture-grounds and forests; after him the “mílma,” whose office is said
to have been introduced from Bórnu, to whom succeed the “gar-ngóde,” the
“gar-ngínge,” the “zérma,” and the “kadamánge,” the latter having
originally the tutorship of the sons of the king. But besides these, the
captains, or “bárma,” and the governors of the principal places, possess
considerable power; and among the latter, especially the elífa Moító, or
governor of Moító, while the officer of the water also, or elífa bá,
exercises a great deal of authority. Of these courtiers, the following
have the privilege of using a carpet to sit upon:—the fácha, the bárma,
the ghelétma, the mílma, the gar-moyenmánge, the bang Busó, bang Dam,
elífa Moító, and elífa bá. We have seen that the sultan, during his
absence from the capital, had made one of the meanest of his courtiers,
the kadamánge, his lieutenant-governor.

The mother of the sultan, or the “kuñ-bánga,” is greatly respected, but
without possessing such paramount authority as we have seen to have been
the case with the “mágira” in Bórnu, and as we shall find exercised by
the móma in Wádáy. The claimant to the throne, who bears here the same
title as in Bórnu, viz. chiróma, enjoys a certain degree of influence,
the limits of which are not circumscribed, but depend upon his natural
qualifications.

Although the sultan has here so different a title from that of the king
of Bórnu, nevertheless the princesses bear the same title as those of
Bórnu, viz. “méram,” a name which has even extended into the country of
Wádáy.

As for the tribute which the king levies, and which is called “hadén-
bánga,” the circumstances connected with my stay in the country did not
allow me to arrive at a definite conclusion with regard to its amount;
and I can only make a few general remarks upon it. The tribute levied
upon the Mohammedan inhabitants of Bagírmi Proper consists principally
in two different kinds, viz. in corn and cotton strips. The tribute in
corn, which corresponds to the tsídirám maibe in Bórnu and the kúrdi-n-
kassa in Háusa, is here called mótten-bánga, or, as it is generally
pronounced, mótten-bánki, while the tribute in cotton strips bears the
name “fárda-n-bánga.” But many places have to deliver also a tribute in
butter, although the Shúwa, or, as they are here called, Shíwa, (the
native Arabs) are the principal purveyors of this article to the court.

The Shíwa of Bagírmi belong principally to the following
tribes:—Sálamát, Bení Hassan, Welád Músa (a very warlike tribe), Welád
ʿAlí, the Deghághera,—who live scattered over the whole country, but
occupy some villages almost exclusively for themselves. The principal
tribute which these Arabs have to pay consists of cattle, and is called
“jéngal;” it is very considerable. But whether these Arabs of Bagírmi,
like those settled in Bórnu, have also to deliver to the king all the
male horses, I am not quite sure; however, I think that is the case.

The most considerable tribute, however, which the sultan levies consists
of slaves, which the tributary pagan provinces have to pay to
him,—especially the chiefs of Miltú, Dam, Sómray, and all the others of
whose territories and power we obtain some information from the
itineraries I have collected.[60] This tribute of slaves constitutes the
strength and riches of the king of Bagírmi, who is always endeavouring
to extend his sway over the neighbouring pagan tribes.

The natives of Bagírmi are compelled to show to their sovereign a
considerable degree of servile reverence; and when they approach him
they are obliged not only to be bareheaded, but also to draw their shirt
from the left shoulder, and to sprinkle dust on their heads. But they
are not in general oppressed; and a far greater liberty of speech is
allowed than in many European states.


[Footnote 46: The difficulty with regard to the name Bájó is
considerable; for no such name as the Bájó is known, while the Dájó are
a well-known tribe, who dominated Dár-Fúr in the tenth century of the
Islám, and even at the present day are called “nás Farʿaón.”
Nevertheless we cannot imagine that the name Bájó is a mere clerical
error for Dájó, unless we would suppose those authors guilty of a very
considerable mistake, as the Dájó seem to be of an entirely distinct
origin from the Zogháwa, who belong to the great Tedá stock, while the
former appear to have originated in the mountainous district of Fazogló,
and the Bájó are expressly stated by those authors to have been the
kinsmen of the Zogháwa. The Bájó may be identical with the tribe of the
Bédeyát. With regard to the Zagháy of Makrízí, and the Soka of Masúdi, I
have already offered an opinion on a former occasion.]

[Footnote 47: Ébn Sʿaíd, in Ábú ’l Fedá, p. 158.]

[Footnote 48: The Bagírmi people, even at the present day, connect the
Bulála in the most intimate way with the Kanúri; for while they give to
the latter the name “Bíyo,” they call the former “Bíyo-Bulála.”]

[Footnote 49: I will here mention that Fittrí is a word belonging to the
language of the Kúka, and means nothing but “river,” “lake,” being quite
identical with “Tsád,” “Sárí” or “Sháry.”]

[Footnote 50: The name Yʿawó is formed entirely in the same way as that
of Mʿawó, the present capital of Kánem, and of Gʿaó, or Gʿawó, also
called Gógó, the capital of the Songhay empire.]

[Footnote 51: With regard to their places of residence in the time of
Edrís Alawóma, see Appendix II.]

[Footnote 52: I shall give a short account of the history of that
country, in Appendix VI.]

[Footnote 53: Thus the name is generally pronounced in the country
itself; but it very often sounds like Bagrímmi, and the adjective form
is certainly Bágrimma, which often sounds like Barma. The learned men
write بَقْرِم and بَكْرِم indifferently, while the Bórnu people write
the name Begharmí بَغَرْمي or Bekármí بَكَارْمي.]

[Footnote 54: From all that I have said here, it appears very doubtful
whether the Ibkárem, ابكارم, mentioned by Ebn Sʿaíd in the latter part
of the thirteenth century, can be justly identified with this kingdom.
Of course a tribe of this name may have existed many centuries before
the foundation of the kingdom. The first undoubted mention of Bagírmi,
or Bagharmí, occurs in Imám Áhmed’s account of Edrís Alawóma’s
expeditions to Kánem.]

[Footnote 55: See collection of itineraries in the Appendix.]

[Footnote 56: The fact of the spreading of the Arabs at so early a
period, is entirely confirmed by Imám Áhmed’s account.]

[Footnote 57: According to others he married also his sister. It seems
that some attribute similar crimes to his father.]

[Footnote 58: I must observe, however, that boats of the Kaleáma, or
islanders of the southern part of the Tsád, sometimes carry corn as far
as Búgomán.]

[Footnote 59: See Appendix VII.]

[Footnote 60: See Appendix IX.]




                               CHAP. LII.

            HOME-JOURNEY TO KÚKAWA. — DEATH OF MR. OVERWEG.


[Sidenote: August 10th.]

Although I had once cherished the idea of penetrating towards the
upper course of the Nile, I was glad when I turned my face westward,
as I had since convinced myself that such an enterprise was not
possible under the present circumstances. I had been so many times
deceived by the promise of my final departure, that when in the morning
of that day a messenger from the zérma arrived with the news that I
might get ready my luggage, I did not believe him, and would not stir
till Zérma himself made his appearance and confirmed the news, assuring
me that I should find the letter of the sultan, with regard to my
security on a future visit, with Máina Sabún.

In consequence I ordered my servants to get my luggage ready; but before
I started I received a visit from a large number of courtiers, with an
agíd at their head, in order to bid me farewell, and also to entreat me
for the last time to sell to the sultan my fine “kerí-sassarándi”
(horse). But this I was obliged to refuse, stating that I wanted my
horse for myself, and that I had not come to their country as a
merchant, but as a messenger. It had always been a subject of great
annoyance to them that I refused to sell my horse, as all the people who
visit this country from the other side of Bórnu are in the habit of
bringing horses with them expressly for sale. They revenged themselves,
therefore, by giving me another nick-name, as an ambitious and
overbearing man,—“dérbaki ngólo.” But I would not have parted with the
companion of my toils and dangers for all the treasures in the world,
although it had its faults, and was certainly not then in the best
condition. I had some foreboding that it might still be a useful
companion on many an excursion; and it was in reality still to carry me
for more than two years, and was to excite the envy both of my friends
and enemies in Timbúktu as it had done here.

Having received the letter of the sultan, with the contents of which I
could not but express myself highly satisfied[61], I set fairly out on
my journey; and my heart bounded with delight when, gaining the western
gate, I entered the open country, and once more found myself at liberty.

The whole country was adorned with the most beautiful verdure, the
richest pasture-grounds and fine corn-fields alternately succeeding each
other; but as for the crop, the height which it had attained in the
different fields varied greatly,—it being in one field as high as five
feet, and the seed just coming out, while in another field, close by,
the young crop was only shooting out of the ground. This was in
consequence of no rain having fallen in the beginning of the season for
nearly a month, a circumstance which had deterred many people from
confiding their seed to the ground. Further on, there was much
cultivation of beans.

Having now no necessity for laying down the path, with which I was
sufficiently acquainted, I could surrender myself entirely to the
general impression of the landscape, the whole aspect of the country
being greatly changed. Beyond the Felláta village which I have mentioned
on my outward journey, we had to cross an extensive sheet of water, and
the ground was often very difficult to pass with my camel; so that we
were full of anxiety with regard to the swampy country of Logón. Indeed
the people who met us on the road did not fail to warn us that this was
not the right animal for this season of the year; and there is no doubt
that pack-oxen, on account of their sure-footedness, have a great
advantage in travelling during this part of the year, though they are
difficult to get across the rivers.

We arrived at the well-known village of Bákadá just in time to escape a
heavy tempest, which continued with slight interruption the whole of the
afternoon; but not finding my former host at home, I took possession of
his hut on my own responsibility, and I afterwards calmed the anger of
my good old friend, whose hospitality was so often claimed by all the
passers-by on this great highroad, by presenting him with two fine white
shirts. In fact I sympathized with him very heartily, seeing that the
whole host of people who had attached themselves to my troop importuned
him for shelter during our stay here the following day, although I might
have expected that he would have extended his hospitality to myself for
a day longer, as we were to part for ever, and as it was against my wish
that I was delayed here. But such is the character of the Bagírmi people
in their present reduced political and moral condition.

My companions were not yet quite ready. It rained the greater part of
the following night; I had some trouble in making my people stir in the
morning, and was really obliged to employ force in order to get our
troop once more in motion. A European can form no idea how the energy of
a traveller is paralyzed in these regions by the laziness of the
natives.

At length we were on our road, and after a moderate march took up our
quarters in Kólle-kólle. The quantity of rain which had fallen gave the
country a very rich and exuberant appearance. Everywhere on the fields
the long black worm called “halwési,” which causes so much damage to the
crops, was seen in extraordinary numbers. It was scarcely possible to
recognize the villages, the whole appearance of which, from every side,
we had been well acquainted with during the dry season, the tall crops
now concealing the cottages entirely from view. The following day we
reached Kókoroché, having fortunately crossed a very difficult bog
without any accident. The whole forest-region, which did not contain a
drop of water on my out-journey, was now converted into a continuous
line of swamps; and the whole surface was thickly covered with verdure.
It is during this season that the Shúwa Arabs form here their temporary
encampments.

In Kókoroché also we had another day’s delay, till the messenger of the
sultan arrived who was to protect me against any further intrigues of
the ferrymen, whom I regarded with more suspicion than any policeman or
constable in Europe. Meanwhile also the wife of Gréma ʿAbdú, who all
this time had been staying with her father-in-law in Mústafají, joined
us, and all further delay seemed to be at an end. Certainly such a visit
of a married woman to her father’s house cannot but contribute to give
to Europeans a higher opinion of African domestic life. Indeed people in
Europe have little conception how cheerfully man and wife in these
regions live together; and it was this amiable feature in his character
which reconciled me in some degree to my companion, whom in other
respects I greatly disliked.

[Sidenote: August 13th.]

There had been a great deal of rain in the afternoon of the preceding
day; and a heavy shower which came on in the morning, and lasted full
two hours, delayed our departure considerably. The distance which
separated us from the river was not great; but the latter part of the
journey was so bad that my camel threw off its load no less than six
times, so that my servants were almost in despair, and did not join me
till several hours after my arrival in the town of Ásu, and when I had
made myself already comfortable in an excellent hut, built of clay,
neatly polished, but from which I felt sorry to have driven away two
spinsters, who had been its tenants.

Having rested awhile, I went to obtain a sight of the river. Its
magnitude had already surprised me, when I first saw it on coming from
Logón, and it had delighted me as often as I looked down upon it from
the village of Mélé; but it was now greatly increased in size, forming a
broad sheet of water not less than one thousand yards across, and dotted
with several little islands, while the high and gradually-shelving shore
on this side was clothed with rich crops of Egyptian corn or masr (_Zea
Maïs_). Several small canoes, or rather boats, were lying on the shore;
but I looked in vain for one large enough to carry my camel, as I was
really afraid to trust it to the stream. However, I was glad to observe
that the current was not very strong; and it did not seem to me to flow
faster than from about two and a half to three English miles an hour.
Unfortunately, to-day also the weather was very wet, so that strolling
about was not so pleasant as it would otherwise have been.

Ásu was formerly a walled town; but the walls at present exhibit the
same signs of decay which characterize the whole country. However, the
inhabitants, to whom the ferry is a constant source of profit, seemed to
be tolerably at their ease. It is this village (which formerly appears
to have been of much greater importance) after which the river is
sometimes called the river _of_ Ásu; but it ought never to be called the
river Ásu. Here also there is an officer or inspector of the ferry, with
the title of kashélla[62], the same as in the village of Mélé.

[Sidenote: Saturday, August 14th.]

We had first to follow the bank of the stream for a little more than a
mile lower down, in order to reach the flat sandy beach which I have
mentioned above. At length, after a good deal of delay, the boats were
brought, and the passage began. Our horses went first, three or four
swimming alongside each boat; but it was a difficult affair for the men
who were sitting in the boats to manage them, and notwithstanding all
their exertions, and all the cries of those who were standing on the
bank, several of them were washed away from the boats, and carried a
considerable distance down the river by the current: one, a fine black
horse, was drowned. It was the very latest period when the river is
passable for horses; for during the whole of the month of September, the
people assured me that the passage was never attempted. I myself
succeeded in crossing the river, with my horse and luggage, without any
accident; and having fired a shot, in order to express my satisfaction
at having safely escaped from the hands of the superstitious Bagírmi
people, I pursued my march without delay, for I was afraid of exposing
my horse to the pernicious stings of the “tsetse” fly, which, as I have
observed before, proves extremely dangerous to the animal, but which
fortunately infests only the very banks of this river, for I have
observed it nowhere else. It is a large yellow species.

I had now entered again upon the territory of my friend Yúsuf the prince
of Logón, and could, without any danger of molestation, freely move
about. The weather was very wet; and I twice took refuge in small
villages, which were situated in the midst of rich corn-fields, in order
to escape a heavy shower. The whole district is called Mókoró, and
comprises, besides several villages of lógodé Logón, or people of Logon,
ten hamlets of Shúwa, in one of which we took up our quarters. These
Shúwa, however, are not distinguished for hospitality; and it required a
great deal of negotiation before I was allowed to make myself
comfortable in one of these huts, which are very spacious indeed for
these countries, being from 50 to 60 feet in diameter: they have besides
a very remarkable peculiarity, being furnished with a large bed-room, if
I may say so, which occupies the middle of the hut, and consists of a
room raised about three feet from the ground, twenty feet long by six to
eight feet wide, and the same in height, separated into several
compartments, and encompassed all round with mattings of latticework
made of fine reeds, in which branch of industry, as I have before
observed, the people of Logón are very clever. The matting is of dark
colour; but upon my inquiring how they dyed it, I was not a little
surprised to hear that it is done by dipping it into the black
argillaceous soil. In this secluded room, which is called “ghurára,”
these people protect themselves against the innumerable swarms of
mosquitoes which infest these low swampy regions during the night.

Of course, I could not have any pretensions to this distinguished place,
which is reserved for the different members of the family; and I took my
station upon a raised platform of clay at the side of the entrance,
where I was a little annoyed by the mosquitoes, although, the door
having been shut at an early hour, and some cattle inside the hut
attracting the attention of this cruel insect in a stronger degree, the
numbers were supportable. In other respects I was well treated, the
landlord being a wealthy man, of the name of Ádim, and his wife being
even a princess or méram of Logón; she was a talkative and cheerful
person. They regaled me with a small pancake soon after my arrival, and
a dish of rice and milk in the evening. It was extremely interesting to
witness the singular kind of living of these people, and to hear them
talk their peculiar style of Arabic, which has not yet lost that
profusion of vowels which originally characterized this language; but
its purity has been greatly impaired by other peculiarities. They have
some remarkable customs which connect them with their brethren in the
East,—especially the law of retaliation, or e’ dhíye[63] and the
_infibulatio_ of the young girls. These Arabs belong to the large tribe
of the Sálamát.

[Sidenote: Sunday, August 15th.]

After a march of about eight miles, through a country partly cultivated
with Negro millet, partly forming an extensive swampy plain, we reached
the river of Logón. On account of the great rising of the river, we had
been obliged to follow, this time, an entirely different path from the
one we had pursued on our outward journey. The scenery was greatly
changed; and the little hollow which we had formerly crossed close
behind our landing-place had now become a navigable branch of the river,
on which several boats of considerable size were seen plying to and fro.
The whole river now presented a very extensive sheet of water, unbroken
by any sandbanks or islands, which, while it certainly was exceeded in
breadth by the river Shárí, surpassed it in its turn in swiftness, the
current being evidently more than three and a half miles an hour.

The town of Logón with its palm-trees, of three different varieties,
towering over the clay walls, invited me to its hospitable quarters; and
as I was extremely anxious to reach Kúkawa without any further delay, I
immediately crossed over (after having made a small sketch, which is
represented in the accompanying plate), in order that I might be able to
pursue my journey the following day; but upon paying a visit to the
keghámma, I had great difficulty in persuading him to allow me to
proceed, and at first he peremptorily refused to comply with my wish,
saying that it would be dishonourable for his master to allow me to
leave him empty-handed. But I chose rather to forego the opportunity of
taking final leave of the prince Yúsuf, although I could not but feel
sorry at not being able to wait till my hospitable host had prepared a
few tobes for me, as specimens of the native manufacture.

It rained during the night and the following morning, and we had a
difficult march through the deep swampy grounds of Logón; but we
proceeded onwards till three o’clock in the afternoon, when we made a
halt about three quarters of a mile beyond Úlluf or Húlluf, the town
before mentioned, the magic arts of whose people frightened my
companions also this time, and prevented them from seeking shelter
there. However, even in the village where we stopped we were badly
received at first; and it was only by force that my companions could
procure quarters, till I succeeded gradually in opening friendly
relations with the man who had become my host so much against his will.
I even, with the aid of a few of the large beads called nejúm, succeeded
in buying fowls, milk, and corn, so that we were pretty much at our
ease. The neighbourhood is said to be greatly infested with thieves; and
we therefore took all necessary precautions.

The following day I made Áfadé, passing by Kala, where I was surprised
to find the swamp at present of much smaller dimensions than on my
former journey, although the season was so far advanced. This is a very
remarkable phenomenon, which receives its explanation from the
circumstance that these swamps are fed by the inundations of the river,
which, notwithstanding the rainy season, continue to recede till the
river is again full, and once more inundates the country, in the month
of September. The latter part of the road to Áfadé was very swampy,
almost the whole of that bleak kabé tract being under water. Here my
companions endeavoured by all sorts of intrigues to detain me for a day
or two, but, notwithstanding the hospitable treatment which I received
from the governor of the place, I was too anxious to reach Kúkawa; and,
ordering my servants to follow me as speedily as possible, I pursued my
march the following morning without delay. But the roads were
excessively bad, and we were obliged to take quite a different direction
from the one by which we came, following a more northerly one in order
to avoid the impassable swamps of the town of Rén, and the very
difficult road of Ngála.

Having passed several larger or smaller villages, and innumerable
swamps, we halted for the night, after a march of eleven hours, in a
village inhabited by Shúwa and Felláta, and called Wángara, a name which
is rather remarkable; but it required a long negotiation in order to
obtain quarters, as these people, who rely upon the strongholds afforded
them by the swampy neighbourhood of the lake, are of a very independent
character. But having once made their acquaintance, we were hospitably
treated. The bíllama of the village was a Tynjurawi, who had emigrated
to this place from Móndo; but he did not understand the peculiar idiom
of his tribe.

During my next day’s march, I led rather an amphibious life, being
almost as much in the water as on the dry ground; for, besides being
drenched by a heavy rain, which lasted the greater part of the day, I
had to pass three considerable rivulets without the aid of a boat, and
had twice to strip myself and swim my horse across, tying clothes and
saddle on my head. The first rivulet we had to cross was the Múlu, about
seven hundred yards beyond the small town called Legári, which belongs
to Kashélla Belál; the second was probably the Mbulú, and identical with
the river called Gumbalaram by Major Denham, beyond the village of
Dágala, which lies on a small eminence. At the Múlu we had enjoyed the
assistance of the inhabitants of Legári; but here I and my mʿallem, with
whom I had vigorously pushed on in advance, were left to our own
resources, and the strong current of the rivulet, which was encompassed
by steep banks about eight feet high, frightened my companion not a
little, till I stripped first, and, relying upon my experience as a
swimmer, led the way. While endeavouring to cross over, we were
fortunate enough to meet with a fisherman, who was floating about the
river on a simple yoke of large gourds, such as I have described on a
former occasion; and with his assistance we succeeded in getting our
horses and clothes across without any accident. While engaged in this
arduous business, we were joined by Gréma ʿAbdú, who, seeing that I was
obstinate, and ashamed at not arriving in the capital together with us,
had at length left his wife and slaves behind, and endeavoured to keep
up with us. We then continued our march through this swampy country, the
rain falling in torrents, and near the village Hokkum reached the third
rivulet, which however, notwithstanding its rapidity, we were able to
cross without dismounting, the water just reaching up to our saddles.

At length we left behind us the black argillaceous soil which
constitutes the whole of this alluvial plain, and which at the present
season was converted into one continuous swamp, fine sandy soil
succeeding to it near the village of Gujári, so that from thence we
pursued our march more cheerfully; and having taken a small luncheon in
the village Débuwa, we did not halt until we reached the village of
Bogheówa, situated about a mile N.E. from Yédi. Here we were well lodged
and hospitably treated, and were busy till late at night drying our wet
clothes.

[Sidenote: Friday, August 20th.]

We had now only one long day’s march to Kúkawa; and, reaching the town
of Ngórnu after six hours’ ride, I had great trouble in dragging on my
horsemen, who being quite exhausted, wanted to make themselves
comfortable with their friends, for the Bórnu men of the present day are
not accustomed to much fatigue. Indeed both my companions were so
utterly prostrated, in mind and body, that, strange to say, they lost
their road close to the capital, although certainly the high corn-fields
gave the country a totally different appearance. The great pond of Kaine
was now larger than I had ever seen it, and flooded the path to a great
extent.

Having sent on a man in advance, in order to announce my arrival to the
vizier and Mr. Overweg, I made a short halt near one of the many pools
of stagnant water; and we were just about to remount when my friend came
galloping up. We were both extremely glad to see each other again,
having been separated from one another longer than on any former
occasion; and they had received in Kúkawa very alarming news about my
reception in Bagírmi. Mr. Overweg had made, meanwhile, a very
interesting trip into the south-western mountainous districts of Bórnu;
he had returned from thence about two months previously; and I was
surprised to find that, notwithstanding the long repose which he had
enjoyed, he looked more weak and exhausted than I had ever seen him. But
he informed me that since his return he had been very ailing, and that
even at present he did not feel quite recovered. He gave me a very
lively and encouraging description of the means which had been placed at
my disposal; and with the most spirited projects for the future we
entered the town. Here I once more found myself in my old quarters, with
luxuries at my command which during the last six months had become
almost strange to me,—such as coffee with sugar, and tea with milk and
sugar.

It was very fortunate that I had not arrived half a day later; for the
caravan as well as the courier had gone, and not less than four days had
passed since the departure of the latter, so that the people declared
that it was not possible to send my letters after him. But the vizier,
upon whom I called early the next morning, and who received me with
great kindness, gave me three horsemen, who, he said, would overtake the
courier; and as I had fortunately answered my letters and despatches in
Bagírmi, I had only to make up my parcel: but the horsemen did not
overtake the courier till he had got forty miles beyond Ngégimi, in the
very heart of the desert. My servants did not arrive until the evening
of the following day; and they were in rather a sorry plight, having had
great difficulty with my camel and luggage.

[Sidenote: Monday, August 23rd.]

We had a very important private audience with the sheikh, when, after
the usual compliments were passed, I endeavoured to give him a clear
description of the present relations of the expedition; for, when he
expressed his wish that I might be appointed by Her Majesty as a consul,
I declared to him that that could not be, but that it was my business to
explore unknown countries, to open intercourse with them, and afterwards
to return to my native country; that it was the most ardent desire of
Her Majesty’s government to enter into the most friendly relations with
Bórnu, but that our scientific mission extended far beyond that country.
And I further explained to him that Government, in their last
despatches, had expressed their wish that if we should ascertain the
impossibility of penetrating in a southerly or easterly direction, we
might turn westward and endeavour to reach Timbúktu.

This statement seemed to gratify him extremely, as he was afraid of
nothing more than that we might go to Wádáy, and enter into friendly
relations with the sultan of that country. It is from this point of view
that I am quite sure that the vizier at least had done nothing to ensure
me a good reception in Bagírmi, if not the contrary. However, the sultan
declared that, as he was greatly pleased at our desire to try our
fortune in a westerly direction, he should not prevent us, even if we
wanted to go to Wádáy, as it was stipulated expressly in the treaty that
Her Britannic Majesty’s subjects might go wherever they
pleased,—although it was not until a few days later that he actually
signed the treaty, after numerous delays and evasions. I, however,
expressed my wish that, before we left the country, circumstances might
allow us to complete the survey and exploration of the Tsád, which was
both our own wish and that of the British government. Our addresses and
our presents having been received with equal affability, we took a
hearty leave, and returned home. On the last day of August the sultan
signed the treaty, expressing moreover the hope that, if merchants
should actually visit the country in quest of other merchandise than
slaves, the slave-trade might be gradually abolished.

I was now enabled to arrange all our money matters, which were in a very
confused and desperate state; for, besides the large debt due to the
merchant Mohammed e’ Sfáksi, we were indebted to the vizier alone for
500 Spanish dollars. Not being able to satisfy all our creditors with
ready money, there having been sent only 1050 dollars in cash, I
arranged with the merchant, giving him 200 dollars in cash, and a bill
for 1500 dollars on Fezzán, while I paid all the smaller debts, as well
as that of the vizier. Indeed we might now have been able to achieve a
great deal, if it had been our destiny to remain together—for in the
beginning almost all our efforts were paralyzed by the smallness of our
means, which did not allow us to undertake anything on a large scale;
but it was our destiny, that, when sufficient supplies had arrived, one
of us should succumb.

I have already observed that, when on my return I met my companion
before the gates of the capital, I was surprised at his exhausted
appearance; and I was sorry to find that my first impression was
confirmed by what I observed afterwards. As he himself was anxious for a
little change of air, and as it was entirely in accordance with our
object of exploring the lake, to observe the state of the komádugu at
this season, while it was not possible at present to enter upon any
great undertaking, we agreed that he should make a small trip to the
lower part of the river; and he left accordingly for Ájiri on the 29th
of August, in company with a small grandee or kókana, to whom the place
belonged, a short distance westward from the district of Dúchi. I
accompanied him about as far as the village of Dáwerghú; and we
separated with a firm hope that the excursion would do him a great deal
of good—and he really enjoyed extremely the rich vegetation of the
komádugu, which at this time of the year, during the rising of the
river, was in its full vigour. He learnt, by inquiry from the natives,
the very interesting fact that the water in the komádugu, which during
the dry season is limited to detached pools of stagnant water, begins to
form a continuous stream of water eastward towards the Tsád on the 21st
or 22nd July, and continues running for about seven months; that is to
say, till about the middle of February. It begins to overflow its banks
in the month of November. But, although my companion took great interest
in the objects around him, he could not have felt very strong, as the
notes which he wrote during this excursion are extremely short and
unsatisfactory, while it would have been of importance if he had been
able to lay down the course of the river with tolerable exactitude.
Moreover, in his feeble condition, he committed the mistake of forcing
his last day’s march in returning to Kúkawa, on the 13th September; and
I was sorry to observe, when we supped together that evening, that his
appetite greatly failed him.

Being fully aware of the unhealthiness of the climate during the month
of September, we agreed by common consent to keep moving about as much
as possible, and to take a ride every day to some distance. It was on
this account that we arranged a visit to Dáwerghú on Sunday the 20th;
but, unfortunately, some business which we had to transact prevented our
setting out at an early hour in the morning, and, my friend’s head being
that day rather affected, I proposed to him putting off our excursion
till another day; but he thought that the fresh air might do him good.
We therefore started in the heat of the day, although the sun was not
very bright, while my companion did not neglect to protect his head as
well as possible from the rays of the sun.

Having refreshed ourselves in the cool shade of a fine hájilíj, Mr.
Overweg thought himself strong enough to go about shooting, and was so
imprudent as to enter deep water in pursuit of some waterfowl, and to
remain in his wet clothes all the day without saying a word; and I only
became aware of this fact late in the evening, after we had returned to
the town, when he dried his wet clothes at the fire.

Although he had been moving about the whole day, he was not able to
enjoy our simple supper; but he did not complain. However, the next
morning he felt so weak that he was unable to rise from his couch; and
instead of taking a sudorific, which I most earnestly advised him to do,
he was so obstinate as not to take any medicine at all, so that his
illness increased with an alarming rapidity, and rather an alarming
symptom appeared on the following day, when his speech became quite
inarticulate and almost unintelligible. He then became aware himself of
the dangerous state he was in. He informed me that in the town he should
never recover, that it was absolutely necessary for him to get a change
of air, and that he entertained the hope that, if I could take him to
Máduwári, he might speedily regain his health in the house of our friend
the kashélla Fúgo ʿAlí.

It was a difficult task to take my sick companion to the desired place,
which is distant from Kúkawa more than eight miles; and though he began
his journey on Thursday morning, he could not reach the desired place
until the morning of Friday. Having made a present to our friend Fúgo
ʿAlí, that he might be induced to take sufficient care of him, and
having left the necessary orders, I returned to the town in order to
finish my despatches; but the same evening one of the servants whom I
had left with Mr. Overweg, came and informed me that he was much worse,
and that they were unable to understand a single word he said. I mounted
immediately, and found my friend in a most distressing condition, lying
outside in the courtyard, as he had obstinately refused to sleep in the
hut. He was bedewed with a cold perspiration, and had thrown off all his
coverings. He did not recognize me, and would not allow me or any one
else to cover him. Being seized with a terrible fit of delirium, and
muttering unintelligible words, in which all the events of his life
seemed to be confused, he jumped up repeatedly in a raging fit of
madness, and rushed against the trees and into the fire, while four men
were scarcely able to hold him.

At length, towards morning, he became more quiet, and remained
tranquilly on his couch; and, not becoming aware that his strength was
broken, and hoping that he might have passed the crisis, I thought I
might return to the town. After asking him if he had any particular
desire, he said that he had something to tell me; but it was impossible
for me to understand him, and I can only fancy, from what happened,
that, being aware that death was at hand, he wanted to recommend his
family to me.

At an early hour on Sunday morning, Mr. Overweg’s chief servant came to
me with the sad news that the state of my friend was very alarming, and
that since I had left him he had not spoken a word, but was lying
motionless. I mounted immediately on horseback; but before I reached the
place, I was met by a brother of Fúgo ʿAlí, who, with tears in his eyes,
told me that our friend was gone. With the dawn of day, while a few
drops of rain were falling, after a short struggle, his soul had
departed.

In the afternoon I laid him in his grave, which was dug in the shade of
a fine hájilíj, and well protected from the beasts of prey. Thus died my
sole friend and companion, in the thirtieth year of his age, and in the
prime of his youth. It was not reserved for him to finish his travels,
and to return home in safety; but he met a most honourable death, as a
martyr to science; and it is a remarkable fact that he found himself a
grave on the very borders of that lake by the navigation of which he has
rendered his name celebrated for ever. It was certainly a presentiment
of his approaching death which actuated him in his ardent desire to be
removed to this place, where he died hard by the boat in which he had
made his voyage. Many of the inhabitants of the place, who had known him
well during his repeated visits to the village, bitterly lamented his
death; and no doubt the “tabíb,” as he was called, will be long
remembered by them.

Dejected, and full of sad reflections on my lonely situation, I returned
into the town in the evening; but our dwelling, which during my stay in
Bagírmi my companion had greatly improved, and embellished by white-
washing it with a kind of gypsum, of which he found a layer in our
courtyard, now appeared to me desolate and melancholy in the extreme.
While, therefore, originally it had been my plan to make another trial
along the eastern shores of the Tsád, any longer stay in this place had
now become so intolerable to me, that I determined to set out as soon as
possible on my journey towards the Niger—to new countries and new
people.


[Footnote 61: I sent this letter, with the sultan’s seal, to the Foreign
Office at the time.]

[Footnote 62: Kashélla is properly a Bórnu title; but it is in general
use in these places along the western frontier.]

[Footnote 63: With regard to this custom, Burkhardt’s information
(_Travels in Nubia_, 2nd ed. Appendix I. p. 434.) is very correct; but
in general his information respecting the countries on the east side of
the Tsád is marred with mistakes, not only with regard to the geography,
but even the ethnology of these quarters, as he always confounds native
and Arab tribes.]




                               APPENDIX.


                              APPENDIX I.

    ACCOUNT OF THE EASTERN PARTS OF KÁNEM, FROM NATIVE INFORMATION.


In attempting to give a description of those parts of Kánem which I have
not visited myself, I must express my regret that, when in that country,
I had no knowledge of the manuscript history of the expeditions of Edrís
Alawóma into the same region, as, with the assistance of the rich supply
of the important historical as well as geographical data contained in
that work, I should have been enabled to give a far more interesting
description of the country, and even perhaps to identify the sites of
many of its former remarkable places.

The former capital of Kánem, as has been seen, was Njímí, or Njímiye, a
place whose approximate situation will be pointed out hereafter; the
present capital, if we may still employ this title in such a country as
Kánem is at the present time, is Máwó[64], or rather Mʿawó, a place
which already in the time of Edrís Alawóma was of great importance.

This town, which it was our ardent desire to visit, and which we most
probably should have reached if the Welád Slimán had undertaken that
expedition, on which we accompanied them, with the whole of their little
troop, instead of allowing half of it to go to Kúkawa, seems to be
situated about 20 miles S.S.E. from Hénderi Síggesi, and is at present
only thinly inhabited, its population probably not exceeding 3000 or
4000, though the circuit of the town is said to be still of considerable
magnitude. It is surrounded with a wall, and is adorned with a great
many date-trees. It is the residence of a khalífa, whose power is of the
most precarious and uncertain condition, as its existence depends
entirely on the relative supremacy of either Wádáy or Bórnu. The
consequence is, that there are generally two khalífas—one actually in
power, and the other watching to expel him at the first opportunity,
with the assistance of one of the patronising powers—Mohammed Sáleh, the
father of the celebrated king of Wádáy ʿAbd el Kerím Sabún, having
succeeded to the pretensions which the Bulála, the princes of the
provinces of Fittrí and Kúka (then swallowed by the empire of Wádáy),
possessed by conquest over the kingdom of Kánem.

But, to return to Mʿawó, there is a market held in the town every
Wednesday; but, on account of the very insecure state of the country, it
cannot possibly be now of any great importance. The inhabitants seem to
belong to a peculiar race; for the Tedá Gurʿaán call them by the name of
Beránema, the origin and meaning of which I was not able to make out
with certainty, but which may seem to have some connection with the name
Bórnu, although it can scarcely have any relation to the name Beráuni,
given to the Tedá themselves by the Kél-owí and other foreigners.

Between Mʿawó and Hénderi Síggesi there appear to be several favoured
valleys, where the date-tree grows in more or less abundance. The most
famous are the large valley called Kárafu, or Kárfu, a few miles from
Mʿawó, under the authority of Keghámma Gúrde, who succeeded to Keghámma
Síntal; on the west side of Kárfu, at a short distance from it, Yégi;
and not far from it the valley Badánga, stated to be very rich in date-
trees, and Kédalá, belonging to the chief Chéfandé[65]; then the valleys
Hamáji (belonging to Fúgo?), Gáltará, and Mápal.

The valley of Mápal is said to form the limit of the date-tree in that
direction. On the west side of Mʿawó is likewise an inhabited place
called Kajídi, but without date-trees.

The upper part of the valley Gésgi, which is said to stretch from south
to north, is called Télerí-Chemó, and is the dwelling-place of the
Shírí, to whom belong the Fugábú (or, as the name is often pronounced,
Fógubó[66]) Shírí, who are the inveterate enemies of the Woghda, the
inhabitants of Gésgi. In this neighbourhood is also a valley called
Líllowa.

North from Mʿawó, at no great distance from Aláli, towards the east, is
the place Kulákulá, inhabited likewise by Kánembú. How Beráda, a place
stated to be also on the north side of Mʿawó, and to be inhabited by a
tribe called Kemálla, who are under the authority of a keghámma, is
situated in relation to these places, I am unable to say. In various
valleys on the same side of Mʿawó are also stated to be the dwelling-
places of the Médelé, a nomadic tribe who possess a great many herds and
flocks. In this neighbourhood is also the valley called Gúmsa, inhabited
by a Tebu tribe called Gúmsuwa, and who seem to be different from the
Gúmsu mentioned further on.

E.N.E. from Mʿawó are the inhabited places Kámmegrí and Jugó, inhabited
by a peculiar tribe called el Mʿallemín by the Arabs. What their
indigenous name is I did not learn; they are most probably identical
with the tribe called Haddáda, whose original name is Búngu.

The dwelling-places of the Shitáti are very numerous, and at a greater
distance west from Mʿawó: several of them, indeed, we visited, such as
Yégil, Aghó (formerly an important place, of great antiquity), Arnánko,
Burkadrússo, Bóró. Besides these, the following are the most renowned
places of their temporary residence: Bérindé, Línkero, Kínti, Hedérke,
Din, Géringé, Tyíro, Kúlla, Laríska, two different places called Núnku,
Kaú or Kó, Líshegó, Kélemrí, Delé, Tawáder, Géno, Lérgeji, Yíggela,
Maina, Yíggu, Yakúlge, Bágalé[67], Búni, Chánga, Nduró, Lódoré, two
places with the name Kiyála (with one of which we shall soon become
acquainted as Gharni Kiyála), Bólleli, Kúttuwa, My, Kájiró, Áddufó,
Yeró.

I now proceed southwards from Mʿawó towards the south-eastern border of
Lake Tsád, the interior basin of which being tolerably well-established
by Mr. Overweg’s navigation, its outline can be laid down according to
these data with a great deal of approximative accuracy, though it is
certainly much to be regretted that we did not succeed in reaching this
district ourselves, and deciding the principal points by ocular
demonstration.


          I. ITINERARY FROM MʿAWÓ TO TÁGHGHEL, DIRECTLY SOUTH.


1st day. Róyendú, a place inhabited by a peculiar tribe of Tedá or Tebu,
called Vgýgim.

2nd. Belángara, a place inhabited by the Díbberi, who speak the Kanúri
language[68], and are said to be the original tribe of the Fugábú.
Arrive before the heat of the day.

3rd. Ghalá, a considerable village of huts inhabited by the Kúbberi, or
Kobber, who speak the Kanúri language.

4th. Jékeré, a place at present inconsiderable, but once of large size,
inhabited by the Kánku, (identical with the Kúnkuná?) a tribe or section
of the Kánembú.

5th. Arrive, before the heat is great, at the well Lefádu, without
inhabitants, make a short halt, and reach Mailo, a place with a lake
full of fish, and inhabited by a peculiar tribe called Haddáda or Búngu,
who are said to speak the Kanúri language, but go almost naked, being
only clothed with a leather wrapper round their loins, and are armed
with bows and arrows and the góliyó. They are very expert bowmen, and,
when attacked, withdraw into the dense forests of their district (to
which seems to apply the general name of Bárí), and know well how to
defend their independence in politics as well as in religion—for they
are pagans. To them belong the famous clan called, at least by the Welád
Slimán, Dwárda Hájra. A celebrated town of the Haddáda is Dímári, the
residence of Malá Díma. In Bárí there is a market held every Thursday,
as it seems, in that part of it which is nearest to Mʿawó. In 1853 the
Welád Slimán made a strict alliance with the Haddáda, and in consequence
defeated, in their woody district, the officer of Wádáy, called Agíd el
Bahr.

For the general outlines of this little-known region, the following
itinerary from Kúsuri to Mʿawó, according to the Kánemma chief Ámsakay,
is of great importance:—

  1st day. Sleep in the wilderness.

  2nd. Sleep near Káú Abúddala, a rocky eminence near the lake (see
  Denham, vol. i. p. 261.). Two routes, connecting this important spot
  with Abú-Gher and Mélé, will be given in another place.

  3rd. Yámanúk Kaléma, a large, open, straggling village, apparently
  named from the warlike chief Ámanúk or Yámanúk, well known from
  Denham’s narrative.

  4th. Bárí, a large place or district formerly under the authority of
  the sheikh of Bórnu, near the shore of the lake.

  5th. Dímári, a considerable place belonging to Díma, called by Ámsakay
  a vice-governor of Kánem.

  6th. Gúmsu, a place situated in a valley rich in date-trees, inhabited
  by Kánembú and Shúwa.

  7th. Mandó, or Mondó, a large market-place, formerly under the khalífa
  of Bórnu.

  8th. Mʿawó.

6th. Tághghel, a place situated on the border of the lagoon, and
inhabited by the Kajídi, who cultivate a good deal of corn, and have
large herds of camels. Arrive before the heat of the day. If agreeable,
you can go on from Jékeré without stopping, and reach Tághghel the same
day at sunset.

N.B.—The direction of all the wádiyán, or valleys, which you cross on
this route, is from west to east.


     II.—FROM BERÍ TO TÁGHGHEL, GOING ALONG THE BORDER OF THE LAKE.


1st day. Kólogó.

2nd. Késkawa, inhabited by the Kúbberi, with much cultivation of corn,
principally “masr” (_Zea Maïs_), besides beans; much cattle. There was
formerly also a village or district Késkawa on the southern shore of the
lake, one day from Ngála.

3rd. Kóskodó.

4th. Talgín, a considerable open village. At no great distance from this
place is a valley with date-trees. A man on foot can easily reach Talgín
in two days from Berí, sleeping in Késkawa. From Talgín the direct road
leads to Mʿawó in three days:—

  1st. Mánigá, a place inhabited by Tebu and Kánembú, and situated, as
  it seems, on a creek of the lake.

  2nd. A village inhabited by Tebu, under the authority of Kashélla
  Bacha, with a market of some importance, where a great many dates are
  sold.

  3rd. Reach Mʿawó at sunset, after having passed the heat in an open
  valley-plain with date-trees.

5th. Vuli, or Fúli. From here another route leads to Mʿawó.

6th. Kúnunú.

7th. Kánaná.

8th. Forrom, a place on _terra firma_, not to be confounded with the
island of the same name.

9th. Ngíllewá.

10th. Medí.

11th. Tághghel.

I will here only just mention that Tághghel cannot be identical with
Denham’s Tangalia, because the latter was situate about one day’s
journey south (see Denham, vol. i. p. 265.[69]), or rather S.W. from the
Bahr el Ghazál, and Tághghel lies a day and a half to the north of it.


 III.—THE BAHR EL GHAZÁL, CALLED “BURRUM” BY THE KÁNEMBÚ, AND “FÉDE” BY
                           THE TEBU GURʿAÁN.


All the accounts which I received with regard to this much talked-of
valley, which it had been our ardent desire to visit, agreed in the very
remarkable statement, that its inclination was not from the desert
towards the lake, but from the lake towards the desert. All my
informants stated that it is now dry, but that less than a hundred years
ago it formed the bed of a river or channel opening a communication by
water between the Tsád and Búrgu. Indeed some people asserted that there
was still living a very old man who, in his early youth, had made this
journey by water. The spot where this very large wádí, now dry and
densely clothed with trees, joins the Tsád, is near the south side of a
place called ʿAlimarí, distant one day and a half from Tághghel, in a
southerly direction. Start from Tághghel, sleep at Kirchímma, before
noon arrive at ʿAlimarí. But at present this connection between the lake
and the valley is said to be blocked up by sandhills near a spot called
Súggera, or Mezrák, by the Arabs, which prevents the water of the lake,
even in its highest state, from entering into the Burrum. However, more
inward, another basin is here formed, which is occasionally called
Hédebá.


                        FROM ʿALIMARÍ TO MOÍTÓ.


1st day. Kedáda, a large place, entirely inhabited by runaway slaves,
who have asserted their liberty.

2nd. Kédigi, inhabited by La Sálʿa, or el Asʿale’ Arabs.

3rd. Moíto (see Appendix VIII.)


            ʿALIMARÍ TO KÁRNAK LÓGONE, TWO AND A HALF DAYS.


Though a few of my informants were of opinion that there was a branch-
wádí uniting the Bahr el Ghazál with Lake Fittrí, nevertheless most of
them stated uniformly that they have no connection whatever, but that
several independent valleys intervene between them. This statement is
borne out by many circumstances.

The direction of the Burrum, for a considerable part of its course, is
given by the route from Mʿawó to Yʿawó, the capital of the province
Fittrí (according to my informants, due east).

1st day (short). Kálkalá, different from the place Kulákulá mentioned
above.

2nd. Gújer. Pass here the heat; start again in the afternoon; sleep on
the road. This whole district appears to have the general appellation of
Sagóre, which I think cannot be different from Yagóre, the name of the
country in which Mondó is situated.

3rd. Toróro, a well in the Burrum; before the kaila. A man on horseback
is said to go in one day from Mʿawó to the wádí. Pass here the heat;
start again at dhohor, and encamp at sunset, still in the wádí.

4th. Encamp at the beginning of the heat, still in the same wádí.

5th. In another (?) wádí.

6th. Shégeráye, a well with much water (and, according to other
informants, in the Burrum).

7th. Hájiját.

8th. Encamp between the rocks in Wádí Fáli.

9th. Fittrí.


    ITINERARY FROM YʿAWÓ TO MʿAWÓ, ACCORDING TO THE BULÁLA IBRAHÍM.


1st day. Fáli, a rocky valley belonging to Bagírmi.

2nd. Aúni, a hamlet inhabited by Bagírmi people.

3rd. Búkko.

4th. Shégeráye, a valley inhabited by Tebu Gurʿaán.

5th. Bahr el Ghazál.

6th. Kedáda, a place inhabited by Týnjur. It is a question of some
importance whether this Kedáda be identical with the Kedáda mentioned
above.

7th. Mondó, a considerable place in the district Yagóre, and therefore
sometimes called Mondó Yagóre, inhabited by Týnjur (about this curious
race of people I shall have occasion to say more in another place),
Wádáy people, and Arabs. In the same district of Yagóre lies also the
place Bugárma, governed by the chief Kedl Adúmmo. Mondó is mentioned by
Denham repeatedly under the form Mendoo or Kanem Mendoo, and was
computed by him to be distant about ten hours’ ride from his station in
the camp of the Dúggana.[70] Mondó is the residence of a governor
formerly under the authority of Bórnu, but at present (at least in 1851)
under that of Wádáy. The present governor is Fúgobo Bakr, or Ábakr
(properly Ábú Bakr); and very often the agíd el bahr resides here.

8th. Yagúbberi (the name, probably, connected with that of the Kánembú
tribe Kúbberi), inhabited by Týnjur.

9th. Mʿawó.

Here may be conveniently mentioned the stations along the celebrated
Burrum, as given to us by the Welád Slimán, which, checked by the
itineraries mentioned above, will give an approximate outline of the
windings of the valley, as laid down in the map.

Beginning at ʿAlímarí, always keeping along the Burrum, the usual
stations are the following:—

Gerén, Hebál, Shégeráye, Fajája, Múnarak, Shéddera, Toróri, Haradíbe,
Gélemní, Hagéji, Tylb-bahr (Túl el bahr?), Chúwaru, Egé.

The situation of Egé is decided by an itinerary from Ngégimi to that
place, which shall be given further on. But first I must mention one
difficulty, which leaves a little uncertainty in the configuration of
this part of the country. This difficulty regards the place Shégeráye,
which in this piece of information is mentioned as a spot and well in
the Burrum itself; while in the itineraries (p. 493.) it is indicated
rather as a different valley; but it does not seem so difficult to
account for this difference, the large valley apparently dividing
repeatedly into several branches.

About the identity of Toróri there cannot be the least doubt, as the
road from Mʿawó to this place leads by Kálkalá and Gújer.


                  SHORT ITINERARY FROM NGÉGIMI TO EGÉ.


Mayiját, bír Nefása, bír Sherífa, bír el Hósha, el Hamír, bír Hadúj, bír
el ʿAtesh, bír ben Mússebí, bír Sali, Kéderi, Díra or Díri, Bírfo (I am
not sure whether originally bír Fó), Egé.


 ANOTHER ITINERARY FROM BÍR EL KURNA TO EGÉ, TOUCHING AT BÍR EL ʿATESH
                              AND MÚSSEBÍ.


1st day. A long march; at sunset arrive at bír el ʿAtesh, north.

2nd. At dhohor encamp in the wilderness.

3rd. After four hours’ march arrive at bír ben Mússebí.

4th. About ʿaser (about half-past four o’clock, P.M.) encamp in the
wilderness.

5th. After four or five hours’ march, arrive at bír el Borfó, which is
already beyond the boundaries of Kánem. It is evident that this well is
not identical with Bírfo.

6th. Encamp in a place with plenty of hád, but only few trees.

7th. At sunset arrive in Egé.

Egé is a very celebrated locality (one prominent spot of which is called
Kukúrde) with the nomadic inhabitants of these regions, and is
temporarily frequented by a variety of tribes, who visit it in order to
water their camels from the famous wells (which are believed to promote
the growth of the camel), and to collect the fruit of the siwák, or
_Capparis_, which grows in very great abundance in this part of the
valley, while higher up it seems to be more scanty. The strongest among
these tribes in former times were the Bultu or Biltu, who will be
mentioned presently in the list of the Tebu tribes, and had formerly the
supremacy over the Nakássa, the Halál el debús (an Arab nickname, the
proper name of the tribe not being known to me), both of whom frequent
likewise Egé, and the Khiyát e’ ríh (another nickname). Besides the
tribes above-mentioned, Egé is generally frequented by the Músu, the
Sakérda, by that section of the Fugábú which is under the supremacy of
Kédl Lawáti, and occasionally by the Welád Slimán. But Egé, of course,
on account of its being resorted to by many tribes as a fine place for
their herds of camels, is also a marked point for predatory expeditions.

From Egé the Burrum or Bahr el Ghazál seems to turn to the N.W., or at
least to the N.N.W., going to Tangúr, a famous place two days from Egé.
Tangúr (where the country seems to form a large basin) is generally
regarded as the end of the Burrum; and a hypsometrical observation made
here would immediately decide the question about the inclination of the
Burrum, and show whether the very remarkable statement of the natives be
correct or not. Some people contend that the wádí extends still further
into Búrku, or Búrgu. North from Tangúr, a day or two’s march, is the
famous place Báteli, not less celebrated than Egé for its fine breed of
camels, generally of a dark-brown or a rather blackish colour, of which
I myself had occasionally a specimen in my train, and Degírshim.

After having given this piece of information with regard to the south-
east part of Kánem and the Burrum, I now proceed to give some
itineraries from the quarters of which information has been obtained in
this way, to the country of Búrku or Búrgu, about which Captain Lyons
has given so many interesting details. I will only add that Dr. Overweg
took down, from the mouth of a well-informed native, a very exact
itinerary of the route from Múrzuk to this country, which, together with
the other data and the information collected by Mr. Fresnel, goes far to
establish its position with great approximative precision.


 FROM EGÉ TO YEN OR BELED EL ʿOMIYÁN, THE CHIEF PLACE IN BÚRKU. N.N.E.


1st day. Taró or Tró, a valley with bitter water.

2nd. Karó; before the heat of the day.

3rd. Aúdánga, a well, with plenty of excellent brushwood.

4th. Tungúrki, before the heat of the day.

5th. Yaiyó el kebír, a well, with dúm-palms, and near to it Yaiyó
elsghír. Yaiyó is nine days from Só, on the Búlma road, reaching Gíri in
two days, Árraka in two more days, and from hence Só in five days.

8th. Yen, having entered the limits of Búrku on the 6th day, when you
first come to the source called ʿAín Telékka. The neighbourhood of Yen
is rich in herbage and palm-trees. The village in general consists of
houses or cottages built of stone; but the number of the inhabitants
fluctuates. Galákka is another of the principal places in Búrku. There
are several chiefs of authority in the place, the most influential of
whom seems to be Lénga or, with his title, Táwa Lénga. There is, besides
Yówórde, another chief called Kálemé, and a third one called Bíddu,
belonging to the tribe or family of the Bídduwa. As for the Kédl-Agré,
the chief of the Búltu, he also occasionally resides here. In Téki, a
locality fertilized by a large spring, another chief resides, belonging
to the Tiyówa, and called Gehénni.

Yen is eleven days from ʿArádha, the seat of the Máhamíd, the position
of which may be determined with great precision by the distance from
Wára (see Appendix, No. VI.):—1st day, Wen; 3rd, Chirógia; 7th, Oshim;
11th, ʿArádha.

I will now say a word about the tribes and families of the Tebu and
their present settlements, referring to my account of the history of the
Bórnu kingdom (Vol. II. p. 275.), and to my journey homeward in 1855 for
further particulars.

The Tebu, Tubu, or rather Tedá, I think myself still justified in
considering, as I have stated on a former occasion[71], as nearly
related to the Kanúri; and the historical relations between the two
nations, which I have had occasion to elucidate above, serve to
corroborate my opinion. The Arabs, especially the Welád Slimán,
generally add to the name Tebu the word “Grʿaán” or “Gurʿaán,” which I
think myself justified in referring to the district Goran, so often
referred to by Leo Africanus, while Marmol writes it Gorhan. The Tebu
themselves I never heard use the name, and forgot to ask the meaning of
the word. I will here only add, that in their own language they call the
Kanúri by the name of Túgubá, while they give to the Imóshagh, or
Tawárek, the name of Yéburdé. I shall first mention those Tebu tribes
who live in and near Kánem, and have already been mentioned
occasionally, then proceed northwards, and from thence to the south-
east.

The principal tribes settled in Kánem are the Woghda, the Dogórda, the
Gádeá, the Yewórma[72], and the Fídda; in Lúmna, on the komádugu Wáúbe,
the Éderé or Édurí; north of the komádugu, as far as Beduwáram, the
Búlgudá, called by the Arabs and Bórnu people Dáza; near Beduwáram the
Wándala, a tribe already mentioned by Captain Lyon, as well as by Major
Denham[73]; near them the Aússa; about the well of Ághadem the Bolodúwa,
called (by the Kanúri) ám Wadébe; along the Burrum, called “féde” by the
Tebu, the Kárda, called generally Kréda, separated into several
families, the principal of which are the Gelímma, the Grasón (this I
think rather the name of a chief, all the names of tribes ending with a
vowel), and Bukóshelé; the Shindakóra, with the chief Ábú Nakúr; the
Sakerda, with Bakáikoré; the Médemá and the Nóreá, generally called
Nwórmá[74]; in Egé and Báteli, the Músu, with their chief Wúdda; in
Tongúr, the Nakássa, a section of whom are the Un, with the chief Máina;
in Bilma, or Bulma (which probably is the right form), and the wádí
Kawár, or rather “hénderi Tedá,” as it is called by the natives, the
tribe of the Gésera or Gésedi.

In Tibésti (a general name which once seems to have had a wider range
than it has at present) and Báteli:—the Temághera[75], as they are
generally called, a very interesting tribe, of ancient historical
importance (which I have already mentioned on a former occasion as
probably having given the name to the province of Demágherim, and which
in the time of Edrís Alawóma was settled in Ngurúti [written Ghugúti] in
Kánem), with the chief Gurdé, who has succeeded to Tehárke; the Gonda or
Gunda, whose old chief Taher Asar died some time ago (the same who
wanted to write a letter to King George, in Denham’s time) in Bordé (the
Berdai of Capt. Lyon), one of the principal localities in Tibésti, and
in other places; the Árindá in Dírkemáwu, another locality of Tibésti,
with the chief Kénemé. North from Tibésti, in the valley Tʿawó, the Abó,
a name which has often, by Lyon and even by M. Overweg in the itinerary
just mentioned, been mistaken for that of a place.

These latter tribes together, I think, form the group generally called
Tebu Resháde, but with the indigenous appellation “Tedetú.”

In Ójánga or Wajánga[76], eastward from Tibésti, and north-eastward from
Búrku in the direction of Kúffara, with Kebábo, which latter place, by
the people of Búrgu, is called Tesser:—the tribe of the Wónya with the
chief Onókke; the Matátena or Gúrin, to the south of them, in fertile
valleys producing even figs.

In Búrku:—the Búltu, called by the Arabs by the nickname of Nejʿa el
Keléb, with their powerful chief the kedl-Agré, and residing part of the
year in Yen, but after the dates have been gathered, generally settled
in the district called Keré Búrku, and at other seasons in Egé; under
the authority of the kedl-Agré are also the Kírdidá in Kírdi[77], the
Guruwá in Gur, and the Elbuwéda in Elbuwé; the Yenowá, with their chief
Alánga, or rather Lénga, in Yen; the Dóza, with their chief Kálema in
Búdda, a valley east of Yen; the Yerda in a locality of the same name
about half a day’s march east from Yen, with the chief Yíle; the Téyewá
in Téke, a favoured spot or valley at present under the authority of
Gehénni, their former chief, Saháyi, the father of a numerous family,
having died; in the large valley ʿArádha, on the borders of Wádáy, the
Mohéde, formerly under ʿOthmán Beléde, who died some time ago, and,
further on, the Zogháwa, a very numerous and powerful tribe.

I should have now to enumerate the tribe of the Terauye or Bédeyát (or,
as they are called by the Arabs, Áuwa), who live in the district Énnedi,
intersected with a great many valleys, one of which is called Káúle, and
another, in the neighbourhood of Wádáy, Níyu, if I were sure that they
belong to the nation of the Tebu. But the few words of their language
which I was able to ascertain, such as water, fire, are entirely
different from the corresponding words in módi Tedá:—“water,” mí
(Terauye), éyi (Tedá); “fire,” jó (Terauye), wuëni (Tedá). One of their
chiefs is Rúzzi, who has become well known on account of his connection
with the mercantile enterprise of ʿAbd el Kerím Sabún the king of
Wádáy.[78] This chief, who was still living in 1851, is a Moslim, while
most of the Terauye are pagans.


[Footnote 64: The name is written in Arabic in very different ways, the
MS. account of the expeditions of Edrís sometimes having the form معوا
at others ماوا; but the real indigenous form seems to be Mʿawó, a name
exactly similar to Gʿawó, that of the capital of the Sónghay empire, and
Yʿawó, the residence of the Bulála princes. It is not improbable that by
corruption the name Mátán, which by Ebn Sʿaíd and Abú ’l Fedá (p. 162.)
is given to a well-known place in Kánem, has originated in the name of
Mʿawó, although they place it close on the shore of the Tsád (bahíret
Kúrí), and north from Njímiye.]

[Footnote 65: In this last statement there may be some error.]

[Footnote 66: May the name Fúgó, Fugábú, have any connection with the
tribe of the Fúgu mentioned by Masúdi (_Golden Meadows_, chap. xxxiii.
p. 138. MS. Transl. R. Asiatic Society)?]

[Footnote 67: Bágalé is certainly an interesting example of the homonymy
of African names in distant countries.]

[Footnote 68: From the origin of the people the name of the place is
probably derived; for Bille Ngáre is the name which the inhabitants of
Logón give to the Kanúri.]

[Footnote 69: In this passage, however, it seems almost as if there were
a misunderstanding, “in a day” instead of “once.”]

[Footnote 70: Denham’s Journal, vol. i. p. 262, ff. It is not quite
clear whether Denham reckons the fifty miles (p. 267.) to Mendoo or to
Mʿawó, but probably to Mʿawó. The name Korata Mendooby (p. 267.) means
the Keráda (Fugábú) of Mondó.]

[Footnote 71: Vol. II. p. 276. note.]

[Footnote 72: The Yewórma, as well as the Tymmélme and Yéggada, have
been almost annihilated by the Tawárek.]

[Footnote 73: As for the Traita, mentioned by Lyon, p. 265., and by
Major Denham repeatedly, vol. i. p. 42. _et seq._, I think that this
name is not indigenous; at least I have been unsuccessful in getting
information respecting a people so called. Denham himself calls them
once “the people of Traita.”]

[Footnote 74: Under this form they came also under Burckhardt’s notice.
(Travels in Nubia, 2nd ed. Appendix I. p. 435.)]

[Footnote 75: There seems to be some Berber element in the word; but I
think it is more apparent than real, for the word is distinctly written
by Imám Áhmed Tumághira.]

[Footnote 76: See Capt. Lyon’s Narrative, p. 266., where a rather
exaggerated account is given of the irrigation of the country, which
seems certainly not to be at all sterile throughout.]

[Footnote 77: This name has obviously nothing to do with the name which
the Kanúri give to pagans; the Tebu called pagans “érdi.”]

[Footnote 78: See Fresnel, _Bulletin de la Soc. de Géogr._ 1849, 3me
série, t. xi. p. 53.]




                              APPENDIX II.

 GEOGRAPHICAL DETAILS CONTAINED IN “THE DIVAN,” OR ACCOUNT GIVEN BY THE
 IMÁM ÁHMED BEN SOFÍYA[79] OF THE EXPEDITIONS OF THE KING EDRÍS ALAWÓMA
                          FROM BÓRNU TO KÁNEM.


                           FIRST EXPEDITION.


1 day, Ghambarú. غَمْبَرُوا, starting from Birni Ghasréggomo.

„ Zantam زَنْتَم.

„ Kishímuwa كشموه (returning westward).

„ Zantam (returning eastward).

„ Ghotúwa غتوه.

Several days, Berí بري[79], having made short marches. However, the king
did not encamp in the town of Berí itself, but round about a fortified
place (شوكيه) called Ghátigha غَاتِغْه, which according to other
accounts was situated at some little distance from the town of Berí.
Berí was a celebrated place, on account of its situation, and of great
importance in the intercourse between Bórnu and Kánem.[80]

1 day, Furtú فُرتُوا (arrival at the time of the káila, or kiyúla),
passing by Sakala سكله, a locality (مكان), not an inhabited place, and
by the town Ghayawá غَيَوا. The town of Furtú or Furtúwa is of the
greatest importance in the geography of Kánem, as it is identical with
the Íklí or Íkelí mentioned by Makrízí.[81] Imám Áhmed writes اِكْلِهْ.
But it had besides a third name, viz. Gháljadú, or Gháljadúwá
غَلْجَدُوا.

„ Alále, اْلاله, with easterly direction.

„ Ghibúwa-kanjiyíz غِبُوَ كَنْجِيِز, a locality, not an inhabited place.

„ Daghál دغال.

„ Burum بُرُم.

„ Róro بلد رُورُ.

„ Keswadá كَسوَدا.

„ Ghumámí غُمَامي.

„ Súlú or Súlúwá سُولُوا. This place in another passage[82] is called by
the author a seat of the Kenaníya, a tribe which in former times seems
to have formed the principal stock of the population of Kánem, and who
were hostile to the people of Bórnu, but who appear to have suffered
greatly by the expeditions of Edrís. See further on.

„ Múlghim مُولْغِم.

„ Kurú or Kurúwá كُرُوَا.

„ Melajerá, a river النهر المسمي بِمَلجَرا.[83]

„ Rimbawá رِمبَوا.

„ Mʿawó, written here معوا, but soon afterwards ماوا and p. 16. ماُو
(even مَاوُو by mistake). He arrived here a little before zawál. The
situation of Berí being ascertained by ourselves, and that of Mʿawó
being laid down with approximative certainty, the whole route, supposing
that it runs in a tolerably straight line, could be described with some
approach to exactness in a map. Of course the uncertainty increases as
we pass beyond this place into the south-eastern quarter of Kánem. Mʿawó
was then a place celebrated throughout the whole of Kánem; but it was
not the residence of any powerful chief. ʿAbd el Jelíl the Bulála prince
at that time resided in Yitúkurma (or Yutúkurma, for both forms
appear[84] يِتُوكُرْمه and يُتُوكُرْمَهْ) distant from Mʿawó “megíl”
(that is to say, from five to six hours’ march, at a very swift rate),
in a S.E. direction, as it seems.

From Mʿawó Edrís directed his course to Wasámí وَسَاْمِي in a northerly
direction (p. 18.) distant about zawál, while the host of the Bulála
came to Kírsila كِرْسِلَه, which probably[85] lay west of Wasámi. The
Bulála fled (at the dhahúwe); Edrís went towards the southern parts of
Kánem, arrived between dhohor and ʿaser at Mánmana مَنْمَنَه, where
there was no water.

From hence to Tasa تَسه or Tusa تُسه. Arrived about zawál. Evidently a
large place, as he remained here eight days. Here the Bulála fled a
second time.

From Tasa, Njímiye or Shímiye (here written السِيمِ, a little further on
الجِيم, and a few lines previously السيِمَ), before zawál; the old
capital before the time of Dáúd. Unfortunately he does not add in what
direction he went.

Here Edrís had the Kurán read thrice at the sepulchres of the old kings
of Bórnu.

From Njímiye Edrís went to Ágháfí الاَغَافي, where there was a fortified
place of the Bulála; arrived at dhohor (after a short delay on the
march), met the hostile army there, who instantly turned their backs.

From Ágháfí to Sendú سَندُوه.

From Sendú to Íkima اكِمَه.

From Íkima returned to Ágháfí, and celebrated there the ʿAíd el Fotr
according to the old fashion of Bórnu.

From Ágháfí to Fifísi فِفِيسِه, starting in the evening; marched the
whole night, and arrived in the morning. Made here much booty, ʿAbd el
Jelíl having taken to flight.

From Fifísi returned to Ágháfí in two days and a half, while ʿAbd el
Jelíl was in Ghasikú غَسكُوا north from Ágháfí.

From Ágháfí Edrís went to Njímiye, starting at the beginning of ʿaser
and arriving at el ʿashá.

From Njímiye he then went to Melíma مَليمَه from dhohor till mughreb at
a swift rate.

From Melíma to Ghasikú.

From Ghasikú returned to Ágháfí by Melíma and Njímiye, and resided there
for a long time, collecting the chiefs of the Bulála and even the Arabs
and the tribe of Fittrí, and conferring the government of Kánem on the
fáki Mohammed ben ʿAbd-Allah.

From Ágháfí Edrís went to Ghamtilú the burial-place of Bíri ben Dúnama.

From Ghamtilú, southwards to Belághi بَلَاغِ.

(While the King Edrís went to Belághi, his imám, Áhmed ben Sofíya, the
author of the history of Edrís’ expeditions, keeping more to the west,
visited an old mosque called مسجد اَرْمِي apparently one of the first
places of Mohammedan worship in the country.)

From Belághi Edrís went again southwards, in the direction of the lake
الى جهة النهر من اليمين to Fisla فِسلَه where he remained a long time,
receiving embassies from Arabs and Kúka, or rather Kúkú كوكوا and
Fittrí.

From Fisla Edrís turned westwards towards Bórnu:—

First to Díyawá ديَوا where he made some stay.

From Diyawá to Ghalá, or rather Ngalá, غَلَا.

From Ngalá to Áwano, اوَنُه.

From Áwano to ʿAlúwa, علُوَه.

From ʿAlúwa (returned?) to Ngalá.

From Ngalá to Madaghama مَدَغَمه where he was joined by Mohammed ben
ʿAbd-Allah and his army.

From Madaghama, having heard that ʿAbd el Jelíl had come again to
Yitukurma, Edrís returned once more eastward to Ngalá, thence again to
Madaghama.

From Madaghama, proceeding straight for Bórnu, in one long day, to Súlú.

From Súlú to Keghusiti, كغُسِطِه.

From Keghusiti to Síki, البلد سِيكِه, which at that time formed the
frontier between Bórnu and Kánem, on which account the drum was there
beaten.

From Síki to the district of the Sugurti or Sukurti ارض سُكُرْت.

From Sugurti to Bulúghi بُلُوغِ.

From Bulúghi to Ngughúti (Ngurúti) غوغوته, further on غُغُوته.

From Ngughúti to Berí.

But his return to Bórnu was frustrated; for, having learnt in Berí the
news of a battle fought between ʿAbd el Jelíl and Mohammed, whom he had
made governor of Kánem, near Yitukurma, in which the latter was
apparently vanquished, he returned once more to the east, dividing his
army into two portions, and taking only one division with him.

From Berí to Ghátíghi (here written غاتىْغِه) the same fortified place
which has been before mentioned as lying quite in the neighbourhood of
Berí, and where the armies used to assemble.

From Ghátíghi or Ghátiga to Ngughúti.

From Ngughúti to Bulúghi.

From Bulúghi to Kirteti (?) كرتتي.

From Kirteti to Keghusiti.

From Keghusiti to Ririkmi رِرِكْمِه.

From Ririkmi to Gharni-Kiyála غَرْني كِيَالَه a large walled town,
evidently one of the two Kiyála mentioned (p. 484.) as belonging to
Shitáti.

From Gharni-Kiyála to Yesembú يَسمبُوا starting in the night, at a swift
rate, and reaching the place after sunrise; but apparently it did not
lie in his way, as he returned from thence into the direct road.

From hence to Wasámi.

From Wasámi to Melíma, reaching it at the káila (about eleven o’clock).

From Melíma to Njímiye (east), arriving in the evening.

From Njímiye to Ágháfí, or the fortress of Ágháfí, starting after
midnight, and arriving before sunrise. Pursuing thence ʿAbd el Jelíl, he
caught part of his Zmála, with the queen Ghumsu Wábi.

From Ágháfí returned to Njímiye.

(The khalífa Yeríma Yaghá, whom Edrís had left with the sick in Wasámi,
pursuing his march from thence at a slow rate towards the north (الى جهة
الشمال), went first to Díru ديرُ.

From Díru to Madhími مَضِيمِ.

From Madhími to Njímiye, where he met Edrís.)

From Njímiye Edrís went eastwards to Kawál كَوَالْ. Arrived at dhahawe
(about nine o’clock A.M.).

From Kawál he started at midnight; went first south, at dawn turned
eastwards gradually towards the north, and fell upon the Tebu (evidently
about the Bahr el Ghazál).

Returned from this predatory excursion to Kawál.

From Kawál returning to Njímiye [apparently by a long detour], went
first to Saghi (Sheghi, Shiri?) سَغِه which he reached at sunset.

From Saghi, starting before sunrise, reached Njímiye by way of Íkma
اِكْمَه and Ghurfala غُرْفَلَ.

The return of Edrís to Njímiye happened just at the right time; for the
Bulála king, who had received the news of Edris’ return to Kánem on his
way to Bagírmi, or as it is here written, in the form usual to the
Kanúri, Bagharmí بَغَرْمي led his host against the Bórnu army, and had
almost succeeded in taking the camp by surprise, when Edrís arrived and
compelled him to fly.

From Njímiye Edrís now went to Ghimará غِمَرا.

From Ghimará, in a southerly direction, to Satóm سَتُوم a place close to
Yitukurma.

From Satóm to Daghelú or Daghelwá دغلوِا, where ʿAbd el Jelíl had taken
up his residence, but fled. [Daghelú, most probably, is identical with
Taghghel.]

Returning from Daghelú to Satóm, Edrís met his vizier in Kargha-Simsim
كرغه سِمسِم[86] [consequently Daghelú lay south from Kargha, or in the
southern part of Kargha].

In Simsim, Edrís had a conference with some Arabs [Shúwa] and Tebu or
Tubu تُبُ as Áhmed generally writes the name. The latter chose to
migrate to Bórnu, while the former, who enjoyed a strict alliance with
the Bórnu king, remained behind in Kánem.

From Simsim Edrís went northwards to Bárí باري [evidently the district
mentioned above]. (The vizier also, whom Edrís had left behind in Satóm,
in order to meet his master in Simsim, had traversed Bárí).[87]

From Bárí Edrís went to Mandó مندو [Mandó Yagóre].

From Mandó Edrís went northwards, when he became aware that the enemy
was marching westwards, and changed his march till he came to Kitaki (?)
البلد كِطَكِ.

ʿAbd el Jelíl, being pursued, fled into the desert.

(The officer Mídalá ben Fátima, left in Mandó, followed his king slowly,
but nevertheless, on starting from Mandó, did not encamp before he had
passed Mʿawó.

Having in this encampment received the order to come to Yira, he went
first to Yíkima يِكِمه.

Thence to Yira يِرَه where he arrived at the time of the hejír, that is
to say, a little past twelve o’clock.

From hence he went to Sitati (probably Shitáti) سِطَطِ(thus written
thrice).[88]

From Shitáti Edrís turned westwards on his home-journey to Bórnu, but
encamped the first day quite near, where the Arabs (Shúwa) took leave of
him.

From hence he proceeded slowly to Berí[89], where the booty was divided,
and all those among the captives who were free men allowed to return to
their families or tribes, without any ransom, according to a very
remarkable custom observed from ancient times by the Bulála, in their
predatory incursions into Bórnu—a first germ of international law.


                           SECOND EXPEDITION.


Scarcely had Edrís Alawóma dismissed his governors and officers, in
order to prepare all that was wanted for another expedition into Kánem,
when he received the news that his indefatigable and harassing enemy had
come into the neighbourhood of Bulúji, or Bulúghi.

Edrís therefore hastened back from his favourite town Ghambarú, when
ʿAbd el Jelíl turned off towards the north to Kara كَرَه or Kura كُره
and Jitkú جِتْكُوا [probably so called from the Tebu tribe of that
name], while Edrís ben Harún, the faithful and valiant vizier of the
Bórnu king, was stationed in the neighbouring town of Butti بُتِّه.

Edrís came from Berí to Ghayawá غَيَوَا, where he met his vizier.

From Ghayawá he came to the district of the Sugurti arriving about the
ʿashá.

From Sugurti he went to “the red water” الما لاحمر.

From this place, instead of taking the road by Súlú, he kept more to the
north, reached a copious well at zawál (between twelve and one o’clock),
started again at ʿaser, and reached at sunset the well Rubki رُبْكِه or
Rubku رُبْكُه with irrigated plantations (khattatír).

From Rubku, starting at midnight, reached Íkeríma اِكريمه where ʿAbd el
Jelíl had taken up his residence, about zawál, made a great booty; the
Bulála king fled.

Edrís returned from Íkeríma to Rubku in two days and a half.

From Rubku he returned to Berí, and from thence returned to Ghambarú, as
it would seem from Imám Áhmed’s account, at an enormously swift rate,
traversing the space from Berí to Ghambarú, 130 geogr. miles in a
straight line, in about 25 hours’ actual march.

Start from Berí at ʿaser, arrive at Kebúwa كَبُوَه at the ʿashá.

Start from Kebúwa in the morning, arrive at Kikeri كِكَرِه at the káíla.

Start from Kikeri in the afternoon, arrive at Debúbu دبُوبُو or دبُوبُه
at the ʿashá.

Start from Debúbu in the morning, arrive at Ruwáyah رُوَايَه at the
káíla.

From hence Ghambarú, a few miles, from the beginning till the end of
ʿaser.


                           THIRD EXPEDITION.


Edrís having rested but a short time, immediately prepared another
expedition, in order to return to Kánem before the gathering in of the
dates.

The army collected in Ghátigha close to Berí.

Setting out from thence, along the shores of the Tsáde, or Tsádi يسير
بطرف النهر ثَادِ he went to Ngughúti.

From Ngughúti to Bulúji.

From Bulúji to the district of the Sugurti.

From hence to Róro, from whence he sent his light and choice cavalry in
advance.

From Róro to Kimisnó البلد كِمِسْنو arrived at zawál.

From Kimisnó, starting at the beginning of the ʿaser, at a very swift
rate, reached before sunset Lebá لَبا, a celebrated locality with
artificial irrigation.

From Lebá, proceeding in an easterly direction, to Gharni Kiyála, in two
days and a half.

From Gharni Kiyála, starting at ʿaser, following an easterly direction,
for Ísembú, or Yisembú, dismounting only at sunset to cook, and feed the
horses; and thus continuing on the whole night, and only dismounting
again to say the prayer of dawn, Edrís continued his march till he had
passed Wasámi, which was near Yisembú, evidently towards the west, and
made a rich booty.

From Yisembú he went to Delli البلد دَلِّه which was famous on account
of its richness in dates, and its general exuberance. Here he gathered
the dates in all the different stages of maturity.

From Delli, Edrís turned westwards, in order to join the officer Yíruma
Yaghá, when, receiving intelligence that the Tebu wanted to cut him off,
he attacked them, and made an immense slaughter.

Went from hence to “the great well”—name not given.

From hence to Gharni Kiyála, following an experienced Tebu guide.

From Gharni Kiyála Edrís turned eastward towards the places or valleys
rich in date-trees. Encamped in a vale بقعة.

From hence he went without stopping till he reached Yídh يِضْ or Yídhi
يِضِه a place especially famous on account of its dates.

From hence he turned southwards, and went to Fógha فوغه likewise rich in
dates. (Another place with date-trees is here mentioned, of the name of
Debekú.)

From Fógha back to Delli, or rather a little beyond it.

From hence in several days, in a southerly direction, he went to Íwana
إِوَنه, in the southern part of Kánem.

From hence, by way of Delmi, he went to Daghelú or Daghulwá, here
written دَغُلوَا, the place above-mentioned, but which, on this
occasion, the historian represents as a place especially celebrated with
the people of Kánem, and at that time extremely wealthy. Slept on the
shore of the lagoons, as his whole road led through numbers of lagoons
or ponds, just then full of water; arriving the next morning at the
town, found it empty, but the Koyám, and those of his army who were
mounted upon camels, followed the people northwards, and made rich
booty.

The king of the Bulála and his party meanwhile fled into the desert.

Edrís returned homewards towards Bórnu.

First to Ngalá, a cluster of villages, or rather district البلد غلا او
الفليم غلا.

From Ngalá to Tentebú تَنْتبُوا.

From Tentebú to Róro.

From Róro northwards to Siru سِرُه. In going, Edrís employed a day and a
night يوما وليلا but on returning from Siru to Róro only marched from
morning till sunset, so that the distance cannot be very great, as he
was then laden with spoil (a great booty in cattle and goats, but no
camels).

From Róro to Limárá لِمَارَا, where he stopped two days.

From thence to Ghayáwa.

From Ghayáwa he took another road to Dilárá دِلارا where he left half of
his army, returning with the other half to Ghambarú.


                         FOURTH[90] EXPEDITION.


The next year, on the first Sunday in Shawál, Edrís again left Ghambarú,
reached Kesúdá by way of Zamtam, Ítanáwa, Berí, Ngurúti or Ngughúti,
Sugurti, Róro.

From Kesúda, leaving the road to Ghumámi on one side, he went to Síki.

From Síki to Rírikma ريركمه.

From Rírikma to Wagham وَغَم.

From Wagham to Wasámi.

From Wasámi to Mʿawó or Máwó, here written ماوا.

From Mʿawó to Ghamirá غَمِرَا.

From Ghamirá to Njímiye, the chief town of Kánem المدينه الكبيره البلد
الكبير.

From Njímiye to Belághi, taking with him a great provision of water.

From Belághi to Ágháfí; starting at ʿaser, arrived before sunset.

From Ágháfí to Ghanjáya, arriving near zawál.

From Ghanjáya to Ragharkú رغَرْكوا.

In their fortified encampment near this place the Bórnu army on the 25th
Dhu el kadá, was attacked at night by the Bulála, when a very severe
struggle ensued, and the camp was almost taken by the enemy with great
slaughter of the Bórnu people, and considerable loss of property.

From Ragharkú Edrís went to Delli, when the Bulála gave up their last
stronghold, Aghó اغو or اغوا, a very old place which they had rebuilt
and restored after Edrís had destroyed all their strongholds in Kánem,
even the two other most famous places Íkima and Ágháfí.[91] Aghó was
evidently situated on the brink of the vale or hollow which we passed on
our march, the 10th of October; and Delli is identical with the place
mentioned above among the most important inhabited spots of Shitáti.

From Delli Edrís went southwards towards Kelu كَلُه very slowly, till
they crossed the river which divides Kánem from Kelu[92], and he pursued
his march till he came to Listerí لِسْتِرِي a place which is stated to
have belonged formerly to the tribe of the Kilábetí كِلَابتِي and which
contained a great number of cottages or tents كثيرة البيوت. I should
believe that Kelu is the country of the Kaleáma in the south-eastern
quarter of the Tsád, if anything were said about his having crossed Bárí
and Kargha; but at least it is evident that it was a distant march of
several days.

From Kelu, Edrís returned northwards, and fought a sanguinary battle
with ʿAbd el Jelíl, the Bulála king, before Kiyáyaka كِيَايَكَهْ (a
little further on less correct كِياكَهْ).

Kiyáyaka was a district where the Bulála, after their other strongholds
Íkima, Ágháfi, and Aghó had been destroyed, had built a new fortress, at
the instigation, it is said, of the princesses. This fortification, or
rather group of three different forts, Yekí يَكِي, Makaranna مَكَرَنّه,
and Kurkuriwa كُرْكُروَه[93], became a large and important place, the
Bulála transferring thither by force the inhabitants from all parts of
Kánem, with the exception of those of Tetálúwa or Tetálú تتالوا and
Áfági افاقِه.[94] But principally they settled there all the Tebu, even
the Keserdá (كَسردًا) most probably a mistake instead of Sakerdá, so
that but few of this tribe remained behind in Kánem. The Bulála made,
moreover, strict alliance with the people of the south (اهل جهة اليمين),
the people of Kargha, in order to provide them with corn, which they
bought with tobes and cattle. This intercourse ceased only when Edrís
came to Ragharkú.

The battle which was fought near this important place of Kiyáyaka, was
won by the king Edrís through his personal valour, after much slaughter
on both sides, when he entered the town, and having encamped there for
two days, all the time beating the drum, burnt the whole place.

From Kiyáyaka Edrís went eastward to Mi بلد مِه probably the place of
this name mentioned above as belonging to Shitáti, although this would
carry back the situation of Kiyáyaka very far westward, as from the
author’s words it appears that the distance between both places was
considerable.

(Meanwhile his vizier pursued ʿAbd el Jelíl to Kawál, evidently the
place mentioned above;

From Kawál to Kuwáka كواكه.

From Kuwáka to Ítanáwa, also mentioned on a former occasion.

From Ítanáwa, while ʿAbd el Jelíl fled into the open desert, the vizier
Edrís fell upon the Tebu and made great plunder. He went thence and
joined his master the sultan in Mi, where they celebrated the ʿAíd el
kebír.)

From Mi, Edrís returned to Kiyáyaka.

(From Kiyáyaka the king sent Farkama Mohammed to Kála الى البلد كَالَه.)

Edrís himself went from Kiyáyaka to Gharikú, where he had a long
conference with the Arabs.

From Gharikú he proceeded a great distance northwards on an expedition
against the Tebu, while he sent the heavy part of his army to Njímiye.

Having vanquished the Tebu, he returned to Tínu تِينُه.

From Tínu to Njímiye, south, from dhohor to sunset, and from morning to
zawál.

In Njímiye the Tebu came to make their submission, and in the sansanne
(evidently the fortified camp of his army), which the sultan then
entered, he received legations from the inhabitants of Fittrí اهل البلد
فِتْرِي and from the Arab or Shúwa chief ʿAli ben Yerdha, and a
messenger from the tribe of the Kúka من قبيله كوكو مِلِه (what Mili is I
do not know, but suppose it to be the name of a particular spot or
division of the Kúka). During his stay here he was plentifully supplied
with corn by the Arabs.

(From Njímiye Edrís sent part of his army in pursuit of ʿAbd el Jelíl,
who had turned westwards, and then probably to the north, for the Bórnu
men directed their course first to the northward, but, having gone to a
great distance without finding ʿAbd el Jelíl, gave up their pursuit, and
ransacked the town Kiríwa كِريوَه.

From Kiríwa they went to Mʿawó to wait for the sultan.)

Edrís himself went from Njímiye westward to Ghamirá غمِرَا made an
alliance with its inhabitants.

From Ghamirá southward to (?[95]), and remained there some time.

From this place, which is somewhere in the south about Kargha, Edrís
returned to Mʿawó, where he met his people.

From Mʿawó Edrís began his home-journey to Bórnu:—

First to Málehí مالَهِي.

From Málehí to Múlí Ghim and Múlí Fúlí الى الموليين مُولِي غِم ومُولِي
فولِ.

From Múlí to Súlú سولوا where he fixed his camp in a place called Fíyú
فيو.

From Sulú to Kesúdá كسودا.

From Kesúdá, by the well-known places Róró, Sugurti, Bulúji, Ngughúti,
to the celebrated place Ghátigha, or Ghátighi, near Berí.

From Ghátigha to Ítanáwa, starting at ʿaser and arriving at ashá.

From Ítanáwa to Ruwáya.

From Ruwáya to Ghambarú.


                           FIFTH EXPEDITION.


Having spent ten days in his favourite place Ghambarú in great
festivity, Edrís prepared another expedition to Kánem against the tribe
of the Kenáníye قبيلة الكنانيِة. I have already spoken of this tribe on
a former occasion[96]; and I must confess that I doubt whether the name
Kenáníye be indigenous, but rather think that the people who bear it are
identical with the Haddáda, or Bongu, who seem to have once formed a
very numerous tribe, and may have been the original inhabitants of Kánem
altogether. At that time the principal seat of this remarkable tribe was
Súlú, the place mentioned already repeatedly, and were therefore
generally known under the name of “the people of Súlú” اهل سولوا. But
being afraid of the Bórnu king, whose wrath they had provoked by their
predatory habits, they left their seats, while he was returning from
Kánem, and retired to Kargha كَرْغَه.[97]

Edrís collected his army in Fakará about middle of Jumád I.

From Fakará he went to Dalikina دَلِكِنه; arrived at káíla.

From Dalikina to Madáwa مداوَه; arrived at káíla.

From Madáwa to Keri Kurúku كَرِه كُرُوكُ, arriving at noon.

From Keri Kurúku to Keri or Kuri Keramnú كُرِه كَرمْنُوه.

From Keramnú to Wurni وُرنِه, arriving at kaila.

From Wurni to Lebúdu, arriving at noon.

From Lebúdu to Kesúdá.

Then by Bulúji, Berí [erroneously written for Burrum], to Róro.

Having arrived at Róro at noon, he left it again at ʿaser, said the
prayers of mughreb at a ghadír called Kitanáka كِتَناكهْ, started again
in the evening, and arrived at Síki about two o’clock in the morning.

In Síki he divided his army into three parts, one going with the
keghámma southwards to Ríríkma رِيرِيكْمَه and other places of the
Kenáníye, another with the Yeríma, northwards, to Máy and the district
thereabouts, inhabited by the same tribe.

Edrís himself took the middle road towards Dídí دِيدىِ and other places
in the neighbourhood, made a great plunder (about one thousand slaves),
and then turned back.

From Dídí to Ríríkma, where he arrived at ʿaser.

From Ríríkma he went and encamped near a celebrated ethel-tree which
marked the very frontier of Kánem, having rested during the heat a
couple of hours at the ghadír or pond of Kitanáka, where he arrived at
zawál.

From the frontier (which must have been somewhere near Síki; see above)
to Róro.

(From thence by the great road to Birni.)

From Róro to Burrum [here again by mistake Berí is written].

From Burrum to Bulúji.

From Bulúji to Fúrtu.

From Fúrtu to Melfífí (not a town, but a pond or basin الحوض المسمي
بملفيفي), apparently not far from Berí.

From Melfífí to the place Merdalí البلد مَردَلِي.

From Merdalí to Ghuwi Kefúkwa غُوِه كفوكْوَه, where he met a caravan of
Bórnu and Tebu merchants with plenty of horses.

From thence to Ghíghir البلد المعروف بغيغِر, starting at dhohor, and
arriving at the end of ʿaser.

From Ghíghir to Ghiskirú البلد غِسكِرُوا.

From thence to Zamtam.

From Zamtam to Ghambarú, having crossed the river البحر الكبير.

From Ghambarú to Birni, or Burni, in the evening.

The result of this expedition had been that the tribe of the Kenaníye,
which had hitherto been the most numerous in Kánem, was entirely
humiliated.


                LAST EXPEDITION TO THE BORDERS OF KÁNEM.


When Edrís received the news in Birni that Mohammed ben ʿAbd Allah, whom
he had made king of Kánem, had vanquished the Bulála king ʿAbd el Jelíl,
chiefly with the assistance of the Arabs, or Shúwa, and especially that
of the powerful chief ʿAlí ben Yerdha, he returned once more to Kánem in
shawál, going—

From Ghambarú to Zamtam;

From Zamtam to Ghetú;

From Ghetú to Mílu;

From Mílu to Ledá لدا;

From Ledá to Burkumúwa بُركُموه;

From Burkumúwa to Ghawáli غَوَالِه;

From Ghawáli to Milti;

From Milti to Berí, here written بَرِيَه;

From Berí to Ghayawá;

From Ghayawá to Melhú مَلْهُوا;

From Melhúwa to Dighimsil دِغمسل;

From Dighimsil to Hughulghula حُغُلْغُله, near Dílaram دِيلَرَم;

From Hughulghula to Róro;

From Róro to Kesúdá.

From Kesúdá to Síki, here distinguished by the surname داننمَه (_sic_).

Here he met the new king of Kánem, Mohammed ben ʿAbd Allah, and had a
conference with him on the subject of the borders of their respective
kingdoms; and they stipulated that the whole of Keghusti and the whole
of Síru (Shíri), as well as Babáliyá, should belong to Bórnu.[98] The
latter condition, in particular, is of great interest.

Mohammed ben ʿAbd Allah took an oath of obedience, and in conformity the
officers of the Bulála took two oaths,—the first to the king of Bórnu,
and the second to that of Kánem.

Having held a review of the army, Edrís returned by Síki, Róro, Dílaram,
Bulúji, Ghayawá, Berí, Multi, Dídí, Mílu, Ruwáya, Berselma, Ghatawa, and
across the komádugu النهر الجاري to Birni.


[Footnote 79: See Vol. II. p. 260. I remark once for all that the names
in the MS. are written in the Maghrebi or Warash style; but they shall
here be given in the Eastern or Ábú ʿOmár character.]

[Footnote 80: وهو بلد مشهور عند كل من يذهب الى بلد كانم من اهل برنوا.]

[Footnote 81: See Vol. II. p. 277.]

[Footnote 82: MS. p. 101.]

[Footnote 83: This river is a very important feature in the country, and
would be easily identified if a traveller were to visit those southern
regions of Kánem.]

[Footnote 84: These two different forms occur in many Kanúri and Tebu
names:—Bulma and Bilma, burni (as Imám Áhmed always writes) and birni,
and so on.]

[Footnote 85: Very questionable; the Bulála when flying retired
eastward.]

[Footnote 86: In my MS., before this name there is a slight mistake,
caused by a repetition of the first part of the name.]

[Footnote 87: In Bárí the vizier fell in with a kafila of strangers whom
he plundered:

الذي وجد فيه الرفقا الذين كانوا مع كَوُمه من اهل الاَرمي. Kaúma probably
was a governor of the town Kaú, the place of Shitáti mentioned p. 484.
Áhel el Ármi has evidently a connection with the mesjed Ármi mentioned
p. 502.]

[Footnote 88: It is evident from this, that the name كِطَكِ above is a
mere lapse of the pen.]

[Footnote 89: Berí is here once written باري by mistake; in another
place it is written بريه.]

[Footnote 90: According to Imám Áhmed, this was the fifth expedition
which the king had undertaken.]

[Footnote 91: I shall here insert the whole passage of the historian,
which is of the highest importance:

سار السلطان الى كانم اربع مرات قبل هذا السير الذه فيه القتال بيننا
وبينهم حهارا ليلا ونهارا فخرب فيها البقاع الثلاثه الكبيرة المشهورة حتى
صرت كالفضا الواسع احدها البلدة الكبيرة اِكمه ثانتيتها شوكية الاغافي
ثالثتها البلدة اغوا ولما خرب تلك البقاع الثلثة اصاب هم الغم العطيمُ
ومعذلك خرب البلاد كلها وايضا فقد نقل القوم لساكنين بكانمُ الى بلد
بَرنُوا حتى اهل البلد كَلُه الذي كان في جهة اليمين العيدَةٍ من النهر وما
بقيت في بلد كانم قبيلة من القبايل الذين اتوا الى بلد بَرنُوا البعض
اَفوامهم وما اتوا الى برنوا عن طيب واذعان قلوبهم بل بالخبر القاهر والخوف
الظاحر ولولا قبيله تُبُ الذين ارادوا تاكيد السلطان عبد الجليل وامانته
لما سرنا الى كانم الا سَيرةً واحدةً والله اعلم بحقيقة الحال.]

[Footnote 92: This passage is of the highest interest; and I therefore
give the words of the author:—

الى ناحية اليمين من بلد كَلُم مهلا مهلا الى ان جاوزوا النهرالذي بين كان
البلد كَلُم وبين كانم وما زلنا سايرين الى وصلنا البلد لسترِي.

The author evidently speaks of a watercourse, and not of a dry valley;
but it is not clear whether it be an independent river or part of the
Tsád. Compare the passage in the preceding note, where he speaks about
this same Kelu, and calls it العيدَةِ من النهر, and the note ([93]) on
the following page.]

[Footnote 93: I give here this passage, which is curious:—

ان يبنوا الثوكية بالبلد كِيَايَكُه-فيها موضع يَكِي وموضع مَكَرَنّه وموضع
كُركُرِوَه وهكذا بنوا حدود الارض التي كانت ماصفة بالنهر من بلد كَلُه
وبنوا بالبلد الذه فيه الحصن الكثير في كل قبلةٍ حصنا من الا شجار الا
ناحية اليمين فقط.]

[Footnote 94: The first of these names is evidently connected with the
name of the tribe of the Tetála, a section of the large nation of the Só
or Soy, who, having been almost annihilated by this same king Edrís,
retired into the swampy grounds of the Tsád, see Vol. II. p. 640. The
name Áfági reminds one of Áfagé; but this is not a town of Kánem, and
cannot certainly be meant here.]

[Footnote 95: Here is an omission in the text, p. 99.]

[Footnote 96: Vol. II. p. 277.]

[Footnote 97: The author adds the interesting words (p. 103.):—

وهو المكان الحاطي بالما من النهر ثاد الذي ورآه الحشيش للرعي]

[Footnote 98: فصار جميع كغُسطِه باقليمها من خط برنوا وكذلك جميع بلاد
سِيرُه صارت بافاقها من نصيب بلدنا برنوا وكذلك صار البلد بباليا من خط
برنوا . . واعطاهم سلطاننا من بقي من كانم لمحبة السلطان محمد بن عبد الله
ولولا ذلك ما اعطاهم شبراً من ارض كانِم ابداً.]




                             APPENDIX III.

 ACCOUNT OF THE VARIOUS DETACHMENTS OF CAVALRY COMPOSING THE BÓRNU ARMY
                      IN THE EXPEDITION TO MÚSGU.


                  (_a._) _The Shúwa or Native Arabs._


  Lawán Háji, the chief of the Ámjegé, who had his residence in Ámdagé.

  Fúgo Dermán (ʿAbd e’ Rahmán), from Bainge.

  Fúgo Ádigé, from Mʿalemrí, one of the villages belonging to the
  district Wolóje.

  Fúgo Ínus (Yúnes), from Malewá.

  Fúgo Dermán, from Wólamsáy.

  Fúgo Kóloné, chief of the Sárají, from Yelówenni.

  Mai Ashé, chief of the Mʿayin, from Áshegrí.

  Fúgo Pálama, from Pálamarí.

  Fúgo Hamma, from Mágariyá.

  Máfoníma, from Máfoní.

  Fúgo Mohammed, from Aisárem.

  Fúgo Kóre, from Keríngur.

  Lawán Hámed, from Karawáru.

  Lawán Mohammed, from Góbewó.

  Fúgo Ádam, from Kajé.

  Lawán Slímán, from Slímán.

  Mai Kálama, from Kála.

  Fúgo Hámed (generally called Ábú Dáúd) the chief of the Kohálema, from
  Kúmbedá, to the north of Yédi.[99]

  Sheikh Sále, from Molút, with about 100 horse.

  Sheikh Tauru, from Ngomáti.

  Fúgo Bádawe, son of Háj Beshír, with a few horses.


                 (_b._) _Kanúri, free men and slaves._


                                                    Light      Heavy
                                                   Cavalry. Cavalry or
                                                             Líbbedi.

  Slaves of the Sheikh:—

      Kashélla Belál                                 200        30

      ʿAlí Marghí                                    200        30

      Kashélla Sále                                  100        20

      K. ʿAbdelléhi (ʿAbd-Allah)                      80        16

      K. Zay                                         150        20

      K. ʿAlí-Déndal                                  90        20

      Three other petty officers, together, with      21         0

  Slaves of the Vizier:—

      K. Játo                                        200        34

      K. Khéralla                                    150        20

      K. Kóbtar Ájimé                                140        25

      K. Háji Kakáwu                                  80        15

      K. Túmbedé                                     100        18

      K. Báso                                         40        10

  Mounted Musketeers of the Sheikh:—

      K. Abdelléhi (different from the one            20         0
      mentioned)

      K. Zérma                                        30         0

      K. Mágaji                                       10         0

      K. Bíllama (my friend)                          32         0

      K. Mállaré                                      20         0

  Musketeers of the Vizier:—

      K. Méhemé                                       10         0

      K. Fatálla                                       8         0

      K. Masúd                                        10         0

      Háji Urfay                                     100        16

  Háji Ramadhán                                       60        12

  Bédawé                                              50         0

  Malá Mása Mándará                                   30         0

  Yagha Ghaná                                         80        20

  Mʿallem Chádeli                                    100        10

  Mohammed Gájemí                                     60         1

  Mohammed Bú ʿAlagh                                  20         0

  Legiwódda                                           40         8

  Kashélla ʿOmár                                      50         6

  K. ʿOmár Dóra                                       30         0

  Wáseli (an officer of Mestréma the chief eunuch)    40        10

  K. ʿAlí Agún (attendant of Abaiso)                  28         8

  K. Bággar (another officer of the same)             40         0

  Ámji (a man of Díghama)                             30         1

  K. Mohammed Marghí (an officer of ʿAbd e’ Rahmán    80         5

  Shitíma Mʿadu                                       30         0

  Shitíma Yóma (governor of Yó, with the Mobber)      40         0

  Shitíma Fugóma                                      50         0

  Shitíma Zabeláuma                                   10         0

  Shitíma Yáwama                                      40         0

  Shitíma Bósoma                                      20         0

  Shitíma ʿAbdu                                       20         0

  Shitíma ʿAbadémma                                   10         0

  Courtiers and partisans of the Vizier:—

      Gréma Milúd                                    200        33

      Lamíno                                         150        21

      Báshara (officer of Lamíno)                     13         0

      Dýnama Gajarémma                                20         7

      Sheikh ʿAbbás                                   20         7

      Hamza weled el Góni                             60         3

      Karaberíma                                       8         0

      Balál                                           18         0

      Ádamu                                            8         0

      ʿAbdelléhi Shíntiri                             16         0

  Mʿallem Malérama                                     6         0

  Abrás                                                6         0

  Kashélla Sʿaíd (officer of Mʿallem Mohammed)        30         0

  Abba Masta (son of the old sheikh Mohammed el       60        10
  Kánemí)

  Abba Bagar                                          90        13

  Refáy                                               90        16

  Beshír                                              10         0

  Asan (grandson of Mohammed el Kánemí by ʿAlí)       30         1

  Kázelma                                             13         0

  Yeríma                                               5         0

  Érima                                               10         0

  Únoma (Tebu chieftain)                             200         0

  Fagodóma (chief of Koyám)                          100         0

  Murjúma (Koyám)                                     80         0

  Káúma[100] (Koyám)                                  60         0

  Senwa Babudma (Koyám)                               40         0

  Senwa Kindagoma (Koyám)                            100         0

  Kótoko (Kánemma chief)                              30         0

  Fúgo ʿAlí (from Maduwári)                           20         0

  Zíntelma                                            10         0

Kanúri:—Light cavalry 4181, say 4500, as many small detachments are
omitted; heavy cavalry 472, say 500.

Shúwa:—About 8000.


[Footnote 99: Each of these Shúwa chiefs had some hundred horsemen with
him. Only two great chiefs did not join the expedition; namely Mohammed
Kunéwu the chief of Shegáwu, and Lawán Gíbdo from Lerdó.]

[Footnote 100: An officer with this title, Káúma, is already mentioned
in Imám Áhmed’s history; he was most probably called so originally from
the place Káú, or Kow, in Shitáti in Kánem.]




                              APPENDIX IV.

         TOWNS AND VILLAGES OF THE PROVINCE OF LÓGON OR LÓGONE

(_Large places, most of them walled; at present, indeed, generally in a
                           state of decay_).


In the north-western part of the province: Kúndi, Gérle, Sína, Gódoní,
Gemáng, Kókoñá, Kíddebá, Nguláwa, Mázerá, Delow, Kázeré, Unko-ʿalem,
Thágulú, Kárse, Guwáfa, Díffil, another Thágulú, Múkhse, Gozenáke, Módeá
(village of the mother of the ruling prince Ýsuf), Biwál, Mágwy,
Wanánukí, Mátke, Finálle, Suwántegá, Tsí, Mosóggolí, Úlesémme, Ngáme,
Dúggulá, Kutteláha, Ngázi, Sáude, Jilbé, Tildé, Kála, Húlluf or Hélib,
Waká, Kásesá, and others here about.

In the south-eastern part: Golónderá, Dégemé, Sígge, Bágeám, Bílle,
Hóya, Hánnené, Wáza, Lábané, Gurfáy on the river, Chidé, Njéggere, Sigé,
Últseme, Sílim, Kábe ’lmadhé or the Western Kábe, Báge, a place rich in
ivory; Jínna, the largest town of the little kingdom after the capital,
and important on account of the quantity of ivory there brought to
market, and of the fine mat-work there produced[101]; Kalásimó, one day
west from Jínna; Kábe demá or ngólo, the “large Kábe” forming the
frontier-town towards Búgomán,—the frontier itself being formed by a
swamp called Kénkang,—Sú, Úmsa, Madeágo, Túmbalá, the largest place
beyond the river, that is to say, the river of Logón or the Lagham;
Mélé, to be distinguished from the place of the same name situated on
the east side of the Shárí; Fuljí; Kuljí, with a governor who is almost
independent; Fóngol and Mére, both on the river; Gófa, Diyá, Ngúltsemí,
Wainálle, Jemádo, Wódeó, a large place; Ngóso, residence of a governor.


[Footnote 101: See Vol. II. p. 620.]




                              APPENDIX V.

                COPY OF A DESPATCH FROM LORD PALMERSTON.


                                     “Foreign Office, October 7th, 1851.

“SIR,

“I am directed by Viscount Palmerston to acknowledge and to thank you
for your letter of the 19th of April last, from Kouka, in the Bornou
country, in which you announce the lamentable event of the death of Mr.
Richardson, on the night of the 2nd and 3rd of the preceding month of
March, at Ungurutua, between Zinder and Kouka.

“The expedition being thus deprived of its head, just before the
conclusion of that principal stage of its proceedings which was to
terminate in the exploration of Lake Tchad, it appears to Her Majesty’s
Government that the completion of that exploration is alone wanting to
enable them to consider as accomplished the main objects of Mr.
Richardson’s expedition.

“I am, therefore, directed by Lord Palmerston to state to you that,
whenever you may have finished your survey of Lake Tchad and its shores,
his Lordship wishes that you and Dr. Overweg should carry out the
remainder of your projected proceedings in Africa exactly as you would
have done if Mr. Richardson were still living, and you had separated
from him as contemplated in the memorandum signed in triplicate in
December, 1849, of which yourself and Dr. Overweg possess each a copy.

“At the period of your signature of that memorandum, you appear to have
entertained the thought of pushing your further researches eastward
towards the Nile, or south-eastward towards Mombaz.

“Whether you may still adhere to that project, or may now see reason to
prefer a westerly course in the direction of Timbuctoo, I am directed by
Viscount Palmerston to state to you that he will be perfectly satisfied
to intrust to you the duty of carrying on to its final completion the
expedition heretofore confided to the charge of Mr. Richardson.

“You will therefore consider yourself hereby authorised to take upon
yourself the future charge of the expedition, and to pursue that course
which, upon full consideration, may appear to you best fitted to effect
the general objects which Her Majesty’s Government had in view when they
set on foot the expedition into the interior of Africa.

“Those objects you will find stated in the original instructions
furnished to Mr. Richardson, of which a copy is herewith inclosed for
your use and guidance.

                  “I am, Sir,

                         “Your most obedient humble servant,

                                                       “H. WADDINGTON.

“Dr. Barth.”




                              APPENDIX VI.

                      HISTORICAL SKETCH OF WÁDÁY.


In the chapter wherein we have treated of the history of Bagírmi, we
have seen that the tribe of the Týnjur founded a large empire, which, as
it consisted of an agglomeration of heterogeneous elements loosely
connected together, was overwhelmed and torn to pieces in less than one
hundred years after its foundation. The first part which separated from
the body, comprises the eastern regions; Kúru, the third predecessor of
Slímán, who was the first Moslim king of Dár Fúr, vanquishing the
Týnjur, and vindicating the dominion of those quarters to the tribe of
the Furáwy.

As for the centre of the empire of the Týnjur, it was overthrown by the
founder of the Mohammedan empire of Wádáy, namely, ʿAbd el Kerím, the
son of Yáme, according to indigenous tradition, in the year 1020 of the
Hejra.

Wóda, the son of Yáme, belonging to the tribe of the Gémir[102], who at
that time were settled in Shendy, and had embraced Islamism, had
emigrated with his countrymen into the regions which afterwards, in
honour of him it is said, were comprised under the name of Wádáy; and
here he is reported to have exercised considerable authority in the
empire of the Týnjur. His grandson, ʿAbd el Kerím, is said to have been
governor of certain provinces of the empire of Dáúd, who at that time
ruled the empire of the Týnjur, though he had already felt the mighty
hand of his eastern neighbour Slímán, the first Mohammedan king of Dár
Fúr.

Instigated by a religious feeling, this man is said to have spent
several years in Bídderi, a place about ten miles to the east of the
capital of the kingdom of Bagírmi, which at that time, however, does not
seem to have existed; for Bídderi was one of the places in that region
where people belonging to the widely-spread nation of the Fúlbe had
settled from early times, and among them a family which, by means of
undisputed sanctity and learning, had begun to exercise a considerable
influence in the introduction of Islamism, upon a wide circumference of
the surrounding provinces; and the head of this family, whose name was
Mohammed, is said to have inspired ʿAbd el Kerím, the grandson of Wóda,
as well as his companions Amálek, chief of the Márfa, settled in
Hóggené, Múmin the Masaláti, Dédebam the Ábú-Sharibáye, and Wúwel-Banán
the Jellábi, with the idea of overthrowing the pagan dominion of the
Týnjur, and of founding in its stead a new kingdom based on Islamism.

Having returned to his country, and spread his ideas of independence,
ʿAbd el Kerím, after some years, rose against his liege lord, Dáúd, and
making Mádabá, a mountainous place situated about ten miles to the north
of the later town of Wára, his residence, succeeded, after a desperate
struggle, in laying the foundation of the kingdom of Wádáy, as he called
the country, in honour of his grandfather. He is said to have died after
a long reign, leaving as his successor his son Kharút, whom we may call
Kharút the First. This is the king who founded Wára, and made this
place, which is defended by natural ramparts (a circumstance which gave
rise to its name, meaning “the town encircled by hills”) his residence.
He, too, is said to have reigned several years, and was succeeded by his
eldest son, Kharíf, who was not so fortunate as his father and
grandfather, but, in the third year of his reign, was killed by the
warlike tribe of the Táma, whom he endeavoured to subjugate.

The successor of Kharíf was Yakúb ʿArús, his younger brother, who felt
himself strong enough to undertake an expedition into the interior of
Dár Fúr, where, on account of the advanced age of its king, Músa, the
son and successor of Slimán, the illustrious founder of that Mohammedan
kingdom, he may have expected little resistance; but he was beaten, and
obliged to make a speedy retreat. This prince was succeeded by his son
Kharút II., who, during a reign of forty years, is said to have
established greater tranquillity and happiness than were to be expected
in a kingdom composed of such heterogeneous elements.

The son of this king was Jóda or Jáude, with the surname Kharíf e’
Tímán, but better known under his honorary title, Mohammed Suláy or Sulé
(meaning the deliverer)—a title which was given to him by his subjects
in consequence of the victory by which he saved his country from the
yoke of the Furáwy, who under the command of Ábú ’l Kásem, the second
son of Áhmed-Bókkor, and the sixth Mohammedan king of that country, had
overrun Wádáy with a powerful army, in order to make it tributary. It is
from this victorious king, who has made Wádáy honoured and respected by
its neighbours, that the country has received its other name, viz. Dár
Suláy. It is likewise this king, who at the close of his reign wrested
Kánem from the hands of the sultan of Bórnu, or at least the better part
of it, by conquering Mandó or Mondó, the town of the Týnjur, as well as
Mʿawó, the residence of a khalífa, invested by the sultan of Bórnu; and
this is the commencement of the hostilities which are carried on between
Bórnu and Wádáy. Mohammed-Suláy is said to have reigned, like his
father, forty years. To him succeeded his son Sáleh, with the surname
Dérret, who has been almost unanimously represented to me as a bad sort
of prince, although this seems to be owing to the circumstance of his
having put to death a considerable number of ʿulama, a class of men who,
in Wádáy, enjoy great authority. This king hastened his death by giving
offence to the mother of his eldest son ʿAbd el Kerím, who belonged to
the tribe of the Málánga; for, instigated by her, it is said, her son
ʿAbd el Kerím took the field against his father, while the latter, in
the eighth year of his reign, had marched with an army against the
Mádalá, the inhabitants of a place close to Mádabá, and not far from the
seats of the Málánga, and after a sanguinary battle the son succeeded in
vanquishing his father, who was killed in the year 1805. These are well-
known facts, which cannot be denied.

ʿAbd el Kerím, better known under his surname Sabún, which he received
at a later time, mounted the throne of Wádáy, stained with the blood of
his father, and began a reign which all agree in representing as one of
the wisest ever known in this part of the world.

First, he enriched himself and his country by the spoil of Bagírmi,
whose inhabitants were much further advanced in civilization than their
eastern neighbours; and by their predatory expeditions to Dirki, had
amassed a great deal of riches, consisting not only of fine clothes, and
merján or coral, but even of silver, of which ʿAbd el Kerím is said by
trustworthy persons to have carried away with him five camel-loads,
being equal to about fifteen hundred pounds’ weight. It was also during
his reign, as I have stated before, that Bagírmi became for ever a
tributary province of Wádáy. Having then founded a powerful kingdom, it
formed the chief object of his exertions to establish a direct
communication with the ports on the coast of the Mediterranean, in order
to supply himself with those manufactures which, before the spoil of
Bagírmi, had been almost unknown to the people of Wádáy.

But to the account of the exertions of ʿAbd-el-Kerím in this field, such
as has been given by the late M. Fresnel, in his memoir on Wádáy, I have
nothing to add, as it no doubt formed the chief subject of his
inquiries; but the account given by that gentleman of the king’s death,
and of the reign of his successor, is full of errors. ʿAbd el Kerím
Sabún died in the tenth year of his reign, which falls in the year 1815,
in a place close to Wára, called Júnne, where he had collected an army,
in order, as I have been assured by well-informed persons, to make war
upon the ruler of Bórnu, or rather on the sheikh Mohammed el Kánemí;
who, endeavouring to restore his adopted country Kánem to its former
splendour, was anxious to rescue it from the hands of Wádáy.

Sabún died so suddenly that he was unable to name his successor; but by
all whom I have questioned on this point, I have been assured that the
suspicion of poison is quite out of the question. Moreover, the
circumstances as related by M. Fresnel are greatly misrepresented, Sabún
having no son at all of the name of Seksán; for he left six sons, the
eldest of whom, of the name of Ásed, was born of a mother from the tribe
of the Kóndongó, while Yúsuf, the second son, and three more sons of
ʿAbd el Kerím, were born of one and the same mother, who belonged to the
tribe of the Mádabá. As for Jʿafar, who, on account of his long
residence in Tripoli, and his numerous interesting adventures, has
become well known to the English public[103], his mother belonged to
another tribe.

When therefore Sabún had died, without naming his successor, the
partisans of the tribe of the Mádabá arose against the Kóndongó, or the
faction of Ásed; and having succeeded in vanquishing their adversaries,
and slaying Ásed, they placed on the throne Yúsuf, with the surname
Kharífáyín, a name which, however, is not generally known in the
country. This Yúsuf, partly under the guardianship of his uncle Ábú
Rokkhíyé, and partly by himself, after he had slain his uncle, together
with Dómmo, the agíd of the Máhamíd, ruled for sixteen years in the most
tyrannical manner over Wádáy till, about the beginning of the year 1830,
he was put to death at the instigation of his own mother, whose name was
Símbil. There has never ruled over Wádáy a king of the name of ʿAbd el
Káder; and Major Denham was quite right when, in 1823, he called the
then king of that country the immediate successor of Sabún.

Yúsuf was succeeded by his infant son Rákeb, who after seventeen or
eighteen months died from the small-pox, when a man belonging to a
lateral branch of the royal family, namely, ʿAbd el ʿAzíz, son of
Rádama, whose father Gándigin was a younger son of Jóda Mohammed Suláy,
while his mother also belonged to the royal line, ascended the throne;
and being supported by the warlike tribe of the Kódoyí (called by the
Arabs Bú-senún, on account of their red teeth), among whom he had taken
his residence, he succeeded in maintaining his position, in an almost
continuous struggle with his adversaries. The first conflict which he
had to sustain was against the Kélingen, who put forth, not Jʿafar, the
rightful claimant to the succession, but another pretender, named Kéde;
they were, however, totally beaten, near a place in the vicinity of
Wára, called Fólkotó.

ʿAbd el ʿAzíz had hardly begun to enjoy some tranquillity, when the
tribe of the Kóndongó, leaving their mountain seats, marched against
him; but they likewise were beaten, and almost annihilated, in a battle
fought near a place called Búrtay. ʿAbd el ʿAzíz, who has been
represented to me by my informants as a man of excellent qualities, and
of great intelligence, died likewise of the small-pox, after a reign of
five years and a half, when his infant son Ádam was placed upon the
throne, but, after a little more than a year, was dethroned, and carried
into honourable captivity, into Dár Fúr.

The circumstances which led to this revolution were as follows. Mohammed
Sáleh, not quite correctly named e’ Sheríf, who had stealthily entered
Wádáy a long time previously, but had not been able to collect a party
sufficiently strong to enable him to assert his claims openly as the
brother of Sabún, had at length addressed himself to Mohammed Fádhl, the
king of Dár Fúr, and, under promise of a considerable tribute to be paid
yearly, had induced that prince to assist him in obtaining the kingdom
of Wádáy; and in the misery in which that country was just then plunged
by a severe famine, it only required the assistance of two captains or
ágade, viz. ʿAbd e’ Síd, and ʿAbd el Fat-ha, to conquer Wádáy, while
none but the Kámkolák of the tribe of the Kodoyí made a serious
resistance, though without success.

Mohammed Sáleh, who thus ascended the throne with the assistance of a
foreign power, in the month Tóm el awel, in the year 1250 H., may
certainly be said to have exerted himself for the benefit of his
country, though the last years of his reign have been rather
unfortunate, as well for himself for his subjects.

The first enterprise which he undertook in order to enrich his subjects,
or perhaps himself, and with the purpose of extending his dominion, was
an expedition against Kárká or Kargha, the district composed of islands
and half-submerged meadow-lands and pasture-grounds in the south-east
corner of the Tsád, which I have described in my account of Kánem, and
from whence he carried away a great number of cattle. Perhaps, also, one
reason why he undertook this expedition was the circumstance that
another member of the royal family, namely, Núr e’ Dín, who by Yúsuf and
Fúrba was descended directly from Sáleh Derret, had retired into that
swampy and almost inaccessible district, and, owing to the influence
which he obtained over the neighbouring tribes, might have risen as a
pretender at a future time. The next year Mohammed Sáleh marched against
the Táma, that very intractable and predatory tribe settled in a
mountainous district four days N.E. from Wára, and, having conquered
them and slain their chief, invested another man with his authority; but
the Táma having driven this person away after the king had retraced his
steps, Mohammed Sáleh was obliged to make another expedition against
them the following year, when he subdued them once more, and made them
acknowledge as their chief a person called Íbrahím.

After this, in the year 1846, he undertook that expedition against
Bórnu, of which I have given a short account in the chronological table
of the history of that empire, and which had been greatly misrepresented
by M. Fresnel; for although he penetrated to the very heart of that
country, he did not attain his object of reinstating the family of the
sultan of Bórnu in its ancient right; and although he certainly carried
away a great amount of spoil, yet he lost a considerable portion of his
army, as well in the battle of Kúsuri as on his return home,—principally
while crossing the Shárí.

However, on his return, the king turned his arms against the Tebu tribes
settled on the Bahr el Ghazál; and, conquering them, subjected them to
an annual tribute. Having returned from this memorable campaign,
Mohammed Sáleh did not undertake a second expedition, but, having kept
quietly at home for three or four years, was obliged to waste the
strength of one part of his empire in a bloody struggle against the
other.

The origin and reason of this civil war, which up to the time of my
leaving Negroland kept Wádáy in rather a weakened state, is to be sought
for in the real or presumed blindness of the king, which gave to his
adversaries the Kodoyí, who regard Ádam as their legitimate prince, some
pretext for not acknowledging him any longer as their master, besides
the general unpopularity, produced by his avarice. It was on this
account, in order to escape from his public and private enemies, that in
the year 1850 he abandoned the old residence of all the former kings of
Wádáy, down from Kharút the First, and transferred the seat of
government from Wára to Abéshr, a very inconsiderable place or village,
about twenty miles to the south of Wára, where, on account of its being
almost entirely destitute of water, and situated in the very territory
of his partisans the Kélingen, he felt himself tolerably secure.

The contest, fomented for a long time, did not break out until 1851,
when in the month of Shʿabán he was obliged to march against the Kodoyí,
who, assisted by part of the Ábyí or Ábú Shárib, awaited him in their
mountains, from whence they rushed down upon him when he had closely
approached them, on Friday the 9th of Shʿabán, with great impetuosity,
and breaking through all his lines, and killing a great many persons of
high rank, amongst whom was Ábú Horra, the blind aged brother of the
king, and his own daughter Fátima, penetrated to his very person, and
were on the point of slaying him, when his people succeeded in saving
his life. But having become emboldened by this success, the enemy the
next day ventured to leave their mountain fastnesses, and descended into
the plain, and were in consequence overpowered by the greater numbers
and the superior cavalry of the king’s host, and, after a severe loss,
which however cleared rather the ranks of their companions the Ábú
Shárib than their own, sought refuge in the mountains. But
notwithstanding this shock, received by them in the above-mentioned
battle, which by the natives is called the battle of Tórbigen or Jálkam,
being a warlike race, they have by no means given up their point, and
were stated during my stay in Bagírmi to persist in the intention of
renewing the struggle after the labours of the harvest should be over.

So far I have brought down the history of the country in the despatch
which I sent home after my return from Bagírmi; and the remarks with
which I then concluded my account of the history of Wádáy have been
since confirmed in a very remarkable manner. My words were: “The discord
which at present prevails in the centre of Wádáy is the more
considerable, as the king Mohammed Sáleh seems to be on bad terms even
with his eldest son Mohammed, the heir to the throne, who, having stayed
behind in Wára, and being repeatedly summoned to appear before his
father, is said to have retired to the southern parts of the country.” A
few months after I wrote these lines, we received the news of a civil
war having broken out between the son and his father; and a long
sanguinary struggle ensued, in which Mohammed, the son of Mohammed
Sáleh, vanquished not only his father, but also his brothers, who were
supported by strong factions, while he himself, being born of a woman
who was not a native of the country, but a Fellatníye from Kordofán, had
solely to rely upon his own energy and courage; and it is said that he
committed great havoc amongst the principal men of the country. What the
present state of the country may be I do not know; but I have been told
that this king has been overthrown by one of his brothers. If Mr. Vogel,
who, according to the latest accounts, has succeeded in entering this
country, should be so fortunate as to escape with his life, we shall
soon hear more about this interesting region.

Such is the short account of the history of Wádáy, as far as my
inquiries in Bagírmi enabled me to learn it, and for the general
accuracy of which I can answer, although it may be at variance with
other reports. As for the character of the country, which has been thus
united into one extensive kingdom, stretching in its greatest extent
from W.N.W. to E.S.E., and reaching from about 15° east long., to about
23°, and from about 15° north lat. to 10° south, I shall here only give
a very short view of the most characteristic features, leaving the
particulars to the itineraries, as all the knowledge which we possess of
the country is derived from them, and not from ocular inspection.

Wádáy Proper is rather a level country, but interspersed with a great
many isolated mountains of a dry and sterile character, as it seems,
without being capable of feeding constant springs of water, the only
sources of whose existence in the country I have been able to obtain
information, being those near the place Hámiyen, in the wadí Waringék;
and even these are said to contain hot water. The whole country has an
inclination from east to west—in other words, from the foot of Jebel
Márra, in Dár Fúr, towards the basin of the Fittrí, the lake or lagoon
of the Kúka, which receives all the moisture carried down during the
rainy season by the smaller watercourses, and collected in the larger
valley of the Bat-há; with the exception as it seems of the wádí Kíya,
which, running from north to south, next to the above-mentioned range of
mountains, is stated by most of my informants not to have any connection
with that basin, and may possibly join some branch of the Nile. In the
northern part, where the country is bordered by desert tracts, there are
several smaller watercourses or, as they are here called, “zaraf,” which
die away in the sands.

As for the country between (Lake) Fittrí and (Lake) Tsád, I have already
shown it in another place to be an elevated district intercepting
entirely the communication between the two lakes, or rather lagoons. The
watercourses and valleys form the natural high roads, along which the
dwelling-places of men are established.

With respect to the outlying provinces of the empire, which are situated
towards the south, their character is evidently much more varied and
rich in perrennial watercourses than the nucleus of the kingdom, but
inquiries with regard to these watercourses have not as yet advanced far
enough to enable us to take a general view of them.


[Footnote 102: The derivation of this royal family from the ʿAbbasíyin
is altogether imaginary. I am in possession of a letter with the royal
seal.]

[Footnote 103: See Mr. Barker’s, or rather Lieutenant (now Rear-Admiral)
Sir Henry Smyth’s story of Jʿafar in the United Service Journal, 1830.]




                             APPENDIX VII.

                    ETHNOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF WÁDÁY.


Wádáy in every respect is as yet a young empire, where the most
heterogeneous elements subsist together side by side, with almost
unrestricted power, weakening and debilitating the whole body.
Nevertheless the variety of those elements in a territory of so
considerable an extent as Wádáy is not at all marvellous and
extraordinary in this part of the world, the number of the different
languages spoken there not exceeding that of the different languages
spoken in the circumference of Fúmbiná; and even in Bórnu, where, by a
system of centralization, several tribes have in the course of time been
almost entirely annihilated, the number of languages spoken at the
present day exceeds fifteen.

As for Wádáy, there are first to be separated the two large groups of
the indigenous or immigrant Negro tribes, on the one hand, and that of
the Arab tribes on the other. I shall first consider the Negro tribes,
of which I give a complete list, adding in each place a few observations
with regard to their strength and their political power. As for their
affinity to each other, little can as yet be stated with certainty,
vocabularies of their languages not being at hand; and I myself was not
able to procure more than three, namely, vocabularies of the language of
the principal stock or the Mába, of the Kúka, and of the Ábyí or Ábú
Shárib. With regard to their dwelling-places, they will be better
ascertained from the collection of itineraries than from this account.

I will first consider that body of tribes which inhabit Wádáy Proper, or
rather Dár Mába, speaking one and the same language, called Bóra Mábang,
of which I have been able to collect a tolerably complete vocabulary,
comprising more than two thousand words, together with a great many
phrases, including the Lord’s Prayer. This group consists of the
following tribes, or rather sections. First, the Kélingen[104],
inhabiting several villages, about one day south of Wára; the Kajánga,
two days south of Wára; the Malánga[105], to the N.E.; the Mádabá, and
the Mádalá, close to the latter; the Kodoyí, or mountaineers, (from
“Kodók,” the mountain) called by the Arabs “Bú-Senún” (in the singular
form Sennawy), on account of their red teeth, which colour is said to be
produced by the quality of the water in their mountain residences, where
they preserve their vigorous bodily frames and their intrepid state of
mind, and are unanimously acknowledged to be the most valiant among all
the tribes of Wádáy. The most conspicuous of their mountain seats,
situated one day’s march east of Wára, are Kúrungun, the residence of
their chief; Búmdan, Mógum, Búrkulí, Mutúng, and Warshékr. Then follow
the smaller sections of the Kunó, the Jámbo, the Ábú Gedám, the
Ogodóngda, the Kawák, the Áshkitíng, the Bíli, the Bílting, the ʿAín-
Gámara, the Kóromboy, the Gírri, settled in Ám-dekík, the people of
Shéferí, the Mánga, settled in the district called Fírsha; the Amírga,
settled in Máshek; the people of Ándobú, those of Shíbi, those of Tára;
all localities situated in the neighbourhood of Wára, and possibly a few
others. All those I have mentioned are said to be entirely different
sections, while the Kélingen, the Kajánga, the Malánga, and the Kodoyí,
are the most numerous, the priority of the former consisting in nothing
else than the precarious circumstance that the present mómó, or queen
mother, who in Wádáy exercises a certain influence, belongs to this
tribe.

As for that tribe from which the kings of Wádáy were originally derived,
at least with regard to the male issue, these are neither the Kélingen,
nor any other of those tribes constituting the group of Dár Mába, but
one of an entirely different nationality, namely, the above-mentioned
Gémir, to whom, from this reason, and not on account of their power,
which is greatly diminished, I assign the second place as distinguished
by a peculiar language.

I now enumerate the different clans of the Ábú Shárib, or Ábyí, who,
taken collectively, are stated to exceed the whole group of Dár Mába in
numbers; but they seem to have so many different dialects amongst
themselves, that one clan is said scarcely to understand the other, and
can only make themselves intelligible by means of the Bóra Mábang, known
to all the respectable persons of the country, to whatever particular
tribe they may belong. I first mention the Ábú Shárib Ménagón and
Márarít, who have one and the same language, of which I have been able
to make a select vocabulary, comprising about two hundred words,
together with a translation of the Lord’s Prayer; and I must rank with
them the Táma, who are positively stated to be nearly related to the
former, though the seats of these two tribes are widely separated, the
Ménagón and Márarít being settled about six days south from Wára, while
the Táma, as has been stated above, inhabit a mountainous district four
days to the N.E. of the capital.

This warlike tribe, distinguished principally by their ability in using
the spear, seem at present to have lost, in some degree at least, their
independence, for which they had been fighting for more than two
centuries with success; for Íbrahím, the chief imposed on them by the
present king after they had driven back another person called Bilbíldek,
whom he had invested, instead of their former independent chief E’ Núr,
who was executed by him, seems to be really installed in one of their
principal dwelling-places, called Nanáwa. Indeed the Táma are said to
frequent at present the markets of Wádáy, while the “Kay Mába,” or the
people of Mába Proper, do not dare to visit theirs. The Táma possess a
good many horses, but only few cattle.

After the Táma I range the Ábú Shárib Gnórga[106] and Dárna, settled to
the east of the Ménagón and Márarít; the Ábú Shárib Kúbu, settled in
Goñánga, close to Ándabú; the Abú Shárib Sungóri[107], inhabiting a
considerable district towards the frontier of Dár Fúr, intermingled with
the Másalít—they are principally noted for their fine tall horses; the
Ábú Shárib Shálí, close to the Sungóri; the Ábú Shárib Shokhén,
inhabiting principally the well-known place of the same name; the Ábú
Shárib Búbala, intimate friends of the Kodoyí, whose eastern neighbours
they are; and, finally, the Wela Jémma, belonging likewise to the large
group of the Ábú Shárib, but distinguished, as it is asserted, by a
peculiar language.

After this group I rank the Másalít, who are said to be the most
numerous next to the Ábú Shárib, and who may probably be found to have
some affinity with the Sungóri, with whom they are promiscuously
intermingled, although the state of barbarism into which they have sunk
appears to be of the very lowest description, as they are even said to
be guilty of devouring the flesh of human beings, an imputation made
chiefly against that section of them established in the place called
Nyéseré, close to the frontier of Dár Fúr.

Having mentioned next in order to the Másalít, on account of the
neighbourhood of their dwelling-places, the tribe of the ʿAlí, I shall
retrace my steps, returning to the neighbourhood of Wára, where I shall
name first the Mímí, a tribe distinguished, it is said, by a peculiar
language; and then rank a group comprising several tribes, the degree of
whose affinity to each other can only be ascertained after vocabularies
of their languages or dialects have been collected. These are the
following tribes: the Moëwó[108] and the Márfa, the Kórunga or, as they
are called by the Arabs, Káringa, and the Kashémeré. It seems probable
that there is some kind of relation between these tribes and the
Másalít.

I now enumerate the Kóndongó, a tribe formerly of considerable strength,
but at present much debilitated by the struggle sustained by them
against ʿAbd el ʿAzíz, and by a famine which befell them in consequence
of that struggle. They are principally famous on account of the
excellency of their weaving. I now mention as separate tribes or
nationalities the Kábbága, to the S.E. of Wára, close to the Kúbu; the
Múbi, on the Bat-há; the Márta; the Dermúdi or Darámdutú; the Bákka, or
Welád el Bákhkha, close to Malám; the Birkit, near the frontiers of Dár
Fúr, in which country they are more numerous; the Tála; Kajágse or
Kajágase, near the S.S.W. frontier of Wádáy Proper; and not far from
them the Týnjur, the remainder of that powerful nation which once ruled
over all these countries; at present chiefly settled in Mágará, a place
belonging to Dár Zoyúd.

I now mention the Kúka, settled principally along the lower course of
the Bat-há, and in Fittrí, where, as far as regards language, they form
one group together with the Bulála, separated from the other tribes of
Wádáy as above-mentioned, but intimately connected with the inhabitants
of Bagírmi, with whose language, at least with regard to half of the
elements of which it is composed, the language of the Kúka is identical.

After the Kúka must be ranked the Dájó, a tribe even at present, though
their ancient power is gone, very numerous, and, as far as regards
Wádáy, settled principally to the S.E. of the Kúka, with whom they have
some distant affinity. Perhaps these elements in the language of the
Kúka which do not harmonize with the language of the Bagírmi people may
be identical with the language of the Dájó. As for the relation between
the Dájó and the Ábú Telfán, inhabiting a mountainous district two days
S.S.W. from Bírket Fátima, we are likewise not yet able to decide; at
least, as far as regards civilization, the latter seem to occupy a very
low stage, and are considered by the people of Wádáy as “jenákhéra,” or
pagans. They are very rich in horses and cattle.

In the province called Dár Zoyúd, on the middle course of the Bat-há, I
have still to mention a separate tribe or clan, namely, the Kaúdara,
residing in a considerable place called Kínne, and speaking a peculiar
language.

Before enumerating the tribes inhabiting the outlying provinces to the
south, who are only partly subdued, I shall first mention the Zogháwa
or, as the name is pronounced in Wádáy, the Zokháwa, and the Gurʿaán,
two of the great divisions of the Tebu or Tedá, inhabiting the desert to
the north of Wádáy, who, are very rich in flocks, and have become
dependent on and tributary to the ruler of that country.

In the provinces to the south there are the Sílla, in the mountainous
country S.S.W. from Sheníni; the Bándalá, close to Jéji; the Rúnga,
inhabiting the country to the S.W. from Sílla, and fifteen days’ march
from Wára, and paying tribute as well to Dár Fúr as to Wádáy; the
Dággel, whose capital is Mangára, to the north from Rúnga and west from
Sílla; the Gúlla, to the west from Rúnga, said to be of a fine bodily
figure, and some of them copper-coloured; the Fáña, south of Gúlla; the
Bírrimbírri, to the S.S.E. of Wádáy; the Séli, south of Rúnga; and the
Kutingára.

This is rather a dry list of the numerous tribes belonging to the black
population of Wádáy; and nothing but further researches into the
interior of the country itself, and the collecting of vocabularies of
their languages, can establish the degree of relation or affinity
existing between them. As for the other large group, viz. the Arab
population of Wádáy, or the “ʿArámka Dár Mábana,” as they are called in
the Wádáy language—for the Wádáy people never employ the term Shúwa or
Shíwa, used in Bagírmi and Bórnu—it consists of the following tribes,
who have been settled in Wádáy for about 500 years. First (the most
powerful and richest of them all, as well in camels as in small cattle),
the Máhamíd, settled in the wádiyán to the north of Wára, principally in
Wádí ʿOrádha, two days’ march from that place, but leading a nomadic
life like all the others; and near to them the Bení Hélba, who are said
to have been politically united with the Týnjur; the Shíggegát, partly
associated with the Máhamíd, partly settled near Jéji; the Sébbedi; the
Séf e’ dín; and the Bení Hassan. The latter, whom we have met already in
Bórnu and Kánem, where they are spread in considerable numbers—also in
Wádáy, are rather miserably off, a great many of them roving about
Eastern Sudán, in order to gain something by their labour, while the
rest wander, in the rainy season, to a place called Étang, situated to
the N.E. of Wára, between the Táma and Zoghháwa.

While all these tribes roam about to the north of Wára, I now class
together those settled, at least part of the year, in the valley of the
Bat-há. These are the Missiríye, the third tribe amongst the Wádáy
Arabs, in respect to numbers, and divided into two sections, viz. the
Missiríye Zorúk, or the black (dark) ones, and the Missiríye Homr, or
the red ones—Dómboli is the chief place of residence of the Missiríye;
then the Khozám, the next in point of numbers; the Zóyúd, the Jʿaátena,
the Zábbadé, and the ʿAbidíye; to whom may be added the Nuwʿaíbe, who
keep more to the north of the Bat-há. Next in order may be named the
Sábalát, a rather indigent tribe, who breed cattle for the king, and
supply his household with milk. South of the Sungóri are the settlements
of the Kórobát, whose chief place is Ténjing, east of Týnjung, which is
two days from Sheníni. On the rich pasture-grounds, fed by a shallow
water called the bahr e’ Tíni, four days S.E. from Birket Fátima, there
are the wandering tribes of the Kólomát and the Térjem; while towards
the S.W. extremity of the empire, on the borders of another shallow
water, probably without any current, and called after the tribe which I
am just about to mention, there are the settlements of the Welád Ráshid,
close to the eastern borders of the pagan dependencies of Bagírmi, and
part of them settled even in the midst of those pagan tribes,
principally amongst the Búwa Kúli, with whom they are said even to
intermarry; they are particularly rich in horses of small breed, and
possess considerable property.

Finally, there is another group of Arab tribes, who pasture their cattle
near another shallow water, which seems to me to have likewise very
little inclination, and is generally called Óm e’ Timán, but very often
named after the tribes who are settled on its borders. There are towards
the east, not far from the Bándalá, the Sálamát, a rather numerous
tribe; to the west of them the Hémád; and, finally, the Shárafa, who
occasionally also visit the bahr e’ Tíni. Besides these, in the western
extremity of the empire there are the Dúggana or Dághana, who were in
former times dependent on Bórnu.

With regard to their colour, all these Arab tribes may be distributed
into two groups, namely, the “Zorúk,” and the “Homr.” To the first
group—the dark-coloured tribes—belong principally, the Missiríye, the
Zorúk, and the ʿAbidíye; while the Máhamíd, the Ráshid, the Khozám, the
Hamíde, and the others mentioned above, constitute the far more numerous
group of the Homr.


[Footnote 104: The name is written in Arabic كلن.]

[Footnote 105: Written ملك.]

[Footnote 106: غرك.]

[Footnote 107: سنكور.]

[Footnote 108: The name is written ميو or ميُ.]




                             APPENDIX VIII.

                          GOVERNMENT OF WÁDÁY.


It appears, from the above exposition of the various elements of which
the population of the country of Wádáy consists, that its government
cannot but be of a varied composition, and that it has not as yet
assumed an harmoniously concentrated character. If we investigate the
manner in which the government of this number of various nationalities
is in general managed, we have first to observe that, no doubt in
imitation of Dár-Fúr, the whole of the empire of Wádáy is divided into
four great sections: viz. the inhabitants of the western districts, or
“Lulúl-endí;” those of the southern provinces, or “Motáy-endí;” those of
the eastern districts, or “Talúnt-endí;” and, lastly, those of the
northern ones, or “Túrtalú.” Over these four large departments or
provinces a like number of Kemákel or Kamkoláks have been placed, the
Kamkolák of the west, at present K. Nehéd, having his residence in
Gosbéda, a village belonging to Máshek, three days W.S.W. from Wára; the
Kamkolák of the southern districts, at present Mohammed, having his
residence in Kúrkutí, two days south from Wára, on the Betéhá; the
Kamkolák of the East, at present Abákr (Abú Bakr) Weled Méram, residing
near the frontier of Dár-Fúr; and, finally, that of the north, at
present Sheikh-el-ʿArab, son of Tondó, residing in Mégeren, about twenty
miles north from Wára.

Besides these four principal governors or Kamkoláks, there are four
smaller ones, called Kamkolák-endikrék, who appear to be the substitutes
of the former, but seem besides to have some particular duties to
perform. Their names at present are Kamkolák Násr, belonging to K.
Nehéd; K. Hejáb, stationed in the south; K. Kélingen, and Kamkolák
Rákeb.

These Kamkoláks in general have the management of all public affairs in
the provinces, and have the power of life and death, and wherever they
go they levy the “dhiyáfa,” properly the present of hospitality, a sort
of tribute regulated according to the size of each respective place.
However, they seem to have nothing to do with the Arab population, and
even with regard to the indigenous tribes there are many exemptions from
their authority, several of those clans, especially the Táma, the
Kodoyí, the Bulála, the Míddogó, and some of the Ábú Sháribs, having
powerful chiefs of their own, and some of the pagan tribes having
retained their former princes. Moreover, a great many of the places
inhabited by indigenous tribes have been allotted to the Ágade or Agíds,
who were originally appointed as governors over the Arab tribes, so that
on military expeditions the Kemákel have not nearly so large a force
under their command as the Ágade.

Besides, as far as regards the eastern districts, a particular Agíd e’
sybba (sábah) has been appointed, who exercises a distinct function from
that of the Kamkolák of the east, and has his residence in Bír-Tawíl, a
place near the frontier of Dár-Fúr, though originally his authority
extended only over the Kórobát.

The following is a list of the present agíds or ágade, together with the
tribes over which they rule, and the chiefs each tribe has of its own.

     Name of the Agíd.             Name of the            Name of the
                                     Chief.               Tribe over
                                                        which they rule.

                              {    ʿAbd e’ Salám          Máhamíd.
                              {    Hagar
                              {
                              {    Mʿallem                Bení Helba.
                              {    Búrma[109]
                              {    Dendáni[110]
                              {
                              {    Tamóki                 Shíggerát.
                              {
  Jérma, nephew of Mohammed   {                      {    Séf e’ Dín.
  Sáleh                       {                      {
                              {    Goddúm            {
                              {                      {    Bení Hassan.
                              {
                              {    Músa Khabásh           Welád Jenúb.
                              {
                              {    Sherf e’ dín           Maharíye Welád
                              {                           ʿAlí.

  Mágené                           Yaríma                 Missiríye
                                                          Zorúk.

  Dágga                            Magáddam               Missiríye
                                                          Homr.

  (Kamkolák Nehéd)                 Allajád                Zoyúd.

  Mámmedí                          Riyát                  Nuwaíbe.

                              {    Sheikh Sáleh           Jʿaátena.
  Fadalállah (Fadhl-Allah)    {
                              {    Al Bahér               Dúggana.

  Jérma Shógoma                    (Not known to          Khozám.
                                   me)

                              {    Dilla             }
  Hanno                       {                      }    Hamíde.
                              {    Rádama            }

  Barka Méser                      Sindur                 ʿAbidíye.

  Jérma ʿAbd el Azíz               Sáleh                  Kólomát.

  Gádi                             Fákih Yakúb            Térjem.

  Bakhéd, Agíd e’ sybba            (Chief not             Kórobát.
                                   known)

                              {    Diyáb, with the        Sálamát.
                              {    surname “sídí
                              {    jénún”
                              {
  Sʿaíd                       {    Rekék, whose           Shárafa.
                              {    daughter is
                              {    married to the
                              {    king
                              {
                              {    Jedd el Móla           Hemád.

  Horr                             Sheikh Anje            Sábbada.

  Danna                            Halíb, a woman         Ráshid.

  (Not known)                      Máfer                  Sábalát.

  ʿAbd-el-Wáhed                    Diyáb                  Debába, a
                                                          section of the
                                                          tribe of this
                                                          name.

                              {    Ádim, next to          Asále’.
                              {    whom in
                              {    authority is
                              {    Kharith
                              {
  Fákih ʿAlí, or ʿAlío,       {
  called Agíd-el-bahr; his    {
  father Beshára died at      {
  Kúsuri                      {                        _Tebu Tribes._
                              {
                              {    Áb Kashélle            Kréda.

                                                     {    Shinnakóra,
                                                     {
                                                     {    Sákerdá.
                                                     {
  Bírre                            Ábú Nakór         {    Sákeré.
                                                     {
                                                     {    Madamée.
                                                     {
                                                     {    Fámálle.

These agíds, the most powerful of whom is Jérma, to whom the half of
Wádáy is said to belong, exercise a very great authority in times of
peace, as well as in case of war; for they have not only to inspect the
state of their respective districts, and to collect the tribute, but
they have also to assemble the troops, and lead them into battle; and
they are continually undertaking great expeditions on their own account.
After Jérma, the agíd el bahr, to whom Moíto, the north-easternmost town
of Bagírmi, has still to pay a special tribute, besides the general one
which Bagírmi pays to Wádáy, is the most powerful on account of his
numerous cavalry; then follows, it seems, the Agíd of the Jʿaátena, and
Dúggana. The Agíd-e’-sybba, is very unpopular on account of the
extortions and vexations to which he is continually subjecting
travellers and pilgrims, who on that account shun his territory as they
would the haunt of a wild beast.

Each of these agíds has a khalífa, or substitute, called agíd-el-birsh,
whom he sends into his province if he does not wish to go himself, and
some of whom exercise considerable authority by themselves; and besides
this person an Emín is also added, on the part of the sultan, in order
to inspect and control the collection of the tribute, and to see that
the due proportion, viz. half of the dhiyáfa, is sent to the sultan.

_Tribute._—The tribute or tax, called here “diván,” varies greatly
according to the wealth and character of the productions of the several
districts. But as a general rule, an inhabitant of any town in Wádáy
Proper, besides occasional contributions or presents, has to pay for
himself two mudd—a measure containing twenty-two handfuls of corn, or
rather dukhn; and, together with the other inhabitants of his town, a
certain number of camels; while with regard to the Arabs, every chief of
a family has to give a káffala of two heads of cattle every third year,
and if he be a fákih, but one. But besides this general tax, there are
some smaller ones for the black natives; as, for example, on each of the
great Mohammedan holidays, every village has to present to its Ajuwádi,
that is to say, to the person upon whom it has been settled as an
estate, one makhaláye—a measure containing three mudd or medád—of dukhn,
and has also to make the same present to an officer in the palace called
“Sídi-e’-derb,” as well as to the “Sídi-el-alboye;” the larger villages
or towns have to give more in proportion, as much as ten mekháli; and
besides this, on bringing their tribute to the king, the smaller
villages have to present their Ajuwádi with one camel-load of dukhn, and
the larger ones with more. The native negro population of Wádáy Proper
have not to pay any cattle or tokáki (strips of cotton), except at the
special request of the king; but certainly with them also the various
character of the productions of their district, and the wealth they
possess, are taken into account; the Sungóri, for instance, whose
excellent race of horses I have mentioned above, are said to pay every
year a tribute of one hundred horses; and the tribute of the Gémir and
the Týnjur is entirely confined to rice—wild rice—with which they have
to supply the household of the king.

As for the Arabs, besides the general tribute or káffala mentioned
above, they have to give to the king himself the “nóba,” that is to say,
once in three years, every four men, one cow; and on each holiday, every
encampment has to furnish a young cow; and besides this, they are
greatly annoyed by the expensive dhiyáfa, which, as I have stated above,
they have to present to the agíd-el-birsh on his annual visit, while on
the whole it is well known that the Wádáy people keep the Arabs settled
in their country in very strict subjection, and do not allow them to
collect any considerable property for themselves. As for the Máhamíd,
they pay their tribute entirely in camels, and are said to make up every
third year the number of one thousand camels, while the ʿAbidíye, who
have very little cattle for themselves, but breed cattle for the king,
they have to pay their tribute in butter.

With respect to the indigenous tribes in the outlying provinces of Wádáy
Proper, the tribute or diván imposed upon them varies greatly. For
example, the Dájo have to give 1000 tokáki, besides honey, wherein
consists the whole regular tribute paid by the provinces of Dággel,
Kebáit, and of the Bándalá; while Sílla, besides honey, has to furnish a
certain number of handsome female slaves; and Rúnga, in addition to a
certain quantity of this favourite article (viz. honey), 100 large
elephants’ teeth every year, or half of the value in slaves. The tribute
of Gúlla, and of the adjacent pagan states, consists solely of slaves.
As for the Tebu tribes, the Zogháwa have to furnish a certain number of
horses, while the tribute raised on the Gurʿaán, as far as they are
dependent on Wádáy, consists of camels.

Here, finally, I have to mention the diván paid by the king of Bagírmi,
down from the period when ʿOthmán, father of the present ruler of that
country, solicited the assistance of Sabún, in order to reconquer his
country from the facha, as I have stated in my account of Bagírmi. This
tribute, which was levied the very year of my residence in Más-eñá,
consists of 100 horses of indifferent description, 100 slaves, 30 serári
or handsome female slaves, and 1000 shirts, or gumsán. This tribute, the
whole value of which, in Bagírmi, is from 2500 to 3000 dollars, is paid
every third year, besides a present of 10 serári, 4 horses, and 4 gumsán
to Jérma, Weled el Méram, who has the superintendence of this
dependency. For there is a superintendent, or as the Wádáwy call it a
“Kursí,” for every province without the borders of Wádáy Proper; and
Jérma, besides having all those Arab tribes above mentioned under him,
is the Kursí, not only of Bagírmi, but likewise of the whole Fittrí, of
the Dájó, and of Míddogó. The present Kursí of Runga, whose name is
Sheríf, has his residence in Sheníni, which, together with the
neighbouring villages, has to furnish him with necessaries, and he
visits that province annually, in order to levy the tribute. The Welád
Ráshid also, partly owing to their considerable distance from the
capital, and partly, as it would seem, on account of their being deeply
sunk in paganism, although they have a special agíd, have likewise,
together with the Sálamát, had a kursí established over them.

_The Fásher and Members of the Fásher._—After having given this short
account of the external government of the country, if I may so call it,
I now proceed to the interior; but, as there is naturally no civil
government, I content myself with naming the persons composing the
Fásher, or Royal Council, where the present sultan Mohammed Sheríf
however never appears. This council is held in an open place, which is
likewise called Fásher, where all public business is transacted. The
president of the Fásher, and the first of the “Fásher-melé” or members
of the Fásher in authority, is the Sing-melék, or, properly speaking,
the master of the gate, but whose character and authority evidently
approach those of a vizier, all business, as far as regards the internal
operations of government, being principally transacted by him. The
present Sing-melék is said to be a person of intelligence, of the name
of Ashén, the younger brother of the powerful Jérma, Weled el Méram, who
surpasses him in material power and wealth. But with regard to the
composition of the Fásher this Jérma is to be ranked next to Sing-melék.
Then comes Kamkolák Rákeb, who appears to have the authority of a major-
domo, then Emín ʿAbd-Alláhi, a brother of Sing-melék, who is the
inspector of the shirts, that is to say, the private treasurer of the
monarch; next in order is Kursí Ábú Bakr, son of Ábú Horra, the person
mentioned above, at present stationed in the territory of the Kodoyí;
Kursí ʿAbd-Alláhi, who has the inspection of the Welád Ráshid; the Agíd
el Máhamíd; the Agíd of the Welád Ráshid; the Agíd el Jʿaátena; Agíd e’
Sálamát; Agíd el Khozám; Agíd el Birsh; Agíd el Édderí; Maigenék, a
person whose duty it is to proceed with his troop in advance of the
sultan, in case of an expedition, like the Jérma in the Bórnu army;
Kamkolák Mohammed Wókilík, K. Nehéd, K. Tandó, K. Ábú Bakr, Agíd el
ʿAbidíye, Kursí Rúnga, Agíd e’ sybba; K. ʿAtamán (ʿOthmán), Agíd
Ammárga, an officer of the household, Agíd Sálem, inspector of the corn
supplied to the palace, Agíd Yúngo, likewise for the interior, Milleng-
díme, khalífa of the Kamkolák of the southern provinces, Milleng-túri,
Khalífa of the governor of the eastern districts, Mohammed Jégeles,
khalífa of the agíd of the Máhamíd, Mohammed Dahába Bódda, substitute of
Kamkolák Mohammed, khalífa Fód, whose station is towards the S.; Kubár,
an Ajuwádi, who has his residence in Ábgudám, eleven days S. from Wára,
and others of minor authority.

The order in which I have enumerated the members of the Council, is
nearly that of their rank. As for the Mómó, or queen mother, she is
sometimes asked to give her opinion, but she never appears in the
assembly.

_Army._—I shall add but a few words concerning the military department.
After various minute inquiries, I think I shall not be wrong in stating
the cavalry of Wádáy, in which, as in almost all these countries, the
strength of the army consists, at seven thousand horse. Of these about
one thousand appear to be clad in coats of mail or “derret,” while, on
account of the communication with Ben-Gházi, the number of these coats
of mail are annually increasing, every caravan bringing several camel-
loads of them, which sell for one or two female slaves apiece. The
horses are said to be excellent; and exposed as they are to storm and
heat, never enjoying the protection of a roof or shade, they are able to
support the greatest fatigue, while at the same time those of the great
men at least are said to be fed sumptuously with rice and milk. All the
horses of the sultan, which bear the special title of “aruwáil” (_sing._
rawáil) have each of them a particular name. The number of muskets in
the army is very small, the Wádáwy themselves having assured me that
there are not more than about 300; for the strength of the people of
Wádáy consists in their spears, while the Fúráwy trust almost entirely
to their swords.

As for the commanders on an expedition, their rank, according to the
number of the troops which they lead into the field, is as follows.
After the sultan and the Sing-melék, certainly nobody can emulate Jérma,
the agíd of the Máhamíd, after whom follows Jérma ʿAbd el Azíz, and then
Kamkolák Rákeb; these are free men; then follow the slaves, viz. the
powerful agíd el Bahr; then Fadalálle, the agíd of the Jʿaátena, Sʿaíd,
agíd of the Sálamát; then Dánna; Dágga, who is the Édderí of the army,
that is to say, he has the command of the rear; then Mágené; El Horr;
Hánno, the Agíd of the Hamíde, who is not a slave, but a native of
Wádáy; Jérma Shógoma; Káffa, and others.

There are several captains of the sultan’s own cavalry with the title of
Jérma: as Jérma Angarútú, Jérma Dhohob, J. Rebek, J. Kaukob, J. Hassan,
J. Siyáde, J. Dháhab, J. Fudhl, who has his station generally in Kánem,
J. Mongó, and J. Benáy.

_Household of the Sultan._—The principal persons composing the household
of the sultan of Wádáy are the kolótus and the mérams, the former title
being given to every son of the monarch, and the latter to all his
daughters. Of kolótus there were during my stay in Bagírmi five.
Mohammed, the heir apparent, who already at that time was said not to be
on good terms with his father, was born of a Púllo or Fellatníye woman,
whom Mohammed Sáleh married in Kordofán, and for this reason the greater
part of the people of Wádáy did not wish him to succeed to the sovereign
power. ʿAlí and Ádim were born of one and the same mother, Mádem
Shékoma. Khodr, the third son, and Makhmúdi, are by another mother.
After the kolótus and mérams follow the hábbabát, or, as the Wádáwy call
them in their own tongue, elísi (sing. elík), the wives or concubines of
the sultan, of whom Shékoma and Sokáy were said to be the favourites.

The officers who have the management of the household of the monarch, or
part of it, under their inspection, are as follows: the barákena-kolí,
meaning royal servants in general; the daláli-kolí, or “siyáde el
alboye,” who have to make and repair the tents; the tuwerát, or
messengers; the motór-melé, or bearers of the spears; the tangna-kolí,
or pages and chamberlains; the ayál-legedábe, or messengers waiting in
the shed or hall, “legedábe,” for the occasional orders of their master;
then the kórayát, or siyád el khél, the masters of the horses, the
gárrafín, or “siyád el kholgán,” the masters of the shirts and “tokáki,”
and, finally, the ártu (_sing._ arak), or, as they are called here,
shiúkh, the eunuchs, or the masters of the female department.

_Character of the Towns and Villages._—The dwelling-places throughout
the whole extent of Wádáy are in general small; and I have been assured
by the natives themselves that there is no town containing one thousand
separate dwellings. Indeed Wára, till recently the capital and residence
of the monarch, which in 1852, on account of the seat of government
having been transferred to Abéshr, was every day becoming more and more
deserted, scarcely contains above four hundred houses, while Nimró, the
famous seat of the Jellába, is stated not to exceed two hundred. In
general the towns or villages of the Kodoyí are said to be the largest,
some of them containing as many as six hundred houses, while those of
the Mímay are said to be the smallest. But the largest place in the
whole of Wádáy is said to be Kódogus, two days west from Sheníni.

The houses or huts consist, like those of all the rest of Negroland, of
groups of round, bell-shaped huts, made of reed, and called “máharéb,”
or “samavi,” in the Wádáy language, enclosed by a wall or fence,
“sherágena-dalí,” and but very rarely, as is the case with the houses of
the king and those of the persons of rank on one side and the Jellába on
the other, built of clay. But the Arabs live in portable huts, made of
mats which they themselves manufacture of the leaves of the deléb-palm,
and which are called “réri” by the Wádáwy.

_Commerce and Market-places._—Almost all the commerce, on a large scale,
which is carried on in Wádáy, is in the hands of the Jellába; a
considerable number of this peculiar stock, whom I have not classed
above among the various tribes inhabiting that country, having migrated
into Wádáy about a hundred years ago, from the valley of the Nile, and
principally, though not exclusively, settled at present in Nimró, a
place about eight miles S.W. from the former capital. Separated into
several bodies, these merchants by birth have each of them his own route
of commerce; thus, there is one body of Jellába who go annually to
Runga; another body frequents the copper-mines south of Dár-Fúr; others
take their merchandise only to the distant provinces towards the S.W.,
viz. the territory of the Welád Ráshid and the neighbouring pagan
countries on the borders of Bagírmi, namely, Bedánga, Gógomi, Ándi;
while others again visit the markets of Bagírmi, Logón, and Bórnu; some
of them visiting Más-eñá during my residence in such numbers that they
built a considerable village for themselves outside of the town, on the
road to Ábú-Gher; while another band visits annually the markets of Dár-
Fúr and Kordofán, others, and especially the wealthier individuals,
frequently follow the recently-opened caravan-road to Ben-Gházi, of
whose history M. Fresnel has given such an elaborate account. Each of
these bodies when _en route_ has its chief or agíd appointed over them
by the sultan, to whom he is responsible for a handsome tax raised on
the profit obtained.

The principal objects of this commerce in general are the following
articles: salt, brought by the Máhamíd and the Tebu to Nimró and Wára,
and bought by the Jellába in large quantities, in order to be sold by
them in detail to the most distant provinces—even as far as Logón;
copper, brought chiefly from the famous copper-mine “el Hófrah,” and
from Runga, and exported, principally to Bórnu, where it fetches a high
price; European articles, brought by the caravans from Ben-Ghází, or
imported also from Egypt by way of Dár-Fúr, such as fine clothes,
bernúses, coats of mail, beads, and other ornaments, calico, paper,
needles, &c., ivory, principally taken in exchange from the Rungáwy, the
Welád Ráshid, and in Bagírmi, in order to be exported, with very great
profit from Wára to Ben-Gházi; asses, of the Eastern breed, very much in
request in the western part of Sudán; túrkedí; tobacco; kóhol; and
sundry other articles brought by the retail merchants of Háusa to
Bagírmi, where they are taken in exchange by the Jellába. Slaves, as in
the whole of Sudán, are certainly the most important article of
commerce.

With regard to the market-places, I have to observe that there is no
considerable market-place in the whole of Wádáy where a person might
find the productions of the different parts of the country collected
together, neither at Wára nor at Nimró, nor in any other place, and one
has to go some distance in order to supply himself with the necessaries
of life. Thus the people of Wára, as well as the Máhamíd, when they wish
to lay in a provision of dukhn, which is their principal food, have to
go to Gírre, a place a little to the west of Nimró, or to the villages
of the Kodoyí; or else they go to the settlements of the Kashémeré, such
as Kúldi, Bútir, Kúndungó, Kornayé, Héjir and others, while in the
southern districts dukhn is bought at the cheapest rate in Abker,
Gnamúniya and Mistakhéde, and in the valley of the Bat-há; principally
in Dumbóli, Rás el fíl, Summúkedúr, Agílba, in a village called Kósi-
wáhed (“one hut”) and in Asáige.

The standard price of every article is the tokíya (pl. tokáki), a term
signifying two long strips of cotton, measuring eighteen drʿa in length,
and three wide, made of smaller strips, which however far surpass those
used in Bagírmi, Bórnu, and all the western parts of Sudán in width,
though they are much coarser. This is the currency of Wádáy, and with it
all the smaller bargains are made, while the larger ones are made in
cattle, in which consists the chief wealth of the Wádáy people in
general, or in slaves; dollars have only lately been introduced by the
Ben-Ghází merchants. One tokíya will fetch, it is said, three or four
sheep, with the Máhamíd, who, as has been stated above, are very rich in
small cattle, and where consequently they are the cheapest; and about
thirty ewes will fetch a cow, while from twelve to fifteen cows are said
to buy a good horse. As for the price of corn, one tokíya is said to buy
from four to five wéba—a measure, eight of which constitute a bullock-
load of dukhn, at the time when it is dearest, and six after the time of
the harvest; while a cow is said to fetch from thirty to thirty-six
wéba, but the bullock only from sixteen to twenty.

_Manufactures and Productions._—It is clear that in a newly-founded
kingdom, such as that of Wádáy, composed of a mere agglomeration of
almost entirely barbarous tribes, there can only be very few
manufactures, or rather none at all, except the roughest productions of
industry, such as weapons and rural implements, made from the iron found
in the country, while besides iron, copper alone is found, namely, in
Runga, and in small proportion in the wádí called Jélingák. Indeed the
Wádáwy themselves do not even know how to make use of the fine indigo
found in their country, in order to dye their clothes, or rather their
shirts, as there are very few persons who are able to afford anything
better than this most essential article of dress. It is even stated that
before the time when the considerable spoil was carried away from
Bagírmi by ʿAbd el Kerím Sabún, the great majority of the people of
Wádáy were clad in nothing but the well-known fáruwá. As for the
business carried on with indigo, it is entirely in the hands of Bagírmi,
or Bórnu people, established in Wádáy; but the Bórnu people are the most
famous and numerous, and their settlements in the country, to which
great importance is attached on this account, are the following:—The
greatest fame for giving the finest tint of indigo to the clothes has
been obtained by the inhabitants of Jemíl e’ Síd, a place situated two
short days S.W. from Wára, and second to it is Bírbashón, another
settlement of Bórnu people, situated between Jemíl e’ Síd and Wára; west
from Jemíl e’ Síd, there is another dyeing settlement called Shálla, and
close to it Léyin, and likewise Birén, a somewhat larger place, situated
on the Betéhá, two days S.W. from Wára. Other Bórnu dyers are
established in Karríngalá (two days south of Wára), and in Dérdigí (one
day south from the former), while others again have settled in Kélingen
Méser, a place situated in the district of the Kélingen. But
nevertheless a black or blue shirt is a great luxury in Wádáy, and a
mark of distinction for persons of rank; indeed, when on their
expedition against Bórnu, as related above, the Wadáwy satisfied
themselves by tearing the black shirts from the backs of all the Bagírmi
or Bórnu people they could lay hold of, instead of leading the persons
themselves into captivity.

_Learning._—Certainly no one will look for any great amount of learning
in such a country as Wádáy; but the Wádáwy fákihs and ʿUlama are the
most famous of all the nations in Sudán for their knowledge of the
Kurán, the Fúlbe or Féllani not excepted. But besides, they possess
several small books or tracts which are generally read as well as the
Kurán, partly for grammatical partly for religious instruction, namely,
Nóh, Elfíye, Khalíl, Resála, Ákhdar-Mandhúm, Ákhdar-Mansúr, Bakádi,
Taʿalík, Abú-el-Hassan, Thamán al jénne, ʿÁjeli or Áujeli el kúbbara,
Áujeli-el-ustha, and others. As for the Sheríya, it is exercised with
ability by these fákihs or doctors; but the Siyása, or the usage of the
country, has greater authority than the book.

The greatest doctor in Wádáy, at the present time, is stated unanimously
to be a man belonging to the Ábú-Shárib, and generally known merely
under the name of Fákih-el-bahr, who spent many years with Mohammed
Sáleh, when he was wandering homeless about; and probably on this
account was not put to death by the fierce king who has executed a
considerable number of learned men, and among others, the Sheikh-el-
Herán, a great doctor, belonging also to the more spirited tribe of the
Ábú-Shárib, on the pretext that he had betrayed him to his enemies the
Kodoyí; he likewise executed the great and learned Imám Mohammed Gírga.

_Food._—I shall conclude this notice of Wádáy with a few observations on
the food of its inhabitants. As in most parts of Sudán, it consists
principally of dukhn or pennisetum typhoïdeum; but they have also some
wheat and rice. The people of Wádáy have a plentiful supply of meat, and
are tolerably well provided with milk and butter, and are therefore not
obliged to have recourse every day to that insipid broth made of dried
and powdered fish, formed into a sort of loaf, and in this form called
“méndichék,” the dried fish, preserved in its natural form, being called
“fértené.” On the contrary, they have a tolerably good variety of
dishes, of which I shall give a short list, without, however, being able
to explain the exact preparation of each. But first I must observe, that
the people of Wádáy do not make any use of the funduk or kárru, the
large wooden mortar so exclusively used over other parts of Negroland,
but grind their dukhn on stones, their country being rather of a stony
character, while in many parts of Bórnu and Bagírmi not a single stone
is seen. As far as the dishes are prepared of dukhn, the following are
the principal ones: first the damírge, the common daily dish; then
masáffa, a very favourite dish in Wádáy; reshéfa, another dish of dukhn,
prepared with milk; takárin, prepared with the fat of oxen, instead of
milk; kíssere, denási, amkóshu, súri, kókor, ʿajíne amráfa, rotóto, and
subáy; another dish made of sesamum and called amkeleño. Then their
various sweetmeats, as the kíllikáb, prepared with corn and honey; the
matábba, made of rice and honey; the kák, made of corn, or rice, with
butter, honey, and dates; the ʿajíne zérka; and, finally, the fáworó,
made of dates boiled in milk and then left to cool. Of the dishes of
meat, the wéka, and the shaham el kebél are the most celebrated. As for
drinking, it is well known that almost all the people of Wádáy indulge
in an intoxicating beverage called merísa by the Arabs, of which there
are three species,—the bilbil or red, the ákebésh or white, and the
“hal.”

I cannot conclude this account of Wádáy without stating that the whole
of it was drawn up in Bagírmi in the year 1852. I did not see _Le Voyage
au Ouadáy_, published in 1851, by Jomard et Perron, till 1855, and have
not changed a word in it. The account of the Sheikh el Túnsí is
extremely valuable with regard to the private life of the people, but
full of exaggerations with regard to public affairs; for example, the
strength of the army, the tribute paid by Bagírmi, and so on.


[Footnote 109: Residing in Gálum Kúsha.]

[Footnote 110: Residing in Ám-Sidr, a zaraf, one day N.W. from Wára, and
about the same distance from Gálum Kúsha.]




                              APPENDIX IX.

COLLECTION OF ITINERARIES FOR FIXING THE TOPOGRAPHY OF WÁDÁY, AND THOSE
             PARTS OF BAGÍRMI WHICH I DID NOT VISIT MYSELF.


                 1. ROADS FROM MÁS-EÑÁ TO WÁRA, E.N.E.


(_a._) _Route of Háj Bú-bakr Sadík of Bákadá, who performed this journey
three times. March, about six hours per diem._


1st day. Baláwu, a large Bagírmi place with a sheikh of its own; pass
Bídderi on the road,—the place mentioned repeatedly in my journey.

2nd. Dílfin, a Bagírmi place. The wells all about here are deep.

3rd. Kínji, the last place of Bagírmi Proper, already mixed with
Shúwa.[111]

4th. Wenése, a Shúwa place with cultivated fields.

5th. Bírka, a place of the Welád Músa, represented as the most warlike
tribe of Shúwa hereabouts.

6th. Túmsa, a place inhabited by Kúka, but belonging to Bagírmi.

7th. No village. Having arrived about noon, you start again in the
evening, and, after a short repose, reach in the morning

8th. Géla, the first place of Fittrí.

9th. Mélme, a considerable place with a great market held every Tuesday.
The direction, having hitherto been nearly north, now turns east.

10th. Yʿawó, the capital of Fittrí, on the north side of the Bat-há, and
not far from its junction with the (lake) Fittrí, a large but open place
(built by the Bulála, before whose arrival and settlement in the
country, Kúdu was the capital of Fittrí), the residence of Juráb ben Ábú
Sekín, the present ruler of the Bulála. The country abounds in rich
pasture-grounds. The road from Mélme to Yʿawó forms an angle, first
east, further on south.

11th. Séta, a place of the Bulála.

12th. Hafír, encampment without a village, still within the territory of
the Fittrí.

13th. Jeddáda, no inhabited place; encampment in the sandy valley of the
meandering Bat-há, which in the dry season forms only stagnant pools of
water.

14th. Surra, a locality only temporarily inhabited by the Arab tribe of
the Jʿaátena, who frequent it during the rainy season. The territory
belongs to Wádáy.

15th. Dífda, a place of the Arab tribe of the Khozám.

16th. Néjme, a place of the Arab tribe of the Hémedát.

17th. Kunjur, a village of the tribe of the Kúka.

18th. Dermáma, a place of the tribe of the Kúka. From Dermáma to Ábú
Telfán, a great mountain inhabited by pagans of the tribe of the Dájo,
one day, a little south from east.

19th. Birket Fátima, an extensive basin filled by the water of the Bat-
há beyond the north limit of the wádí, with a place of the Arab tribe of
the Masmája, frequented likewise by the Erzegát.

20th. Ráhet el Khalla, another large pond of water, with a hamlet
inhabited by the Dájó, a tribe of negroes under the rule of Wádáy, with
a language of their own.

21st. Ojób, a place of the Másalít, negroes with a peculiar speech
(ertána).

22nd. Foróli, a place of the Siyáda, a division of the Másalít.

23rd. ʿAín Hajar, a place of the Másalít.

24th. Jemést (Juméz) el bédha, a place of the Másalít, on a bend of the
Bat-há, which here comes from the south, and which you now leave behind.

25th. Bórorít, a large village in Wádáy Proper. You turn now from east
to N.E.

26th. Ám-sháraríb, a large village, Wádáy.

27th. Máshek, a large place.

28th. Nimró, a place of the Jellába, with clay houses. The well is three
fathoms deep. South of Nimró lies Tolfú, a place situated on a mountain.

29th. Wára, the capital of Wádáy, inclosed on all sides by sandhills,
leaving only, both on the south and the north sides, a single passage
for access to the town. By the south entrance (the Lingak Embélkena),
you enter the town, leaving the hamlet Búrtay on one side. With the
exception of the palace, all the dwellings consist of reed. The Fásher,
or council-place, is nothing but a spacious open square, planted with
trees (of the kind called here sayál). The wells within the town are
nine fathoms deep; those outside are of less depth. The palace lies on a
range of hills on the east side. The western range of hills is called
Tiré, contains several huts, and has a military guard. W.N.W. from Wára
lies Toná, and at a short distance south lies Gándigin. Nimró from Wára
is about eight miles.


(_b._) _Route of Fáki Íbrahím, from the Ábú Shárib Ménagón, from Bórorít
to Más-eñá. West somewhat south._


1st day. Hillet e’ Sheikh, a large village inhabited by the slaves of
the sultan, by the Zoyúd Arabs, and by the Bulála. You pass in the
morning several small hamlets, and stop during the heat of the day (from
ten to three or four o’clock) at Angúrma Táwemát, a place of the Dár-
Zoyúd, at some distance north of the Bat-há, which has received the
Betéhá at Malám.

2nd. Ám-debáng, a large place inhabited by Kúka, situated in sandy soil
(góz), about one day and a half north of the Bat-há. The heat of the day
is passed at the village of Módu on the ráhet Sáribé, a pond with a
clayey soil, fed by the water coming from the north.

3rd. A large place of the Zoyúd, name not known. Stop during the heat at
Dókeát, a place of the same tribe of the Zoyúd. Within Dár Wádáy the
villages of the Arabs consist of huts of reed; beyond the boundaries of
the country, of portable huts of matting, called “véri” by the Wádáy
people.

4th. Sheg el hájilíj, a place of the Kúka and Bulála, under Agíd
Fadalallah, at some distance from the Bat-há. Stop during the heat of
the day at another village, whose name my informant has forgotten.

5th. Encamp in the open air on néga, sterile land, without an inhabited
place and without water, talha being the only vegetation. Stop during
the heat at Ám-birke, a small place.

6th. Ám-jumézi, a place adorned by sycamores, “juméz”; stop during the
heat at a place of the Bulála.

7th. Khatít, a village of the Bulála. Íbrahím, remaining the whole
morning at Ám-jumézi, started at ʿaser; consequently Khatít is only
distant from the former a few miles.

8th. A small hamlet. Stop during the heat of the day at a place
inhabited by Bórnu people.

9th. Ngarruwendi, a considerable place of the Missiríye; stop during the
heat at Ám-Sheráy, a Pullo or Felláta place, with numerous cattle.

10th. Árda, a village of the Kúka and Bulála on the Bat-há; stop during
the heat at Shebína, a considerable place of the Kúka, who formerly
possessed there much power, situated on the Bat-há. On the banks of the
Bat-há the deléb-palm at present has entirely disappeared, all the trees
having been cut down during the great famine which prevailed seventeen
years ago, in order to feed on the nourishing pith or core.

11th. Ám-aláwi, a considerable place, inhabited by Wádáy and the
Jʿaátena Arabs, at some distance from the Bat-há, which here turns
southward. As far as Ám-aláwi, where Íbrahím stopped two days, the whole
district belongs to Dár Mába, or Wádáy Proper. Stop in the morning at a
small hamlet. From Árda you turn a little N. by W.

12th. Encamp in the sandy bed of the Bat-há without an inhabited place.
Surra is left to the right in the north bend of the wádí. My informant
did not stop for the heat during these days, but travelled on from
morning till noon.

13th. Kharúb, in the bed of the Bat-há, no inhabited place.

14th. Jeddáda, open encampment in the Bat-há.

15th. Séta, a village of the Bulála in their district of Fittrí.

16th. Gámsa, a place of the Bulála on the south bank.

17th. Yʿawa or Yʿawó, capital of the Bulála, close to the north bank of
the Bat-há. Míddogó is from here about twelve hours E.S.E.

18th. Mélme, a considerable market-place, consisting of three hamlets,
close to the north bank of the (lake) Fittrí. Between Yʿawó and Mélme,
the road describes an angle.

19th. Encamp in a forest at midnight, having stopped during the heat at
a well, and started thence at dhohor. Up to this well the road follows a
westerly direction; from here to Más-eñá it keeps south.[112]

20th. Moító, the first place in Bagírmi, which, however, has to pay a
separate tribute of 400 shirts to the agíd el bahr. Moító comprises five
villages, three of which lie in a line on the southern foot of a rocky
eminence, and two at the eastern foot of another. The road to Fittrí
runs between the two rocky ridges, which are of considerable elevation,
and the eastern one of which extends to a great length. At the
easternmost village of the western group, a market is held twice a week,
every Tuesday and Thursday, but is much less important than that of
Mélme. Moító is the residence of a khalífa of the sultan of
Bagírmi.[113] Stop during the heat in the morning in hillelát (small
villages) of the Kúka, and start at dhohor; arrive late in Moító.

21st. Hillet ʿArab, which you reach in the morning, having started in
the evening and slept on the “néga.”

22nd. Garra, in the morning, having started in the evening, and slept at
a place belonging to some Arabs.

23rd. Jilás, having started in the morning, and passed the heat at a
place of the Kúka.

24th. Ábú-Gher, a place of some importance on account of its Saturday
market, and comprising two villages separated from each other by the
market-place. The place is of Púllo or Felláta origin; and the southern
village is entirely inhabited by Fúlbe, whilst the northern one is
occupied by small tradespeople. The name, as far as I know, has nothing
to do with the ábú kern or rhinoceros.

25th. Sobiyó, a village of the mʿallem Sáleh Tynjuráwi, a very learned
fáki. Arrive early in the morning, having started in the evening and
slept on the road.

26th. Más-eñá, the capital of Bagírmi, after a short march. From Ábú
Gher, direction S.S.E.


     (_c._) _Route of the Fáki ʿAlí Malánga from Más-eñá to Wára._


1st day. Ábú-Gher.

2nd. Yelás, the Bagírmi place above-mentioned.

3rd. Ábú Gérra.

4th. Moító, a group of villages skirting some rocky eminences. Seven
hours north from Moító lies the village of Aúni, likewise on a rocky
eminence[114]; one day N.W. Gosús, also on a hill; Ángora, a place of
the Kúka, two days N.E.

5th. Kalkálle, a Bagírmi place. A long march.

6th. Mélme, a large place, with small hamlets lying in the
neighbourhood.

7th. Séta, a large place north of the Bat-há. Yʿawó is left on the
right.

8th. Surra, encampment without any inhabited place.

9th. Jeddáda, encampment only.

10th. Geltsa, encampment.

11th. Difdé, a village of the Sálamát and Kúka, who use the water of the
Bat-há, which here makes a bend towards the north.

12th. Ám-aláwi, a place of the Malánga, distant from the Bat-há. A short
march. The Menázel Sultán extends from Wára as far as this place.

13th. Ngaruwendi, a place of the Welád Hasén, distant from the Bat-há,
which has turned towards the south.

14th. Esheráya, a hamlet of the Fúlbe or Felláta.

15th. Tawíle, a place of the Jellába, with clay dwellings and reed huts,
distant from the Bat-há.

16th. Bírre, a place of the mʿallem Mohájar, the agíd of the Sébbadé.
Birket Fátima, the great place of the Siyáde Masmáje and residence of
their agíd, with clay and reed huts, is six hours south from here.

17th. Abú Gérra, a large place of the Welád Bú Sʿaíd.

18th. Beréga, a place of the Malánga. A good march.

19th. Mégerá, a place of the Týnjur and Jellába on the wádí Elmá, which
extends towards the north into the gizán.

20th. Dókeát, a considerable place of the nás (people of) Gírri, on a
wádí abounding with lions and rhinoceroses.

21st. Dúggulí, a place of the Ráshid Arabs, Fókara zuwáye, close to Ám-
debáng.

22nd. Ám-batéta, a place of the Missiríye Arabs in the néga, no wádí.

23rd. Támmedál Húmmelán with Missiríye Arabs.

24th. Bír Sunta, an opulent place of Bórnu tradesmen.

25th. Bíri Yóyo, a place of the Mágena Makhmúdi.

26th. Ám-Zét, a place of the Fókara of the Missiríye, with a small
zaraf.

27th. Ám-shéreríb, a place of the Térjem, near three eminences
consisting of a red-coloured rock.

28th. Ám-dekík, a place of the nás Gírri, founded by Sabún, and called
by the people Karnak Wádáy.

29th. Fírsha, a place of the nás Mánga.

30th. Káltegge, a place of the Mánga.

31st. Nimró, a Jellába place, with the great fáki Góni Merés.

32nd. Wára.


                  2. ROUTES IN THE INTERIOR OF WÁDÁY.


       (_a._) _Fáki Íbrahím’s Route from Wára to Sheníni. South._


1st day. Abéshr, formerly a small place of the Kélingen, but, three
years ago having become the residence of Sultán Sheríf, more densely
inhabited, and containing also some clay huts. Arrive about dhohor,
having in the morning passed Tára, Menzel Sultán (where Yúsuf Kharifáyín
died, and which was formerly a large place); further on, Kay-wána, a
considerable village; then Gañánga, Nyaláng (a place of the Jellába),
Jikúb, and finally Útuló. From Abéshr to Nimró is a long march.

2nd. Kélingen Kíri, a hilly place belonging to the sultan (whose mother
is a native of it), and the residence of the kamkolák Rákeb. Dílebát has
been passed on the way.

3rd. Kínji Mínrak, a place of the Kajánga, who inhabit about forty
villages in this hilly region, on the north bank of the Betéhá. Stop
during the heat in Errin-manga in a level tract of country.

4th. Deñam, a village of the Ábú Shárib, having passed in the morning
Ám-dírdi, a place of the Kajánga, Fárrel and Gándigin situated at the
western foot of a rocky eminence. Stop during the heat at Bedíne, pass
Gúngerúm,—all places of the Kajánga,—then Kórdufál, and finally Gélebé,
the native place of my informant Fáki Íbrahím.

5th. Sheníni, a place of the Ábú Shárib Ménagón and Márarít, who are,
however, mixed with the Bíli, the Kodoyí, the Mími, the Gañánga, the
Bulála, and the Khozám Arabs. Pass in the morning Ám-búrtunú, a place of
the Dájó at the northern foot of a rocky eminence, at the western foot
of which lies a place of the Jellába, and to the east of which lies a
place of the Missiríye. Having turned west round the hill, you pass the
wádí el Hamra, a wide valley which, in its upper course near the
villages Kóriyó, Gúndur, &c., is overgrown with deléb-palms, date-palms,
and ʿardéb—here, however, producing corn. The valley towards the S.W.,
near Sunkútu Malám, joins that of the Bat-há. Further on you traverse a
“néga,” or “élan,” a plain overgrown with talha, and reach, ultimately,
Habíle, a place of the Ábú Shárib, with Mʿallem Zakharíye, where you
stop during the heat. Then you pass Áblubán, where the wádí Habíle joins
the wádí el Hamra, and reach Sheníni, having passed the deep and
expansive wádí Dirrengék, which runs towards the wádí el Hamra.


(_b._) _From Sheníni to Bórorít, by way of Ógrogó, according to the Fáki
                               Íbrahím._


1st day. Abkar ʿAbd el Khálik, a village of the district of Abkar,
which, besides this, comprises the following villages: Abkar Jembóng,
one of the largest villages in Wádáy, with about 600 huts, A. Mótotóng,
A. Béndaláng, A. Táwalibé, A. Ámjedáge, A. Hejéllijóng, A. Hejérbasán
(called by the Arabs “Hajar Ábú Hassan”), A. Gógnotáng, A. Dillit, A.
Jemíl e’ Síd. Having in the morning first turned west, you cross the w.
el Hamra, and pass the village of Mustakhéde, then turn N.W., and cross
the w. Wárringék, which is close on the right, and pass the village
Rógrogó; stop, during the heat, at Méri, a place of the Ogodóngde and
Gámara; having then crossed the w. Wárringék, which, between Rógrogó
towards the west, and Áblubán east, joins the w. el Hamra, you pass
Seríra, Magállemék, all on the west bank of the w. Wárringék, and,
lastly, A. Hejéllijóng, close before you reach A. ʿAbd el Khálik.

2nd. Namwúrren, a place of the Kajánga, passing in the morning Hámiyen,
the only place in Wádáy possessing warm springs of fresh water, in a
district distinguished by some small rocky hills, and close to the wádí
Wárringék. The water is so warm that you cannot put your hand into it;
but it soon cools in the air. In Hámiyen resides Fáki Jʿabúr, of the Ábú
Shárib. Passing then Sakháli, a place of the Bándalá, you halt, during
the heat, at Karángalák. In the afternoon you cross once more the w.
Wárringék, which, in its upper course, comes from N.W. from Morró, a
place of the Kajánga, from whence it proceeds to the néga Ajáje, thence
to Marfa, and thence east to Kulbú, distant three hours W.N.W. from
Hámiyen. From Karángalák you come to Kiréngel, a place of the Bándalá,
situated on the west and north side of the wádí Karéngelnák, which, by
way of Nyára, where it is joined by the w. Kórkotó, runs south towards
the wádí Wárringék. The country, “góz” (sand) and “tín” (clay),
stretches to Himéda, and thence to Namwúrren.

3rd. Jómbo Fókarán, on the w. Ngónjobók, a large wádí, where onions are
extensively grown, and which, coming from the north, joins the Betéhá,
which is not far from this place. Having in the morning passed Fáringáng
a place of the Kajánga, Kúñigi, and further on Fútela nyammúk gwána
(“pour in the butter,” butter being here very plentiful), then
Fírti,—all places of the Kajánga,—you cross the Betéhá, which supplies
the inhabitants of Fírti with water, and stop, during the heat, at
Nyemér Hejilíje, a place of the Kajánga, but under the authority of the
agíd of the Jʿaátena, N.W. of the Betéhá, which here comes from the
north. Proceeding then to Nyemér Tergeménge, still on the Betéhá, which
now is left on the east side, you reach Jombó.

4th. Ógrogó was reached by Íbrahím about káíla, he having passed Jómbo
Lársherí on the Betéhá, J. Swébe and J. Dángal, all places inhabited by
Wádáy people. From Ógrogó he intended to proceed to the Máhamíd in the
wádí ʿOrádha, for the purpose of pursuing his studies among this most
opulent Arab tribe. The Kodoyí being, however, at that time at war with
the sultan, and the road running between the Kélingen and the Kodoyí
being unsafe, he resolved to go to Bagírmi, and consequently changed his
direction west, and then N.W., towards Bórorít. He started the same day,
and slept at Kinji-Mínrak, a large village of the Kajánga, consisting of
500 huts, and the native place of Sáleh Dérret, having passed Jómbo
Sárkalé and Gúndogín, a village of the Kajánga, consisting of three
hamlets. West a little south.

5th. Óshena, a place of the Kashémeré, south of the Betéhá. Having
passed in the morning Gósmin, in a sandy tract, then Tongóng, a small
hamlet of Shékoma, the mother of Mohammed the eldest son of the sheríf,
inhabited by Kajánga, then Jerád, also a Kajánga place, on the Betéhá,
and Ofúlek, a village inhabited by Moslemín of the tribe of the Dájó, he
stayed, during the heat, at Birén, a considerable place with a mixed
population consisting of nás Koróngo, Gardáy, Kólotáng, and Júngoráng,
south of the Betéhá, and sixteen to seventeen hours south of Wára.
Passing then Birén Kénga, a place of the Wádáy, and Kashémeré on the
Betéhá, he arrived at Óshena.

6th. Ám-kharúba, a large place of the Kashémeré, formerly belonging to
Ábú Horra, the brother of the sheríf, who fell in the battle of
Tórbigen. Of all the inhabitants of Wádáy, the Kashémeré prepare their
meals in the richest and most palatable manner. Pass in the morning
Kélti, a considerable place of the Kashémeré, and the village Bútere,
both south of the Betéhá, and stay, during the heat, in Fúnduk, another
place of the Kashémeré, quite close to Ám-kharúba.

7th. Káure, a place north of the Betéhá, where you stop for the night,
on account of the good edibles, the Káure people being, next to the
Kashémeré, the most excellent cooks in Wáday, while next to them in this
respect rank the Ábú Godám and the Marfa. Crossing in the morning the
Betéhá, leaving Nyángalá, a place of the Jellába north of the Betéhá, on
your right hand, and bending a little north from west, you pass
Híjjerát, a place of the people of the shiúkh (eunuchs) of the hábbabát
(concubines of the sultan), at some distance from the Betéhá, and stay
during the heat in Hijjér, not very far from the Betéhá, formerly a
place of Fátima, the sheríf’s favourite daughter, who died at Tórbigen;
at present the village is transferred to a daughter of Shékoma. From
this place, Káure is a little south from west.

The Betéhá bends from Káure S.W. to Malám, so called on account of this
watercourse joining here the Bat-há (“the confluence”), a place
inhabited by a clan of the Táma, ten or twelve hours south a little west
from Káure.

8th. Bórorít, a large place, “Menzel Sultán,” inhabited by Kashémeré,
Wádáy, Arabs, and Welád Hushta (domestics of the former sultans),
consisting of about twenty hamlets, the largest of which is called
Bórorít Hajar. Pass in the morning several small hamlets, in one of
which you stop during the heat of the day.


(_c._) _From Wára to Dumta, the first Place in Dár Fúr, according to Háj
Sadík._ [About 10 miles per diem.]


1st day. Gáttakarák, a place of the Wádáy.

2nd. Gáttakarák, a place of the Kélingen.

3rd. Wáweledá, a place of the Wádáy.

4th. Kélmedí, a large place of the Sungóri with a considerable market-
place (“tarf e’ dár”), the last place in Wádáy. East from this place are
some rocky hills which occasionally serve as hiding-places to the Táma
highway robbers.

5th. Tumtubáya, a well in the khalla or wilderness.

6th. Asúnga, a wádí overgrown with deléb-palms, and with running water
in the rainy season. (Wádí Asúnga, according to all appearance, is
identical with W. Kíya.)

7th. Dumta, the first place in Dár-Fúr.


Dumta, according to Háj Sadík, is eight days’ journey from Kebkabíye:—

1st day. Bír Degíg, a place with a separate ertána (jargon).

 2nd. Óra,        }
                  }
 3rd. Ám-dúkhen,  }  villages.
                  }
 4th. Kulkuláya,  }

5th. Kónge, with a great mosque.

6th. Wádí Báre, a densely inhabited valley, stretching S.S.E.

7th. Sultán ʿOmár, a large place on the Báre, at the foot of a rocky
eminence.

8th. Kebkabíye, a large place of the Jellába, with clay houses, and a
much-frequented market, held every Tuesday and Thursday. Warm springs.


From Kebkabíye to Tendélti, eight days:—

1st day. Bír Nabék, a well in the wilderness, in the Márra mountains.

2nd. Káura, a well, with some slight cultivation in the mountains.

3rd. Kúru, a place in the mountains, with mosque.

4th. Shebéna, a place of the Jellába, in the wádí.

5th. Jéllo, a place, with clay huts, of the Jellába.

6th. Mowéle, a place with clay houses and reed huts; wells deep.

7th. Maddúb, a small place.

8th. Tendélti, the capital of Dár Fúr.


       (_d._) _From Sheníni to Dumta, according to Fáki Íbrahím._


1st day. Derjíli, a place of the ʿAlí, blacks, with a separate ertána or
jargon. Pass in the morning Bárekálla, and stop for the heat at Míchirí,
also villages of the ʿAlí.

2nd. Búrtay, a group of two villages, of the ʿAlí. Stop for the heat at
Aláshi.

3rd. Harrúnek, a considerable place in the mountains, inhabited by
Másalít and ʿAlí; arrive before dhohor, at about two o’clock. Pass in
the morning Sáñigó, likewise a place of the ʿAlí, in the mountains,
where the wádí Bat-há commences, two days E.N.E. from Ám-gontúra, a
place of the Kúbu.

4th. Dulla, a place of the Másalít, in a plain.

5th. Kíya, a wádí with clayey soil and with deléb-palms and another tree
called jákh-jakh; in its upper course called Asúnga. Stop during the
heat at Mʿamúr, a pond of water at the base of a rocky eminence.

6th. Murlí, a place of the Másalít, but already belonging to Fúr. Pass
in the morning Wádí Kája; halt there during the heat.

7th. Dumta, a small place with a few date-palms, “mukdám Hánafí” (the
residence of Hánafí).


       (_e._) _From Sheníni to Jurlú, according to Fáki Íbrahím._


1st day. Óguma, a village of the Ábú Shárib, passing Áblubán and Habíle.

2nd. Adékke, a place in the hills, inhabited by the Kúka, passing
Glégis, Wére, Shakh-hén, all occupied by the Ábú Shárib, then Tará, a
village in the mountains; Tará Gorórgorá, a place of the Táma; and
Gáskunji, a place of the Kúka.

3rd. Betéhá, the valley, without an inhabited place, passing Tynjúng and
Kúltumó, both inhabited by nás Wádáy, and Tammám, all situated in the
plain. Tammám is occupied by the Sungóri.

4th. Jurlú, a place in the mountains, inhabited by the Sungóri, who,
along with the Másalít, occupy all this tract down from the Betéhá.
Jurlú is the residence of the higher classes of the Sungóri. The
mountain is very considerable in comparison with the other mountainous
eminences in Wádáy, but nevertheless not an entire day’s journey in
breadth. According to Íbrahím, the Betéhá rises in this mountain, whilst
the Bat-há rises in the Soñyó.


  (_f._) _The Principal Villages along the Betéhá from Birén upwards.
                      According to Fáki Íbrahím._


West of Birén lies Aúshena, or Óshena, on the opposite or northern side
of the wádí Múrshudú; then east, further up, Ofúla, a place of the Dájó,
then Jemér Hejilíje, a place of the Kajánga and Koróriyang, likewise
belonging to the Kajánga and the Fírti, all on the south side of the
wádí, while on the north lies Gosmínni, further on Ámmárga, then
Shokán—consisting of six or seven villages, viz., Sh. Kórdofán, Sh.
Bátarán, Sh. Abérbi, Sh. Miñi, &c., all inhabited by the Bíli; then east
of the latter Shimé, a place of the Mími and Kóromboy; then Agúrbo, a
place of the Mími; Kunó, a place of the Kodoyí and Kawák; then follow
the villages of the Sungóri.

All these villages are remarkable for their cultivation of onions. About
Etím, west of Birén, near an eminence, corn is cultivated by slaves of
the sultan.


                 (_g._) _From Sheníni to Nyéseré. S.E._


1st day. Ám-gontúra, a place of the Ábú Shárib on the south bank of the
Bat-há, which is here joined by the wádí Iséra, which comes from
Dirjéli, four days N.W. of Birén, by way of Marfa-Ógumó— Dóbbur—Dirjéli.
Passing in the morning Bárekalla of the Ábú Shárib and Gumtúj, a place
of the Gnórga, you stop during the heat in Dalíñe, a hamlet of the
Gnórga.

2nd. Kétteké, a place of the Másalít. Passing in the morning Urúlla,
situated close to Ám-gontúra towards the east, and Nebbegága, both
villages of the Ábú Shárib, you enter the district of the Másalít, and
pass their villages of Óla Sábbalát and Óla Dábangát.

3rd. Khalla; stop during the heat in Wádí Kíya.

4th. Nyéseré, a place of the Másalít, or, more strictly speaking, of the
Ambús, a division of the Másalít, who are accused of cannibalism. This
place belongs already to Fúr.


        (_h._) _From Sheníni to the Móku, or iron mines. West._


The Móku are situated near Shákkayak, a place consisting of two hamlets,
and inhabited by the Barúwala, one mine being close to the place, the
other south of it, on two separate hills, whilst close to Shákkayak on
the west there is another mine, in a hill close to the village of
Lágiya, where 100 jerári, or hoes of this shape [Illustration], may
be bought for one ox. The iron from these Móku, which is only broken
in small stones on the surface, is manufactured by the blacksmiths in
the neighbouring villages of Fáhem, south of Shákkayak, Áblubán, south
of Fáhem, Múruske, south of Shákkayak, and in Gosmán.

On the short march from Sheníni to Shákkayak, you pass Mistakhéde,
Rógrogó, Mánga Dírdigé and Mánga Abákrnak, these two hamlets forming
part of the large place of Mánga, inhabited by Mími, Gélma, Ábú Shárib
and Kanúri. The other hamlets belonging to the place are called Mánga
Kordále, Mánga Mérendé, which lies north of Shákkayak, Mánga Múttong,
Mánga Ábeyáng, inhabited by Ábú Shárib, and Mánga Míri, from whence it
is not far to Abkar Hájilíj, the village above mentioned, by way of
Serír and Magállem.

There is besides another considerable iron mine at Kájam, four hours
W.S.W. of Tókhilí, in the district Jéji, the iron of which is brought by
the Áblebay to Átarek between Abkar and Mánga Mérendé, where this iron,
as well as the copper brought by the Jellába from the celebrated hofra
in the south of Dár-Fúr, is manufactured by the “haddád Mónnu.”


   (_i._) _From Sheníni to Sillá by way of Ándelá, according to Fáki
                Íbrahím. Direction S.S.W., then south._


1st day. Ándelá, a place inhabited by Wádáy and Bándalá. Passing in the
morning Shokhúlke, a place consisting of two hamlets, and inhabited by
the Ogodóngde, close to Sheníni, Tordóna, likewise of the Ogodóngde, you
cross the wádí Hamra, and stop during the heat in Súnkutú, whereupon,
passing Súnkutú Jídnak or Nyílik, you cross the Bat-há, which somewhat
higher up, near Súnkutú Malám, receives the wádí Hamra, and finally pass
Agílbe, a village comprising three hamlets inhabited by Wádáy people,
and close to Ándelá, Agílbe Angneréda.

2nd. Shakák, a village of the Bándalá, in a sandy tract, with rocky
hills. A good march; stop during the heat at the well of Kadáda, a place
not inhabited, but containing numerous trees, particularly dúm-palms.

3rd. Chilímna, a village of the Bándalá and the Áblebay, near to which
towards the west dwell the Sálamát, Míssiríye, and Jéji. Here are seen
the mountains of Sillá, the inhabitants of which supply the market of
Chilímna with honey, and fish, fresh and dried. Stop during the heat at
noon in the wádí Bokhás, said to run south into the large wádí Diwé,
which skirts the district Jéji, and by some is considered identical with
the bahr Sálamát, which passes Mangára, and then, one day from Mangára,
is called Gedé, or bahr el Hémád, and further down Óm e’ Tímán or bahr
Sálamát. Íbrahím considers it as a tributary of the river of Runga.
Besides the Hémád and Sálamát, the Shárafa also pasture on its banks.

4th. Sillá, which was not visited by Íbrahím himself, is reached after
crossing in the morning the wádí Diwé, which spreads out to a great
extent on clayey ground, and swarms with fish. The Sillá are handsome
people, without incisions. Yúsuf Kharifáín made a ghazzia to this place.


                     (_k._) _Direct way to Sillá._


1st day. Dumbóli, a place of the Míssiríye, close to Rás el Fíl or
Tánjaknák on the west. Passing in the morning Shokhúlke and Abjefíli, a
place of the Ogodóngde, with the small wádí Ábú Ghánem (pronounced Ábú
Khánem) in the south, which joins the wádí el Hamra, near Súnkutú; stop
during the heat at Sórumó, on the north bank of the Bat-há, which flows
close, on the east, to the Wádáy hamlet of Maráy.

2nd. Khalla, passing the large mountain of Kajéske.

3rd. Sillá, in the morning.


 (_l._) _From Wára to Rúnga, according to Háj Sadík. South, afterwards
                                 west._


1st day. A place of the Kóndongó, with a large mountain stretching out
to a great length.

2nd. Andísha, a place of the Wádáy.

3rd. Hawára, a place of the Wádáy in a level country.

4th. Betéhá, a wádí, occupied by Wádáy people.

5th. Áfi, a place of the Wádáy, at the base of a ridge of mountains.

6th. Kémerí, a place of the Wádáy, in a plain with mountains in the
distance; south.

7th. A place of the Chaíma, slaves of the Bándalá, who prepare honey.

8th. Kódogus, one of the largest places of Wádáy, inhabited by Talba
Arabs. According to Íbrahím, Kódogus is rather a place of the Ábú
Shárib, Kajágasé, and Dermúdi, and is three days and a half from
Sheníni. Sleep at Úrka, a place of the Wádáy and Bándalá, on the Bat-há,
then at Ám-búrtunú, a village of the Wádáy and Bándalá, the latter being
the more numerous, and the third night at a place the name of which he
had forgotten. W.S.W.

9th. Íd el Gadém.

10th. Kájam, a village at the western foot of a mountain.

11th. Mangára (according to this informant erroneously called the chief
place of Kebét or Kajágasé). From Mangára to Sillá, one day’s journey
east.

12th. Gurára, encampment in the wilderness.

13th. Metérbe.

14th. Donás, the name of the ruler of the province of Runga, the
successor of Sebír, who pays tribute both to Fúr and Wádáy.

According to Háj Sadík, the position of Runga with regard to Wára is
like that of Mándará and Kúkawa, and its geographical relation to
Tendélti as that of the Púllo place of Bógo, on the east side of
Mándará, to Más-eñá.


   (_m._) _From Sheníni to Runga. From the account of Fáki Íbrahím._


1st day. Ándalá.

2nd. Shakáki.

3rd. Jéji, a district comprising about twenty hamlets.

4th. Kerére, a place of the Másmajé.

5th. Khalla.

6th. Kebét, an outlying province of Wádáy, not, as my other informant
thought, identical with Kajágasé, which belongs to Wádáy Proper.

7th. Khalla.

8th. Mangára, the capital of Dággel, situated on a rocky eminence
(“Mangára,” in the Dággel language, signifies a rock), and close by a
large pool of standing water, called by the Arabs, “Bahr e’ Tíni.”

9th. An expansive marsh, inundated to a large extent during the rains,
with a clayey soil.

10th. Runga in the morning.South from Runga, according to Fáki Sámbo,
lies Dár Meng.


  (_n._) _From Tendélti to Runga, according to the information of Háj
                                Sadík._


1st. day. Kórigó, a considerable market-town. A long march till ʿaser.
If you travel but slowly, you stop during the heat at the pond called
Ráhet Birbídi, sleep at Ám-habíle, and reach Kórigó only on the
following morning. The market of Kórigó is held only on Tuesdays and
Thursdays. Some of the pilgrims turn from the territory of the Sungóri
by way of Jebel Herés, straight upon Kórigó.

2nd. Jurtóba, a place of the Bulála and Kúka.

3rd. Abéshr, a village of the Furáwy.

4th. Wágif, a place occupied by Bagírmi people.

5th. Ám-kordás, another village inhabited by Bagírmi people. The entire
tract consists of sandy soil.

6th. Selálo, a large place inhabited by Bórnu people.

7th. Ám-majúra, a considerable place, important on account of its
traffic with the Kirdi country, here called Firtít, and the residence of
the governor of Birket, inhabited by Másalít, Dájó, Bagírmi, and Furáwy.


        _From Tendélti to Ám-majúra, according to Háj Mohammed._


1st day. Difán Haggeróna, a place of the Dájó, beyond Kórigó, which you
pass. A long march.

2nd. Ám-harrás, a place only recently built by a man from Bú Harrás in
Kordofán, and inhabited by Fúr and Bagírmi people.

3rd. Ám-kardús, a place belonging to Shetéta, and inhabited by Fúr.
Identical with Ám-kordés.

4th. Hillet el Makdúm Khalíl.

5th. Ám-majúra, two days and a half from Tebeldíye, three days from the
hofra, and about three days from Bahr el Erzegát. Ám-majúra is very rich
in deléb-palms, and has an important Sunday market supplied with butter
by the Erzegát. The inhabitants of the place are said to trade
particularly in slaves, which they buy with wodʿa and tobacco.

8th. Gíja, a place inhabited by Fúr and Gullá, governed (at that time)
by Mohammed Setéba. Direction from hence a little south from west.

9th. Májam, a place of the Taʿasha Arabs, but inhabited besides by some
Másalít.

10th. Ráhet Kháli in the Khalla, without an inhabited place.

11th. Báli.

12th. Dúm Asehéba.

13th. Dúm ʿArdéba.

14th. Khalla.

15th. Débe, a village of the Runga; pagans, besides a few ʿUrbán or
Arabs.

16th. Tarkámu, a district occupied by Bórnu people.

17th. The place of residence of Donás the Prince of Runga, after whom it
is generally called; the original name is not known to me.


    (_o._) _List of the more considerable places in Fittrí, and the
       divisions of the Bulála, according to the Buláli Íbrahím._


In the district called Defn Meláda: Témsa (identical with Dumsa),
Késhegá, Tíggedí, where a fugitive son of the last sultan of Bórnu
resides, Góla, Dúbunór, Géla, Kábberá, Móyo, Dógo, Gálo. In the district
El Góza: Mélme, Kúdu, Amána, Gúgu, Sége, Ágené, Bayálla, Bógo, Shegé,
Búrrigó, Befárkamá, Dénni, Góllo, Yʿawó, Gámsa, Wágalá, Séta. Kabáíl or
families of the Bulála: Lóffewá the Sóltana or ruling family, Gíjo,
Battáwa, Argumuwá, Chélmuwá, Wádewá, Kásewá, Jilluwá, and many others,
at least twenty; according to tradition, ninety-nine. The ancestor of
the Bulála is Jíli (Jíl Shikomémi), who came from Kánem.


(_p._) _Some account of Fittrí and Bat-há, according to ʿOthmán, who had
been carried off as captive from Bagírmi by Sabún, with additions by Háj
Sadík._


The lake (Fittrí means nothing but valley, basin of water, and coincides
in sense with Tsád) is two days’ journey in circumference, contains
fresh water, is very shallow, has a clayey bottom, and is surrounded on
all sides by a rich marsh almost destitute of trees, whilst the valley
of the Bat-há is densely and beautifully wooded—at least it was so till
lately. No wádí joins the lake except the Bat-há; and none issues from
it. In the centre of the shallow lake lies an island called Módo, the
pagan, or at least half pagan inhabitants of which belong to a tribe
generally called Ábú Simmin, long since reduced to subjection by the
Kúka, and navigate the lake in small canoes, made from trunks hollowed
out, and holding two or three persons. Among the fish found in the lake
are the angóla, which strikes the water, and the bolbút; but there is no
sémmak. The principal places lying about the lake are (beginning from
Yʿawó) Debunóro, Tamsa or Temsa, Géla, Gólo, Dágo, Gámsa, which is about
twelve miles from Yʿawó (but these places are at a considerable distance
from the shores of the lake, though varying, of course, greatly
according to the season). Five tribes pasture in the Fittrí—the Bení
Málekí, who possess numerous camels, the Jʿaátena, the Hamíde, and a
part of the Kréda; and it is visited even by other Tebu tribes during
the summer. In the kharíf, or rainy season, when the Arab tribes are
removing, and the whole country is inundated and infested by swarms of
mosquitoes, the camels of the Fittrí are, like those of the sultan,
stall-fed in sheds, or at least are sheltered with mats.

The principal places along the lower course of the Bat-há are: Séta,
Dífde, Henéwu Júrundú, Ám-kharúba, Durmámi, Sigó, Mugdára; Birket
Fátima, a place of the Másmajé on the west side of the ráhet and north
of the wádí; Ám-siddre, Al Áfanín, then the district called Dár-Zoyúd.

From Míddogó, which is one day from Yʿawó, to Birket Fátima, is four
days by way of Áb Zeráfa, a place of the Kúka, with small rocky ridges;
Hejél, a place of the Kúka, and finally Bóyo.


 (_q._) _From Fittrí to Mʿawó, N.W., according to the Buláli Íbrahím._


1st day. Fáli or Fári (Fághi?), a hamlet inhabited by Bagírmi people, in
a wádí-like hollow encompassed by rocks.

2nd. Aúni, a hamlet of Bagírmi people, with some rocky ridges.

3rd. Búkko, another hamlet of the Bagírmáye.

4th. Shégeráye, a wádí where the Gurʿaán pasture their camels.

5th. Bahr el ghazál, an expansive and richly-timbered wádí.

6th. Kedáda, a place of the Týnjur. Kedáda is one day from ʿAlímarí,
where the waters of the eastern extremity of the Tsád are said to have
been formerly discharged into the Bahr el ghazál, the communication with
which is now interrupted by sandy downs.

7th. Mondó, another place of the Týnjur, under the chief Abákr.

8th. Yagúbberí, a hamlet of the Týnjur.

9th. Mʿawó, the residence of the khalífa of Wádáy, and the general head-
quarters of Jérma Móngo. The inhabitants of Mʿawó are called Beránemá in
the Gurʿaán language.


         (_r._) _From Fittrí to Mʿawó, according to a Wádáwy._


1st day. Khabíni, a Gurʿaán settlement, with abundance of water.

2nd. El Khazálát, a wádi, said to be a tributary of the Bahr el ghazál,
occupied by Dághana.

3rd. Shegeráye, a wádí, occupied by the Gurʿaán.

4th. Délebát, a wádí.

5th. El Grét, a wádí.

6th. Mʿawó.

My informant declares that he left the wádí Fári on his right, and never
passed the Bahr el ghazál at all.

Another informant went from Mʿawó to Fittrí by way of Kálkalá, Gújer,
the well of Toróro in the Bahr el ghazál, the wádí Shegeráye with
abundance of water, and the rocks of Hajjiját in the wádí Fári.


    (_s._) _Wára to Wádí ʿOrádha, according to Fáki Íbrahím and ʿAlí
                               Malánga._


1st day. Bóbok, a place of the Kajígají, a Wádáy tribe. Leaving Wára by
the N.W. gate on the road called Lingak Bátemelek from the village of
Báteme, which is passed soon after starting, further on you pass the
village of Índing, and afterwards Korummúdi, a village inhabited by
Fezzáni people.

2nd. Tátsere, a place inhabited by Wádáy. Stop during the heat at
Tákhsha.

3rd. ʿOrádha, a wádí or zaraf, very rich in pasture-grounds, where the
Máhamíd pasture in the summer, whilst in the kharíf they proceed to
Túrru and Súbbu. East of the wádí ʿOrádha is the wádí Subb, two days
from the mountainous country of the Táma. The road from Fezzán by the
Búrgu country to Wára touches at ʿOrádha.

ʿAlí made the following _détour_ in going to the wádí ʿOrádha, which is
much resorted to by the Wádáy Fákí, as, by their reading and writing,
they may easily earn from the wealthy Arabs of that locality a cow or a
good number of sheep:—

1st day. Bóbok.

2nd. Kursó, a considerable place of the Mími.

3rd. Tátsere. All this country has a sandy soil.

4th. Armán, a place of the fokará of the Máhamíd, inhabited by their
chiefs Mahmúd ʿAbd e’ Salám Weled Chócho and Hagar Weled Bélle.

5th. Rehédo, another place of the Máhamíd.

6th. Subb, a zaraf running west, whither the Máhamíd likewise resort.

7th. ʿOrádha.


                 3. ROUTES IN THE INTERIOR OF BAGÍRMI.


  (_a._) _Large and small Places on the Shári, from Búgomán upwards._


Márja, a small place; Mískin, a considerable walled town; Mébi, a small
place at the confluence of the Báchikám with the Shárí; Mainpa, or
Mankhfa; Anja; Mólan; Gélendé; Mákelíl; Óngo, or Óñoko; Búnjul;
Baleñére, a walled place; Mondó, with a rampart; Moró; Madélamá;
Baingané; Laffiyáta; Gedó; Músgu; Bowáy; Miyán; Mógoló; Kába; Jílim;
Mábbelé, a town surrounded by a strong wall; Láffaná, with a rampart in
ruins; Busó, a large place; Móngalá; Bá-Ngórgolong; Bíri; Korómafé;
Tábe; Májim; Bubúr; Dére; Gófna; Chíromadí; Miltú.


               (_b._) _From Más-eñá to Láffaná and Busó._


1st day. Mogál, beyond the ford of Báchikám, on the upper part of the
river of the same name, which at Tápe, a village near Miltú, branches
off from the upper Shárí, and rejoins it at Mébi, a small village near
Mískin.

2nd. Mangagúllafé.

3rd. Gáram, a place inhabited by Kanúri.

4th. Sleep in the wilderness.

5th. Bedá-kúrchi, a Bagírmi place under Busó.

6th. Dendám, a Bagírmi place.

7th. Láffaná.Bedá-kúrchi is nearer to Mábbelé and Láffaná than to Busó.

(Busó, according to Agíd Músa, is about as far from Más-eñá as Logón
bírni or Moító, Busó being reached in three long marches: viz.

  1st day. Gáwin Háji.

  2nd. Bedá-kúrchi.

  3rd. Busó.)


         (_c._) _From Más-eñá to Busó, according to Háj Sádík._


1st day. Báchikám, a village on the southern side of the small branch of
the Shárí which, from this village, is generally called Báchikám, at
least by the inhabitants of the capital, although from the larger town
of Ír, which is situated on its northern bank, and was formerly governed
by a sultan of its own, it is also called Bá-Ír. Its size varies
extremely, according to the season, from a small rivulet scarcely twenty
yards across, to a large sheet of water more than a mile in width.

2nd. Búlturí, a large village, inhabited by Kanúri.

3rd. Bedá-kúrchi, with a large swamp (bedá), whence its name. You stop
during the heat in Dílfin, a Kanúri place.

4th. Dendám, a Bagírmi place.

5th. Busó, a large town inhabited by a mixed population of pagans, who
are however clothed, and of Moslemín. It contains many of those so-
called mʿallems, that is to say, people who know how to write a few
phrases from the Kurán.


                   (_d._) _From Busó to Miltú, S.E._


1st day. Kiyár, at some distance from the river, the inhabitants drawing
their supply of water only from wells. Crossing the river in the
morning, you keep close along it a little south from east.

2nd. Tápe, a large place on the southern side of the river, S.S.E.
_N.B._ Agíd Músa appears here to have made a mistake by transposing
Kiyár and Tápe.

3rd. Miltú, a pagan place of considerable extent, at present governed by
Bá, the son of ʿAlí Fenjár, who died two years ago in Más-eñá. The
inhabitants possess large numbers of horses, and prepare, from the ashes
of the reeds in the river, a sort of salt, which, in the form of sugar
loaves, has a sale extending over a very large region. At Bólo, close to
Miltú on the east, the Báchikám branches off from the Shárí.


           (_e._) _Places along the Báchikám upwards, S.S.E._


Báchikám, the fording place; Ír, a large town; Mogál; Mábberat or
Mábbelat, formerly the capital of an independent principality; Más-
eñawu, the place of the bowága or trumpeters of the sultan; Bélamédi, a
Bagírmi place; Mámsa; Chíkorigá; Bugolóbe; Kúttutú; Díggeli; Máseré;
Gáyoko; Mírre or Méré, seat of a man of influence called Damre, formerly
the capital of an independent principality; Dol; Mégelé, or Mégedé;
Yelál; Dímkir; Mariñé; Mub Béti; Ngírbing; Ságemáta, the last Bagírmi
place beyond which the pagan country of Sáruwa begins.


         (_f._) _From Más-eñá to Kírbe the capital of Sáruwa._


1st day. Báchikám.

2nd. Naíromá, a place with a considerable market held on a Friday, and
situated on a rivulet, which joins the Báchikám at Ír.

3rd. Ngáttara, about 10 A.M.

4th. Jíl, a village, about 10 A.M.

5th. Ságemáta, a Bagírmi place on the Báchikám. A long march.

6th. Négi, a village; about 10 A.M.

7th. Móngolá, a place on the Shárí, already belonging to Sáruwa.

8th. Kírbe, the residence of the chief of Sáruwa, of the name of Ábú, as
he is called in Bagírmi. One day from each of the three places Kírbe,
Tápe, and Miltú, but a little nearer to Kiyár.

The road from Kírbe to Míddobó, another important town in Sáruwa, passes
by Dañ or Daña. Other places in Sáruwa are, Tógilá, Dángwa, both on the
Báchikám; Dañ, Mírti, Jílang, Mírkin, Móngolá, Jímmir, Jó, Bélay, Mut,
Bilé, all of which are on the Shárí. From Daña to Lairy is one long
march, about 30 miles.


(_g._) _From Miltú to Gógomi, according to Agíd Músa, with additions by
                       Ramadhán. Direction, N.E._


1st day. Attar, another place in Sáruwa, having passed in the morning,
close to Miltú, the Shárí, which here comes from the south, and is
called bá-Busó. A long march.

2nd. Komé, a place inhabited by pagans, in a mountainous district,
surrounded by four mountains, two of which are called Tábe and Boño. A
long march. Komé is one day from Míddobó, north.

3rd. Belél Kolé, a place inhabited by the Sókoró, fortified by nature in
an extraordinary way, encompassed as it is said to be by several rocky
ridges which inclose each other in a circular form, so as to leave only
a single approach, whilst the interior is supplied with water. The
prince resides on a rocky eminence in the centre of this peculiar
mountain-basin. The other inhabitants dwell between the rocky ridges. In
the vicinity is a place inhabited by Shúwa. Between Komé and Belél Kolé
lies Jótol, at some distance to the south.

4th. Gógomi, a place situated in a deep basin in the mountains,
accessible only by a narrow defile, and inhabited by a division of the
Sókoró, whose formerly powerful chief was conquered and made prisoner by
the sultan of Bagírmi during my stay in the country. The Jellába of
Wádáy travel as far as Gógomi, where they import European commodities.
From Gógomi to Kénga it is five or six short days’ journey, by way of
Búdir, a place situated a short distance from Gógomi, on a steep
mountain, said to be about as high as that of Tibésti, with a spring at
its base and on its summit; Sim, a place in the mountains; Báddegé, a
place on the top of a mountain; all these places being inhabited by
Sókoró, who are armed with bows and arrows; Gal, a place in the
mountains, surrounded by a moat; Tumki, a place situated on an eminence;
Kénga Matáya.


                    (_h._) _From Más-eñá to Gógomi._


1st day. Bídderi, a considerable place, renowned on account of a family
of shiúkh, who, as I have mentioned above, have exercised a most
remarkable influence in the extension of Islám in these regions, and
important on account of its Friday market, where, however, the usual
money of Más-eñá, viz. fardas and kholgán, has no currency, but only the
finest gábagá, twenty of which are deemed equivalent to one khálag or
shirt. About dhohor.

2nd. Múdda, a Bagírmi place.

3rd. Dekháruwe, a large place of the Arab tribe of the Dekhákhera or
Deghághera.

4th. Kúrí, a Shúwa place on a pond of stagnant water.

5th. Maskáwu, a Shúwa place.

6th. Gató, a Shúwa place with a pond in the wilderness.

8th. Jená, a large walled town of the Sókoró, in a hilly district. The
inhabitants, like almost all of the Sókoró, are said to eat a kind of
beetle, called “dernána” by the Bagírmi. Jená lies between Gógomi and
Komé.

9th. Gógomi, two days from Míddobó, a little north from east.

The road from Gógomi to Ábú Telfán passes by Bánem, Bálli, Sim, Kóndolá,
Kéngetá, Ábú Telfán.


                    (_i._) _Divisions of the Búwa._


The following divisions of this numerous tribe are subject to the Sultan
of Bagírmi: the Búwa Nyéldang, the most powerful of all; the Búwa
Gamkúl; Gamkúl[115] is from Míddobó, the frontier-place of Sáruwa,
twelve miles east, and two days south from Gógomi, through a mountainous
wilderness; Búwa Ír; Búwa Wagé, and Búwa Shok.

The following are independent: the Búwa Lá, who are very numerous, and
are divided into several families, occupying distinct places; the Búwa
Kúnne; Búwa Gángli; Búwa Móke; Búwa Dámla; and east and S.E. from
Gamkúl, at the distance of from twelve to fifteen miles, are the two
places Kormále and Sarakélle, both situated on the top of a hill, and
the latter said to be governed by a queen; Búwa Kurmán (?); Búwa Goy,
with a high mountain, having water on its top; Búwa Dókeró; Búwa Gúm;
Búwa Ladón; Búwa Túniya; Búwa Kúrbul; Búwa Kullúnga or Kelánge, on a
mountain, two days from Komé; Búwa Malbón; Búwa Bulúl, and finally the
Búwa Mubb and the Búwa Kúli, who occupy a mountainous district close to
the territories of the Welád Ráshid.

Another tribe, the Nyílem, to whom, according to Agíd Músa, belong the
Dasár, whilst others consider these to belong to the Búwa, dwell close
to the N.E. bank of the river. Beyond the Dasár you reach the Kólum, the
Nyú, and at no great distance the Furá with Gambay.


              (_k._) _From Más-eñá to Kénga Matáya. East._


1st day. Naíromá, the market-place abovementioned.

2nd. Mílle, a place with a Sunday market.

3rd. Kírsuwa, a considerable place on a small marshy watercourse or sél
on a clayey soil, which, in the Kharíf, flows to Barkadaña, Sidígiyá,
Bulúlu, and to Gámmara, a considerable place under an independent chief.
(Is this watercourse identical with the Msél of Debbába?)

4th. Hírla, a place of a tribe related to the Bágrimma.

5th. Bedánga, a considerable place in a hilly district belonging to a
section of the tribe of the Sókoró, under a powerful chieftain,
converted, at least in outward appearances, to Islám. These people wear
clothes and do not disfigure themselves by incisions on their faces; the
women, however, have a bead in the nose and beads in the ears, as worn
almost universally in these regions. The Wádáy Jellába import their
commodities even into these districts. The natives are armed neither
with bows nor arrows, but only with spears and hand-bills. According to
Mohammed Búme, who has been living here several years, the waters of
this mountainous region are drained by the Nile through the territory of
the Welád Ráshid,—a piece of information which is, however, very
doubtful.

From Bedánga to Ábú Telfán is three days’ journey E.N.E. by way of
Bámmaná and Míggedi.

6th. Kénga Matáya, the chief place of a tribe closely related to the
Bagrimma nation, under a powerful chief, to whose extensive territory
also Jon, Gal, and Dámbar belong. The principal produce of this region
is sesamum. My new informant, the aforesaid Moh. Búme, confirmed fully
the statements communicated to me previously by Agíd Búrku with regard
to the strange religious observances of these pagans. According to the
same, the waters of the district round Gógomi are discharged by way of
Lim, Gal, Bánam, and Kénga, into the “gezán,” the sandy wilderness south
of Fittrí. Kénga, according to the same, is four days from Yʿawó, by way
of Ngar-sára, the residence of a powerful chieftain, distant about two
days from both places and also from Míddogó. According to the Buláli
Íbrahím, Kénga is reached in three long day’s marches from Yʿawó, by way
of Gáriya, Mórbo, and Býllum. From Bedánga to Kénga is a long and unsafe
journey, made during the night, in about sixteen hours, from evening to
the heat of the day.


            (_k._) _From Más-eñá, by way of Laíry to Busó._


1st day. Gógo. Stop during the heat in Malá.

2nd. Ngóg;

3rd. Duwíng;

4th. Múro. All short marches.

5th. Laíry, a large Bagírmi place, E. (S.E.) from Kírsuwa, on the same
watercourse, and one good day’s journey from Tógilá, and from thence to
Attar in two days, having slept on the Báchikám.

6th. Gapkóng. A short march.

7th. Busó, having crossed the Báchikám about halfway.


   (_l._) _From Más-eñá, by way of Kólle to Laíry, and from Kólle to
                                Moíto._


1st day. Séta, passing Bídderi, Mandélu, Dabíñen, and Gadáwu.

2nd. Ámjerí, passing Mábbelá, Dérrejá, Meléde, Bindébiyó, and Tawyín.

3rd. Kólle, a considerable Bagírmi place, one day from Kírsuwa, towards
which place a sél or shallow and marshy water takes its course hence by
way of Dóldegí and Fór.

4th. Laíry. A long march.


                _From Kólle to Moíto by way of Debába._


1st day. Kírsuwa Jibílgi, with an independent chief, situated on a
watercourse.

2nd. Hírla, a place situated on a hill.

3rd. Jókko, a place of the Kúka.

4th. Debába, a large place, consisting of various hamlets of the Shúwa,
with rich pasture-grounds, and several watercourses. Debába is two days
from Baláwu, having slept in Kósi, a Kanúri place, and crossed another
“sél” between Kósi and Baláwu.

5th. Moító. A good day’s march.


(_m._) _From Láffaná to Bang-Bay. Expeditious march, such as is usual on
               a ghazzia. Direction south as far as Lay._


1st day. Állowa, a pagan place, subject to Bagírmi; crossing in the
morning the Shárí, or rather, as it is called here, the Bá-Busó.

2nd. Gúrgará, a large place belonging to a considerable tribe, whence
all the iron consumed in Bagírmi is exported. It is obtained from
_siderites_, and is not near so good as the iron of Wándalá or
Búbanjídda.

3rd. Cháken, a large place, with an independent chief; about noon.

4th. Jogdó, a large place, consisting in part of clay huts, belonging to
the extensive principality of Gábberí.

5th. Lóji, a place under the independent chieftain Kíki the son of
Belát.

6th. Gun, a place on the Bá-Gun, as the river of Logón is here called.
Almost every place has its separate ertána (jargon). The country yields
sorghum, beans, “kolche” or ground-nuts, and melons.

7th. Lay, on the same bank of the river, the residence of Súgulum son of
Nóba. The river abounds with fish, and is navigated by numerous boats.
South of Lay, according to this informant, an arm, coming from the Fúlbe
territory (from Bubanjídda, it seems), appears to join the river. This
informant considers the river of Logón and the river of Day, Miltú,
Busó, and Ásu to be only arms of the same river, which is bifurcated, as
he says, above Day. It may be so; but I doubt whether this account be
true, the rate of the current in these two rivers being very different.
The direction now becomes almost south.

8th. Myl, having crossed the river at Lay, and then taken a course a
little south from west.

9th. Kóyo, a place with an independent chieftain, on a dry clay soil.

10th. Kíyagór, at a short distance, with an independent chieftain. About
six hours from Kíyagór, a little north from east lies Bári, in a
mountainous region.

11th. Nong, another place belonging to Bagírmi.

12th. Dógo, the furthest place in Bagírmi which was reached by the
ghazzia. The country produces abundance of honey, contains large numbers
of goats and sheep, but no cattle. Dukhn (_Pennisetum typhoïdeum_)
constitutes the principal food. Among the trees the tábur, or butter-
tree, and the deléb-palm, are the most remarkable and predominant. The
soil is dark red (being loam). From Dógo to Búbanjídda, according to
informant, two days.


     (_n._) _From Mábbelé to Lay and Kim, according to Agíd Músa._


1st day. Gúrgará; a long march till ʿaser.

2nd. Cháken, a considerable place, with an independent chief; important
as the point of junction of several roads leading south to Lay, S.W. to
Kim, and W.S.W. to Dam.

3rd. Jogdó, an important place; short march.

4th. Cholól, a place four hours east from Gun.

5th. Nyinga, a short journey.

6th. Lay, a large place on the eastern bank of the river of Logón. If
you go from Lay W.S.W., after having crossed the river you reach, after
ten or twelve miles, Mung-chiré, and thence Chúwa, with three
independent chiefs, Málo, Dúkko, and Baíbotó.


                         _From Cháken to Kim._


1st day. Gunógunó; about twenty miles.

2nd. Kim, a large place on the river of Logón. Kim is three days’
journey from Démmo, in Wúliya, our furthest point on the Músgu
expedition. This, therefore, is a very important piece of information
for joining these routes:

  1st day. Jimán, on the river; about ten miles.

  2nd. Kar, twenty miles.

  3rd. Démmo in Wúliya.

Kim from Lay is two good days’ journey S.S.E., stopping for the night at
Bisme, on the river. This track has a dry clayey soil, almost without
trees, so that you may see from Kim the trees of Éré, a place in the
N.W., on the west bank of the river, and probably called from its
situation on a ford, “éré” meaning river in the Músgu language. Márraba,
a large place of the Mógom, is ten or twelve miles from Kim, beyond and
at some distance from the river.


        _From Lay to Sálin. Direction a little north from east._


1st day. Chíre, a large place, residence of the chief Kassarák, who is
not the only chieftain in this region, but there are two petty chiefs
besides him. This place has a separate ertána. It is distinguished by an
extensive plantation of fruit-bearing date-trees, which is well
irrigated and kept in order,—a very remarkable circumstance, so that I
have taken pains to ascertain that the informant has not confounded the
date-palm with the deléb-palm. There are no asses in Chíre, nor any
cats; and the horses are imported from Bagírmi. A long march of twenty-
five miles.

2nd. Masró, about thirty miles.

3rd. Sálin, the residence of the chief, and the principal market-place
of Dam.

From Sálin to Dámmuk, the capital of Somray, one day S.E.


                        _From Más-eñá to Sálin._


  1st day. Mogál.

  2nd. Jeljélli, a Kanúri place.

  3rd. Bana-kúrchi.

  4th. Busó.

  5th. Túnjurkú, a Kerdi place.

  6th. Gúrgará.

  7th. Límmi.

  8th. Sálin, the capital of Dam or Ndam, which latter may be the right
  form.


                     (_o._) _Más-eñá to Báng-Bay._


1st day. Kagá.

2nd. Garám.

3rd. Mábbelé.

4th. Gúrgará, or rather one of the three villages which constitute the
district of that name; the southern village lying in the direction of
Cháken, and the western one in that of Chejiráki.

5th. Mátelé.

6th. Kim, a large place, where a kashélla (inspector of the river) of
the sultan of Bagírmi resides.

7th. Márraba, about ʿaser (there having been probably a difficulty in
crossing the river).

8th. Dómaná. A whole day.

9th. Bísay; about noon.

10th. Bay Kurí.

11th. Bay Toy, one of the four large principalities of the Bay.

12th. Kóman.

13th. Kaktíya.

14th. Múdumbím, one of the four largest principalities or places of
Bang-Bay.

15th. Kéni, another of the four principalities.

16th. Debjógemé.

17th. Gómbay.

18th. Tápoló, the principality of the most powerful chief in Bang-Bay.

19th. Másentá.


     (_p._) _From Busó to Bang-Day. Expeditious march, a ghazzia._


1st day. Tábe, a large place on the south side of the river, which you
cross in the morning.

2nd. Kiyár, a smaller place, at some distance from the river.

3rd. Miltú, a large straggling place close to the S.W. bank of the
river.

4th. Báki, at some distance from the river.

5th. Shéggi.

6th. Myl, a large place.

7th. Sará-Gulé, with the chief Koína, son of the renowned Gósdegá, after
whom the country and the place is usually named. The inhabitants take
their supply of water from wells only.

8th. Dígti, with an independent chief.

9th. Gár-Kúmra, or Sará-Ngár-Kúmra, another principality with a powerful
chief.

10th. Bang-Day, another principality on a considerable river, called by
my informant—the same from whom I wrote down the itinerary marked
(_m._)—the river of the Fellán, or Fúlbe. Day and Fong are the most
important principalities in Sará.


(_q._) _From Miltú to Day, and from Lay to Day, according to Agíd Músa.
                                South._


1st day. Myl, a large place. A long march, till sunset; about thirty-
five miles.

2nd. Sará-Gósdegá; dhohor (two o’clock P.M.); twenty-five miles. A
little east from south.

3rd. Kumra. Till ʿaser; thirty miles. South.

4th. Day, a large place in a densely-populated country on the Upper
Shárí, which here flows from south to north, and at Miltú bends to N.W.
Dhohor; twenty-five miles. S.S.E.


                          _Lay to Day. S.S.E._


1st day. Bay Fir, an independent principality on the river of Logón.

2nd. Bay Kagá, another principality belonging to Bay, distant from the
river, surrounded by woods, close to Masró.

3rd. Day, after having crossed the river Shárí. According to the express
statement of another informant, Day lies on the western bank of the
river, in the same way as Kárnak Lógone does.


(_r._) _Mábbelé to Fong, and from Fong to Busó, according to Háj Sadík._


1st day. Gúrgará, a pagan place beyond the river. A long march.

2nd. Sotto, a pagan place.

3rd. Gam, another place. The country produces sorghum, beans, millet,
and has numerous deléb-palms, also “báwa,” a sort of sweet melon (_C.
melopepo_.)

4th. Jogtó, a large place belonging to Somray, one day from Kim.

5th. Cholól, territory of the chief Kíki.

6th. Pam, a large place possessing both sheep and cattle.

7th. Míddigí.

8th. Ledánga; the whole country level.

9th. Chíre, a place with abundance of palms—date-palms, as it seems.

10th. Bróto.

11th. Múrki, a considerable place, with large trees called “rúm.”

12th. Dam Pasár.

13th. Fong or Dam Fong, a considerable territory, called after its chief
or “kenús” Fong. Fong is about 30 miles S.W. from Gósdegá as well as
from Chíre. Lay a day and a half’s march, crossing the river.


                       _From Fong, back to Busó._


1st. Túmmak, on a small watercourse.

2nd. Myl, a large place. Fálik, close to Myl, eastwards.

3rd. Sek.

4th. Úr. The places and territories last enumerated are disconnected and
have distinct “ertána,” or at least dialects.

5th. Godák.

6th. Betáng Godák. Gadáng, a large place one day east from here, may be
reached in one good day’s march from Busó.

7th. Gónda.

8th. Busó.


(_s._) _Places from Báchikám downwards along the river, and from Más-eñá
                               to Músgu._


Sigír, Májir, Bakúl, Mánga, Tar ngólo, Bukábe, Mátiya (formerly a
considerable place, and capital of an independent territory), with a
large market on Saturdays, Márja. From here, if you keep on this side of
the river, you come to Bála Mása, or, if you cross it, to Mískin, both
on the great river Shárí, which is again joined by the Báchikám at Mébi.

Kókoroché, the place which, next to Búgomán, sends the largest supplies
of corn to the capital, lies one hour north from the Báchikám; and the
road from here to Bála Mása goes by way of Békeri and Héla.


                          _Más-eñá to Músgu._


1st day. Bekábe or Bukábe, a considerable place, with a clay wall of
earth, on the Báchikám.

2nd. Mátiya.

3rd. Mankhfa, a considerable place on the east bank of the Shárí, after
crossing the Báchikám in the morning.

4th. Músgu, a Kerdi town on the river of Logón, after crossing the Shárí
in the morning. A long march. If you proceed more slowly, and keep along
the river, you sleep the first night in Óñokó, the second in Báingané,
and reach Músgu on the third morning.

From Músgu to Gunna, a large Kerdi place of the Mása, is not above one
day’s journey.


   (_t._) _Más-eñá to Báng-Bay, according to Agíd Búrku. In a winding
                              direction._


    [Published previously in the “Journal of the Royal Geographical
                  Society,” 1852, but here rectified.]

1st day. Ír on the (river) Bá-ír, which is said to flow to the east
[west]. In the morning.

2nd. Báchikám, a Bagírmi place on the south side of the same river, or
rather arm of the Shárí, at a short distance.

3rd. Garám. Arrived when the heat commenced, but started again at
dhohor, and slept in the karága.

4th. Láffaná, on a large river, the Shárí, flowing east. [N. W.].

5th. On the sandy bank of the river, which he crossed in a large boat.

6th. Busó, a place under a powerful chief, on the north bank of the
river, which had been crossed again by informant.

7th. Mirtí, an island in the Shárí, possessing a large number of boats.
The water, however, is dangerous on account of the numerous crocodiles
which infest it.

8th. Halánga, a place on the north bank of the Shárí, under the same
chief as Busó.

9th. Tabé, a large place on the south bank of the river, with a mixed
population.

10th. Gadáng, a Kerdi place, distant from the river. At dhohor.

11th. Kiyár, a village consisting of several small hamlets, at some
distance from the river.

12th. [Miltú], a large place, with numerous horses, belonging at that
time (1850) to the powerful chief ʿAlí Fenjár, who shortly afterwards
died in the capital of Bagírmi, as a holy man.

13th. A place of the Bang-Dam (the chief of the Dam), who is the only
person in the place who wears clothes. The country contains numerous
small hamlets, and is richly wooded; the soil sandy. The inhabitants eat
horseflesh.

14th. Ísemray (Somray), an extensive district under Sultan (Bang) Wónja,
with a clayey soil. Early in the morning.

15th. Another place in Ísemray, under the independent chieftain Búrso.
In the whole country, water is obtained only from wells two or three
fathoms deep. The food of the people is chiefly (red) sorghum. The soil
is clayey. The fields are shaded by some large trees.

16th. Fáchang Góngawe, the territory of a powerful chief, which is
densely inhabited, and intersected by numerous shallow watercourses
(“sél” or “ngáljam”), which, however, only contain water during the
rains, when the country becomes impassable.

17th. Gábberí, or rather a place (Jogtó?) of the territory of Gábberí,
this name being that of the whole country; a large place, reached in the
evening, after a halt at noon. The only weapon of the inhabitants is the
hand-bill, called in their language “jígaji.” They breed numerous horses
and cattle, but are said, nevertheless, like all the inhabitants of the
country of Bang-Wónja to eat only dogs’ flesh. They kill dogs, sheep,
and fowls around a large sycamore (“juméz”), in honour of their deity,
accompanying their sacrifices with loud music on cowhides. They pillage
and wage war upon each other.

18th. Koriñína, a large place of the sultan Koína (the son of Gósdegá)
with a rampart flanked with a palisade, and surrounded on the outside by
trees and a ditch. In the vicinity of the capital are situated several
small hamlets. The inhabitants wear only a leather apron, and do not
practice circumcision. They raise abundance of beans.

19th. A large open place (name not known), in the territory of Sará
under the chief Gósdegá, the inhabitants of which cultivate plenty of
millet, sorghum, and beans, and plant a tree with a date-like fruit,
with a large crown, but small leaves, the marrow of which, as white as
fat, constitutes their butter and oil. This same tree I afterwards found
along the Niger.

20th. Sará-ngár Kúmra, another place wrongly stated to belong to Sultan
Gósdegá, with a stagnant water.

21st. Sará-bé-Day, a place under the chief Sáriya, who possesses
numerous horses (on the Upper Shárí). An entire day’s march, including
halts.

22nd. Yáldang (or Nyéldang), a place inhabited by a tribe of the same
name, belonging to the powerful nation of the Búwa, who in time of war
retire to a high mountain in the southern part of their country.

23rd. Gamkúl, a place of another tribe of the Búwa, in a sandy tract
with rocky ridges, rich in trees, and intersected by small watercourses.
Giraffes, lions, elephants, and hogs, are numerous in this tract, and
the latter constitute the principal food of the inhabitants.

24th. Dan Mádobó (or Míddobó), under Sultan Garé, beyond a mountain-
chain which you cross. The country yields cotton, millet, and sorghum.

25th. Dan Bébe, a place of the chief (gár) Godá. The country, which
during the rains is intersected by various streams, yields cotton and
sorghum.

26th. Komé, in a mountainous district. The people dwell at the foot of
the mountains, which they only ascend in order to harvest their crops,
which grow on the mountains. They obtain water from wells only. A short
day’s journey.

27th. Kómaré in a mountainous district, where cotton is produced. The
inhabitants wear only a belt, and worship a rock as their god; but it is
said that there exist some Mohammedans among them.

28th. Andí, a place of the tribe of the Sójigá, who are said to clothe
their horses as well as themselves. Andí from Gógomi is two days, _viâ_
Jíli. Andí from Gamkúl, north about 30 miles. A mountainous tract. An
entire day’s journey.

29th. Burdá, a large place of the (Gár) Mánga, with a deep lake
abounding with fish. (Identical with the lake of Bisá, which is passed
between Gógomi and Andí?)

30th. Tamkí, probably a place of the Sókoró, who are armed with spears
and bows, the men wearing clothes. They are said to eat lizards, which
they boil; they have, however, likewise sorghum. Their country is
mountainous.

31st. Góberá, a Kérdi place in a mountainous and richly wooded tract.

32nd. Báng-Bay, a large town on the south bank of a considerable river
abounding with fish and flowing eastwards, under the chief Sará Gulá.

All this is quite correct; but this Báng-Bay is altogether different
from the territory called Bay, on the river of Logón. According to
Ramadhán, the river of Báng-Bay is identical with the bahr Ráshid,
which, as he states, flows from here to Tamkí, Andí, Nyéldang and
Gamkúl, and falls into the Shárí at Nílem.

The inhabitants, who are in a very rude state of civilization, have only
slings; and no cotton is cultivated. Báng-Bay is four days from Ábú
Telfán, and two days and a half from Míddogó.


 (_u._) _Más-eñá to Runga and Sillá, according to Agíd Búrku. Route not
              in a straight course, but veering westerly._


1st day. Gíñim, a considerable place, with a rampart, and a large clay-
built mosque. A well-wooded tract.

2nd. Ám-jérri, a middling-sized place, surrounded by a stockade,
inhabited by elephant and lion-hunters. You pass some wood.

3rd. Kírsuwa (Jibílki?), on a river which flows N.N.W., abounding with
fish, and navigated during the rains by the people in bukhsa, those
large calabashes described on a former occasion. A woody tract.

4th. Kírsuwa Hírla, a place under a powerful chief, to the south of
which is a considerable well-wooded mountain. Of the inhabitants, one-
half are pagans, and the other half Moslemín. A long march.

5th. Bedánga, a place surrounded by a palisade, to the west of which is
a mountain, only inhabited by pagans, with abundance of fig-trees, which
are considered holy. The soil to the north consists of sand, and in the
southern part of clay. The wells are about five fathoms deep. The gár
(chief) of Bedánga is dependent upon Bagírmi.

6th. Bámmená, a pagan place in a mountainous tract, where water is only
obtained from wells. The huts are of reeds. Not distant.

7th. Óle Mántanjá, a large pagan place. The upper parts of the huts
consist of reeds, the lower parts of clay. Halt at noon near a large
mountain in the wilderness.

8th. Sómo, a place situated partly on the top and partly at the foot of
a mountain possessing springs. The inhabitants are pagans; they breed
horses, cows, and sheep, eat pork, and cultivate much cotton. Tétel
(_Antilope oryx_) abounds here; also an animal called wáktotó,
resembling a cat, but without a tail (the súmmolí?).

9th. Gellá, a place under an independent chief, on a rivulet flowing
south, called Múggerú, abounding with fish, and navigated during the
rains in bukhsa.

10th. Gár-Sará, or Ngár-Sará, a large pagan place, under a powerful
chieftain of the name of Makét, on a stagnant water (sél), which, during
the rains, becomes a running river, and is navigated with bukhsa, or
crossed by means of a rope drawn from either side. On the way you halt
at a group of four wells at the base of a mountain.

11th. Dámbar, a large pagan place, consisting merely of reed huts, under
the chieftain Gár-Dogó, and the native place of my informant.

12th. Bánam, a large place, close to which is a high mountain, called
“tot Shímme.” The country produces millet, sesamum, sorghum, and much
cotton. The field-labour is not done by the women, as is general in
Negroland, but by the men, the women having the upper hand.

13th. Górgor, a place nominally under Bagírmi, on a rivulet in a
mountainous, rocky tract, the rock being partly of red, partly of blue
colour. The mountains are steep. The inhabitants are armed with spear
and sword (the latter very remarkable), rarely with bows.

14th. Leté, in a mountainous tract, short distance.

15th. Bubú, a middle-sized place.

16th. Chélemí, a large place.

17th. Kénga Matáya, a large place, under a powerful chief, on the
western side of a watercourse running from north to south. Near Kénga a
mountain rises as steep as a wall, presenting colours as richly
chequered as those of a carpet, and densely inhabited by birds, whence
it is called “the birds’ rock.” At the foot of this mountain the
inhabitants celebrate, during summer, a great festival in a large hut,
their temple, at the top of which an urn is suspended, which is said to
be raised by supernatural powers on the approach of an enemy, and to
descend again on his retreat. The people slaughter here fowls and sheep,
and bring sorghum and beans, which they sow, the crop being said to
start forth immediately, so that they reap, boil, and eat it the same
day. Then they place a woman, in splendid attire, on a kárru or wooden
mortar, on each side of the hut, who are said to be transformed into
horses, and to beat the kárru, which itself rises up in the shape of a
horse.

These fabulous statements, on whatever imposture they may rest, were
repeated to me by several most credible informants, quite independently
the one of the other. The vessel or urn suspended at the top of the hut
is said to represent their deity. According to the experienced Ramadhán
Degéji, the following places lie at short distances from each other, in
the mountainous tract between Kénga and Belél-Kolé:—Gér (Gére, see lower
down), a large and populous district, rather mountainous; Sára, under
Sultan Mokhé; Bedánga, Bámmená, Bajáwu and Mére (another village
situated on the top of a mount, and on the watercourse running to Andí,
Jená, Kédil, Kótkol, Belél Kolé).

18th. Sár, a large place on and at the base of a high hill, on which
stands the chief’s dwelling, surrounded with a rampart. The sultan
feasts, at ʿAíd el kebír, the chiefs subjected to his dominion, on
receiving their tribute, by slaughtering a great number of cattle.

19th. Doy, a large place under an independent chieftain; not distant.

20th. Dángal, a place on the top of a mountain in a mountainous tract.

21st. Bánal, a large place with a great body of horsemen, situated at
the foot of a steep mountain. This mountain-range is said to extend a
month’s journey, and to contain numerous villages. In its valleys,
watercourses are formed during the rains, and it contains numerous small
lakes, abounding with fish. The inhabitants wear clothes, and possess
numerous herds. It is said that the cold on these mountains is sometimes
very severe, and that snow and hail fall occasionally. The whole country
is under the supremacy of Kénga.

22nd. Íyon, a large place at the foot of a mountain, under Kénga.

23rd. Tamkí (see above) a large place under the chief Bishára Milkéte.
Tamkí, in a straight line from Kénga, is only one day S.W.

24th. Góberá, a place on a mountain, consisting of a rock of red colour,
the inhabitants of which are armed with bows and arrows, and are very
formidable. This tract contains several watercourses.

25th. Jayá, a group of several villages on the top of a mountain.

26th. Miñedogó.

27th. Míddogó, a place, or rather district, mountainous, and comprising
about 40 hamlets lying around an isolated mountain, under the chieftain
Ábú Khódr. The inhabitants, on the inroad of the Wádáy people in 1852,
retired to the mountain, which they held for seven months, till the
Wádáy army retired.

28th. Dróngoló, a village of the Áfanín, as they are called, a section
of, or rather an indigenous tribe subjected to, the Kúka in the valley
of the Bat-há, with stagnant pools.

29th. Kúnjur, a place of the Kúka.

30th. Ám-Kharúba, a district comprising numerous hamlets on the Bat-há,
which is fringed with dúm-palms. A very short distance.

31st. Kórnay, a large place of the Kúka, consisting entirely of reed-
huts. The principal produce is millet.

32nd. Birket Fátima, a large stagnant water on the north bank of the
Bat-há. Informant now turns south.

33rd. A large place of the Másmajé, Arab cattle-breeders at the foot of
a mountain, the summit of which is inhabited by pagans. The district
abounds with large trees.

34th. A considerable village of the Dájó. In the Khalla a large number
of Fullán, as the Fúlbe are there called, graze their herds.

35th. Kórbe (?) a large place, or rather district, of the Másalát, or
Másalít (whom my informant erroneously takes to be Arabs) with numerous
herds, of a very thievish disposition, on a watercourse called Bérekat.
North of the Másalát, according to my informant, there is no watercourse
properly speaking.

36th. A hamlet of the Salamát Arabs, mixed with pagans, and themselves
pagans; on the bahr e’ Tíni, a stagnant water.

37th. A district of the Welád Ráshid, name not known.

38th. A large place of the Bándalá, in a district rich in honey.

39th. Dár Séli, an extensive district quite level and bare of trees.

40th. Sofálawén, a small village inhabited by Arabs, stated by my
informant to be pagans, under ʿAbd e’ Rahmán Jóko.

41st. A large place under the sovereign of Runga, name not known. The
country is traversed by various mountains.

42nd. Dár Shilá, a mountainous country with a river flowing eastwards,
beyond which is Dár Dínga.


  (_v._) _From Kúkawa, by way of Logón Bírni and Busó to (the Western)
                 Bang-Bay, according to Slave-traders._


1st day. Ngórnu.

2nd. Ngála.

3rd. Áfadé.

4th. Kála Kabé.

5th. Hállebú.

6th. Kála Gurú.

7th. Kárnak Lógone, or Logón Bírni.

8th. Kúbu ngólo, a large town surrounded by a rampart.

9th. Búgomán, a large town under Sultan Másseri, on the west bank of the
Shárí.

10th. Mayemba, or Mankhfa, on the east bank of the large river.

11th. Músgu, a tract comprising a number of hamlets, with some isolated
eminences. You always keep along the watercourse.

12th. Baleñére.

13th. Mondó.

14th. Muró.

15th. Gurumbánga.

16th. Gadó.

17th. Kókochó.

18th. Máfelé, constantly along the river.

19th. Láffaná.

20th. Busó, a large place under a powerful chief.

21st. Mirtí, a village on an island in the Shárí.

22nd. Birrí, still on the river.

23rd. Móngolá, under the chieftain Biñígo.

24th. Mútu, a place on the same river, with abundance of boats, ngurútu,
and crocodiles, and surrounded by a dense wood.

25th. Bargná, a considerable village.

26th. Yó, another pagan place.

27th. Bíllay, the last place on the Shárí.

28th. Nígi, a village situated in a tract intersected by small
watercourses, which join the river.

29th. Tógilá, on the Báchikám.

30th. Kérbe, a large place in a woody tract.

31st. Górewó.

32nd. Búkkabé, a place situated on a river.

33rd. Limmírkay, on the large river, one day from Attar.

34th. Békang. The inhabitants of all these places go naked, are only
armed with the hand-bill, and eat dogs’ flesh.

35th. Kórbol, another village on the same river.

36th. Búwa Dasár, so called from the chief Dasár. The people eat beef
and horseflesh, and gird their loins with horsetails. The “délu”-tree is
said to be their deity.

37th. Kóna.

38th. Nyégel.

39th. Nílem, a place on a headland between the Shárí, towards the west,
and a tributary of the latter, the river of Andí, on the east side.

40th. Kunnó.

41st Jénge, a large place at the foot of a mountain which here starts up
from the plain.

42nd. Gasháffar, a village in a mountainous district.

43rd. Téngi, a place in a mountainous tract on the west bank of a river
(the Shárí?).

44th. Fátum, in a woody plain on the river.

45th. Kóm.

46th. Kúmra (Sará-ngár-Kúmra) in a mountainous tract.

47th. Báng-Bay, in a hilly tract, with four chiefs, one of whom is
Jímdil.

48th. Kúdumúr, a place near a mountain.

49th. Géjjemir, a village with a mountain and a river to the south.

50th. Báng-Derír, a mountainous tract with a river, abounding in the
tree called kó, which bears a large fruit.

51st. Day, in a mountainous tract, with a river.

52nd. Gurál, a place situated in a level tract, inhabited by a fierce
race of people of a red colour.

53rd. Cholól, residence of the chief Kíki.

54th. Jogtó, a large place. All short marches.

55th. Mugmó, in a woody plain with small watercourses without a current,
producing millet, and abounding with elephants and beasts of prey,
particularly hyænas.

56th. Gam, a place in a level tract, the inhabitants of which go naked,
are only armed with the hand-bill, and eat dog-flesh.

57th. Somray, in a plain, with small watercourses.

58th. Yálma, in a plain. You here change your course.

59th. Dólemá, in a level tract, subject to Somray, with large trees,
producing only millet. The people breed dogs, cattle, and pigs.

60th. Chíre, a large place.

61st. Gábberí, in a plain, devoid of running water, and having only
wells.

62nd. Kímre.


(_x._) _From Más-eñá, by way of Gáwi to Mʿawó, according to Agíd Músa,_


Who, nine years ago was sent by ʿOthmán Búgomán to Kánem, to pay his
respects to Mohammed, the son of ʿAbd el Jelíl, and to deliver to him a
number of slaves as a present, by way of opening negotiations. Músa,
however, barely escaped being killed by the khalífa ʿAlí, the governor
of Mʿawó and a partisan of Wádáy; and the negotiations were soon broken
off in consequence of the insecurity of the road.

1st day. Ábú-Gher (see above).

2nd. Chekká.

3rd. Dérja.

4th. Méddebá, on the Shárí, a little above Klésem.

5th. Gáwi, a town formerly of importance, but containing at present,
after having been destroyed by the sheikh Mohammed el Kánemí, who,
assisted by Mústafa el Áhmar and Mukní, took it, after a long
resistance, in A.H. 1234—only a small population. Gáwi from Klésem about
20 miles.

6th. A place of the Yamanúk Arabs, or the Dághana, on a sheet of water.

7th. Kídik.

8th. Babáliyá, formerly the capital of an independent territory, with a
peculiar dialect like that of Búgomán; at present nearly deserted, since
its destruction together with Gáwi in 1234 A.H., and possessing but a
very small remnant of population. Bábaliyá is about twelve miles from
the Shárí, and thirty miles, or a long day’s journey, from Gáwi.

9th. Ziyán, a place belonging to Kárká or Kargha.

10th. A hamlet belonging to Kárká, not far from the lake.

 11th.  }
        }
 12th.  }
        }  Híllelát (small hamlets) of Kárká.
 13th.  }
        }
 14th.  }

15th. A village of the Nefása.

16th. A village of the Kánem Arabs. A long night’s march, from ʿaser
(four o’clock, P.M.) till the next morning.

17th. Mʿawó.


        _From Babáliyá to Moító, according to Ramadhán Degéji._


1st day. Augúra, a place of the Kúka.

2nd. Dimdim, a wádí whence the inhabitants of Moító fetch natron, and
much frequented by the Shúwa, who like to graze their herds therein.

3rd. Kargha.

4th. Babáliyá.


                       _From Más-eñá to Méddebá._


 1st. Bákadá,      }
                   }
 2nd. Kóllekólle,  }  Separated by short distances. Very easy to
                   }  be performed in two days.
 3rd. Márga,       }

4th. Jógodé, a large place inhabited by Kanúri, with a khalífa.

5th. Méddebá.


    (_y._) _Places on the Shárí, descending the river from Búgomán._


Below Búgomán are situated on the river:—Yaúya; Bála Mása, with a
rampart; Kuljí; Ásu or Aisu, with a rampart in the utmost state of
decay; Ndára; Mai Dalá; Gédiyé, and Mélé.

Below Mélé are situated on the river:—Méddebá; Klésem, a considerable
place, with a peculiar dialect, twenty miles from Mélé; Tibálo; Shégguwa
or Kinjí Búrgu, with the ford of Siña-Fácha, where the river of Logón,
or the lághame Lógone (the Arre of the Músgu), falls into the Shárí;
Gulfé; Mafáng; Sháwi, a place well-known from Denham’s description;
Makari, a very important place, which, it is much to be regretted, we
were prevented from visiting.

For the very important itinerary of an expedition undertaken from Ám-
majúra in Dár Fúr, in a south-westerly direction, through Bánda (called
Dár Bánda) to the borders of a large river running westward, which must
be one of the great objects of discovery to future expeditions, see
Journal of the Royal Geog. Soc., 1853, vol. xxiii. p. 120.


[Footnote 111: Kínji is two days E.S.E. from Moíto, a large place, east
of which is a mountain, the only one in Bagírmi. See further on.]

[Footnote 112: This is a very important circumstance, which explains all
the errors of M. Fresnel in constructing his incomplete itineraries.]

[Footnote 113: This place has been repeatedly mistaken for the capital
of Bagírmi, even by M. Fresnel.]

[Footnote 114: This place Aúni is evidently identical with the
homonymous place mentioned above in the itinerary of the king Edrís
Alawóma.]

[Footnote 115: It is most probable that this is Wogga’s Kimkul.—Journal
of the R. Geogr. Soc., vol. xv. p. 374. “Koome,” p. 375., is Belél
Komé.]




                                   X.

                FRAGMENTS OF A METEOROLOGICAL REGISTER.

                               * * * * *


[Deg. F.: Degrees in scale of Fahrenheit.]

 +-----+-------+-------+----------------------------------------------+
 |Date.|Hour of|Deg. F.|                 Remarks.                     |
 |     | Day.  |       |                                              |
 +-----+-------+-------+----------------------------------------------+
 |1851.|       |       |                                              |
 | July|       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  28 |sunrise|  78·8 |Sky overcast, a few drops of rain; 8.30 a.m. a|
 |     |       |       |heavy thunder-storm, with rain till 11        |
 |     |       |       |o’clock.                                      |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  79·7 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  29 |noon   |  87·8 |In the night some more rain.                  |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  30 |sunrise|   77  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  93·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  89·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  31 |sunrise|   74  |A thunder-storm early in the morning; 10 a.m. |
 |     |       |       |a few drops of rain.                          |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  89·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |   86  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 | Aug.|       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  1  |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  2  |noon   |   95  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  3  |   No therm.   |Heavy thunder-storm in the night of the 2nd,  |
 |     |      obs.     |with the most plentiful fall of rain which we |
 |  4  |               |had during this season. In the night of the   |
 |     |       |       |4th another very heavy fall of rain, lasting  |
 |     |       |       |till the morning, and not accompanied by any  |
 |     |       |       |thunder or lightning.                         |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  5  |       |       |9.15 a.m. a heavy shower lasting till 11      |
 |     |       |       |o’clock, preceded by gusts of wind, and       |
 |     |       |       |followed by a few claps of thunder.           |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1 p.m. |  73·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  6  |noon   |  84·2 |In the morning sky overcast.                  |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  7  |noon   |  78·8 |At 10.30 a.m. rain.                           |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  8  |noon   |  89·6 |The morning fine; about noon sky overcast;    |
 |     |       |       |about 2 p.m. heavy thunder-storm with much    |
 |     |       |       |rain.                                         |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  9  |sunrise|  71·6 |In the morning rainy; afterwards the sun broke|
 |     |       |       |forth.                                        |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  10 |   No therm.   |Fine weather.                                 |
 |     |      obs.     |                                              |
 |  11 |               |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  12 |sunrise|       |11 a.m. very heavy shower, but only of short  |
 |     |       |       |duration.                                     |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  73·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  13 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  14 |       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  15 |       |       |About 11 o’clock a.m. rain; and again in the  |
 |     |       |       |after noon.                                   |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  16 |       |       |Sky overcast.                                 |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  17 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  18 |       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  19 |noon   |  88·7 |Fine weather.                                 |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  20 |       |       |In the night a thunder-storm, with heavy rain.|
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  21 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  22 |noon   |  89·6 |Sky overcast.                                 |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  23 |noon   |  91·4 |At 9 p.m. heavy thunder-storm, with a         |
 |     |       |       |tolerable quantity of rain.                   |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  24 |noon   |  87·8 |A cold northerly wind.                        |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  25 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  26 |       |       |7½ a.m. a heavy thunder-storm, with moderate  |
 |     |       |       |rain.                                         |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  27 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  28 |       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  29 |       |       |Fine weather.                                 |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  30 |noon   |  89·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  31 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |Sept.|       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  1  |       |       |Fine weather.                                 |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  2  |noon   |   77  |10 o’clock, thunder-storm, with heavy rain.   |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  3  |       |       |In the morning, till near noon, rain;         |
 |     |       |       |afterwards fine weather.                      |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  4  |noon   |  87·8 |In the afternoon some rain.                   |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  5  |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  6  |noon   |  89·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  7  |       |       |A good deal of rain, at times heavier, at     |
 |     |       |       |others gentle.                                |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  8  |noon   |   86  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  9  |noon   |  89·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  10 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  11 |       |       |Heavy dew.                                    |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  12 |noon   |  91·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  13 |noon   |  89·6 |Sky overcast. Sun gradually broke forth.      |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  14 |sunrise|   77  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  15 |       |       |Heavy gale.                                   |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  16 |sunrise|  72·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  17 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  18 |2 p.m. |  98·6 |               (Town of Yó.)                  |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  19 |2 p.m. |  98·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  20 |2 p.m. |  96·8 |Heavy easterly gale.                          |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  87·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  21 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  22 |       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  23 |2.30   |  89·6 |Thunder-storm, with a little rain.            |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |24 to|No observation.|27th, storm, with considerable rain in the    |
 |  29 |       |       |afternoon.                                    |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  30 |sunrise|  69·8 |                 (Kánem.)                     |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1 p.m. | 102·2 |A hot northerly wind from the desert.         |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 | Oct.|       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  1  |2 p.m. | 106·7 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  2  |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  3  |noon   | 101·3 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |2 p.m. |  104  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  4  |noon   | 100·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |2 p.m. |  104  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  5  |noon   |  98·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |6.15   |  96·8 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  6  |noon   | 100·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |2 p.m. | 105·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  7  |sunrise|   68  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   | 102·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |2 p.m. | 105·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  8  |noon   |  103  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |2 p.m. | 105·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  9  |noon   |  101  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |2 p.m. |  104  |About 2 o’clock p.m. a thunder-storm towards  |
 |     |       |       |S.E.; about sunset a little rain.             |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  104  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  10 |2 p.m. |  111  |A thunder-storm. A little rain in the evening.|
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  11 |noon   | 101·3 |At noon thunder-storm gathering on all sides. |
 |     |       |       |At 2 p.m. a little rain.                      |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  12 |noon   |  98·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  13 |       |       |Strong northerly gale.                        |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  14 |       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  15 |noon   | 101·3 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |16 to|No observation.|                                              |
 |  21 |               |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  22 |noon   | 100·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  23 |2 p.m. |  108  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  24 |2 p.m. | 109·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  25 |1 p.m. |  109  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  26 |2 p.m. | 107·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  27 |noon   | 105·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |2 p.m. | 108·5 |After 3 o’clock, a thunder-storm from the     |
 |     |       |       |south; rain towards the west.                 |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  28 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  29 |2 p.m. | 100·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |30 to|               |                                              |
 | Dec.|No observation.|                                              |
 |  1  |               |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  2  |1 p.m. |  96·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  3  |sunrise|  64·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |  96·8 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  4  |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  5  |1.30   |  82·4 |(Díkowa.) Thick fog in the morning, as was    |
 |     |p.m.   |       |often the case at this season.                |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  6  |1.30   |   95  |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  7  |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  8  |1.30   |   94  |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  9  |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  10 |       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  14 |sunrise|  51·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  15 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  16 |sunrise|  55·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  17 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  18 |5.30   |  55·4 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  19 |sunrise|  52·7 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  20 |sunrise|  51·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |2 p.m. |   86  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  21 |sunrise|   51  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  22 |sunrise|  51·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |23 to|No observation.|                                              |
 |  25 |               |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  26 |sunrise|  56·3 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  27 |sunrise|  56·3 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  74·3 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  28 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  29 |       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  30 |sunrise|  61·7 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  31 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |1852.|       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 | Jan.|       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  1  |No observation.|(Wúliya, Músgu.)                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  2  |sunrise|  60·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  3  |sunrise|   59  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  96·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  4  |noon   |   95  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  82·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  5  |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  6  |sunrise|   59  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  7  |sunrise|   59  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   | 100·4 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  8  |6 a.m. |   59  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1 p.m. |  91·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |   77  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  9  |sunrise|  57·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |2 p.m. |  96·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  78·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  10 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  11 |sunrise|  62·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |   95  |In cool shade.                                |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |       | 100·4 |In ventilated tent.                           |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  82·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  12 |sunrise|   59  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1 p.m. |  87·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |   77  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  13 |sunrise|  56·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |  84·2 |In very cool shade, with cool northerly       |
 |     |p.m.   |       |breeze.                                       |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  74·3 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  14 |sunrise|  56·3 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  15 |sunrise|   51  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |   87  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  70·7 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  16 |sunrise|  52·7 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  91·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  17 |sunrise|  55·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |  89·6 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  18 |sunrise|  57·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1 p.m. |   86  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  19 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  20 |       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  21 |sunrise|   58  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  75·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  22 |sunrise|  56·3 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  23 |sunrise|   59  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  24 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  25 |sunrise|  56·3 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  26 |sunrise|  52·7 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |  93·2 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  75·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  27 |sunrise|  57·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  28 |noon   |  98·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  29 |sunrise|   59  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  30 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  31 |       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 | Feb.|       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  1  |No observation.|                  (Kúkawa.)                   |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  2  |sunrise|  56·3 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  75·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  65·3 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  3  |sunrise|   59  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |12.45  |  70·7 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  4  |sunrise|  55·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  71·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  5  |sunrise|  61·7 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |   78  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  72·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  6  |sunrise|  63·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |12.15  |  80·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  75·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  7  |sunrise|  62·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  84·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |   77  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  8  |sunrise|  62·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1 p.m. |  81·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  78·3 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  9  |sunrise|  63·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  87·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  79·7 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  10 |sunrise|  64·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  87·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  79·7 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  11 |sunrise|  68·0 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  95·0 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  81·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  12 |sunrise|  70·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  92·0 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  86·0 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  13 |sunrise|  69·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  98·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  87·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  14 |sunrise|  70·7 |Heavy gale.                                   |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |  98·6 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  15 |sunrise|  69·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |  98·6 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |   86  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  16 |sunrise|  69·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |12.45  |  98·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  87·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  17 |sunrise|  71·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |12.45  | 102·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  86·0 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  18 |sunrise|  69·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.45   |  101  |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  87·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  19 |sunrise|  70·7 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |  98·6 |The evening foggy.                            |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  20 |sunrise|  67·3 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |12.45  | 102·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  21 |sunrise|   68  |All this time much sickness in Kúkawa.        |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.15   |  99·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |   86  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  22 |sunrise|  66·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.45   |  89·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  79·7 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  23 |sunrise|  68·0 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |  88·7 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  78·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  24 |sunrise|   67  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1 p.m. |   87  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |   77  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  25 |sunrise|  64·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  26 |sunrise|  65·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1 p.m. |   89  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  80·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  27 |sunrise|  66·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |2 p.m. |   91  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  80·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  28 |sunrise|   67  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1 p.m. |  91·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  82·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |March|       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  1  |sunrise|  67·3 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |12.30  |  91·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  86·0 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  2  |sunrise|   69  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1 p.m. |  96·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |   86  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  3  |sunrise|  71·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1 p.m. | 100·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  4  |sunrise|  71·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |   95  |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  5  |1.30   |  97·7 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |   86  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  6  |sunrise|  78·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |  99·5 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  80·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  7  |sunrise|  71·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |   94  |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  84·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  8  |sunrise|  71·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |  96·8 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |   86  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  9  |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  10 |sunrise|  70·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |  98·2 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |   89  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  11 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  12 |1.30   |   94  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  13 |       |       |Logón birni. About 2.30 p.m. a little rain.   |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  14 |sunrise|  71·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  15 |2 p.m. |  94·1 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  16 |1.30   |  98·2 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  17 |sunrise|  75·2 |Sky overcast; thick clouds.                   |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  18 |1 p.m. |  96·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  19 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  20 |1.30   |  92·8 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  21 |sunrise|  57·7 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  83·3 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  22 |1.30   |  100  |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  23 |sunrise|   58  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |2 p.m. | 101·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  24 |sunrise|  62·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   | 102·2 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  87·8 |Sky overcast.                                 |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  25 |sunrise|  69·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |2 p.m. |  98·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |26 to|No observation.|                                              |
 |  30 |       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  31 |noon   | 104·7 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   | 107·4 |Bákadá.                                       |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |April|       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  1  |sunrise|   63  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   | 106·2 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  91·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  2  |sunrise|  66·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   | 105·3 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  87·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  3  |sunrise|   73  |The first thunder-storm of the rainy season.  |
 |     |       |       |The sky, in the morning, thickly overcast; the|
 |     |       |       |air moist. The sun broke through the clouds   |
 |     |       |       |after 9 o’clock; but half-an hour past noon   |
 |     |       |       |the thunder-storm broke forth at a short      |
 |     |       |       |distance towards the south, from whence it    |
 |     |       |       |proceeded, reaching us at 1 p.m.              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |12.30  | 102·7 |From 1 o’clock to 1.23 large drops of rain,   |
 |     |       |       |followed by heavy gusts of wind.              |
 |     |1.30   |  87·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  85·1 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  4  |sunrise|   73  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   | 100·4 |About 11 o’clock thick rain-clouds gathering, |
 |     |       |       |but no rain.                                  |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  5  |sunrise|  81·5 |About 5 o’clock in the morning the thunder-   |
 |     |       |       |storm broke forth, with light rain lasting    |
 |     |       |       |till about 8 a.m. Then the sun broke through  |
 |     |       |       |the clouds, while the thunder continued. At   |
 |     |       |       |9.30 a.m. again a little rain; the sky        |
 |     |       |       |remaining overcast the rest of the day.       |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |  91·4 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  90·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  6  |sunrise|  76·3 |Sky thickly overcast; storm towards the north.|
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.15   | 105·4 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  7  |sunrise|   72  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1 p.m. | 106·7 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |2 p.m. | 109·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  94·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  8  |sunrise|  76·5 |Sky overcast; at 11 o’clock a little rain     |
 |     |       |       |began, often interrupted, the thunder-storm   |
 |     |       |       |gradually turning to the north.               |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  94·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.15   |  104  |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  92·5 |About 8 p.m. a thunder-storm arose from the   |
 |     |       |       |east, accompanied by much wind, but only      |
 |     |       |       |little rain; night very oppressive.           |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  9  |sunrise|   80  |The sky overcast; atmosphere oppressive. About|
 |     |       |       |8 o’clock a few drops of rain.                |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |2 p.m. |  98·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  10 |1 p.m. |  104  |About 3 a.m. a thunder-storm, without wind,   |
 |     |       |       |but accompanied by considerable rain, which   |
 |     |       |       |lasted for about an hour and a half.          |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  11 |sunset |  100  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunrise|  76·3 |Sky overcast.                                 |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |  103  |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  87·4 |In the evening a thunder-storm gathered from  |
 |     |       |       |the west, but bringing only a few drops of    |
 |     |       |       |rain.                                         |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  12 |sunrise|  75·6 |Sky overcast; sultry. About 2 p.m. a thunder- |
 |     |       |       |storm in the distance eastward, gradually     |
 |     |1.30   |  95·5 |approaching, and sending forth, at sunset,    |
 |     |p.m.   |       |uninterrupted peals of thunder and flashes of |
 |     |       |       |lightning, with only a few drops of rain, but |
 |     |sunset |  99·3 |heavy squalls of wind lasting till about 8    |
 |     |       |       |p.m.; a heavy shower followed, lasting for    |
 |     |       |       |about two hours.                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  13 |sunrise|  70·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   | 101·7 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  91·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  14 |sunrise|  73·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   | 101·7 |About noon the sky became thickly overcast,   |
 |     |       |       |and at 1 p.m. a few large drops fell, followed|
 |     |2.30   |   94  |by a shower for about ten minutes; the sky    |
 |     |p.m.   |       |remained overcast.                            |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  88·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  15 |sunrise|  76·6 |About 7 o’clock in the morning a few drops    |
 |     |       |       |fell, but afterwards the sky cleared up; and  |
 |     |1.30   |  96·8 |in the afternoon a fresh breeze arose. In the |
 |     |p.m.   |       |following night a little rain.                |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |2 p.m. | 101·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |   90  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  16 |sunrise|  80·2 |In the morning the sky overcast, and a little |
 |     |       |       |rain fell.                                    |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1 p.m. |  99·7 |About noon a heavy wind arose from S.E., and  |
 |     |       |       |the sky became again thickly overcast.        |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  80·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  17 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  18 |       |       |At 2 o’clock in the morning a heavy N.E. wind |
 |     |       |       |arose.                                        |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  19 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  20 |       |       |Sultry day.                                   |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  21 |1.20   | 104·4 |At 2 p.m. a thunder-storm gathered from S.E.  |
 |     |p.m.   |       |At 3.30 o’clock it began raining, first       |
 |     |       |       |slightly, but from 3.45 to 4.15, a heavy      |
 |     |       |       |shower followed, greatly refreshing the       |
 |     |       |       |temperature. The rain then ceased, while the  |
 |     |       |       |thunder continued, with heavy squalls from    |
 |     |       |       |E.N.E.; but at sunset the rain began afresh,  |
 |     |       |       |and lasted for full two hours.                |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  22 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  23 |1.15   | 100·4 |The sun broke through the thunder-clouds about|
 |     |p.m.   |       |8 a.m.                                        |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  24 |noon   | 102·2 |The sky overcast, but no rain.                |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  25 |12.30  |  95·4 |At 4 p.m. a heavy shower, but of short        |
 |     |       |       |duration, followed but not preceded by        |
 |     |       |       |thunder.                                      |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  26 |1.45   | 101·8 |Sky thickly overcast; the sun breaking through|
 |     |p.m.   |       |the clouds at 9.30 a.m., the atmosphere       |
 |     |       |       |remaining sultry. In the afternoon a thunder- |
 |     |       |       |storm accompanied by heavy squalls of wind,   |
 |     |       |       |but no rain.                                  |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  27 |       |       |Atmosphere sultry.                            |
 |     |       |       |               (Más-eñá).                     |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  28 |       |       |In the afternoon a thunder-storm gathered, but|
 |     |       |       |brought us only a few drops of rain in the    |
 |     |       |       |evening.                                      |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  29 |       |       |The sky the whole day overcast; in the        |
 |     |       |       |afternoon a storm gathered in the south, but  |
 |     |       |       |not accompanied by rain.                      |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  30 |       |       |In the afternoon a thunder-storm arose,       |
 |     |       |       |followed by a considerable rain the following |
 |     |       |       |night, lasting about two hours.               |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 | May |       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  1  |       |       |Sky overcast; the sun breaking through the    |
 |     |       |       |clouds about 10 a.m., but only for a few      |
 |     |       |       |moments. At 4 p.m. thick thunder-clouds, with |
 |     |       |       |much heat-lightning, but no rain.             |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  2  |       |       |About 5.30 p.m. dark thunder-clouds gathered, |
 |     |       |       |but passed by westward.                       |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  3  |       |       |A little before 9 p.m. thunder-clouds from    |
 |     |       |       |S.W., with heavy squalls, followed at 9       |
 |     |       |       |o’clock by a heavy shower, lasting about two  |
 |     |       |       |hours.                                        |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  4  |       |       |No thunder-storm.                             |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  5  |1 p.m. |  90·5 |Fine weather.                                 |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  88·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  6  |1 p.m. |  93·6 |Beautiful weather.                            |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  7  |1.30   |   95  |Beautiful morning, in the afternoon heavy     |
 |     |       |       |squalls of wind.                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  8  |1.30   |  96·8 |Fine day.                                     |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  9  |1.15   |  95·7 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  10 |1.30   |  97·3 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  11 |2 p.m. |  98·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  12 |2 p.m. |  98·1 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  13 |       |       |At 9.30 a.m. a heavy gale.                    |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  14 |1.45   |   95  |Sky thickly overcast, the sun shining forth   |
 |     |p.m.   |       |only now and then; at about 11 a.m. the       |
 |     |       |       |weather cleared up, but became again overcast |
 |     |       |       |in the afternoon; and at 2 o’clock a thunder- |
 |     |       |       |storm gathered, but without bringing us much  |
 |     |       |       |rain.                                         |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |4.30   |  96·6 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  15 |       |       |The sky overcast the whole day. At 1.45 p.m.  |
 |     |       |       |distant thunder towards the east; at 4 p.m. it|
 |     |       |       |began raining, and continued till five with   |
 |     |       |       |considerable violence, then ceased and began  |
 |     |       |       |again with sunset, accompanied by thunder now |
 |     |       |       |and then, and lasting in a uniform way till   |
 |     |       |       |8.30 the next morning.                        |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  16 |2 p.m. |   86  |The sky having cleared up a little before noon|
 |     |       |       |again became overcast in the afternoon.       |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  17 |       |       |Sky thickly overcast; the sun breaking through|
 |     |       |       |the clouds about 10 o’clock.                  |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |  88·7 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  18 |       |       |The weather dull.                             |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  19 |2 p.m. |  91·4 |Fine day.                                     |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  20 |       |       |No thunder-storm.                             |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  21 |sunrise|  75·2 |At noon light thunder-clouds gathered,        |
 |     |       |       |bringing a heavy gale, but no rain, and the   |
 |     |       |       |weather soon cleared up.                      |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  22 |       |       |No storm.                                     |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  23 |sunrise|   68  |Fine fresh morning.                           |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  24 |sunrise|   77  |Fine weather, light clouds gathered in the    |
 |     |       |       |course of the afternoon, and in the evening   |
 |     |1.15   |   96  |heat-lightning.                               |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  25 |2 p.m. |  96·8 |Windy; sky a little overcast.                 |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |In the afternoon after 5 o’clock thunder-     |
 |     |       |       |clouds from west, as well as N.E., and in the |
 |     |       |       |latter direction much heat-lightning without  |
 |     |       |       |thunder. After sunset a little rain, very     |
 |     |       |       |little in the town, more outside.             |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  26 |sunrise|  74·3 |Sky a little overcast, in the evening a       |
 |     |       |       |thunder-storm, but not accompanied by rain in |
 |     |       |       |the interior of the town.                     |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |2.30   |  89·6 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  27 |sunrise|  78·8 |Sky a little overcast.                        |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |  96·8 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  28 |sunrise|  75·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |  95·4 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  92·3 |After sunset heat-lightning and wind.         |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  29 |sunrise|  72·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |2 p.m. |  96·1 |At 5 p.m. a little rain with sunshine; a      |
 |     |       |       |single thunder clap being heard.              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  30 |sunrise|  74·7 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1 p.m. |  95·5 |At 2 p.m. heavy gusts of wind.                |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  31 |       |       |Weather clear.                                |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 | June|       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  1  |       |       |Sky overcast, at 6.45 a.m. a little rain, with|
 |     |       |       |distant thunder. Afterwards the weather       |
 |     |       |       |cleared up.                                   |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  2  |       |       |Sky overcast, the sun not coming forth before |
 |     |       |       |5 p.m.                                        |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  3  |       |       |Sky overcast, chilly atmosphere, with a strong|
 |     |       |       |south-easterly wind, till at length the sun   |
 |     |       |       |broke through the clouds and scattered them.  |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  4  |       |       |About 9 p.m. a thunder-storm gathered,        |
 |     |       |       |accompanied by only a little rain.            |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  5  |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  6  |       |       |At 3.30 p.m. a very heavy thunder-storm, with |
 |     |       |       |violent squalls of wind from the north,       |
 |     |       |       |followed by a heavy shower, but of short      |
 |     |       |       |duration.                                     |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  7  |sunrise|  75·2 |Sky thickly overcast.                         |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  8  |sunrise|  76·3 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |  95·5 |Thick clouds, portending a storm; the sun     |
 |     |p.m.   |       |broke through the clouds at 9 a.m. In the     |
 |     |       |       |evening heat-lightning towards the west.      |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  9  |       |       |Weather clear.                                |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  10 |sunrise|  77·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.45   |  95·4 |In the afternoon thunder-clouds gathering, and|
 |     |p.m.   |       |at 4 p.m. a light rain.                       |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  11 |2 p.m. |   95  |After 4 p.m. a thunder-storm from the south,  |
 |     |       |       |but without rain.                             |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  12 |sunrise|  74·1 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |2 p.m. |  92·7 |In the evening heat-lightning towards W.N.W.  |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  13 |sunrise|   77  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.45   |  93·2 |In the afternoon thunder clouds gathering with|
 |     |       |       |distant thunder towards the west at 3.30. At  |
 |     |       |       |5.30 heavy rain towards the north, but none in|
 |     |       |       |the town (Más-eñá).                           |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  14 |sunrise|  80·6 |Sky overcast from 3 p.m.; heavy thunder-storm |
 |     |       |       |towards N.E. It began raining with us at 3.30,|
 |     |1.30   |  93·2 |mostly heavily, at times more gently, till 7  |
 |     |p.m.   |       |o’clock in the evening. Also the following    |
 |     |       |       |night a little rain.                          |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  15 |sunrise|  74·5 |Sky thickly overcast, at 6.25 a.m. again a    |
 |     |       |       |little rain, the sun breaking through the     |
 |     |       |       |clouds at 1 p.m.                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |2 p.m. |   86  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  74·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  16 |sunrise|  70·7 |Sky overcast.                                 |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |2 p.m. |   87  |In the evening heat-lightning towards N. and  |
 |     |       |       |N.E.                                          |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  17 |sunrise|  77·5 |Sky overcast; the sun breaking forth only now |
 |     |       |       |and then. About 6 p.m. a thunder-storm        |
 |     |       |       |gathered from the west, but did not reach us; |
 |     |       |       |while another storm rose from E.S.E., but     |
 |     |       |       |likewise ended in nothing but heat-lightning, |
 |     |       |       |and passed by without any rain.               |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  18 |sunrise|  73·4 |Sky thickly overcast; the sun breaking forth  |
 |     |       |       |only now and then. At 4 p.m. thunder-storm    |
 |     |2 p.m. |  89·6 |from the west, but without bringing rain.     |
 |     |       |       |Heavy squalls of wind after sunset.           |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  19 |sunrise|  73·8 |(N.B. broke the last thermometer I had with me|
 |     |       |       |at the time.) 2.30 p.m. distant thunder heard,|
 |     |       |       |a heavy thunder-storm gathering from the east,|
 |     |       |       |overclouding the whole sky, but without       |
 |     |       |       |bringing us any rain. In the evening heat-    |
 |     |       |       |lightning.                                    |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  20 |       |       |Weather clear.                                |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  21 |       |       |5 p.m. a thunder-storm with a heavy gale, but |
 |     |       |       |without rain.                                 |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  22 |       |       |Sky overcast; the sun not breaking through the|
 |     |       |       |clouds before the afternoon, and only from    |
 |     |       |       |time to time. In the evening heat-lightning   |
 |     |       |       |towards W. and E.N.E.                         |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  23 |       |       |The sky in the morning clearer, till at 12.30,|
 |     |       |       |a thunder-storm gathered from S.W., when at 1 |
 |     |       |       |p.m. a few drops fell, and at 2.30 a little   |
 |     |       |       |more rain.                                    |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  24 |       |       |The morning clear; at 6 p.m. a thunder-storm  |
 |     |       |       |gathering in the east, but only bringing a few|
 |     |       |       |drops of rain.                                |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  25 |       |       |In the preceding night a moderate fall of     |
 |     |       |       |rain, lasting about two hours; about 3.30 p.m.|
 |     |       |       |a heavy gale arose, and the sky became        |
 |     |       |       |overcast towards the east.                    |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  26 |       |       |Weather clear.                                |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  27 |       |       |3 p.m. a thunder-storm from W.S.W.; however   |
 |     |       |       |only a few drops fell, the storm going        |
 |     |       |       |southward.                                    |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  28 |       |       |The morning fine, the sky being covered with  |
 |     |       |       |cumuli. About 4 p.m. a heavy thunder-storm    |
 |     |       |       |gathered from the west, where it discharged   |
 |     |       |       |itself without bringing us more than a few    |
 |     |       |       |drops.                                        |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  29 |       |       |Sky in the morning clear, in the afternoon    |
 |     |       |       |cloudy, in the night a little rain.           |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  30 |       |       |Sky overcast; about 5 p.m. a thunder-storm    |
 |     |       |       |gathered, but without rain in the beginning,  |
 |     |       |       |till the clouds having discharged themselves  |
 |     |       |       |towards the west and the north, it began      |
 |     |       |       |raining with us at 7 p.m., the rain lasting   |
 |     |       |       |half an hour with great violence, after which |
 |     |       |       |it continued more moderately.                 |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 | July|       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  1  |       |       |A violent shower near morning, lasting about  |
 |     |       |       |an hour and a half; the whole morning showers |
 |     |       |       |continued to fall in drops till 11 a.m., when |
 |     |       |       |the sun broke through the clouds about 2 p.m. |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  2  |       |       |The forenoon clear till about 3 p.m. a thick  |
 |     |       |       |thunder-storm gathered from S.W., but         |
 |     |       |       |dispersed in a southerly and north-westerly   |
 |     |       |       |direction, without bringing us a single drop  |
 |     |       |       |of rain.                                      |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  3  |       |       |At 5.30 p.m. a thunder-storm gathered from the|
 |     |       |       |south, followed by a violent shower, lasting  |
 |     |       |       |about twenty minutes, and after an interval by|
 |     |       |       |two other showers not quite so heavy.         |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  4  |       |       |About sunset a thunder-storm from east,       |
 |     |       |       |followed by heavy rain, which after a short   |
 |     |       |       |interval began once more, and continued till  |
 |     |       |       |about morning.                                |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  5  |       |       |The sky in the morning thickly overcast, and a|
 |     |       |       |little rain fell.                             |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  6  |       |       |No rain.                                      |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  7  |       |       |About noon a thunder-storm gathered from west,|
 |     |       |       |and about 3 p.m. a few drops fell; followed at|
 |     |       |       |4 o’clock by a violent rain, lasting half an  |
 |     |       |       |hour, and a little later some more rain.      |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  8  |       |       |Sky the whole day overcast, the atmosphere    |
 |     |       |       |oppressive, and about noon a little rain.     |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  9  |       |       |Sky overcast, the sun only occasionally       |
 |     |       |       |breaking through the clouds, and a few drops  |
 |     |       |       |of rain fell; at 3 p.m., some more rain, and  |
 |     |       |       |at 6 in the evening a heavy shower, lasting   |
 |     |       |       |till eleven o’clock without any thunder or    |
 |     |       |       |lightning.                                    |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  10 |       |       |The sky at times overcast, at others clear.   |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  11 |       |       |Sky in the morning clear; about noon thunder- |
 |     |       |       |clouds gathered from the south, and about 1.30|
 |     |       |       |p.m. a heavy shower fell, lasting with equal  |
 |     |       |       |violence for an hour, then less heavy till 5  |
 |     |       |       |o’clock.                                      |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  12 |       |       |The sky not clear, the atmosphere moist, till |
 |     |       |       |the weather cleared up about noon, when it    |
 |     |       |       |became warmer. About ten o’clock in the       |
 |     |       |       |evening a heavy gale arose, followed by rain, |
 |     |       |       |which lasted till morning.                    |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  13 |       |       |Sky overcast, till about noon, the sun broke  |
 |     |       |       |through the clouds. In the evening a thunder- |
 |     |       |       |storm gathered from the south, accompanied    |
 |     |       |       |with heavy rain, lasting a quarter of an hour,|
 |     |       |       |then more moderate, and again a very heavy    |
 |     |       |       |shower.                                       |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  14 |       |       |Sky in the morning not clear, till the sun    |
 |     |       |       |broke brightly through the clouds. In the     |
 |     |       |       |evening heat-lightning.                       |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  15 |       |       |Sky in the morning clear; about noon, when a  |
 |     |       |       |cold wind had risen, overcast; at 6.30 p.m. a |
 |     |       |       |powerful thunder-storm gathered from S.E.     |
 |     |       |       |accompanied by rain, which lasted till 7.45   |
 |     |       |       |p.m. with equal violence, and more temperate  |
 |     |       |       |till 9.20.                                    |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  16 |       |       |The day fine, but rather oppressive about     |
 |     |       |       |noon; no thunder-storm.                       |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  17 |       |       |The sky in the morning overcast with cumuli; 4|
 |     |       |       |p.m. a heavy thunder-storm gathering from S.W.|
 |     |       |       |and another from north, at the same time      |
 |     |       |       |followed by rain at 6.20, lasting with more or|
 |     |       |       |less violence till 8.10, and after a short    |
 |     |       |       |interval continuing once more.                |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  18 |       |       |The sky overcast in the morning.              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  19 |       |       |At 5 p.m. a black thunder-storm gathering from|
 |     |       |       |S.W. followed by heavy rain, lasting from 6.30|
 |     |       |       |to 9 o’clock, the first hour with great       |
 |     |       |       |violence.                                     |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  20 |       |       |At 5.45 a.m. the rain commenced again, and    |
 |     |       |       |continued till 8.45. At 1 p.m. again a little |
 |     |       |       |rain; at 3 o’clock another light fall, and    |
 |     |       |       |from 8 o’clock in the evening till about 1    |
 |     |       |       |o’clock after midnight, but not heavy.        |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  21 |       |       |In the morning the sky cloudy, and a few drops|
 |     |       |       |of rain fell; afterwards a black thunder-storm|
 |     |       |       |gathering, but no rain.                       |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  22 |       |       |The sky tolerably clear; in the evening a     |
 |     |       |       |thunder-storm gathered from the north, but    |
 |     |       |       |passed by without bringing us any rain except |
 |     |       |       |a few drops.                                  |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  23 |       |       |Near morning rain, lasting for about an hour, |
 |     |       |       |when the clouds cleared away, but gathered    |
 |     |       |       |again in the course of the afternoon, without,|
 |     |       |       |however, bringing us any rain.                |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  24 |       |       |In the morning light clouds hovering over us, |
 |     |       |       |while the distant horizon was clear; in the   |
 |     |       |       |evening a black thunder-storm gathered from   |
 |     |       |       |east, but bringing us only a few drops of rain|
 |     |       |       |from 8.15 to 8.30 o’clock.                    |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  25 |       |       |The sky in the morning overcast, cleared up   |
 |     |       |       |about noon. Wide halo round moon in evening.  |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  26 |       |       |About 4 o’clock in the morning a light shower,|
 |     |       |       |and the sky remained thickly overcast till    |
 |     |       |       |about 8 o’clock, when the clouds dispersed,   |
 |     |       |       |and we had a fine day.                        |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  27 |       |       |The sky in the morning clear, in the afternoon|
 |     |       |       |rain-clouds from S.S.E., bringing heavy rain  |
 |     |       |       |in the evening, lasting from 5.30 till 10     |
 |     |       |       |o’clock with considerable violence for the    |
 |     |       |       |first three-quarters of an hour, then less    |
 |     |       |       |violent.                                      |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  28 |       |       |No rain.                                      |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  29 |       |       |Sky a little overcast. In the night rain,     |
 |     |       |       |lasting about one hour, and accompanied by a  |
 |     |       |       |very violent gale.                            |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  30 |       |       |No rain.                                      |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  31 |       |       |4 p.m. a thunder-storm gathered from the      |
 |     |       |       |south, but passed by towards the west, without|
 |     |       |       |bringing rain.                                |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 | Aug.|       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  1  |       |       |Weather clear.                                |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  2  |       |       |The morning not clear; afterwards the sun     |
 |     |       |       |broke forth. A little before sunset a thunder-|
 |     |       |       |storm gathered from S.S.E. and after 6.30 it  |
 |     |       |       |began raining, the rain continuing the whole  |
 |     |       |       |night, but only gently.                       |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  3  |       |       |At 5.30 a.m. it began again raining, at times |
 |     |       |       |more gently, at others with greater violence, |
 |     |       |       |but altogether only little. About 10 a.m. the |
 |     |       |       |sun broke forth.                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  4  |       |       |No rain.                                      |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  5  |       |       |About 6 p.m. a thunder-storm gathered from    |
 |     |       |       |N.E., and another from the west; both,        |
 |     |       |       |however, passed by without bringing rain.     |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  6  |       |       |In the afternoon a thunder-storm gathered,    |
 |     |       |       |bringing moderate rain, which lasted from 5.30|
 |     |       |       |to 10 p.m.                                    |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  7  |       |       |No rain.                                      |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  8  |       |       |About noon a heavy thunder-storm gathered from|
 |     |       |       |east, and broke forth at 12.30 with great     |
 |     |       |       |violence, but lasting only ten minutes; the   |
 |     |       |       |rain commenced again at 2.22, and lasted till |
 |     |       |       |2.40, accompanied by a heavy gale; in the     |
 |     |       |       |evening from 7.45 till 8.20 another heavy     |
 |     |       |       |shower.                                       |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  9  |       |       |Weather dark and rainy; a few drops of rain in|
 |     |       |       |the morning, and at 11.20 a light rain,       |
 |     |       |       |followed by warm sunshine.                    |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  10 |       |       |The rain which had lasted great part of the   |
 |     |       |       |night ceased a little before 7 o’clock in the |
 |     |       |       |morning.                                      |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  11 |       |       |About noon rain-clouds passed over our heads  |
 |     |       |       |bringing us but a few drops.                  |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  12 |       |       |In the preceding night light rain not         |
 |     |       |       |accompanied by thunder; at 10 a.m. more rain, |
 |     |       |       |and at 2 p.m. more heavy; at 4.22 another     |
 |     |       |       |fall. The sky remained overcast, with heavy   |
 |     |       |       |clouds the whole day long.                    |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  13 |       |       |A heavy shower in the morning, lasting about  |
 |     |       |       |two hours, followed by another fall of less   |
 |     |       |       |duration; the sky remained overcast almost the|
 |     |       |       |whole of the day, and in the afternoon a      |
 |     |       |       |little more rain.                             |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  14 |       |       |About noon a heavy shower, lasting half an    |
 |     |       |       |hour; more rain in the afternoon.             |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  15 |       |       |The sky the whole day thickly overcast, rain  |
 |     |       |       |falling several times.                        |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  16 |       |       |About 6 a.m. a heavy shower lasting about half|
 |     |       |       |an hour.                                      |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  17 |       |       |A fine genial day; about noon sky became      |
 |     |       |       |overcast, and at 12.30 a few drops fell, later|
 |     |       |       |in the afternoon more rain.                   |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  18 |       |       |Sky at times overcast; a little rain.         |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  19 |       |       |Rainy day; it began raining at 11 a.m. and    |
 |     |       |       |continued till 3 p.m.                         |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  20 |       |       |About 11 o’clock a little rain, round about us|
 |     |       |       |much more.                                    |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  21 |       |       |At 2 p.m. a little rain.                      |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  22 |       |       |No rain (Kúkawa).                             |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  23 |       |       |At 3 p.m. a considerable fall of rain.        |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  24 |       |       |At 4 p.m. a light rain.                       |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  25 |       |       |About noon a thunder-storm gathered, but      |
 |     |       |       |without rain.                                 |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  26 |       |       |Sky about noon overcast, but no rain.         |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  27}|       |       |                                              |
 |    }|       |       |                                              |
 |  28}|       |       |                                              |
 |    }|       |       |                                              |
 |  29}|       |       |No rain.                                      |
 |    }|       |       |                                              |
 |  30}|       |       |                                              |
 |    }|       |       |                                              |
 |  31}|       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |Sept.|       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  1  |       |       |Weather clear.                                |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  2  |       |       |About noon a thunder-storm gathering; in the  |
 |     |       |       |afternoon light rain.                         |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  3  |sunrise|  74·3 |Sky in the afternoon overcast, but no rain.   |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  4  |sunrise|  78·5 |A few drops in the morning.                   |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  5  |       |   78  |No rain.                                      |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  6  |       |  76·6 |At 10.30 a thunder-storm gathered, accompanied|
 |     |       |       |by moderate rain.                             |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  7  |       |   74  |A warm genial day.                            |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 | 8 to|       |       |No rain.                                      |
 |  10 |       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  11 |2 p.m. |   98  |At 4 p.m. a thunder-storm without rain.       |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  12 |2 p.m. |   98  |Fine.                                         |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  13 |       |       |In the afternoon a cold heavy gale.           |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  14 |1 p.m. |  94·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  15 |sunrise|   80  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  16 |       |       |Clear.                                        |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  17 |1.30   |   97  |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  18 |sunrise|   80  |Sky overcast.                                 |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  19 |sunrise|   79  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |2 p.m. |   97  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  20 |sunrise|   78  |Sky overcast; sun came forth about noon, but  |
 |     |       |       |again overcast; towards the east a thunder-   |
 |     |       |       |storm; with us but a few drops of rain.       |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  21 |sunrise|   79  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |   97  |About 5 o’clock in the afternoon a thunder-   |
 |     |p.m.   |       |storm in the evening; few drops.              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  22 |       |       |No rain.                                      |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  26 |       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  27 |       |       |A light rain early in the morning.            |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  28 |       |       |No rain.                                      |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  29 |1.30   |   97  |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  30 |sunrise|   80  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |2 p.m. | 100·3 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 | Oct.|       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  1  |       |       |No rain.                                      |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  2  |       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  3  |sunrise|   77  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |   98  |After sunset a heavy thunder-storm; only a few|
 |     |       |       |drops of rain.                                |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  4  |sunrise|  78·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  5  |sunrise|   78  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |  100  |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 | 6 to|No observation.|                                              |
 |  10 |               |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  11 |       |       |In the preceding night a thunder-storm, with  |
 |     |       |       |moderate rain.                                |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  12 |       |       |Weather clear.                                |
 | and |       |       |                                              |
 |  13 |       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  14 |       |       |At 10 a.m. a heavy gale, with a few drops of  |
 |     |       |       |rain, the rain clouds passing by towards S.E. |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  15 |sunrise|   72  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |   96  |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  16 |       |       |Sky overcast; cleared up about noon.          |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  17 |sunrise|   75  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  18 |sunrise|   72  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |   98  |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  19 |sunrise|   72  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  20 |       |       |In the evening a heavy gale, as if preceding a|
 |     |       |       |thunder-storm.                                |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  21 |       |       |In the afternoon a thunder-storm, with a light|
 |     |       |       |rain at 3 o’clock, lasting about a quarter of |
 |     |       |       |an hour, and followed by a second fall.       |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  22 |       |       |In the afternoon a thunder-storm, but without |
 |     |       |       |rain, near us.                                |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  23 |sunrise| 70-72 |}                                             |
 |     |       |       |}                                             |
 |  to |       |       |}  A strong wind all these days.              |
 |     |       |       |}                                             |
 |  31 |1.30   | 95-98 |}                                             |
 |     |p.m.   |       |}                                             |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 | Nov.|       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 | 1 to|No observation.|                                              |
 |  10 |               |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  11 |sunrise|   68  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  12 |sunrise|  67·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  13 |sunrise|   66  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  14 |sunrise|  65·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  15 |sunrise|   65  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |   89  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  16 |sunrise|  64·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   |   89  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  17 |sunrise|   63  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |18 to|No observation.|                                              |
 |  20 |               |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  21 |1.30   |   85  |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  22 |1.30   |  84·5 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 +-----+-------+-------+----------------------------------------------+


                        END OF THE THIRD VOLUME.




Transcriber's note:


  Dotless _yā’_ ى has been transcribed as _yā’_ ي.

  Changes in the ERRATA of Vol. 5 and in this volume's ERRATA have
  been done, as well as the following:

  pg viii, Changed: "Government of Wádáy — 54" to: "554"

  pg 21, Added ” after: "Kerím faidanse bágo,"

  pg 63, Changed: "way of Kúffara, They" to: "way of Kúffara. They"

  pg 125, Added “ before: "mósogá” (which is limited"

  pg 132, Changed: "greatly to their their interest" to: "greatly to
  their interest"

  caption of plate 13, Changed: "Jany. 22nd. 1853." to: "1852."

  caption of plate 15, Changed: "March 18th 1853." to: "1852."

  pg 342, Added “ before: "ngáberí,” or, as they call it"

  pg 369, Changed: "a green open depresssion clad" to: "depression"

  pg 380, Changed: "occupied a greal deal of my time" to: "great"

  pg 421, Changed: "At length in the afternooon" to: "afternoon"

  pg 460, Changed: "August 15th." to: "August 13th."

  *pg 498, Changed: "Kishímuwa كسموه (returning westward)." to: كشموه

  †pg 500, Changed: "النحر المسمي بِمَلجَرا" to: "النهر"

  pg 501, Changed: "written السِيمِ, a a little further on" to:
  ", a little"

  *pg 506, Changed: "Sitati (probably Shitáti) سِظَطِ" to: "سِطَطِ"

  pg 507, Changed: "Sugurti ariving about the" to: "arriving"

  †pg 508, Changed: "يسير بطرف النحر ثَادِ" to: "النهر"

  *pg 510, Changed: "From Ngalá to Tentebú تَنَتبُوا." to: "تَنْتبُوا"

  pg 511,, footnote 89, Changed: "According to Imám Ah´med" to: "Áhmed"

  †pg 514, footnote 92, Changed: "كانت ماصفة بالنحر من بلد كَلُم" to:
  "بالنهر"

  pg 517, footnote 97, Omitted _maddah_ above "من"

  *pg 520, Changed: "ولولا دلك ما" to: "ذلك"

  *pg 520, Changed: "اعطاهم شًبرا من" to: "شبراً"

  pg 585, Changed: "according to tradition, ninty-nine" to:
  "ninety-nine"

  pg 586, Changed: "camels, the Jåátena, the Hamíde" to: "Jʿaátena"

  pg 599, Changed: "the principa market-place of Dam" to: "principal"

  pg 604, Changed: "_according to Agîd Búrku_" to: "_Agíd_"

  *: changes based on German edition.

  †: changes based on, but not listed in ERRATA.

  Minor changes in punctuation have been done silently.

  Other spelling inconsistencies have been left unchanged.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRAVELS AND DISCOVERIES IN NORTH AND CENTRAL AFRICA, VOL. 3 (OF 5) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


