The Project Gutenberg eBook of Minerals in rock sections
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Minerals in rock sections
        The practical methods of identifying minerals in rock sections with the microscope, especially arranged for students in technical and scientific schools

Author: Lea McIlvaine Luquer

Release date: May 2, 2025 [eBook #76003]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: D. Van Nostrand Company, Inc, 1913

Credits: Charlene Taylor, Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MINERALS IN ROCK SECTIONS ***





                       MINERALS IN ROCK SECTIONS
THE PRACTICAL METHODS OF IDENTIFYING MINERALS IN ROCK SECTIONS WITH THE
                               MICROSCOPE
  ESPECIALLY ARRANGED FOR STUDENTS IN TECHNICAL AND SCIENTIFIC SCHOOLS


                                   BY

                   LEA McILVAINE LUQUER, C.E., PH.D.

                _Late Assistant Professor of Mineralogy,
                  Columbia University, New York City_

                        _FOURTH REVISED EDITION_

[Illustration: [Logo]]

                                NEW YORK
                     D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY, INC.
                           250 FOURTH AVENUE




                            Copyright, 1913
                        BY LEA MCILVAINE LUQUER


                          LANCASTER PRESS, INC
                             LANCASTER, PA.




                PREFACE TO FOURTH REVISED EDITION, 1913.


This edition is practically that of 1908, with necessary minor revisions
and corrections, especially the data referring to indices of refraction
and strength of double refraction. The values of the refractive indices
α and γ are recorded as well as the mean values. References are also
given to “The Methods of Petrographic-Microscopic Research,” by F. E.
Wright, 1912, for exact (quantitative) methods of determining crystal
constants.

                                                        LEA MCI. LUQUER.

  DEPARTMENT OF MINERALOGY,
      COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY, NEW YORK, May, 1913.




                PREFACE TO THIRD REVISED EDITION, 1908.


The 1908 edition is essentially the same as that of 1905; the only
changes being in the nature of corrections, and the addition of a brief
description of the Schrœder van der Kolk method of determining
refractive indices and also an abbreviated diagram for determining
triclinic feldspars in sections showing both Carlsbad and Albite
twinning. The Naumann symbols for crystal forms have also been omitted.

                                                        LEA MCI. LUQUER.

  DEPARTMENT OF MINERALOGY,
      COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY, NEW YORK, April, 1908.




                   PREFACE TO REVISED EDITION, 1905.


In preparing the revised edition, Chapters I. and IV. have been
rewritten and enlarged and the part relating to the determination of the
plagioclases has been greatly amplified. Many additions have also been
made to Chapter III. and the Becke method, for the determination of the
relative indices of refraction of minerals, has been given in detail.

Some new and useful tables have been introduced; as tables of refractive
indices (mean) and double refraction (maximum). A diagram has also been
added, showing the relation existing between strength of double
refraction, interference colors and thickness of section.

Professor E. Weinschenk’s admirable text-book, “Die Gesteinsbildenden
Mineralien”, Freiburg, 1901, has been specially referred to, and the
tables of refractive indices and double refraction have been compiled
from Weinschenk’s new Tables.

Many new cuts have been added, among them being semi-ideal drawings,
showing typical outlines of crystal sections, cleavage, optical
orientation, etc. In describing the “Usual Appearance in Sections” of a
mineral, it is of course only possible to mention the usual crystal form
in which the mineral occurs in a rock. The crystal may be cut in any way
by the plane of the section; but a general knowledge of the crystal
forms will furnish an idea as to the outline, etc., that the mineral may
show in the section.

                                                        LEA MCI. LUQUER.

  DEPARTMENT OF MINERALOGY,
      COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY, NEW YORK, July, 1905.




                    PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION, 1898.


The identification of minerals in rock sections with the microscope,
including as it does a knowledge of optical mineralogy, is often
difficult for beginners. This may be due to the fact that most of the
publications on this subject are quite elaborate in their nature and in
either French or German. While detailed descriptions are very necessary,
and, in fact, indispensable for advanced investigation, they are apt to
prove cumbersome and confusing at first. For these reasons this
text-book has been prepared by the writer, with a view of putting before
the student only those facts which are absolutely necessary for the
proper recognition and identification of the common minerals in rock
sections. The footnotes refer the student to standard publications, in
which are given details of the methods and investigations outlined in
the text. An elementary knowledge of crystallography and mineralogy is
almost indispensable and is here assumed.

The microscopic and optical characters of the minerals are recorded in
the usual order in which they would be observed with a petrographical
microscope. Nearly all the rock-forming minerals become transparent in
thin sections; but when opaque, attention is called to the fact and the
characters are recorded as seen with incident light. White light is
assumed to be used, unless otherwise stated. The interference colors
recorded in all cases are those given by very thin sections of 0.03 mm.
in thickness.

The order followed for the minerals is essentially that of Rosenbusch
(based on the symmetry of the crystalline form), with a few exceptions
made for convenience, such as placing pyrrhotite after pyrite and
zoisite after epidote. The statements regarding the occurrences of
minerals in the common rock-types have been taken mainly from Les
Minéraux des Roches, by Lévy and Lacroix.

The terms axes and directions of elasticity, used throughout this book,
are very commonly employed in petrographical literature of the present
time. These axes and directions should probably more correctly be called
axes and directions of vibration or extinction. The reasons for or
against the elastic condition of the “ether” are of more interest,
however, to the physicist than to the petrographer.

An optical scheme is appended, with the minerals grouped according to
their common optical characters.

The writer’s thanks are due to Dr. A. J. Moses, Professor of Mineralogy,
and to Mr. J. F. Kemp, Professor of Geology, for kind suggestions
offered during the preparation of this book.

                                                        LEA MCI. LUQUER.

  DEPARTMENT OF MINERALOGY,
      COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY, N. Y. CITY, October, 1898.




                           TABLE OF CONTENTS


                                                                   PAGE.
 CONVENTIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS                                        ix

                               CHAPTER I.
               INTRODUCTORY OPTICS FOR OPTICAL MINERALOGY.
 Ordinary Light.—Plane Polarized Light.—Effects Produced by
   Crystal Sections on Transmitted Light.—Amorphous
   Bodies.—Isotropic Crystals.—Anisotropic Crystals.—Double
   Refraction.—Uniaxial Crystals.—Biaxial Crystals.—Principal
   Vibration Directions.—Axial Angle.—Dispersion.                      1

                               CHAPTER II.
                       PETROGRAPHICAL MICROSCOPE.
 Reflector.—Polarizer.—Nicol Prism.—Condensing Lens.—Rotating
   Stage.—Objectives.—Analyzer.—Eye-pieces.                            7

                              CHAPTER III.
    INVESTIGATION OF MICROSCOPIC AND OPTICAL CHARACTERS OF MINERALS.
 Opaque Minerals.
 Transparent Minerals:
 With transmitted light: _Form_, _Color_, _Index of Refraction and
   Relief_, _Becke Method_, _van der Kolk Method_, _Cleavage_,
   _Fracture_, _Inclusions_.
 With polarized transmitted light: _Pleochroism_.
 With crossed nicols: _Isotropic Character_, _Anisotropic
   Character_, _Interference Colors_, _Extinction_ and _Extinction
   Angles_, _Vibration Directions of Faster and Slower Rays_,
   _Order of Interference Color_, _Strength of Double Refraction_,
   _Determination of Minerals and Thickness of Section_,
   _Structure_.
 With convergent light: _Uniaxial Interference Figures_ and
   _Optical Character_, _Biaxial Interference Figures_ and
   _Optical Character_, _Determination of Axial Angle_,
   _Distinctions between Orthorhombic, Monoclinic and Triclinic
   Sections_.
 Resumé of Uses of Parallel and Convergent Polarized Light.           13

                               CHAPTER IV.
             MICROSCOPIC AND OPTICAL CHARACTERS OF MINERALS.
 Amorphous Minerals.—Isometric Minerals.—Tetragonal
   Minerals.—Hexagonal Minerals.—Orthorhombic Minerals.—Monoclinic
   Minerals.—Triclinic Minerals.—Mineral Aggregates.                  51

                               CHAPTER V.
                     METHODS OF PREPARING SECTIONS.
 Cutting and Grinding Machines.—Saws.—Cutting.—Grinding. Plates or
   Laps.—Cementing.—Grinding.—Mounting.—Cleaning and
   Finishing.—Convenient Apparatus for work.                         117

                               CHAPTER VI.
                     CHEMICAL AND MECHANICAL TESTS.
 Chemical Tests on Crystal in Section: _Carbonates_, _Gelatinizing
   Silica_.—Etched Figures.—Heating Section to Redness.—Methods of
   Isolating Crystals or Fragments for Testing: _Specific Gravity
   Separation_, _Electro-magnetic Separation_, _Chemical
   Separation_.—Micro-Chemical Reactions: _Borichy’s Method_,
   _Behren’s Method_, _Special Tests_.                               129

                                APPENDIX.
 Brief Scheme of Classification into Systems by Optical
   Determinations.—Tables of Double Refraction (maximum) and
   Indices of Refraction (mean).—Diagram, showing relation between
   strength of double refraction, interference colors and
   thickness of section.—Order of Consolidation of the Constituent
   Minerals in Plutonic Rocks.—Optical Scheme with Special
   Introduction.                                                     141

 INDEX.                                                              149




                     CONVENTIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS.


a = The assumed direction of the ether vibrations of the fastest ray.

b = The assumed direction of the ether vibrations of the ray with
intermediate velocity.

c = The assumed direction of the ether vibrations of the slowest ray.

In some American Text-Books (by Iddings, Winchell & Phillips) a = X, b =
Y and c = Z.

a′ = The assumed direction of the ether vibrations of the faster ray in
the given section.[1]

c′ = The assumed direction of the ether vibrations of the slower ray in
the given section.

(+) = Optical character positive.

(−) = Optical character negative.

|| = Parallel to.

(γ − α) = The difference between the indices of refraction of the
slowest and fastest rays, respectively, transmitted by the crystal, and
indicates in decimals the relative strength of the double refraction.

_n′_ = The mean index of refraction;[2] hence

                    = (α + β + γ)/3  or (ε + 2ω)/3.

α = Index of refraction of the fastest ray.

γ = Index of refraction of the slowest ray.

_a_, _b_ and _ć_ relate to the crystallographic axes commonly
represented by these letters.

2_E_ = the apparent axial angle measured in air, 2_V_ being the true
angle.

_Bx_{a·}_ = The acute bisectrix.

_Bx_{c·}_ = The obtuse bisectrix.

_Ax. pl._ = The axial plane, _i. e._, the plane containing the two
“optic axes.”

ELONGATION relates to the appreciable extension often shown by the
crystal section. A crystal of long prismatic habit, cut about parallel
to the _ć_ axis, would show marked elongation; while a tabular crystal
(like mica) would show elongation if cut at right angles to the tabular
faces. At times, of course, no elongation is appreciable, as in the case
of granular or broken crystals or where the cross-section is essentially
square or octagonal. Very often the relation of the cleavage is given to
the elongation and also to the directions a′ and c′, which makes it
possible to test for a′ and c′ even when no marked elongation can be
observed.




                       MINERALS IN ROCK SECTIONS.




                               CHAPTER I.
              INTRODUCTORY OPTICS FOR OPTICAL MINERALOGY.


The object of this introduction is merely to give a practical discussion
of elementary optics, as applied to optical mineralogy,[3] and no
elaborate discussion of this important subject will be attempted. The
explanations will be made as simple as possible, and, in most cases,
only the optical phenomena will be described without entering into a
theoretical discussion as to the cause of these phenomena.

_Light_[4] may be regarded as transmitted in straight lines by
vibrations of the “ether,” taking place at right angles to the direction
of transmission.

_Ordinary light_ is light with the ether vibrations in all possible
directions, the path described by any particle of ether constantly
changing.

_Plane polarized light_ is simply light with the ether vibrations all
_parallel_ to one plane passing through the direction of transmission.

By experiment it has been proved that there exists a very close relation
between the optical properties of crystals and their other physical
properties, such as form, color, transmission of heat, etc. Therefore it
is often possible, by a careful optical investigation of a crystal
section, to determine important crystallographic facts, even in the
absence of any distinct outline.


         The Effects Produced by Crystals on Transmitted Light.

Consider that a series of optical tests are made on all possible
sections[5] of crystals in the six systems, and the manner in which
these crystals affect transmitted light ascertained.

▄Isotropic Crystals▄: It will be found that all sections of _Isometric_
crystals transmit light with equal velocity in all directions; that is,
the crystals are optically equivalent in all directions and, hence, can
produce no double refraction.[6] In these crystals any section, however
cut, will transmit all the rays of light, incident to the surface at
right angles, with no change.[7] The same is true of _Amorphous_ bodies,
glass, etc., unless they have been subjected to strains or peculiar
conditions during cooling. A _single image_ is seen through these
isotropic sections.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 1.
]

▄Anisotropic Crystals▄: It will also be found that nearly all sections
(the exceptions being given later) of crystals in the remaining five
systems, produce quite a different effect on transmitted light. In these
crystals the velocity of transmission of light varies with the
_vibration direction_ of the light rays. This property, called _double
refraction_,[8] seems to result from the power of resolving a ray of
ordinary light, with ether vibrations in all directions, into two rays
with ether vibrations in planes at right angles to each other; the two
resulting rays traversing, usually, divergent paths in passing through
the section.

The mineral calcite (Iceland spar) exhibits this property to a marked
degree, and in certain sections will show a _double image_, Fig. 1. That
the vibration directions of the two doubly refracted rays are in planes
at right angles to each other, can be easily proved by using a nicol
prism.[9] In most cases the separation of the two images is so slight as
not to be perceived by the eye, and the practical method of testing a
crystal section for double refraction will be given later, p. 27.

The crystals that show double refraction are further divided into two
groups, _uniaxial_ and _biaxial_:

(1) ▄Uniaxial▄, or those in which the optical characters are symmetrical
to _one_ direction, called an optic axis. This _optic axis_ is the
crystallographic vertical axis, _ć_; and parallel to this direction
there is a single value only for the light velocity and no double
refraction takes place.[10] Hence any section parallel to the base (001)
being at right angles to the optic axis, acts like a section of an
isotropic crystal and transmits all the perpendicularly incident rays of
light with no change. In any other section double refraction takes place
and it can be proved by using a nicol prism that the two rays have ether
vibrations, one in the plane passing through the incident ray and the
_ć_ axis of the crystal, and the other in a plane at right angles
thereto, hence in the basal plane. This latter ray, which has a constant
velocity, is called the _ordinary ray O_; and the other ray, with
velocity varying with the inclination of the section to _ć_, is called
the _extraordinary ray E_.[11]

The vibration directions are either parallel or symmetrical to cleavage
cracks and crystal outlines. In sections parallel to the optic axis, the
two doubly refracted rays have the maximum difference in velocity of
transmission, and hence their vibration directions are called _principal
vibration directions_[12] and the plane containing them an _optical
principal section_. In these sections the refractive index of the ray
vibrating parallel to _ć_ (extraordinary ray) is denoted by ε, and that
of the ray vibrating parallel to the basal plane (ordinary ray) by
ω.[13]

To this group belong all _Tetragonal_ and _Hexagonal_ crystals.

(2) ▄Biaxial▄, or those in which the optical characters are no longer
symmetrical to an optic axis but to three planes at right angles to each
other (for monochromatic light). These crystals have, however (for light
of each wave-length and for each temperature), _two_ directions parallel
to which there is a single value only for the light velocity and hence
no double refraction. These directions are called “_optic axes_.”[14] An
investigation of these biaxial crystals shows that of all the rays
traversing these crystals there are three rays which advance with
maximum, minimum and some intermediate velocity. The vibration
directions of these three rays are called the _principal vibration
directions_ and are at right angles to each other (being the
intersections of the three planes above referred to). The direction of
ether vibration of the fastest ray is denoted by a, of the slowest ray
by c, and of the ray advancing with intermediate velocity by b.[15] Each
of the three planes, containing two principal vibration directions, is
called an _optical principal section_. The index of refraction of the a
ray is denoted by α, of the b ray by β, and of the c ray by γ.

To this group belong all crystals in the _Orthorhombic_, _Monoclinic_
and _Triclinic_ systems.

In the _Orthorhombic_ system, the principal vibration directions are
parallel to the crystallographic axes; hence all pinacoidal sections
contain two of these principal vibration directions. In all sections
parallel to the three crystallographic axes _ă_, _ƃ_ and _ć_, the
vibration directions are parallel or symmetrical to cleavage cracks,
crystal edges, etc.

In the _Monoclinic_ system, one principal vibration direction is
parallel to the ortho axis _ƃ_, the other principal vibration directions
are in the plane of symmetry, at right angles to _ƃ_, but are not
parallel with either the vertical axis _ć_ or the clino axis _á_. In
clino pinacoid (010) sections the principal vibration directions will
make definite angles with crystallographic lines, such as cleavages or
crystal outlines. These angles are called _extinction angles_. They will
vary, in this system, with reference to the direction of the _ć_ axis
from a maximum on the clino pinacoid (010) to 0° on the ortho pinacoid
(100), when the vibration directions of the two doubly refracted rays
will be parallel and at right angles to the plane of symmetry. Hence the
vibration directions are parallel or symmetrical to cleavages, edges,
etc., _only_ in sections parallel to the ortho axis _ƃ_; but in all
other sections are unsymmetrical.

In the _Triclinic_ system, the principal vibration directions are not
parallel to the crystallographic axes, and there is no definite relation
between these directions and the crystallographic axes; hence in all
possible sections there will be extinction angles.

In all biaxial crystals the two _optic axes_ are inclined to each other,
making what is called the _axial angle, 2V_, the apparent angle measured
in air being _2E_. The optic axes lie in the plane, called the _axial
plane_, which contains the principal vibration directions a and c. The
axial angles are bisected by these principal vibration directions, the
direction bisecting the acute angle being called the _acute bisectrix,
Bx_{a}_, and that bisecting the obtuse angle the _obtuse bisectrix,
Bx_{o}_. An approximate idea of the value of the axial angle can be
obtained by the use of the petrographical microscope, as described
later, p. 47. The axial angle is often a convenient distinction between
such minerals as muscovite and biotite.

The axial angle will vary with the temperature and with light of
different wave-length or color, and this variation is called
_dispersion_ of the optic axes. Dispersion of the principal vibration
directions also takes place in monoclinic and triclinic crystals, but
can be usually disregarded.

In closing it is very important to remember that any section of an
anisotropic crystal (not at right angles to an optic axis) will always
transmit two rays of light with different velocities and with vibration
directions in planes at right angles to each other. Isometric crystals,
of course, produce no double refraction of light.




                              CHAPTER II.
                   THE PETROGRAPHICAL MICROSCOPE.[16]


The _petrographical microscope_ is essentially an ordinary
microscope[17] with the following important additional equipment. It
must be provided with: 1° a _polarizer_ (a piece of apparatus for giving
polarized light) placed below the stage; 2° an _analyzer_ (a piece of
apparatus for analyzing the rays of light after they have passed through
the polarizer and transparent section) placed between the objective and
the eye; 3° a _stage rotating_ about an axis which is the line of sight
of the microscope. A convenient type of microscope is that made by
Seibert of Wetzlar (No. 11 _a_), Fig. 2.

The reflector _a_ is usually fitted with a plane mirror on one side, and
a parabolic mirror on the other. The plane mirror should be used with
sunlight, and the parabolic mirror with artificial light, in order to
make the rays of light as nearly parallel as possible.

The _polarizer_ is in most cases a nicol prism, set in a suitable frame
_b_, and made as follows:

For the _nicol prism_ “a cleavage rhombohedron of calcite (the variety
Iceland spar is universally used in consequence of its transparency) is
obtained, having four large and two small rhombohedral faces opposite
each other. In place of the latter planes, two new surfaces are cut,
making angles of 68° (instead of 71°) with the obtuse vertical edges;
these then form the terminal faces of the prism. In addition to this,
the prism is cut through in the direction HH′, Fig. 3, the parts then
polished and cemented together again with Canada balsam. A ray of light,
_ab_, entering the prism, is divided into two rays polarized at right
angles to each other. One of these, _bc_, on meeting the layer of balsam
(whose refractive index is less than that of the ray _bc_), suffers
total reflection, and is deflected against the blackened sides of the
prism and extinguished. The other, _bd_, passes through and emerges at
_e_, a completely polarized ray of light, that is, a ray with vibrations
in one direction only, and that the direction of the shorter diagonal of
the prism.”[18] The vertical plane through the shorter diagonal may be
called the _plane_ of _vibration_[19] of the nicol.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 2.
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 3.
]

The polarizer must be below the stage _c_, and is generally adjusted so
as to have its plane of vibration parallel to the N. and S. cross-wire
in the eye-piece _o_. It is important to know the direction of the plane
of vibration of the polarizer or lower nicol, as we can then determine,
when absorption of light occurs in a mineral, the direction in this
mineral parallel to which the absorbed rays are vibrating. The polarizer
slides in an outer shell or frame, and, by means of a lever _d_, can
easily be raised or lowered.

A convenient test for the location of this plane of vibration of the
polarizer is as follows: Make use of a section of biotite, cut at right
angles to the basal plane, hence showing the basal cleavage cracks.
Biotite has the property of absorbing to a marked extent the light
vibrating parallel to these cleavage cracks. Rotate such a section on
the stage of the microscope until the position of maximum darkness is
reached and when such is the case the plane of vibration of the
polarizer must be parallel to these cleavage cracks.

On the top of the nicol is placed the _condensing lens_ for getting
_convergent_ light, and the adjustments are so arranged that when the
nicol is up as far as it will go, the condensing lens[20] is brought
almost in contact with the lower surface of the transparent section
resting on the stage.

The _rotating_ circular _stage e_ is supported on a suitable frame _c_,
and arranged so that its axis of rotation coincides with the line of
sight of the microscope. The stage is graduated, and, by means of an
index fixed to the frame, the angular rotation can always be obtained.
It is also provided with two adjusting screws[21] _f_, by means of which
the axis of rotation can be accurately centered.

The method of centering is as follows: Bring some prominent mark in the
section exactly in coincidence with the intersection of the cross-wires
in the eye-piece. Rotate the stage 180°, and correct one half the error
by means of the centering screws, and the other half by moving the
section on the stage. Check the result by rotating the stage 180° again,
and if necessary repeat the corrections in the same way until the
adjustment is satisfactory.

The _objective_[22] _g_ screws into the collar _h_, which has a slot
_k_, in the upper portion, for the introduction of a sensitive color
plate, a one quarter undulation mica plate or a quartz wedge.[23]

The slot _k_ is so arranged that, when the sensitive color plates are
introduced, the vibration directions of these plates will make an angle
of 45° with the planes of vibration of the crossed nicols, and the
interference color will thus be at its maximum intensity.

A revolving _nose-piece_ is sometimes used which can be attached to the
collar _h_ and arranged to carry two or three objectives, which can thus
be very quickly brought into position for use. This is convenient in
passing rapidly from observations with parallel light to observations
with convergent light, which must be made with a high power objective.
The difficulty is that recentering is generally required. The modern
microscopes are provided with a clip for holding the objectives, instead
of the screw-thread collar _h_.

The _analyzer_[24] or upper nicol is contained in the frame _l_, which
is arranged so as to slide in and out of the tube of the microscope.

The plane of vibration of the analyzer is fixed by the instrument maker
so as to be at right angles to the plane of vibration of the polarizer,
hence in the Seibert microscope parallel to the E. and W. cross-wire in
the eye-piece. Consequently when the frame _l_ is pushed into the tube,
the analyzer is introduced in the line of sight between the objective
and the observer’s eye, with its plane of vibration at right angles to
the plane of vibration of the polarizer; that is the nicols are crossed.
When the nicols are crossed, if they are properly adjusted, no light can
pass through to the eye and the field of view should be dark.[25]

The _eye-piece_[26] _o_ fits into the top of the tube, and, by means of
a little projecting piece fitting into a slot in the frame, can always
be adjusted so as to have its cross-wires parallel to the planes of
vibration of the two nicols.[25]

Some instruments are provided with an additional slot in the tube
between the analyzer and the eye-piece for the introduction of a
Bertrand lens, which is used to magnify the interference figures
produced by convergent light.

The first approximate focusing is made by the screw _m_, and the fine
adjustment by the screw _n_.

In focusing always start with the objective very near the section, and
move it away until the right focus is obtained. Never move down towards
the section in obtaining the focus, as there is danger then of striking
the objective against the section.

For cleaning the microscope xylol can be used, as it will not injure the
lacquer. To lubricate any of the parts use a small quantity of soft
tallow, good clock oil or paraffin oil.




                              CHAPTER III.
    INVESTIGATION OF MICROSCOPIC AND OPTICAL CHARACTERS OF MINERALS.


▄Characters of Opaque Minerals▄, observed by _reflected_ light.

The minerals which remain perfectly opaque in thin rock sections have
usually metallic lustre and are very minute in size, as is the case with
the iron ores.

When the metallic minerals of a rock specimen are distinctly seen with
the unaided eye, it is rarely necessary to make a section for their
determination, as this can more easily be done by any of the well known
blowpipe methods.

Form, Lustre, Color, Cleavage, etc., are recognized in the same way as
in the case of macroscopic specimens. In order to make the observations
by reflected light alone, the beam of light from the reflector-mirror
must be cut off by holding the hand over the mirror or by moving the
mirror.

▄Characters of Transparent Minerals▄, observed by _transmitted_ light.
The petrographical microscope for these observations is supposed to be
in the condition of an ordinary microscope, both nicols being out of the
field and a strong beam of light coming up through the transparent
section from the reflector below.

The characters are considered in the order in which they would most
naturally appear to the observer during a complete investigation with
the microscope.[27]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 4.—Idiomorphic augite crystals in camptonite. The section is
    about at right angles to the vertical axis _ć_, and shows the
    intersecting cleavages parallel to the prism of 87° 06′. Keene
    Valley, N. Y.
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 5.—Allotriomorphic quartz _q_, showing no “relief,” plagioclase
    _p_ and decomposed feldspar _o_ in granite. As seen with crossed
    nicols.
]

(_a_) ▄Form.▄[28] _Crystals bounded by planes_, _i. e._, crystals that
have formed when conditions were favorable for complete development.
Such crystals are often called _idiomorphic_ or _automorphic_, see Fig.
4. Crystals that are large in comparison with other accompanying
crystals may be called _Phenocrysts_. Of course crystals, which are not
wholly contained within the rock section, will only show the outline of
the bounding planes cut by this particular section. In some cases, by a
careful study of the outline of several sections of the same mineral and
by a measurement of the angles, it is possible to determine the common
“crystallographic forms” of the mineral. Very misleading outlines may,
however, be observed; as for example the triangular outline of a section
of a cube, with the corner truncated. For measuring the angles have the
stage accurately centered, then bring the vertex of the angle to be
measured to the intersection of the cross-wires in the eye-piece. Bring
one of the sides in coincidence with one of the cross-wires. Note the
reading of the graduated circle and rotate the section until the other
side is in coincidence with the same wire. Take the reading again and
the difference will be the angle required.

_Crystals without bounding planes_, whose surfaces are more or less
determined by those of adjacent crystals. Such crystals are frequently
called _allotriomorphic_ or _xenomorphic_,[29] see Fig. 5. This
allotriomorphic form must not be confounded with the worn or rounded
boundaries of the component grains in clastic rocks.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 6.—Corroded sanidine crystal in perlite.
]

_Corroded Crystals_,[30] whose fretted outline is undoubtedly due to
corrosive action of the magma, see Fig. 6.

_Broken or Strained Crystals._ In some cases what were formerly larger
individuals have been broken or shattered by dynamic action into much
smaller fragments, see Fig. 7, showing crushed rim of fragments
surrounding feldspar “auge.” In other cases an actual bending or
distortion of the crystal has taken place, and again sometimes the
effect of mechanical stress is only shown by the so-called “wavy”
extinction. See p. 31 and Fig. 7, showing a carlsbad twin of feldspar
that has been bent and therefore shows marked “wavy” extinction.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 7.—Orthoclase “auge” (Carlsbad twin), showing bending and “wavy”
    extinction, surrounded by crushed rim of mineral fragments. As seen
    with crossed nicols. “Augen-gneiss,” Bedford, N. Y.—B. 13.
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 8.—Crystallites and Microlites _a_. Skeleton Forms _b_.
]

_Crystallites_, in general those incipient forms of crystals which have
not yet reached a stage of development sufficient to show double
refraction, see Fig. 8, _a_. Quite a number of names are used to
describe the different forms that occur.

_Microlites_, more or less completely defined microscopic crystals,
which usually show double refraction, but cannot be always specifically
determined, see Fig. 8, _a_.

_Skeleton Forms_, resulting from rapid cooling of the magma occur in
some lavas, see Fig. 8, _b_.

(_b_) ▄Color.▄ It must be remembered that the colors observed are always
due to transmitted light and may be called “_absorption tints_.”
Minerals which in hand specimens are opaque are often colored in
sections; and minerals which are commonly colored may appear colorless
in sections. At times color may be given to a section simply by the
presence of a great number of minute inclusions.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 9.—Olivine crystal in basalt showing “high relief” and cleavage.
]

(_c_) ▄Index of Refraction.▄ _n_ = sin _i_/sin _r_. This can be
approximately determined by the appearance of the surface and outline of
a mineral, that is by its _relief_. The descriptive terms are of course
relative, but in common practice minerals are said to have _medium_
refraction when the refractive index is between that of balsam (1.54)
and that of calcite (1.60), _strong_ refraction when higher than 1.60
and _weak_ refraction when lower than 1.54. In the case of uniaxial and
biaxial minerals the mean value of the indices of refraction is used.

A mineral which has _strong refraction_ appears to have _high relief_,
_i. e._, distinct dark contours and a rough or “shagreened” surface,[31]
which has bright illumination and appears to stand out above the
surfaces of the surrounding minerals with weaker refraction, see Fig. 9.

A mineral with _medium refraction_ does not show any _relief_, hence has
a smooth surface and no dark contours, see Fig. 5.

A mineral with _weak refraction_ may also appear to have a rough
surface, but not so marked as in the case of a mineral with very strong
refraction, due to the smaller contrast in indices between the mineral
and balsam.

The practical way of testing for the approximate index of refraction or
the _relief_ of a mineral is to make use of the lens for convergent
light, which is placed on top of the lower nicol immediately below the
section.

By lowering[32] the lens the character of the relief of a mineral
section is made very apparent.

In order to become familiar with the way in which the “relief” or
appearance of the surface indicates the strength of the refractive
index, the student may use a long glass slide on which are embedded in
balsam (1.54) small fragments of different minerals, for example:
Sodalite (1.483), orthoclase (1.523), quartz (1.547), topaz (1.620),
hornblende (1.631), augite (1.70), epidote (1.751), zircon (1.95) and
rutile (2.712).

Determinations of refractive indices in sections by the methods of
Chaulnes,[33] Sorby,[34] or total reflection are accompanied by many
difficulties and may fail to give satisfactory results. The Becke
method, however, often furnishes a convenient means of determining the
_relative_ values of the refractive indices of adjoining minerals or of
minerals embedded in balsam. This is of especial service when one of the
minerals is known and hence its refractive index.


                           BECKE METHOD.[35]

Suppose two adjoining minerals, in a thin rock section, to be singly
refracting and to have their plane of contact vertical, _i. e._,
parallel to the optic axis of the microscope.

Let _A_ and _C_, Fig. 10, be two such sections with the plane of contact
_OO′_ vertical, _A_ having a lower refractive index than _C_, and
consider only the direction of the rays within the section, neglecting
the refractive effect of the air, glass and balsam.

A beam of transmitted light contains besides normal rays convergent
rays, which pass through the section as indicated in Fig. 10. Consider
now the cone of light rays _GBI_. The rays _O′G_ on meeting the plane of
contact _OO′_ will be somewhat concentrated and deflected by the higher
refractive index of _C_ and will continue as the cone _EF_. Some rays as
_O′H_ will, on meeting the contact plane, be totally reflected and will
continue as the cone _OE_, while the rest of the rays _HI_ will be
dispersed and deflected by the weaker refractive index of _A_,
continuing as the cone _OD_. Hence, more light rays will emerge on the
side of the contact plane where the substance of higher refractive index
lies, and there will be a concentration of illumination on this side
producing the so-called “bright line.”

[Illustration:

  FIG. 10.
]

In practically making the test with a petrographical microscope remove
the polarizer, analyzer and condensing lens,[36] and introduce below the
section a small light-stop, to reduce in size the cone of incident
light.[37] The adapter, holding this light-stop, should be adjustable so
that the stop can be lowered sufficiently to produce the best results.
The smaller the contrast between the indices of refraction the smaller
the incident cone of light should be, as best results are obtained when
this cone is little larger than twice _O′H_, Fig. 10, all the _O′H_ rays
being then totally reflected. The more of the _HI_ rays that pass
through, the brighter will be the _OD_ cone and the less sharp the
contrast in illumination. A high power objective[38] should be used, as
those with small aperture and great focal length do not give good
results. Focus on the dividing plane and adjust until equal illumination
is observed on both sides and the trace of the plane resembles a fine
thread, the focal plane being at _MN_. Then _raise_ the _objective_
slightly, thus moving the focal plane to _ST_, when a _bright line_ or
band will appear on the side of the _stronger refracting_ substance, the
width of the line depending on the contrast between _n_ and _n′_,
becoming narrower as _n_ and _n′_ approach each other in value. On
raising the objective still further the line broadens and finally
disappears. If the objective is lowered instead of raised the reverse
phenomenon will take place, the bright line appearing on the side of the
weaker refracting substance.[39] When the indices are nearly the same a
bright line will appear on both sides and it is important then to make
the cone of incident light as small as possible and to select the
_brighter_ line.

With doubly refracting minerals, each set of doubly refracted rays would
suffer total reflection under somewhat different conditions and there
would be no one point _B_ (as in isotropic minerals) where no bright
lines would appear. However, if the cone of incident light is small
enough in diameter, the test will be practically obtained as described.
The Becke test can often be made with a medium power objective[40]
without removing the polarizer and condensing lens, provided the
condensing lens be lowered sufficiently. It may also prove convenient to
turn the reflector a little sideways.

The thinner the section the more distinct will be the phenomenon. The
contact plane must be clear and not coated with opaque decomposition
products.

When the plane of contact _OO′_ deviates considerably from parallelism
with the optic axis of the microscope a disturbance of the phenomenon
may be expected and no satisfactory results be obtained. In general
under these conditions the “bright line,” both on raising and lowering
the objective, will remain on the side of the overlapping substance,
without regard to the relative values of the indices.

The refractive index of the cementing material should not be very much
lower than that of either of the thin sections, as the result would then
be to disperse the emerging rays too much and dim the effect. In the
case of distinguishing between minerals of high refractive power, such
as augite and garnet, methyliodide is recommended instead of balsam.

In the case of doubly refracting crystals, the lower nicol (polarizer)
must be retained, if it is desired to obtain the relative refractive
index of one of the two rays, either with respect to the balsam or to a
ray in an adjoining crystal with a parallel vibration direction. For
determining vibration directions of rays and the faster and slower rays
in two adjoining sections see later, pp. 31 and 33.

The method of _Schrœder van der Kolk_[41] can also be employed for the
same purpose as the Becke test. The ordinary objective (Seibert No. II)
is used, and the method essentially consists of darkening a portion of
the field by means of the finger or a plate inserted below the
polarizer. The condenser lens must be lowered beyond the sharp focus of
the edge of the shadow (on raising the condenser the following phenomena
are _reversed_). As the shadow approaches the contact between two
minerals a bright line will appear on the edge of the “far” mineral, if
its refractive index is the higher, and a dark line on this same edge if
its index is lower than that of the “near” mineral. The indices of the
two rays in doubly refracting minerals must be determined by the aid of
the polarizer.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 11.—Biotite, showing perfect cleavage, in rhyolite.
]

(_d_) ▄Cleavage▄,[42] which appears as more or less distinct and regular
lines or cracks, see Figs. 11 and 12. These cleavage cracks may be
parallel or intersect, depending on the position of the section relative
to the cleavage planes of the crystal.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 12.—Augite _a_, showing good cleavage, and plagioclase _p_ in
    diabase. The plagioclase shows “polysynthetic” twinning between
    crossed nicols.
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 13.—Garnet in mica schist, showing fracture. Franconia, N. Y.
]

Cleavage is sometimes best observed by slightly lowering the condensing
lens under the section.

When sections show intersecting cleavage cracks it is often possible to
recognize the mineral by its known cleavage angle, as in the case of
amphibole and pyroxene.

(_e_) ▄Fracture▄, which appears as irregular and non-parallel cracks,
see Fig. 13.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 14.—Apatite in feldspar _a_. Garnets in quartz, Branchville, Ct.,
    _b_. Liquid inclusions of CO_{2}, some showing gas bubbles, in
    quartz _c_.
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 15.—Enstatite showing “Schiller” Structure.
]

(_f_) ▄Inclusions▄, which may be _solid_ (either distinct crystals or
glass), _fluid_ or _gas_, see Fig. 14. These inclusions are
distinguished by the fact that the solid inclusions generally have sharp
contours, the fluid inclusions distinct dark borders, and the gas
inclusions broad dark borders more distinctly marked than those of the
fluid inclusions. The fluid inclusions often contain a bubble of gas.
The inclusions may have a definite or indefinite position in the crystal
in which they occur, and can sometimes be more distinctly seen by using
convergent light or a “spot” lens.

(_g_) ▄Schiller Structure.▄ “Is that in which cavities of definite form
and orientation (‘negative crystals’) are developed along certain planes
and filled or partially filled by material dissolved out of the
enclosing crystal,”[43] see Fig. 15.


                Characters Observed by Polarized Light.

The polarized light is obtained by passing the beam of light from the
reflector through the polarizer or lower nicol,[44] which must be in
place below the stage of the microscope. White light is supposed to be
used.

▄Pleochroism▄, that property which all anisotropic minerals have, to a
greater or less extent, of absorbing certain colored rays in certain
directions, thereby showing different colors in different directions by
transmitted light. Uniaxial minerals are dichroic showing two
differences in color, produced by the rays which vibrate parallel to the
direction of the vertical axis _ć_ and the plane of the basal axes.
Biaxial crystals are trichroic showing theoretically three differences
of color produced by rays with vibration directions corresponding very
nearly to those of the three principal vibration directions.[45] Any
given section of a biaxial crystal will, of course, appear only
dichroic.

The practical way of testing for _pleochroism_ is as follows: Revolve
the stage, carrying the section, when a change in the color of the
mineral will be noticed, if it is pleochroic. This pleochroism may
appear as an actual change in color or simply as a change in the shade
of the same color. At times it may be so weak as hardly to be noticed,
when it is best to make the test with the condensing lens in position
immediately under the section, or by rotating the lower nicol instead of
revolving the stage. The color of the light, vibrating parallel to
certain definite crystallographic directions in minerals, is often very
characteristic.

In some cases there may be such strong _absorption_ of one of the rays,
that, when the vibration direction of this ray is over the plane of
vibration of the polarizer, practically no light is transmitted and the
section appears dark. Strong absorption is characteristic of certain
minerals, such as biotite, amphibole, tourmaline and allanite and takes
place parallel to definite directions in these minerals.

Pleochroism may often be noticed with ordinary light in the case of hand
specimens.


 Characters Observed with both Polarizer and Analyzer[46] in Position,
                     that is with “Crossed Nicols.”

When the nicols are accurately crossed, the field should be quite dark,
and if this is not the case the adjustments must be looked to. The
condensing lens should be removed for these tests as they are to be made
with parallel light, but as a matter of convenience instead of removing
the condensing lens, the polarizer with the lens on top may be lowered,
when the results will be about the same as with parallel light. White
light is supposed to be used.

▄Isotropic Character.▄ Sections of isotropic crystals are perfectly dark
and remain so during a complete rotation of the stage through 360°. The
explanation is very simple. Light being transmitted by an isotropic
crystal in all directions without double refraction; it follows that the
light from the polarizer, after having passed through the section, comes
to the analyzer still vibrating in the plane of vibration of the
polarizer. Hence it is entirely cut out by the analyzer.

_Amorphous_ transparent substances act in the same way and remain dark
during complete rotation of the stage.

_Optical anomalies_, _i. e._, double refraction, may occur in isometric
crystals and in amorphous substances that have been subjected to
strains.

▄Anisotropic Character.▄ Sections of anisotropic crystals, having the
property of _double refraction_, produce in general some _interference_
or _polarization color_, except as mentioned later. The popular
explanation is as follows:

[Illustration:

  FIG. 16.
]

In Fig. 16, let PP′ be the plane of vibration of the polarizer, and A′A
the plane of vibration of the analyzer. All the light, after it has
passed through the polarizer, is vibrating parallel to PP′ when it
reaches the lower side of the transparent crystal, _cdef_, on the stage
of the microscope. In this transparent section let _ob_ and _oa_ be the
two _directions_ of _vibration_, _i. e._, the only two directions
parallel to which rays of light can vibrate in passing through the
section.

Let _om_ represent the amplitude of vibration of a ray from the
polarizer. When this ray reaches the section it cannot get through it
vibrating in the direction _om_, but is doubly refracted and of the two
resulting rays, one gets through vibrating in the direction _ob_ and the
other vibrating in the direction _oa_. From _m_ draw perpendiculars to
_ob_ and _oa_. Then according to the law of the parallelogram of forces
_ob_ will represent the amplitude of vibration of the ray passing
through the crystal vibrating in the direction _ob_, and _oa_ will
represent the amplitude of vibration of the ray passing through the
crystal vibrating in the direction _oa_. We will thus have two rays
passing through the crystal, polarized at right angles to each other.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 17.
]

Consider now the general question of the transmission of the doubly
refracted rays through a plate. Whatever the angle of the parallel
incident rays, each ray as AB, Fig. 17, is resolved, as just described,
into two rays BC and BD, polarized at right angles to each other and
following (usually) different paths in the plate. On emergence these
follow parallel paths. Among the incident rays there are rays EG and FH,
such that one component of FH will emerge at D with one of the
components of AB, and one component of AB and one component of EG will
emerge at C. Hence from every point of the upper surface of the plate
there will emerge two rays and these rays will have travelled through
different paths in the plate with different velocities and will have
their vibrations at right angles to each other.

When these doubly refracted rays come to the analyzer, whose plane of
vibration is A′A, they cannot get through vibrating in their present
directions, but components of these rays, such as _ot_ and _os_, can get
through vibrating parallel to the plane A′A.

Hence we have two series of rays coming to the eye, polarized in the
same plane, but one set slightly in advance of the other. These rays
will “interfere” and produce some _interference_ or _polarization_
color.[47] In using white light whenever one of two light rays of the
same color has suffered a “retardation” of just one wave-length (or even
multiple thereof) the color will be extinguished; and when the
“retardation” is one half wave-length (or even multiple thereof) the
color will be intensified. Therefore, some tints will be extinguished
and others intensified, the combination resulting in the production of
some definite interference color. Of course in the case of monochromatic
light the thickness of the section may be such that “destructive
interference” takes place producing no color (darkness).

Now suppose the stage to be rotated until the section _cdef_ takes the
position _c′d′e′f′_. The section will be found to be dark and no
interference color will be seen. This is due to the fact that the
directions of vibration in the section are parallel to the planes of
vibration of the crossed nicols, consequently the light passes through
the section still vibrating parallel to the plane PP′ of the polarizer
and is all cut out by the analyzer. Darkness will occur every 90° and
therefore four times during a complete rotation of the stage. The
interference color is also observed to vary in intensity, but not in
color, and to be at its maximum 45° from the positions of darkness.

Sections of uniaxial crystals at right angles to the optic axis act like
isotropic substances and remain dark during a complete rotation of the
stage. In the biaxial crystals, a section at right angles to an “optic
axis” shows uniform illumination[48] which does not change as the stage
is rotated.

The only way to find out whether sections that remain dark are
isotropic, or uniaxial at right angles to an optic axis, is to test them
with convergent light as described later, see p. 40.

▄Interference Colors.▄ The interference color shown by any mineral
section depends on three factors: 1° the strength of the double
refraction (_γ_ − _α_ = the difference between the refractive indices of
the slowest and fastest rays); 2° the position of the section in the
crystal; 3° the thickness of the crystal section.

To eliminate, so far as possible, the variation due to the optical
orientation of the section, care must always be taken to obtain the
maximum interference color given by the different sections of the same
mineral in the rock section. Sections giving the maximum color are those
parallel to the _ć_ axis in uniaxial minerals and those parallel to the
axial plane in biaxial minerals.[49] Hence such sections in convergent
light never show the emergence of an optic axis or a bisectrix; and
furthermore, other clues, such as crystal outlines, cleavage,
pleochroism, etc., may help to indicate the favorable section.

The influence of the thickness of the section is also important and must
be considered. The interference color will rise in the scale (be higher
in order) as the section becomes thicker. Methods of obtaining the
thickness of a section are given on pp. 35 and 36. When reference is
made to definite interference colors the mineral section is supposed to
have a thickness of 0.03 mm. and to be such as to give the maximum
color; and all mineral sections in a rock section are considered to have
a uniform thickness.

With these precautions in mind the _interference colors_ indicate the
_strength_ of the _double refraction_ as follows:[50] The colors of
minerals with very weak double refraction vary from a bluish-gray to a
grayish-white. As the strength of the double refraction increases the
colors become the very intense bright tints of the spectrum, yellow,
red, blue, green, etc., called the first and second order colors. As the
strength of the double refraction still increases the colors pass
through the tints of the spectrum in sequence (called orders), becoming
paler until finally, when the double refraction is very strong, the
colors become the neutral, almost colorless tints of the higher orders.
The eye must be trained to appreciate the colors of different orders,
and the student is advised to practice with mineral sections, of known
strength of double refraction, and compare the resulting interference
colors with a color chart,[51] or use the interference color diagram at
the end of the book. A convenient test can be made with a one fourth
undulation mica plate to distinguish between the white of the 1° order
and the practically white very high order tint. Introduce the mica plate
in the slot _k_, Fig. 2, and the effect will be to produce a marked
change in the color of the 1° order, while no change will be observed in
the high order color.

The exact order of the color can be determined by the use of a quartz
wedge, as described on p. 35.

_Abnormal Interference Colors_[52] may be brought about in several ways.
In white light strong absorption of part of the light components may not
only alter the color of the mineral but also modify the interference
color. The double refraction may be nearly zero for light of a
particular color so that the mineral is isotropic for that color,
resulting in a change in the interference color, as for example the
indigo of melilite, which is nearly isotropic for yellow light. In
biaxial minerals the axial angle may be zero for light of a particular
color, resulting also in a modification of the interference color, as
the blue in penninite in sections ⟂ _Bx_{a}_. When the bisectrices are
much dispersed there will be no position of darkness between crossed
nicols in white light.

▄Extinction and Extinction Angles.▄ When the section, see Fig. 16, is in
such a position that its directions of vibration are parallel to the
planes of vibration of the nicols, no light can pass through the
analyzer, and the section is dark. Hence the light is extinguished and
this phenomenon is called _extinction_.

_Extinction_ is said to be _parallel_ or _symmetrical_ when the
directions of vibration are parallel to any crystallographic lines or
directions, or bisect the angles between these lines. The
crystallographic lines or directions may be either cleavages or the
similar boundaries of idiomorphic crystals.

This kind of _extinction_ is shown by all sections of tetragonal and
hexagonal crystals, by all sections parallel to the crystal axes in
orthorhombic crystals and also by the sections parallel to the ƃ axis in
monoclinic crystals.

When the _extinction_ is not symmetrical it is called _oblique_, and is
shown by all sections of monoclinic crystals (except those parallel to
the ƃ axis) and triclinic crystals.

Extinction which does not take place over the whole of the section of a
single crystal at the same moment, but passes over the section like a
dark wave or shadow, is said to be “_wavy_”; and indicates that the
crystal has been subjected to mechanical forces producing a change in
the position of the directions of vibration in different parts of the
crystal, see Fig. 7.

The angle between a direction of vibration in the section and some known
crystallographic direction (as a cleavage or crystal outline) is called
an _extinction angle_, and is measured in the following way: Find the
positions of the directions of vibration in the section, which must be
parallel to the cross-wires when extinction takes place. Note the
reading on the graduated circle of the stage, then remove the upper
nicol, in order to get a more distinct view of the field, and rotate the
stage until you bring some known crystallographic line into parallel
position with the cross-wire selected as a reference line. Take the
reading of the graduated circle again, and the difference between these
two readings will be the _extinction angle_.

It can readily be seen that depending on which way the section is
rotated, either a small or a large extinction angle will be obtained,
the two angles being complements of each other. The extinction angle
generally recorded is that between the nearest direction of vibration
and the vertical axis _ć_.

In monoclinic minerals the maximum value of the extinction angle (the
angle of real value in distinguishing the mineral) can only be obtained
from a section parallel to the clino pinacoid (010); but in practice
sufficiently accurate results can generally be obtained by measuring the
extinction angles of all sections of the same mineral, which seem to be
about parallel to the vertical axis _ć_, and then taking the maximum
value obtained. Amphibole and pyroxene can easily be distinguished in
this way.

_Extinction_ is generally tested for by revolving the stage, carrying
the section, until darkness is observed. The principal difficulty,
however, is caused by the eye failing to appreciate the position of
maximum darkness. Hence it is better to revolve the stage until the
section just becomes dark (or fades out) and then revolve further until
the section just begins to lighten up again. The mean of the readings,
in these two positions, will be the one to use.

A gypsum test-plate, so prepared as to give some definite interference
color, as red of the 1° order, may be introduced between the two nicols,
and the section revolved until this color is exactly matched. This
perfect matching of color is only possible when the directions of
vibration of the section are exactly parallel to the planes of vibration
of the nicols, as otherwise some interference color would be produced by
the section and the true color of the test-plate would not appear. The
most favorable condition is when the section is colorless and only
covers a part of the field of view, as then the rest of the field shows
the color of the test-plate and the exact matching of color is an easy
matter. This method of testing can be employed to recognize the very
weak double refraction of some minerals, whose interference colors are
such dark grays as not to be noticed without this test. After the
test-plate has been introduced, some slight variation in the color will
be observed when the stage carrying the doubly refracting section is
rotated. There are other methods[53] for locating these directions of
vibration. They depend generally on substituting changes of color for
degrees of darkness or on changes in interference figures, and consist
in the use of color test-plates or Klein’s quartz-plate, or of special
oculars prepared by Bertrand, Calderon, etc.


METHOD OF TESTING FOR THE VIBRATION DIRECTIONS OF THE FASTER AND SLOWER
               RAYS, _A′_ AND _C′_, IN A MINERAL SECTION.

A mica or gypsum plate can be used to make this test, the directions of
vibration of the faster and slower rays on these plates being known and
marked.[54]

The crystal section to be tested is placed on the rotating stage,
between crossed nicols, and turned to the position of extinction, when
these directions of vibration will be parallel to the cross-wires in the
eye-piece. The section is then turned 45°, when the interference color
will be at its maximum, and these directions of vibration will make
angles of 45° with the planes of vibration of the nicols and the
cross-wires in the eye-piece.

Now introduce[55] the test-plate, between the section and the analyzer,
so that its known directions of vibration also make angles of 45° with
the cross-wires in the eye-piece.

When the test-plate is introduced a new interference color will be
noticed which is either higher or lower in the color scale[56] than the
original interference color of the mineral section. When the known
directions of vibration of the test-plate are superposed over
corresponding directions in the mineral section, the effect is to
thicken the section and the interference color rises in the scale.

When the directions of vibration of the test-plate are superposed over
directions of vibration in the mineral section which are not
corresponding, the effect is to thin the section and the interference
color sinks in the scale.

For minerals which have very strong double refraction, as zircons, so
that the interference colors are of the higher orders, it is advisable
to use the method of testing with a quartz wedge.[57]

If a wedge is inserted between crossed nicols and its _c_ direction
inclined at 45° to the planes of vibration of the nicols, then
successive interference colors will be seen commencing with the gray of
the first order and passing through the colors as shown by a color
chart. If now the crystal section lies with its vibration directions
also in the diagonal position, the color of any portion of the quartz
wedge will be changed where it covers the section, the new color being
that of a thicker part of the wedge if the _c_ direction in the section
lies under the _c_ direction of the wedge. Also where the wedge overlaps
the section the displacement of the color fringes in the section will be
towards the thin edge of the wedge. On the other hand the new color will
be that of a thinner part of the wedge when the _a_ direction in the
section lies under the _c_ direction of the wedge. In this case the
displacement of the color fringes will be towards the thick part of the
wedge.

This method is very convenient when the crystal section has in any place
sloping edges, showing prismatic color fringes. The movement of these
fringes (as previously described) is towards the thin edge of the wedge
when the vibration directions correspond and away from this edge when
they do not correspond.

If the wedge when inserted finally “compensates” the color of the
crystal section (_i. e._, practically produces an absence of color,
darkness), then the a in this section must lie under the c in the wedge,
as the effect of the wedge has been to continually thin the section.


             DETERMINATION OF ORDER OF INTERFERENCE COLOR.

This can be determined by use of a quartz wedge or a v. Federow mica
wedge.[58] Have the vibration directions of the given section in the
diagonal position, then gradually insert the wedge between the crossed
nicols so that the corresponding vibration directions in the section and
wedge are crossed, that is so that the colors are run down until finally
dark gray or black is obtained. Count the number of times the original
interference color reappears, if _n_ times, then the color is a red,
blue, green, etc., of _n_ + 1 order.[59]

It is often easier to insert the wedge until compensation of the color
is obtained; then as the wedge is pulled out the direct count of the
recurrence of the original color will give the order of that color.


METHOD OF MEASURING THE STRENGTH OF THE DOUBLE REFRACTION BY VON FEDEROW
                            MICA WEDGE.[60]

“The wedge[61] consists of fifteen superposed quarter undulation mica
plates, each about two mm. shorter than the one beneath it and with
their directions of vibration parallel. The series is mounted on a strip
of glass and covered with a cover-glass.

The wave-length of a middle color may be taken as 560 μμ (millionths of
a millimeter); hence each quarter undulation mica plate may be
considered to possess a phase difference or retardation of 140 μμ. If,
then, between the polarizer and analyzer we insert the mica wedge, so
that its direction of vibration of the slower ray, _c_, is at right
angles to that of the mineral under examination, we subtract from the
phase difference of the mineral an amount equal to _n_ times 140 μμ, in
which _n_ represents the number of superposed mica plates in the field.
When the mineral appears dark the value evidently corresponds closely to
the phase difference of the mineral.[62]

From the expression Δ = _eX_, in which Δ is the phase difference or
retardation, _X_ the double refraction, and _e_ the thickness in
millionths of millimeters, the thickness can be deduced when the double
refraction is known or _vice versa_. If a mineral of known double
refraction can be found in the section near the mineral under
investigation,[63] the double refraction of the latter can be deduced by
measuring the phase difference of the known mineral, whence e results,
and this substituted in the above formula yields _X_.”


METHOD OF DETERMINING MINERALS AND THICKNESS OF SECTION, BY USE OF TABLE
            OF DOUBLE REFRACTION (MAXIMUM) AND DIAGRAM.[64]

Select some easily recognized mineral in the rock section and note the
maximum interference color given by any of its sections.[65] The
strength of the double refraction of this mineral being known, look up
on the diagram the diagonal line corresponding to this double refraction
and follow along this line toward the left hand lower corner until the
observed interference color is reached, when the horizontal line will
indicate the thickness of the section. The thickness is given in
hundredths of millimeters. Then in the case of the unknown mineral pick
out the section giving the highest interference color and carry along
the same horizontal line until this new color is located,[66] then pass
up to the right along the diagonal line to the numbers indicating the
strength of the double refraction of the unknown mineral. Turn to the
table where the minerals will be found having about this strength of
double refraction.

_Example:_ In a section of granite (biotite-granite) a grain of quartz
was selected, which gave the brightest color. This color was a bright
yellowish white and the known double refraction of quartz is 0.009.
Following down on this diagonal line until the interference color was
reached it was seen that the thickness of the section was about 0.03 mm.
(a very thin section). The section of the undetermined mineral, giving
the highest order color, showed a bright 2° order purple-blue. Passing
along the 0.03 horizontal line until this color was reached and then up
along the diagonal line, it was seen that the double refraction of this
mineral must be about 0.04. The table gives muscovite and ægerite as
having about this double refraction. The mineral was proved to be
muscovite by its absence of color and relief and by the characteristic
cleavage and parallel extinction.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 18.—Sanidine crystal _f_, showing Carlsbad twin (which, as it
    consists of two parts only, may be called _simple_), and quartz _q_
    in rhyolite. Crossed nicols.
]


                               Structure:

(_a_) _Twinning_, generally noticed by the parts of the twin not
extinguishing at the same time. It may also be observed, without crossed
nicols, just as in the case of macroscopic minerals.

Twinning may be described as: _simple_, Fig. 18; _polysynthetic_, due to
repeated twinning after the same law, Fig. 12; and _crossed or
“gridiron,”_ due to repeated twinning after two laws, Fig. 19.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 19.—Microcline, showing crossed or “gridiron” twinning. Crossed
    nicols.
]

(_b_) _Zonal_ structure, often only made visible by the zones
extinguishing at different times. It may, however, be noticed by the
zones being of slightly different color, or by the zonal distribution of
inclusions. In the case of the feldspars the zonal structure may be
caused either by the crystal being formed of zones of different chemical
composition (the successive zones in the plagioclases growing more acid
towards the exterior), or by ultra-microscopic twinning,[67] Fig. 20.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 20.—Zonal feldspar (Carlsbad twin) in trachyte. Crossed nicols.
]

(_c_) _Aggregate_ structure, being a confused mass of separate little
crystals, scales or grains all extinguishing at different times, Fig.
21.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 21.—Sphærulites in felsite. Ground mass shows aggregate
    structure. Crossed nicols.
]

(_d_) _Sphærulitic_ structure, produced by the aggregation, in a radiate
form, of crystals or crystallites. It is generally easily perceived by
the dark cross, resulting from the extinguishing of the light in those
crystals whose directions of vibration are parallel to the planes of
vibration of the nicols. When the stage is revolved the arms of the
cross do not rotate, Fig. 21.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 22.—Olivine decomposed to serpentine. The pseudomorphism has been
    almost complete, only small portions of the original olivine
    remaining. The outline of the parent crystal can be quite distinctly
    seen. Crossed nicols.
]

(_e_) _Pseudomorphic_ structure, which may be partial or complete and is
noticed by the changed portions producing different optical effects from
those of the original mineral. Sometimes, although the pseudomorphism
has been almost complete, the form of the original mineral or crystal
may still be seen, Fig. 22.


           Characters Observed by Convergent Polarized Light.

_Convergent light_ is obtained by passing the rays of polarized light
through a strong condensing lens, which generally fits like a cap over
the top of the polarizer. By means of a suitable adjustment the
condensing lens can be brought very close to the lower surface of the
section on the stage. The lens thus sends a cone of light through the
section, and used in connection with _crossed nicols_ a series of
optical phenomena, called _interference figures_,[68] are produced.

Each direction in which rays are sent is traversed by a minute bundle of
parallel rays and these rays extinguish and produce interference colors
as already described for parallel light. Hence each direction yields a
spot or picture in the field of view and from all these spots combined
there results an “interference figure” or picture, depending upon the
structure of the section for all the directions traversed by the rays.

A very high power objective[69] must be used, and when the eye-piece is
removed, a small image of the interference figure will be seen. In some
microscopes an arrangement is made for getting a magnified image of the
interference figure, by retaining the eye-piece and using an additional
Bertrand lens.

In order to get good results care must be taken to have strong
illumination and the condensing lens close up under the section. The
tests are best made with monochromatic light, but with white light the
effects are substantially the same, the only difference being that the
rings and curves are variously colored instead of being simply light and
dark.

_Isotropic_ substances show no _interference figures_.


                     Uniaxial Interference Figures.

(_a_) Sections perpendicular to the optic or vertical axis _ć_ show a
dark cross, with or without colored rings, Figs. 23 and 24. The figure
is symmetrical to the center, as the optical behavior of uniaxial
crystals is symmetrical to the optic axis.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 23.
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 24.
]

The arms of the cross are parallel to the planes of vibration of the
nicols, and the figure does not move when the stage carrying the section
is rotated.[70]

(_b_) Sections oblique to the optic axis show a portion of a dark cross,
with or without colored rings, Fig. 25. The centre of the cross is not
in the axis of rotation, and as the stage bearing the section is
revolved, the centre of the cross describes a circle, the arms always
maintaining parallel positions.

If the section is still more oblique to the optic axis the centre of the
interference cross may be outside the field of view, and only portions
of the dark arms will be seen.

Sections parallel to the optic axis show a vague dark cross, which, on
rotating the stage, dissolves into hyperbolic curves (suggesting biaxial
figure), which very rapidly disappear in the direction of the optic
axis. When the interference figure shows colors, these colors are lower
in order in the quadrants containing the optic axis. Knowing thus the
position of the optic axis the optical character can be obtained by the
method for parallel light, p. 43.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 25.
]

Sections which are thick and have strong double refraction will show the
cross and rings clearly and sharply defined, there being quite a number
of rings crowded close together. Sections which are very thin and have
weak double refraction show only a broad dark cross and no rings. The
interference figures will vary between these extremes, depending on the
thickness of the section and the strength of the double refraction.

To obtain the most characteristic figures, observations must be made on
sections about perpendicular to the optic axis, that is sections which
remain dark or nearly dark during complete rotation between crossed
nicols in parallel light.

▄Optical Character, Positive or Negative.▄ After having obtained an
uniaxial interference figure, test it by means of a ¼ undulation mica
plate. This plate must be introduced between the objective[71] and the
analyzer in such a way that its vibration direction c, marked on the
plate, makes an angle of 45° with the planes of vibration of the nicols.

When this is done the interference figure changes, or may more or less
disappear, two dark spots or blotches being brought prominently into
view. If rings are still seen it will be noticed that they have expanded
in the quadrants occupied by the dark spots, and have contracted in the
remaining quadrants. This movement of the rings may make it possible to
determine the optical character of a section, which is so oblique to the
optic axis that the dark spots are not seen after the introduction of
the mica plate.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 26.
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 27.
]

If the optical character is _positive_ the line joining these dark spots
is perpendicular to the direction c of the mica plate, see Fig. 26.

If _negative_ the line joining the dark spots coincides with the
direction c of the mica plate, see Fig. 27.

The (+) and (−) character is easily determined by remembering that the
line, joining the dark spots, makes the + and − sign respectively with
the direction c of the mica plate. The direction c of the mica plate
(represented in the figures by an arrow) is of course not seen, but its
position must be borne in mind when making this test. This test can be
made with either monochromatic or white light.

If the mica plate does not give satisfactory results, which will be the
case when the double refraction of the crystal to be tested is very weak
or when the section is very thin, use a selenite plate, cut the proper
thickness to give the red color of the first order.

This plate must be introduced with its vibration direction a (previously
determined) making an angle of 45° with the planes of vibration of the
nicols. Instead of the dark spots being seen there will appear two blue
and two red quadrants. The diagonally opposite quadrants being of the
same color.

In determining the (+) and (−) character consider the blue quadrants as
the equivalent of the dark spots in the preceding case. This test must
be made with white light.[72]


                     Biaxial Interference Figures.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 28.
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 29.
]

(_a_) Sections perpendicular to an optic axis exhibit the interference
figures shown in Figs. 28 and 29, the curves being nearly circular and a
straight black bar bisecting these curves, whenever the trace of the
plane of the optic axes coincides with the vibration direction of either
nicol. As the stage, carrying the section, is rotated the bar changes
into one arm of a hyperbola and back again into a bar. This arm or bar
will rotate in the opposite direction to the motion of the stage.

As previously stated sections of biaxial crystals, perpendicular to an
optic axis, do not remain dark during rotation of the stage between
crossed nicols in parallel light. On the contrary these sections remain
uniformly illuminated.[73]

(_b_) Sections perpendicular to the acute bisectrix (see p. 5), exhibit
interference figures like those shown in Figs. 30 and 31.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 30.
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 31.
]

Fig. 30 shows the appearance of the interference figure when the plane
of the optic axes is parallel to the plane of vibration of either nicol,
and Fig. 31 shows the appearance when this plane is inclined 45° to the
planes of vibration of the nicols.

As the stage, carrying the section, is rotated the dark cross seems to
dissolve into two branches of a hyperbola, which again unite to form a
cross.

In sections perpendicular to a bisectrix, with a large axial angle, the
figure will appear, during a rotation of 90° (in the direction of the
hands of a watch), as in Fig. 32, top row. When the section is somewhat
oblique to an “optic axis,” the figure appears as in middle row; and
when still more oblique, as in bottom row.

The black centres[74] of the small ellipses and the black hyperbolic
curves mark the points of emergence of the optic axes, and therefore
indicate approximately the size of the _axial angle_, 2_E_.

Sections in other positions, relative to the optic axes, give
interference figures less definite in appearance than those just
described; and the same conditions affect the appearance of all figures
as in the case of uniaxial crystals. Very thin sections, of weak double
refraction, may only show indistinct dark crosses or hyperbolic curves,
without any ellipses.

The section perpendicular to the acute bisectrix, which gives the most
characteristic interference figure, cannot generally be recognized
except by an examination in convergent light. It is never, however, the
section giving the maximum interference color. The interference colors
in different sections, normal to the optical elements, grade downward in
the following order: (1) optic normal, (2) obtuse bisectrix, (3) acute
bisectrix, (4) optic axis. Sometimes cleavage may furnish a clue as to
the best section to test as in Topaz and Mica, where the acute bisectrix
is normal to the cleavage.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 32.—Biaxial Interference Figures (from Reinisch). Top row: Almost
    perpendicular to bisectrix, large axial angle. Middle row: Somewhat
    oblique to an “optic axis.” Bottom row: More oblique to an “optic
    axis.”
]

It must be remembered that this uncertainty, in the choice of sections
for testing, does not exist in uniaxial crystals; where the best
sections are indicated by the fact that they remain dark or nearly so
during complete rotation between crossed nicols.

The uniaxial or biaxial character of a mineral section, which only shows
an indistinct bar, may be determined as follows: A bar (one arm of the
cross) of a uniaxial interference figure moves in the same direction as
the rotating stage, and always remains straight, while the biaxial bar
rotates in the opposite direction to the stage and becomes curved.

▄Optical Character, Positive or Negative.▄ When the axial angle is very
small, so that the interference figure approaches that of a uniaxial
crystal, the methods used for testing uniaxial figures are employed.

When, however, the axial angle is large, the following method can be
used:

After having obtained an interference figure, from a section as nearly
at right angles to the acute bisectrix[75] as possible, the stage is
rotated until the plane of the optic axes (the trace of which on the
plane of the section is the line joining the points of emergence of the
two optic axes) makes an angle of 45° with the planes of vibration of
the crossed nicols or the cross-wires in the eye-piece.

A quartz wedge[76] is now pushed in between the mineral section and the
analyzer,[77] so that its axis _ć_ = c (previously determined and marked
on the wedge) is either at right angles or parallel to the plane of the
optic axes of the mineral section.

The optical character of the mineral is _positive_ when the ellipses,
surrounding the points of emergence of the two optic axes on the convex
sides of the hyperbola, appear to expand or open out towards the centre
when the quartz wedge is pushed in with its axis parallel to the plane
of the optic axes.

The optical character is _negative_ when the ellipses appear to expand
or open out when the wedge is pushed in with its axis at right angles to
the plane of the optic axes.

As the ellipses expand they move from the points of emergence of the
optic axes towards the centre of the interference figure, and finally
open into lemniscates which move outward from the plane of the optic
axes.

Even when the section is very thin and the double refraction very weak,
only the black hyperbolas without ellipses being seen, the test can be
made; and colored ellipses will appear, after the pushing in of the
quartz wedge, which will act in the same way as the ellipses of the
interference figure.

In a section at right angles to the _obtuse bisectric_ these results are
all reversed.

When the section is perpendicular to one optic axis, rotate the section
until the plane of its optic axes is 45° to the planes of vibration of
the nicols. The interference figure will now have the appearance as
shown in Fig. 29, the hyperbola being convex towards the acute
bisectrix. Insert the ¼ undulation mica plate, so that its direction c
is parallel to the plane of the optic axes. If the optical character is
positive the hyperbola will move towards the acute bisectrix and if
negative away from it. When the gypsum plate is used the blue color will
appear on the convex side for (+) and on the concave side for (−)
minerals.

▄Determination of the Axial Angle.▄[78] This can be approximately
determined with a petrographical microscope, if equipped with a
micrometer eye-piece. Have the axial plane of the crystal section in the
diagonal position, Fig. 31; and measure the distance _d_ from the centre
to either hyperbola with a micrometer (or average the distance to both).
Then sin _E = d/C_, in which _C_ is a constant for the same combination
of lenses and is obtained by using a crystal section (mica cleavage) of
known axial angle. For example, in a mica with 2_E_ = 91° 50′ and _d_ =
41.5 divisions on the micrometer scale, _C = d_/sin _E_ = 57.78 for that
special combination of lenses. The true axial angle can be obtained from
the equation sin _V = d/βC_.

▄Optical Distinctions between Orthorhombic, Monoclinic, and Triclinic
Crystal Sections (perpendicular to acute and obtuse bisectrices).▄ The
interference figures are always symmetrical in shape and distribution of
color to the planes and axes of symmetry of the crystal system; hence
are most symmetrical in the orthorhombic, less so in the monoclinic and
still less so in the triclinic system.

_Orthorhombic crystals_ show the figures always in two of the pinacoids
and in white light the color distribution will be symmetrical to the
trace of the axial plane and the line through the centre at right angles
to this trace and also to the central point.

_Monoclinic crystals_ show the figures in the clino pinacoid or in
sections at right angles to this. In white light the color distribution
is never symmetrical to two lines, but is symmetrical either to the
trace of the axial plane (_inclined dispersion_[79]), or to the line
through the centre at right angles to this trace (_horizontal
dispersion_), or to the central point (_crossed dispersion_).

_Triclinic crystals_ show in white light figures with distribution of
color unsymmetrical to any line or point.

In white light the “color fringes” of the hyperbola are due to the
“_dispersion_”[79] of the optic axes and bisectrices. That is, for each
color (for light of each wave-length) there is a particular interference
figure; the overlapping of these superposed figures producing the color
fringes.

When the axial angle is larger for red light than for violet, the
dispersion is said to be ρ > ν and the interference figure, in the
position of Fig. 31, will show the hyperbolic curves fringed with red
towards the centre (inside). In general the color with the larger axial
angle is nearer the centre of the field. This is due to the
extinguishing of light of each color at the axial points, the resulting
colors at these points being produced by white light minus the absorbed
color. When the dispersion is ν > ρ the reverse distribution of color
fringes will take place.

By measuring the axial angle in red and blue light, this dispersion of
the optic axes can also be obtained.


     RESUMÉ OF THE USES OF PARALLEL AND CONVERGENT POLARIZED LIGHT.

_Parallel_ light is used to detect pleochroism, to distinguish between
isotropic and anisotropic substances, to study interference colors, to
determine the strength of the double refraction, to locate directions of
vibration, to measure extinction angles, to find the directions of
vibration of the faster and slower rays, to determine the relative value
of the indices of refraction of the two rays, and to investigate the
crystal structure in general.

_Convergent_ light is used to distinguish between uniaxial and biaxial
crystals, to determine whether a section that appears to be isotropic is
really so or only perpendicular to an optic axis and to determine the
optical character, grade of symmetry (system), axial angle and
dispersion.




                              CHAPTER IV.
          THE MICROSCOPIC AND OPTICAL CHARACTERS OF MINERALS.


                                 OPAL.

            ISOTROPIC.                                   AMORPHOUS.


  COMPOSITION: SiO_{2}.nH_{2}O, generally soluble in caustic alkalies.

  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Colorless patches, incrustations or
  veins, also at times with sphærulitic structure (hyalite), showing
  interference cross, of negative character, between crossed nicols.
  Often shows anomalous double refraction due to strains. The refractive
  index is very low (1.46) so that the surface of the opal appears
  rough.

  REMARKS: Found as a secondary mineral in many acid volcanic rocks,
  rhyolite, trachyte, andesite, etc., and also in basic basalts. H., 5.5
  to 6.5. Sp. gr., 2.2.


                               LIMONITE.

                                      AMORPHOUS.


  COMPOSITION: Fe_{2}(OH)_{6}, Fe_{2}O_{3}, frequently quite impure.

  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Brownish and opaque, in very thin
  sections may be translucent.

  REMARKS: Limonite is essentially a decomposition product, often
  forming pseudomorphs after ferruginous silicates or halos about the
  iron ores.


                            PYRITE, Pyrites.

                               ISOMETRIC.
      COMPOSITION: FeS_{2}.

▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Cubes, pyritohedrons, combinations of
these forms; or in irregular grains. Outline of cross-sections generally
square.

_Opaque_, and by reflected light, bright yellow, with strong metallic
lustre.

Alters very easily to the oxides of iron (rust).


  REMARKS: May be present in all kinds of rocks, igneous, metamorphic
  and sedimentary. Not noticeably acted on by hydrochloric acid. H., 6
  to 6.5. Sp. gr., 4.9 to 5.2.


                     PYRRHOTITE, Magnetic Pyrites.


  COMPOSITION: FeS. Distinguished from pyrite by being practically
  always in irregular masses and not in crystals, and by bronze yellow
  color with reflected light. Found in basic eruptive rocks, more rarely
  in schists.


                     MAGNETITE, Magnetic Iron Ore.

                                      ISOMETRIC.

COMPOSITION: Fe_{3}O_{4}, often contains Ti.

▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Grains and crystals (generally
octahedra), Fig. 33 B. Skeleton crystals frequent in highly ferruginous
eruptive rocks.

_Twinning._—Common, according to _Spinel_ law.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 33.—_A_, Zircon crystals (isolated from granite) in balsam,
    showing high relief. _B_, Magnetite crystals. _C_, Ilmenite, showing
    partial decomposition to _leucoxene_ along crystallographic
    directions.
]

_Opaque_, and by reflected light, bluish-black, with strong metallic
lustre.

▄Distinguished from▄: HEMATITE, CHROMITE, ILMENITE and GRAPHITE, by
being easily separated from powdered rock by weak magnet.


  REMARKS: Very widely distributed in eruptive rocks and crystalline
  schists. In the eruptive rocks magnetite belongs to the oldest
  secretions from the magma, immediately followed by chrysolite,
  biotite, hornblende, augite, etc.; hence often appears as inclusions
  in these and other minerals. Magnetite grains may form with other
  substances pseudomorphs after hornblende, biotite, hypersthene, etc.
  Such pseudomorphs appear to be caused by “resorption.” Magnetite is
  strongly magnetic and soluble in hydrochloric acid. H., 5.5 to 6.5.
  Sp. gr., 4.9 to 5.2.


                               CHROMITE.

                                      ISOMETRIC.

COMPOSITION: FeCr_{2}O_{4}.


  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Octahedral crystals, grains and in the
  olivine rocks sometimes in dense aggregates. May be surrounded by
  green, pleochroic halo of chrome ochre.

  _Opaque_, and by reflected light, brownish-black to black, with
  general absence of metallic lustre. Usually translucent and brownish
  on the edges (by transmitted light), with a very rough surface due to
  high index of refraction (_n_ = 2.1).

  ▄Distinguished from▄:

  (_a_) MAGNETITE by brownish-black to black color and general absence
  of metallic lustre (by reflected light) and by grains being usually
  translucent and brownish on the edges (by transmitted light).

  (_b_) SPINEL (Picotite), see under Spinel.

  REMARKS: Common in crystalline rocks, rich in magnesia, and in
  serpentine. Chromite is not acted on by acids, is non-magnetic and
  gives chromium bead test. H., 5.5. Sp. gr., 4.3 to 5.6.


                                SPINEL.

            ISOTROPIC.                                   ISOMETRIC.


  COMPOSITION: Mg(AlO_{2})_{2}. Pleonaste (Fe, Mg spinel), Picotite (Cr
  spinel).

  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Octahedral crystals and twins (after
  spinel law), less often in grains. Fracture cracks. Always optically
  normal and never decomposed in rocks. Usually colorless or dark green
  (pleonaste) to brown (picotite). The refractive index is high (_n_ =
  1.72, spinel proper, to 2.00, chrome spinel), hence the _relief_ is
  marked and the surface rough.

  ▄Distinguished from▄:

  (_a_) GARNET when colorless by octahedral shape of crystals (garnet
  forms being 110 and 211), when brown (picotite) from melanite garnet
  by common zonal coloration of the latter, but may require chemical
  tests. Furthermore spinel may have green color and is never
  decomposed.

  (_b_) PEROVSKITE by the lower index of refraction and the absence of
  reaction for Ti.

  (_c_) CHROMITE chemically or by density or hardness.

  REMARKS: Found in gneiss, granulite, lherzolite and in regions of
  contact metamorphism and secondary bedding formations (picotite),
  olivine-basalt and serpentine. Spinels are insoluble in hydrochloric
  acid. H., 8. Sp. gr., 3.5 to 4.1.


                                GARNET.

            ISOTROPIC.                                   ISOMETRIC.

COMPOSITION: R″_{3}R‴_{2}(SiO_{4})_{3}. R″ is Ca, Mg, Fe or Mn; R‴ is
Al, Fe‴, or Cr, rarely Ti.

▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Irregular grains, Fig. 13, or simple
crystals, showing forms (110) and (211), alone or in combination, Fig.
14 _b_. Zonal structure not infrequent, especially in the titanium
varieties, Fig. 34.

_Color._—Colorless, or nearly so, to yellowish, reddish or brownish.

_Index of Refraction._—_n_ = 1.750–1.856, hence _relief_ high and
surface very rough.

_Fracture._—Irregular cracks occur, but no cleavage noticed.

▄Crossed Nicols▄: As garnets are isotropic, sections remain dark during
complete rotation. Optical anomalies may however occur, but are
generally confined to, titanium free, lime garnets and manganese
garnets. The effect being to divide the crystal symmetrically into
different areas, “dodecahedral structure.”

[Illustration:

  FIG. 34.—Garnet, with zonal structure, in gneiss. (From Cohen.)
]

▄Alteration▄: Garnets are usually fresh, but may be found altered to
chlorite or hornblende.

▄Distinguished from▄: SPINEL and PEROVSKITE.—See under the latter.


  REMARKS: Found principally in granulites, metamorphic rocks, contact
  rocks, crystalline schists, etc. Certain varieties may be found in
  eruptive rocks or olivine rocks. May form pegmatitic borders with
  pyroxene, spinel, etc. Garnets are practically insoluble in
  hydrochloric acid. H., 6.5 to 7.5. Sp. gr., 3.4 to 4.3. The
  insolubility in acids and the high sp. gr. help in separating garnet
  from a powdered rock.


                                LEUCITE.

            ISOTROPIC.                                 ISOMETRIC.[80]

COMPOSITION: KAl(SiO_{3})_{2}.

▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Crystals or grains, which vary greatly
in size. Cross-sections often nearly round. When very small and free
from inclusions may be easily overlooked. Sometimes the grains are
surrounded by tangentially arranged needles of different minerals.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 35.—Leucite, with radial and tangential inclusions, Vesuvius
    Lava. (From Cohen.)
]

_Color._—Colorless.

_Index of Refraction._—_n_ = 1.509, hence no _relief_ and generally
smooth surface.

_Fracture._—May be noticed, but no cleavage observed.

_Inclusions._—Common, radially or zonally arranged, consisting of
minerals or glass, Fig. 35.

▄Crossed Nicols▄: The smaller crystals appear isotropic; the larger
crystals show characteristic intersecting systems of twin lamellæ, Fig.
36.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 36.—Leucite, showing complicated, interpenetration twinning
    between crossed nicols.
]

_Double Refraction._—Very weak (γ − α = 0.001). In thin sections it may
be necessary to use a sensitive color plate to prove double refraction.

_Interference Colors._—Very low 1st order, dark gray, etc.

▄Alteration▄: Quite frequent to fibrous or granular zeolites.

▄Distinguished from▄: ANALCITE—see under analcite.


  REMARKS: Almost entirely confined to younger eruptive rocks,
  phonolite, tephrite and other leucite rocks and their tuffs. Often
  found with plagioclase, nephelite, augite, etc. It is more or less
  attacked by hot hydrochloric acid. H., 5.5 to 6. Sp. gr., 2.4 to 2.5.
  The isolation of leucite from rock powder can be better accomplished
  by specific gravity than by chemical methods.


                               ANALCITE.

            ISOTROPIC.                                   ISOMETRIC.


  COMPOSITION: NaAlSi_{2}O_{6} + H_{2}O.

  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Secondary colorless grains, with no
  very characteristic microstructure or properties. Cleavage parallel to
  cube (100) usually seen. Index of refraction low (n = 1.488), hence
  rather rough surface. Between _crossed nicols_ may show optical
  anomalies, but not so marked as in garnet.

  _Distinguished from_: LEUCITE, SODALITE and NEPHELITE. These minerals
  are most easily confused with analcite and recourse must be had to
  chemical tests, detection of optical anomalies, gelatinization test or
  turbidity by heating.

  REMARKS: Occurs as a secondary product (commonly from nephelite or
  leucite) in alkali-rich eruptive rocks. Considered also as a primary
  mineral in igneous rocks.[81] Gelatinizes with hydrochloric acid, and
  becomes turbid by heating. H., 5.5. Sp. gr., 2.25.


                            SODALITE GROUP.
           Sodalite, Haüynite (Haüyne) and Noselite (Nosean).

            ISOTROPIC.                                   ISOMETRIC.


  COMPOSITION:

       Sodalite, 3NaAlSiO_{4} + NaCl.
       Haüynite, 2(Na_{2}Ca)Al_{2}(SiO_{4})_{2} + (Na_{2}Ca)SO_{4}.
       Noselite, 2Na_{2}Al_{2}Si_{2}O_{8} + Na_{2}SO_{4}.

  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Dodecahedral rounded crystals or (S)
  irregular grains. Colorless, yellowish, brownish, greenish to deep
  blue. Refractive index low [_n_ = 1.483(S) to 1.503(H)], hence the
  surface appears rather rough in sodalite and slightly rough in
  haüynite. Inclusions, abundant and characteristic, often rod-like and
  arranged regularly, making section translucent and especially dark at
  border, Fig. 37. Dodecahedral cleavage sometimes seen. Optical
  anomalies may occur.

  ▄Alteration▄: Takes place easily to aggregates of natrolite, other
  zeolites, mica, etc.

  ▄Distinguished from▄:

  (_a_) ONE ANOTHER only by chemical tests. Gelatinization test with
  hydrochloric acid will show in addition to jelly, salt crystals for
  (S), abundant gypsum crystals (CaSO_{2} + 2H_{2}O) for (H) and few if
  any gypsum crystals (absence of Ca) for (N). (H) and (N) turn blue
  when heated, but test will not work if minerals are decomposed. When
  treated with hydrochloric acid and nitrate of silver the black
  sulphide of silver will show on (H) and (N), but the white chloride on
  (S).

  (_b_) NEPHELITE (Elæolite) by being isotropic.

  (_c_) ANALCITE by no turbidity when heated.

  REMARKS: These minerals are found in the basic, soda-rich rocks. (S)
  in elæolite-syenite also in trachyte and phonolite, (H) and (N) common
  in phonolite and leucite-porphyry. H., 5.5 to 6. Sp. gr., 2.3.


[Illustration:

  FIG. 37.—Haüynite, showing dark centre and border, in nepelinite.
    (From Cohen.)
]


                        PEROVSKITE, Perofskite.

            ISOTROPIC.                                   ISOMETRIC.
     COMPOSITION: CaTiO_{3}.


  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Microscopic, octahedral crystals or
  larger grains, pale brownish in color and not very transparent, darker
  colored in the larger grains. In reflected light grains appear
  yellowish with adamantine lustre. Refractive index very high (_n_ =
  2.38), hence _relief_ very strong.

  Between _crossed nicols_, the little crystals generally appear
  optically normal and remain dark; but the larger crystals may show a
  complicated penetration twinning.

  ▄Distinguished from▄: GARNET (melanite) and SPINEL (picotite) by much
  higher refractive index and reaction for titanium and by zonal
  coloration of melanite. When opaque it might be mistaken for the iron
  ores, but has no metallic lustre.

  REMARKS: Found in the younger basic eruptive rocks, especially
  melilite-basalt. Commonly associated with the iron ores nephelite,
  augite and chrysolite. Insoluble in hydrochloric acid. H., 5.5. Sp.
  gr., 4.1.


                                RUTILE.

           ANISOTROPIC.               UNIAXIAL.          TETRAGONAL.
      COMPOSITION: TiO_{2}.            _ć_ = c        ELONGATION ∥ _ć_.


  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Sharp, elongated, prismatic crystals
  when microscopic, but granular when the individuals are large. Grains
  may be almost opaque, with adamantine lustre by reflected light. Knee-
  or heart-shaped twins, Figs. 38 and 39, common in the smaller
  crystals, the larger individuals may also show geniculated twinning.
  Small crystals sometimes form net-shaped groups (sagenite), by
  crossing one another at angles of 60°. Pleochroic halos may surround
  crystals. Color, yellowish to reddish-brown. Index of refraction very
  high (_n′_ = 2.712, α = 2.616, γ = 2.903), hence _relief_ marked and
  surface very rough. Prismatic cleavage present in larger individuals,
  not observed in microscopic crystals. Pleochroism and strong
  absorption may be noticed, especially in the larger grains, but may
  fail entirely.

  ▄Crossed Nicols▄: Double refraction _very_ strong (γ − α = 0.287).
  Interference colors[82] very high order, only seen in the microlitic
  crystals which do not appear dark due to total reflection; in other
  cases may not show at all. _Extinction_ parallel to prisms. In
  _convergent light_ optical character (+).

  ▄Alteration▄: May take place to a white or yellowish, fibrous or
  granular substance, strongly refracting, and similar to the alteration
  product of ilmenite. May be surrounded by grains of titanite.

  ▄Distinguished from▄: The OPAQUE ORES by adamantine lustre with
  reflected light; ZIRCON and CASSITERITE in concentrates by chemical
  tests. May not be possible to distinguish from cassiterite in
  sections.

  REMARKS: Found in the metamorphic schists, amphibolites, slates,
  contact and fragmentary rocks, etc.; also as inclusions in quartz and
  mica. Especially common as a secondary product of titaniferous
  hornblende and biotite. The “sagenite” webs of the decomposed micas
  are probably secondary. Rutile is insoluble in hydrochloric acid. H.,
  6 to 6.5. Sp. gr., 4.2. It is easily separated from rock powder by its
  insolubility in acid and its high sp. gr.


[Illustration:

  Rutile twins.

  FIG. 38.—Twin plane (101).      FIG. 39.—Twin plane (301).
]


                                ZIRCON.

           ANISOTROPIC.               UNIAXIAL.          TETRAGONAL.
     COMPOSITION: ZrSiO_{4}.           _c_ = ć.       ELONGATION ∥ c′.

▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Small, short prismatic crystals, Fig.
33A, and grains. Shell-like (zonal) structure may be noticed. When
enclosed in black-mica, hornblende, cordierite, etc., often surrounded
by characteristic pleochroic halos.[83]

_Color._—Colorless, rarely pale brownish.

_Index of Refraction._—_n′_ = 1.95, (α = 1.931, γ = 1.993) hence
_relief_ very high and surface rough.

▄Polarized Light▄:

_Pleochroism._—Not usually noticeable.

▄_Crossed Nicols_▄:

_Double Refraction._—Very strong (γ − α = 0.062).

_Interference Colors._—Very high (4th) order, minute crystals show
brilliant colors.

_Extinction._—As zircon is uniaxial, basal sections remain dark during
rotation of stage. In all other sections extinction is parallel to _ć_.

▄_Convergent Light_▄: Basal sections, which are large enough to give
interference figures, show several rings in addition to dark cross.
Optical character (+).

▄Alteration▄: Very rarely takes place.

▄Distinguished from▄:

(_a_) APATITE.—By much higher relief and stronger double refraction.

(_b_) TITANITE.—By uniaxial character.

(_c_) RUTILE.—See under the latter.

Easily confused with xenotime, which, however, has higher interference
colors and more distinct pleochroism; but chemical tests may be
necessary.


  REMARKS: Found widely distributed but not in quantity in eruptive and
  metamorphic rocks. Occurs in granite, syenite, diorite, gabbro,
  gneiss, etc. It is one of the oldest constituents of the rocks in
  which it occurs, and may often be found as inclusions in the
  ferro-magnesium minerals. Zircon is insoluble in hydrochloric acid.
  H., 7.5. Sp. gr., 4.5 to 4.7. It can easily be separated from rock
  powder on account of its high sp. gr., insolubility in acid and
  non-magnetic properties. The crystals can then be examined separately,
  or chemical tests made to prove the presence of Zr.


                    SCAPOLITE GROUP, Wernerite, etc.

           ANISOTROPIC.               UNIAXIAL.          TETRAGONAL.
 COMPOSITION: Silicates of Ca, Al      _ć_ = a.       ELONGATION ∥ a′.
             and Na.


  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Colorless grains, lath-like
  individuals or prisms (dipyre, in contact metamorphic limestone).
  Index of refraction (_n′_ = 1.551 to 1.584;, α = 1.542 to 1.558, γ =
  1.555 to 1.597) about the same as quartz, hence usually no _relief_
  and surface smooth. Cleavage distinct parallel to square prism.
  Inclusions (carbonaceous) may be abundant in contact rocks.

  ▄Crossed Nicols▄: Double refraction usually strong, but varies (γ − α
  = 0.013 to 0.039), increases with the Ca percentage. Interference
  colors upper 1st or 2d order, more brilliant than those of most of the
  colorless minerals. Basal sections (showing cleavages intersecting at
  90°) isotropic. _Extinction_ parallel in longitudinal sections. In
  _convergent light_ basal sections show distinct uniaxial interference
  figure; optical character (−).

  ▄Alteration▄: Takes place easily to a fibrous substance or to kaolin,
  muscovite, etc.

  ▄Distinguished from▄:

  (_a_) FELDSPARS (not showing twinning) and IOLITE (Cordierite) by
  uniaxial character, cleavage and higher order interference colors.

  (_b_) QUARTZ by cleavage, higher order interference colors and optical
  character; quartz is (+)

  (_c_) APATITE (in grains) by lower index of refraction, cleavage and
  higher order interference colors.

  REMARKS: Found especially in metamorphosed diabases and gabbros
  (Norwegian); also in gneisses, crystalline schists, metamorphosed
  limestones, etc. Dipyre occurs in contact zones of limestones and
  schists, where it might be confused with andalusite, but
  cross-sections show uniaxial character. The minerals of this group are
  more or less soluble in hydrochloric acid. When the scapolite contains
  Cl, the following test can be made on fresh material. Treat with a
  solution of silver nitrate in hydrofluoric acid and the jelly will be
  impregnated with chloride of silver which will turn brown. H., 5.5.
  Sp. gr., 2.68.


                         VESUVIANITE, Idocrase.

           ANISOTROPIC.               UNIAXIAL.          TETRAGONAL.
           COMPOSITION:                _ć_ = a.       ELONGATION ∥ a′.
 Ca_{6}Al_{3}(OH.F)(SiO_{4})_{6}.


  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Grains or prismatic crystals. Almost
  colorless to reddish (when containing Mn). Index of refraction high
  (_n′_ = 1.715, α = 1.701 to 1.726, γ = 1.705 to 1.732), hence _relief_
  marked and surface rough. Cleavage imperfect, parallel to prism.
  Pleochroism generally very faint.

  ▄Crossed Nicols▄: Double refraction very weak (γ − α = 0.001 to
  0.006), may vary in different portions of the same crystal (optical
  anomalies due to the mineral being at times a mixture of isomorphous
  individuals). Interference colors very low 1st order, dark gray, etc.,
  may often appear zonal. Basal sections isotropic when normal, but may
  show division into biaxial portions. _Extinction_ parallel in sections
  elongated ∥ _ć_ axis. In convergent light basal sections show a faint
  cross when normal; optical character generally (−).

  ▄Alteration▄: Not known in rock-making vesuvianite.

  ▄Distinguished from▄: EPIDOTE (Pistacite) by the very low order
  interference colors. CORUNDUM by weaker double refraction. GARNET
  (Grossularite), ZOISITE, and APATITE may be easily confused with this
  mineral and hard to distinguish from it.

  REMARKS: Found in limestones, that have undergone alteration by
  contact with igneous rocks, and in metamorphic schists. Also may occur
  in dense (nephrite-like) aggregates in serpentine. It is insoluble in
  hydrochloric acid. H., 6.5. Sp. gr., 3.3 to 3.8.


                               MELILITE.

           ANISOTROPIC.               UNIAXIAL.          TETRAGONAL.
        COMPOSITION: Na_{2}(Ca,Mg)_{11}(Al,Fe)_{4}Si_{9}O_{36}?.
             _ć_ = a.                                 ELONGATION ∥ c′.


  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Almost colorless, tabular (∥
  base) crystals or irregular grains or shreds. Sections very
  commonly lath-shaped, and often characterized by the peculiar
  “peg-structure,”[84] the lines or markings being ∥ _ć_ (⟂
  elongation of the section). Index of refraction (_n′_ = 1.630, α
  = 1.629, γ = 1.631) higher than that of the other associated
  colorless materials, hence _relief_ rather marked. Cleavage,
  parallel to base, very imperfect.

  ▄Crossed Nicols▄: Double refraction very weak (γ − α = 0.003), and
  diminishes with a decrease of Al. Interference colors the lower 1st
  order, grays, etc.; anomalous interference colors may show.
  _Extinction_ parallel to cleavage or the peculiar markings or lines.
  Optical character usually (−), but when poor in Al (+).

  ▄Alteration▄: Takes place frequently to a fibrous aggregate.

  ▄Distinguished from▄: NEPHELITE and FELDSPAR by higher relief, shape,
  “peg-structure” and usual dull appearance with reflected light.

  REMARKS: Abundant in the leucite and nephelite rocks (associated with
  these minerals and with augite, perovskite and chrysolite), and takes
  the place of a feldspar in the melilite-basalt. It gelatinizes easily
  with hydrochloric acid. H., 5. Sp. gr., 2.9.


                               GRAPHITE.

                                      HEXAGONAL.


  COMPOSITION: C.

  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Minute particles, or flakes and grains
  of irregular shape, seldom crystallized.

  _Opaque_, and by reflected light, black with metallic lustre.

  ▄Distinguished from▄: The similarly appearing ores by its insolubility
  in acids and the possibility of making it disappear by heating.

  REMARKS: Graphite is widely distributed in the oldest rock formations,
  especially in the schists. It is often associated with rutile and the
  iron oxides. Graphite is not acted on by acids. H., 1 to 2. Sp. gr.,
  2.09 to 2.25. It is burnt with great difficulty in thin sections on
  platinum foil; but this test may vary, in many cases the graphite
  (when in bladed flakes) not being consumed even after long heating.
  When heated it may expand into worm-like forms.

  _Carbonaceous Matter._—Occurs in opaque, grayish-black particles
  having no lustre; and is found finely disseminated, sometimes in
  larger aggregations, in clay slates, limestones, etc.


                               HEMATITE.

                                      HEXAGONAL.


  COMPOSITION: Fe_{2}O_{3}.

  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Irregular scales, minute grains or
  earthy. Distinct crystalline forms not often observed in rocks.

  _Opaque_, and by reflected light, black with metallic lustre, or red
  without lustre. May also be transparent in red tints. No marked
  pleochroism observed.

  REMARKS: Found widely distributed in acid eruptive rocks, crystalline
  schists, etc. Also as inclusions in minerals, and as a red pigment in
  many rocks. It is insoluble in hydrochloric acid, and non-magnetic,
  unless attached to grains of magnetite. H., 5.5 to 6.5. Sp. gr., 4.9
  to 5.3.


                         ILMENITE, Menaccanite.

                                      HEXAGONAL.

COMPOSITION: (FeTi)_{2}O_{3}.

▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Irregular masses, without
crystallographic outline, rhombohedral crystals, or skeleton-like
growths. Also in brownish, translucent mica-like forms.

_Opaque_, and by reflected light, iron-black with metallic lustre.

When _translucent_: pleochroism brown to yellow; double refraction not
very strong; optically (−).

▄Alteration▄: Often takes place to a whitish, strongly refracting,
substance only slightly transparent, called _leucoxene_. This alteration
product frequently develops along definite rhombohedral directions, Fig.
33 C. Also a change to titanite or rutile may occur, or the ilmenite may
be surrounded by these minerals.

▄Distinguished from▄: MAGNETITE and HEMATITE.—By whitish, strongly
refracting decomposition product. At times the distinction may be very
difficult.


  REMARKS: Ilmenite occurs principally in the soda-rich and basic
  eruptive rocks. The mica-like form is limited to the porphyritic
  eruptives. The brown pigment in the plagioclase of certain gabbros may
  be ilmenite. It is attacked slowly by hot hydrochloric acid, and the
  solution when heated with tin becomes violet. Pure ilmenite is
  indifferent towards the magnet, hence strong magnetic properties would
  indicate a mixture with magnetite. H., 5 to 6. Sp. gr., 4.5 to 5.


                               CORUNDUM.

           ANISOTROPIC.               UNIAXIAL.          HEXAGONAL.
    COMPOSITION: Al_{2}O_{3}.                             _c_ = a.


  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Pyramidal or prismatic crystals,
  grains or basal plates. Zonal structure or twinning may be noticed.
  Colorless or with patches of blue. Index of refraction high (_n′_ =
  1.766, α = 1.760, γ = 1.769), hence _relief_ well marked and surface
  very rough. Rhombohedral cleavage may show in larger individuals.
  Pleochroism only marked when color is deep.

  ▄Crossed Nicols▄: Double refraction weak (γ − α = 0.009), like quartz.
  Interference colors middle 1st order, white to yellow. _Extinction_
  parallel in elongated sections. Optical anomalies very rarely noticed
  in microscopic individuals. In _convergent light_ basal sections show
  a rather indistinct cross; optical character (−).

  ▄Distinguished from▄:

  (_a_) APATITE and VESUVIANITE by brighter interference colors.

  (_b_) TOURMALINE (light colored) by not having such strong absorption.

  (_c_) CYANITE by uniaxial character.

  Corundum may need to be isolated from the rock in order to be
  determined with certainty.


REMARKS: found in contact metamorphic rocks, eruptive rocks, granular
limestones, etc. It is insoluble in hydrochloric acid. When rock
sections are ground with emery, care must be taken not to confuse grains
of emery with corundum in the rock. H., 9. Sp. gr., 3.9 to 4.


                                QUARTZ.

           ANISOTROPIC.               UNIAXIAL.          HEXAGONAL.
      COMPOSITION: SiO_{2}.                               _ć_ = c.

▄Usual Appearance in Sections:▄ Allotriomorphic in the granitoid rocks,
when apparently the last mineral to form, Fig. 5. More or less
chemically corroded pyramidal crystals (with cross-sections six-sided or
rhombic with an angle of about 100°) in the porphyritic rocks. Rounded
or angular grains in the “clastic” rocks; granular mosaic in crystalline
schists and contact rocks, very rarely in distinct crystals in any
rocks. May at times be mutually interpenetrated with an acid feldspar
(the areas of quartz and feldspar extinguishing as entire crystals),
producing “micro-pegmatitic” structure, Fig. 67. Finally may appear as
pseudomorphs after other minerals, but may then consist of some of the
other forms of silica.

_Color._—Colorless, although by reflected light it may appear colored or
cloudy if it contain many inclusions.

_Index of Refraction._—_n′_ = 1.547 (α = 1.544, γ = 1.553) hence no
_relief_ and surface smooth.

_Cleavage._.—Rarely noticed, an important fact in determining quartz.
Quartz breaks irregularly.

_Inclusions._—Minute fluid, gas and mineral inclusions, often in
irregular trains, are very characteristic of quartz in granite rocks and
crystalline schists. The inclusions are not so abundant in porphyritic
rocks, but a few glass inclusions may occur, filling up “negative”
crystals in the quartz. Rutile, amphibole, etc., may occur as
needle-like inclusions in quartz.

_Polarized Light:_

_Pleochroism._—None.

_▄Crossed Nicols:▄_

_Double Refraction_.—Weak (γ − α = 0.009).

_Interference Colors._—The middle 1st order, white, yellow, etc.

_Extinction._—As quartz is uniaxial, basal sections remain dark during a
complete rotation of stage. In the other sections extinction is not
characteristic, due to the absence of cleavage and crystallographic
outlines. Thin sections do not show circular polarization.

_▄Convergent Light:▄_ Basal sections show a dark cross, without any
rings. Optical character (+).

▄Alteration:▄ Does not take place, so quartz always appears fresh and
unweathered in sections.

▄Distinguished from:▄

(_a_) SANIDINE (in fresh grains).—By use of convergent light. Feldspar
is biaxial, or sections which appear uniaxial are (−).

(_b_) NEPHELITE.—By almost entire absence of hexagonal outline, stronger
double refraction, fresh, unweathered appearance and (+) optical
character.

(_c_) IOLITE (Cordierite), SCAPOLITE and TOPAZ.—See under the latter
minerals.

Quartz may be distinguished from all silicates by being dissolved
without residue in hydrofluoric acid.


  REMARKS: Quartz occurs widely distributed, as in the great sandstone
  formations. It is also a characteristic mineral of all acidic rocks,
  being common in granite, aplite, rhyolite, quartz-porphyry,
  quartz-diorite, dacite, etc. Quartz is very brittle and hence is a
  good indicator of the dynamic forces which have affected the rocks. It
  may show traces of mechanical deformation by peripheral shattering of
  the larger grains or by “wavy extinction”;[85] and also evidences of
  chemical corrosion by curved and looped contours. In some diabases the
  quartz may be surrounded by a rim of hornblende or augite needles
  (“quartz augen”). “Cataclastic” quartz may be biaxial. The “secondary
  enlargement” of quartz in clastic rocks may be noticed by the
  deposition of silica in crystallographic orientation around the
  clastic grains,[86] the new portion extinguishing at the same time as
  the core. Quartz is not attacked by ordinary acids. H., 7. Sp. gr.,
  2.6 to 2.7.


_Chalcedony._—This variety of SiO_{2} has a radially fibrous structure
and shelly parting. It may form sphærulites, central sections through
which show a dark cross between crossed nicols, or line cavities in
rocks.

The index of refraction is a little lower than for ordinary quartz. The
optical character is (−), which must be determined by a mica or gypsum
plate, _ć_ = a. Elongation ∥ a′.


  Chalcedony occurs in the ground mass of very silicious porphyritic
  rocks, which have microfelsitic development; and is found as a
  secondary mineral in all kinds of silicate rocks.


                               TRIDYMITE.

▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: This form of SiO_{2}, which is soluble
in boiling caustic soda, appears in “tile-like” aggregates of minute
colorless plates (pseudo-hexagonal) and is always secondary. The
refractive index is extremely low (_n′_ = 1.477), hence the surface
appears rough.

Between _crossed nicols_ the interference colors are very low in order
(γ-α = 0.002), and the tablets may show a division into different areas
(optical anomalies). In _convergent light_ an indistinct biaxial figure
is generally seen.

REMARKS: Chiefly a volcanic mineral, found in rhyolite, trachyte and
andesite. Commonly associated with opal and chalcedony.


                                CALCITE.

           ANISOTROPIC.               UNIAXIAL.          HEXAGONAL.

COMPOSITION: CaCO_{3}. Ca may be replaced by small quantities of Mg, Fe,
Mn, etc. _ć_ = a.

▄Usual Appearance in Sections:▄ Grains and aggregates. May be fibrous or
oölitic. Only in crystals in certain rocks.[87]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 40.—Calcite, crossed twin lamellæ, in granular limestone. (From
    Cohen.)
]

_Twinning._—Polysynthetic, parallel to one or more faces of −½ R.
(10̄12). Very common in crystalline limestones, and may have been
produced by pressure or by the grinding of the section. Shows itself
between crossed nicols as a series of light and dark bands, parallel or
intersecting, Fig. 40, about parallel to longer diagonal of cleavage
rhombs. When the composition face of the twins is oblique to the face of
the section, interference colors can be seen without the analyzer.

_Color._—Colorless when pure, but may appear colored by transmitted
light, due to organic pigments.

_Index of Refraction._—_n′_ = 1.601 (α = 1.487, γ = 1.659) hence with
ordinary light _relief_ not marked. Due to the great variation in
refractive indices of the two rays, with polarized light, the surface
will appear either quite smooth or rather rough, depending upon which
vibration direction lies over the plane of the polarizer. This marked
variation in appearance (sometimes called “twinkling”) serves as a good
test for calcite.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 41.—Calcite, section parallel to face of rhombohedron, showing
    rhombohedral cleavage. (From Cohen.)
]

_Cleavage._—Parallel to unit rhombohedron (10̄11), appearing in thin
sections as many sharp cracks, whose angles of intersection depend on
the position of the section, Fig. 41. Newton’s colors may be seen along
cleavage cracks.

▄Polarized Light:▄

_Pleochroism._—None.

_▄Crossed Nicols:▄_

_Double Refraction._—Very strong (γ − α = 0.172).

_Interference Colors._—Pale, iridescent colors of very high order.

_Extinction._—As calcite is uniaxial, basal sections remain dark during
rotation. Extinction angles with respect to the cleavage cracks vary
with the position of the section.

_▄Convergent Light:▄_ Basal sections, even when very thin, show distinct
interference figure, with cross and rings. Optical character (−).

▄Distinguished from▄:

(_a_) Other CARBONATES.—By ease with which it is attacked by cold dilute
acids, test can be made on slide after removing cover.

(_b_) MAGNESIUM-BEARING CALCITE.—By micro-chemical tests.

(_c_) TITANITE (Sphene).—See under the latter.


  REMARKS: Calcite is very widely distributed, in addition to the
  extensive sedimentary limestone deposits. Common limestone consists of
  dense aggregates of crystalline grains. Calcite is often a secondary
  product of the lime-bearing silicates in the more basic eruptive
  rocks. Pseudomorphs of calcite after olivine are noteworthy. Coarse
  aggregates of calcite occur in the crystalline schists and contact
  rocks. Calcite is exceedingly plastic to pressure and mechanical
  deformation may be recognized by curving of the cleavage cracks,
  crumpling of the twin lamellæ and “wavy” extinction. Calcite is easily
  attacked and completely dissolved with effervescence by cold dilute
  acids. H., 3. Sp. gr., 2.72.


                               DOLOMITE.

           ANISOTROPIC.               UNIAXIAL.          HEXAGONAL.

COMPOSITION: CaMg(CO_{3})_{2}, when pure CaO = 30.4, MgO = 21.7, CO_{2}
= 47.8. Proportions of Mg and Ca vary, and Fe and Mn also occur. _ć_ =
α.

▄Usual Appearance in Sections:▄ In rocks chiefly as crystals, even dense
homogeneous aggregates showing tendency towards crystalline boundaries
(saccharoidal structure). Crystals almost always unit rhombohedron
(10̄11) with tendency to curved surfaces.

_Index of Refraction._—_n′_ = 1.622 (α = 1.503, γ = 1.682, γ − α =
0.179), a little higher than that of calcite. For variation in
appearance of surface with polarized light, see under calcite.

The microscopic characters are similar to those of calcite, from which
it may be _distinguished_ by not being so easily attacked by cold dilute
acid (test can be made on slide with cover off), by tendency towards
crystalline boundaries, by absence of twin lamellæ (or when present
parallel to _−2R._ (20̄21), hence about parallel to shorter diagonals of
cleavage rhombs), and by micro-chemical tests. The distinction at times
may be very difficult.


  REMARKS: Occurs in sedimentary formations and as crystals in limestone
  and other rocks. In certain rocks the dolomite crystals may not have a
  very good “bond,” and a “drusy” structure may also be characteristic
  of the cavities between dolomite crystals in rocks. Only slightly
  attacked by cold dilute acids, but if acid is heated it dissolves
  easily with effervescence.


                                APATITE.

           ANISOTROPIC.               UNIAXIAL.          HEXAGONAL.
           COMPOSITION:                _ć_ = a.       ELONGATION ∥ a′.
    Ca_{5}(Cl.F)(PO_{4})_{3}.

▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Minute, slender hexagonal prisms,
cross-sections having regular hexagonal boundaries, needles, and grains.
Figs. 14 _a_ and 42.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 42.—Apatite, showing cross fracture, in nepheline-basalt. (From
    Cohen.)
]

_Color._—Generally colorless, seldom bluish or brownish (only in
eruptive rocks).

_Index of Refraction._—_n′_ = 1.635 (α = 1.634, γ = 1.637), hence
_relief_ more marked than that of the colorless associated minerals.

_Cleavage._—Seldom observed microscopically.

_Parting._—Long columnar crystals generally show a transverse jointing,
so that the pieces may be more or less separated.

_Inclusions._—Gas and fluid may be present.

▄Polarized Light▄:

_Pleochroism._—None shown by the colorless crystals, the colored
crystals show stronger absorption parallel to _ć_.

_▄Crossed Nicols▄_:

_Double Refraction._—Weak (γ − α = 0.003).

_Interference Colors._—The lower first order, generally grayish-blue or
white.

_Extinction._—As apatite is uniaxial, basal sections remain dark during
rotation of stage. In all other sections extinction is parallel to _ć_
axis.

▄_Convergent light_▄: Basal sections show a cross, without rings.
Optical character (−).

▄Alteration▄: Does not usually take place, apatite being found perfectly
fresh in decomposed rocks, which is quite remarkable considering its
easy solubility in acids.

▄Distinguished from▄:

(_a_) SILLIMANITE and TREMOLITE.—By weak double refraction and
elongation ∥ a′.

(_b_) NEPHELITE.—By being relatively much smaller and longer than the
nephelite crystals, which are often decomposed. Also by higher relief
and negative results with gelatinization test.

(_c_) ZIRCON.—By lower relief and much weaker double refraction.

(_d_) FELDSPARS (when granular and undecomposed).—By higher relief and
uniaxial interference figure.

(_e_) VESUVIANITE and ZOISITE.—May be only possible by chemical tests.

(_f_) CORUNDUM.—See under the latter.


  REMARKS: Found in most igneous rocks and crystalline schists. In the
  eruptive rocks it appears as one of the oldest secretions from the
  magma, and hence is often found as inclusions in other minerals,
  especially biotite, hornblende, etc. Apatite is easily soluble in
  hydrochloric and nitric acids. H., 4.5 to 5. Sp. gr., 3.19. On account
  of its high sp. gr., apatite, in rock powder, comes down in heavy
  solutions with the metallic minerals, and can be separated from them
  by the use of a magnet. This residue can also be tested for phosphorus
  in the wet way with ammonium molybdate.


                  NEPHELITE,[88] Nepheline, Elæolite.

           ANISOTROPIC.               UNIAXIAL.          HEXAGONAL.
   COMPOSITION: 7NaAlSiO_{4} +                            _ć_ = α.
 NaAl(SiO_{3})_{2}, with partial
     replacement of Na by K.

▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Nephelite in short hexagonal prisms and
grains in the younger volcanic rocks, hence sections rectangular or
hexagonal, Fig. 43; elæolite allotriomorphic in the older plutonic
rocks.

_Color._—Colorless.

_Index of Refraction._—_n′_ = 1.539 (α = 1.538, γ = 1.542), hence no
relief and surface smooth.

_Cleavage._—Imperfect, parallel to prism (10̄10) and base (0001). More
marked in elæolite than in nephelite, especially when decomposition has
commenced.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 43.—Nephelite sections, showing zonal inclusions. (From
    Reinisch.)
]

_Inclusions._—Microscopic needles of augite, etc., also fluid and gas.
Mostly in zones. Elæolite may be much clouded by inclusions and
alteration products.

▄Polarized Light▄:

_Pleochroism._—None.

_▄Crossed Nicols▄_:

_Double Refraction._—Very weak (γ − α = 0.004), may only be detected by
using a test-plate.

_Interference Colors._—The lower first order, grayish-white, etc., a
little lower than the feldspar colors.

_Extinction._—As the mineral is uniaxial, basal sections remain dark
during rotation of stage. In all other sections extinction takes place
and is parallel to cleavage lines when these appear.

_▄Convergent Light▄_: Basal sections show a broad cross, without rings.
Optical character (−).

▄Alteration▄: Takes place easily to fibrous zeolites (natrolite), or in
certain rocks to mica.

▄Distinguished from▄: OTHER MINERALS by gelatinization test and staining
with fuchsine. When present in small interstitial individuals (as is
often the case in basalts) it is very difficult to distinguish without
this test; but it must be remembered that other minerals, zeolites,
etc., will also gelatinize. QUARTZ has stronger double refraction,
rarely shows hexagonal outline, is always fresh and optically (+).
FELDSPAR is biaxial and often shows twinning. ANALCITE.—See under the
latter.


  REMARKS: Nephelite bears the same relation to elæolite as sanidine
  does to orthoclase. It occurs only in the younger volcanic rocks; with
  sanidine in phonolite, with plagioclase in tephrite, without feldspar
  in nepheline-basalt, and with leucite in leucite-basalt. It is not
  found with primary quartz. Elæolite occurs with orthoclase in
  elæolite-syenite, etc. nephelite and elæolite frequently occur with
  the sodalite group. Nephelite gelatinizes with acids. H., 5.5 to 6.
  Sp. gr., 2.5 to 2.6.


                          TOURMALINE, Schorl.

           ANISOTROPIC.               UNIAXIAL.          HEXAGONAL.
     COMPOSITION: Uncertain,           _ć_ = a.       ELONGATION ∥ a′.
   R_{18}B_{2}(SiO_{5})_{4}. R
  chiefly Al, K, Mn, Ca, Mg, Li.

▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Staff-like individuals, bunched or in
radiating aggregates, Fig. 44 B, or prismatic crystals, Fig. 44 A. Basal
sections may be nine-sided.

_Color._—Varies greatly, grayish-blue, brown and green most common.
Li-tourmaline (rare in rocks) is colorless. Zonal structure may be
indicated by differences in color.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 44.—_A_, Tourmaline, showing strong absorption at right angles to
    direction of elongation (_P_ = plane of vibration of polarizer).
    _Quartzite_, Black Hills, D. _B_, Tourmaline in radiate aggregate.
    _Granite_, Cornwall.
]

_Index of Refraction._—_n′_ = 1.633 (precious) to 1.674 (α = 1.620 to
1.651, γ = 1.640 to 1.685), hence _relief_ is marked and surface rough.

_Cleavage._—Not seen in thin sections, but irregular, transverse and
longitudinal cracks may appear.

▄Polarized Light▄:

_Pleochroism._—Distinct, even in light colored varieties, increasing
with the depth of color. The greatest absorption takes place at right
angles to the direction of elongation of the crystal, Fig. 44 A. The
other minerals having this very strong absorption are hornblende, dark
colored mica (distinguished by cleavage and lamellar form) and allanite.
Pleochroic halos may be noticed surrounding inclusions.

▄_Crossed Nicols_▄:

_Double Refraction._—Quite strong (γ − α = 0.017 (precious) to 0.034).

_Interference Colors._—Bright upper first or second order, but may not
be noticeable, due to absorption of parts of the light.

_Extinction._—As tourmaline is uniaxial, basal sections remain dark
during rotation of stage. In all other sections extinction is parallel
to _ć_ axis.

▄_Convergent Light_▄: Cross-sections show a sharp cross. Optical
character (−).

▄Alteration▄: Does not take place.

▄Distinguished from▄:

(_a_) HORNBLENDE.—By absence of cleavage, and by the fact that the
greatest absorption takes place at right angles to the longitudinal
axis, while in hornblende it takes place approximately parallel to the
longitudinal axis, or to the cleavage lines which are parallel to this
axis.

(_b_) APATITE (when colored).—By strong absorption at right angles to
longitudinal axis.

(_c_) CORUNDUM.—See under the latter.

In some cases where recognition is difficult, chemical tests, to prove
presence of boracic acid, must be made.


  REMARKS: The black schorl is the only primary tourmaline and is found
  in granitoid rocks. Tourmaline in other rocks results from “fumarole”
  action; hence occurs in pegmatite, tin and copper veins, clay
  deposits, also (light colored) in contact rocks and crystalline
  schists. The hemimorphic terminations may sometimes be noticed.
  Tourmaline is not acted on by acids. H., 7 to 7.5. Sp. gr., 3 to 3.2.
  It can be separated from powdered rock by sp. gr. solutions combined
  with magnetic methods.


                               ANDALUSITE

           ANISOTROPIC.                BIAXIAL.         ORTHORHOMBIC.
   COMPOSITION: Al_{2}SiO_{5}.         _ć_ = a.      ELONGATION    ∥ a′.


  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: In short, rounded, prismatic crystals,
  with almost square cross-section. Colorless or at times pale reddish
  and spotted. Index of refraction medium (_n′_ = 1.637, α = 1.632, γ =
  1.643), hence _relief_ well marked and surface rough. Cleavage,
  parallel to almost square prism, may show. Pleochroism only marked in
  colored varieties, being reddish ∥ _ć_ (the direction of elongation or
  cleavage). Carbonaceous inclusions are characteristic, arranged as in
  macroscopic specimens (_Chiastolite_), Fig. 45. Pleochroic halos may
  surround inclusions.

  ▄Crossed Nicols▄: Double refraction weak (γ − α = 0.001). Interference
  colors middle 1st order, white to yellow. _Extinction_ in general
  parallel to _ć_ axis in longitudinal sections, symmetrical in
  cross-sections. In _convergent light_ Ax. pl. ∥ (010), Bx_{_a0_}. ∥
  _ć_; axial angle very large (2_E_ > 180°); optical character (−).

  ▄Alteration▄: Often takes place to dense aggregate of mica, when the
  pseudomorph may be hard to recognize.

  ▄Distinguished from▄:

  (_a_) SILLIMANITE by much weaker double refraction, less elongated
  crystals and by elongation ∥ a′ (Sillimanite elong. ∥ c′).

  (_b_) DIOPSIDE by weaker double refraction, rhombic cross-section and
  parallel extinction in longitudinal sections.


  REMARKS: Very characteristic of metamorphic schists and of contact
  zones of clay slates with granite, etc., but not found in rocks which
  have been formed at great pressure. The andalusite grains may often be
  arranged in divergent or finger-like manner. May also form parallel
  growths with sillimanite. It is insoluble in hydrochloric acid. H., 7
  to 7.5. Sp. gr., 3.18.


[Illustration:

  FIG. 45.—Chiastolite, showing characteristic carbonaceous inclusions.
    (From Cohen.)
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 46.—Sillimanite aggregate, showing cross fracture, in mica
    schist. (From Cohen.)
]


                        SILLIMANITE, Fibrolite.


           ANISOTROPIC.                BIAXIAL.         ORTHORHOMBIC.
   COMPOSITION: Al_{2}SiO_{5}.        _c_ = c′.       ELONGATION ∥ c′.

  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Long, slender, colorless prisms or
  needles; often in felt-like aggregates. Crystals often bent. Index of
  refraction rather high (_n′_ = 1.664, α = 1.656, γ = 1.677), hence
  _relief_ marked. Transverse fractures common, Fig. 46.

  ▄Crossed Nicols▄: Double refraction rather strong (γ − α = 0.021).
  Interference colors upper first or lower second order, red, purple,
  blue, etc. _Extinction_ parallel to prisms. Ax. pl. ∥ (100), Bx_{_a_}.
  ∥ _ć_, 2_E_ = 35° to 55°. Optical character (+).

  ▄Distinguished from▄:

  (_a_) APATITE by higher order interference colors and by elongation ∥
  c′ (apatite has elongation ∥ a′).

  (_b_) TREMOLITE by always parallel extinction and small size of axial
  angle.

  (_c_) ANDALUSITE, see under the latter mineral.

  REMARKS: Found especially in clay-rich contact rocks, gneisses and
  schists, often occurring with iolite (cordierite). Crystals may appear
  in bands. It is insoluble in hydrochloric acid. H., 6 to 7. Sp. gr.,
  3.24.


                                 TOPAZ.

           ANISOTROPIC.                BIAXIAL.         ORTHORHOMBIC.
           COMPOSITION:                                   _ć_ = c.
     Al(Al(O.F_{2}))SiO_{4}.


  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Colorless crystals of short prismatic
  habit, grains or rod-like radiating aggregates. Index of refraction
  about the same as that of calcite (_n′_= 1.608 to 1.632, α = 1.607 to
  1.629, γ = 1.618 to 1.637), hence _relief_ medium. Cleavage perfect,
  parallel to base, but does not show as many cracks. Fluid inclusions
  abundant.

  ▄Crossed Nicols▄: Double refraction weak (γ − α = 0.008 to 0.011),
  about the same as that of quartz. Interference colors middle first
  order, white, yellow, etc. _Extinction_ parallel to cleavage. In
  _convergent light_, Ax. pl. ∥ (010), Bx_{_a_}. ∥ _ć_, axial angle
  large (2_E_ = 86° to 126°); interference figure obtained from basal
  sections (_i. e._, from sections showing no cleavage); optical
  character (+).

  ▄Alteration▄: May take place to kaolin or muscovite, by loss of F and
  taking up of H_{2}O and alkalies.

  ▄Distinguished from▄:

  (_a_) QUARTZ by higher relief, cleavage and biaxial character.

  (_b_) SILLIMANITE (when topaz is in radiating aggregates) by lower
  refraction and double refraction.


  REMARKS: Common in greisen and all granite rocks containing tin ore.
  When formed by “fumarole” action (tin veins) the mineral shows
  rod-like radiating forms. It is insoluble in hydrochloric acid. H., 8.
  Sp. gr., 3.5.


                              STAUROLITE.

           ANISOTROPIC.                BIAXIAL.         ORTHORHOMBIC.
           COMPOSITION:                                ELONGATION ∥ ć.
 Fe(AlO)_{4}(AlOH)(SiO_{4})_{2},
  but varying, may contain Mg or
           Mn. _ć_ = c.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 47.—Staurolite, showing twinning at 90° _b_ and 60° _c_, also
    granular quartz inclusions. (From Reinisch.)
]


  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Short, flat prisms, which may be
  twinned at 90° or 60°, Fig. 47, or grains. Color yellowish to
  reddish-brown. Index of refraction rather high (_n′_ = 1.741, α =
  1.736, γ = 1.746), hence _relief_ marked and surface rough. Cleavage,
  both prismatic and pinacoidal, variable. Inclusions of minute quartz
  grains and carbonaceous matter found in larger crystals, but not in
  microscopic crystals. Pleochroism distinct but not strong, showing red
  ∥ _c_ (direction of elongation). Pleochroic halos may surround
  inclusions.

  ▄Crossed Nicols▄: Double refraction weak (γ − α = 0.010). Interference
  colors middle first order, white to yellow, etc. (about like quartz).
  _Extinction_ in general parallel or symmetrical (in cross-sections) to
  cleavages or crystal outline. In _convergent light_, Ax. pl. ∥ (100),
  Fig. 48. Bx_{_a_}. ∥_ć_, axial angle large (2_E_ > 180°); optical
  character (+).

[Illustration:

  FIG. 48.—Staurolite, cross-section.
]

  ▄Alteration▄: Rarely takes place.

  ▄Distinguished from▄: TITANITE, see under the latter mineral.

  REMARKS: Found in metamorphic schists, associated with cyanite
  (disthene), iolite (cordierite), andalusite, etc. It is one of the
  minerals produced by thermal metamorphism, hence found in rocks of
  granite contact zones. It does not occur in the eruptive rocks or in
  schists rich in amphibole. Staurolite is not acted on by hydrochloric
  acid. H., 7 to 7.5. Sp. gr., 3.4 to 3.8.


                      THE ORTHORHOMBIC PYROXENES.
                       Enstatite and Hypersthene.

           ANISOTROPIC.                BIAXIAL.         ORTHORHOMBIC.
   COMPOSITION: (Mg.Fe)SiO_{3}.        _ć_ = c.       ELONGATION ∥ c′.

Enstatite contains little, if any, Fe. Hypersthene contains more Fe, its
optical characters beginning to show with about 10 per cent.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 49.—Enstatite, showing columnar or fibrous structure ∥ _ć_ axis.
    _Norite_, Harzburg.
]

▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Irregularly bounded individuals (E) or
rounded prismatic-pyramidal crystals (H). Columnar or fibrous structure
∥ _ć_ often shows in (E), Fig. 49. Prism angle about 92°. Outline of
crystal sections very similar to that of monoclinic pyroxenes.

_Twinning._—Not so common as in monoclinic pyroxenes. Parallel growths
with monoclinic pyroxene (diallage) occur.[89]

_Color._—Varies with Fe per cent., (E) colorless, (H) brownish.

_Index of refraction._—_n′_ = 1.665 (E) to 1.723 (H) (α = 1.660 to
1.716, γ = 1.670 to 1.729) (about the same as in monoclinic pyroxene),
hence _relief_ marked and surface rough.

_Cleavage._—Variable, parallel to prism (angle 92°) common to all
pyroxenes. Also cleavage or parting parallel to brachy pinacoid (010)
(prominent) and macro pinacoid (100).[89]

_Inclusions._—Parallel oriented, brownish plates and rods, producing
“schiller” structure on the principal cleavage faces, Fig. 15. Glass
inclusions abundant in (H).

▄Polarized Light▄:

_Pleochroism._—Almost absent in (E), but distinct in (H), increasing
with Fe per cent. The change in color may be very marked, from
brownish-red to greenish ∥ _ć_.

_▄Crossed Nicols▄_:

_Double Refraction._—Weak, much weaker than in the monoclinic pyroxenes,
increasing with Fe per cent. (γ − α = 0.010 (E) to 0.013 (H).)

_Interference Colors._—Higher first order, about the same or a little
higher than quartz.

_Extinction._—Parallel to cleavages in longitudinal sections, which are
parallel to _a_ or _b_, and bisecting angles of intersecting prismatic
cleavages in basal sections.

_▄Convergent Light▄_: Axial plane parallel to brachy pinacoid (010),[89]
_i. e._, parallel to best pinacoidal cleavage. Bx_{_a_}. ∥ _ć_ (E), ∥
_a_(H). Axial angles large (2_E_ = 95° to > 180°). Optical character for
(_E_)(+), for (_H_)(−). On account of weak double refraction the
interference figures are not very marked.

▄Alteration▄: Takes place to bastite, serpentine, etc.

▄Distinguished from▄: The MONOCLINIC PYROXENES and AMPHIBOLES.—See under
these species.


  REMARKS: Found in the granular rocks of the gabbro-peridotite series,
  also in the olivine basalts (E); and in crystals in porphyritic
  andesite (H). These minerals are in general not attacked by acids. H.,
  5 to 6. Sp. gr., 3.1 to 3.5.

  _Bronzite_ is the name give to the variety containing about 5% Fe and
  having the characteristic bronzy lustre due to inclusions.


_Bastite_ (an alteration product of the orthorhombic pyroxenes poor in
Fe).—Composed of fibers, often traversed by irregular cracks. Color
light yellowish or greenish and index of refraction about the same as
Canada balsam. Pleochroism faint (only seen in thick sections), the
greatest absorption taking place parallel to the fibers. Double
refraction weak and extinction parallel to the fibers. Axial angle large
and axial plane at right angles to principal cleavage face (010). The
position of the axial plane is the surest distinction between bastite
and the orthorhombic pyroxenes.


                          CHRYSOLITE, Olivine.

           ANISOTROPIC.                BIAXIAL.         ORTHORHOMBIC.
          COMPOSITION: (Mg.Fe)_{2}SiO_{4}.           ELONGATION ∥ a′ or
                                                             c′.

▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Prismatic crystals or in large angular
fragments or grains. Longitudinal sections more or less lath-shaped,
with pointed ends, Figs. 50 and 51, cross-sections six or eight-sided.
Outlines of crystals often rounded or corroded. Skeleton forms may
occur, and sometimes twinning may be observed.

[Illustration:

  Chrysolite.

  FIG. 50.            FIG. 51.
  Basal section.      Macro pinacoid section.
]

_Color._—Nearly colorless, may be reddish (with high Fe per cent.).

_Index of Refraction._—_n′_ = 1.675 (α = 1.661, γ = 1.697), hence
_relief_ marked and surface rough.

_Cleavage._—Parallel to brachy pinacoid (010), less distinct parallel to
macro pinacoid (100), Fig. 50. Often only made visible by decomposition.
An irregular fracturing occurs, which increases with alteration into
serpentine.

_Inclusions._—Chromite, opaque earths, apatite and the brown plates so
common in hypersthene; also glass and slag (in basaltic rocks) and fluid
(in peridotites and olivinfels).

▄Polarized Light▄:

_Pleochroism._—In general none, but noticed in the reddish varieties,
when the absorption is a little stronger parallel to _ć_.

▄_Crossed Nicols_▄:

_Double Refraction._—Very strong (γ − α = 0.036).

_Interference Colors._—Rather high in order (second or third), higher
than the colors of augite.

_Extinction._—In general parallel to cleavage lines.

_▄Convergent Light▄_: Axial plane parallel to base (001) and always at
right angles to cleavage cracks, Fig. 51. Bx_{_a_}. ∥ _a_. Axial angle
very large (2_E_ > 180°). Optical character (+).

▄Alteration▄: Into serpentine very common,[90] producing “mesh-” or
“lattice-” structure (see under serpentine, p. 114); also into
amphibole, etc. In certain basaltic rocks the rims of grains may be
changed into gœthite?, and in certain gabbros the crystals may be
surrounded by a radial rim of amphibole.

▄Distinguished from▄:

Light colored MONOCLINIC PYROXENES.— By the absence of extinction
angles, cleavage (the intersecting prismatic cleavages of augite being
of equal distinctness), stronger double refraction and by axial plane
being parallel to base, hence always at right angles to best cleavage
(in augite axial plane lies in clino pinacoid, bisecting angles of
intersecting prismatic cleavages). Also by gelatinization with acids.


  REMARKS: Found only in basic rocks, as peridotite, diabase, gabbro,
  norite, basalts, etc. Chrysolite (olivine) is a very brittle mineral
  and shows under mountain making pressure “cataclastic” structure.
  Chromite is a characteristic associated mineral. When not too poor in
  Fe, chrysolite becomes permanently red and pleochroic when strongly
  heated. Chrysolite is decomposed by hydrochloric and sulphuric acids,
  with separation of gelatinous silica. H., 6.5 to 7. Sp. gr., 3.3 to
  3.4.


_Hyalosiderite_ (a more ferruginous chrysolite) and _Fayalite_
(Fe_{2}SiO_{4}) may be reddish in sections, and common in the basic
porphyritic eruptive rocks.


                     IOLITE, Cordierite, Dichroite.

           ANISOTROPIC.                BIAXIAL.         ORTHORHOMBIC.
           COMPOSITION:                _ć_ = a.       ELONGATION ∥ a′.
  Mg_{3}(Al.Fe)_{6}Si_{8}O_{28}.


  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Grains, more rarely crystals of short
  prismatic habit, which often form pseudo-hexagonal interpenetration
  twins. Crystals may have edges rounded or corroded. Colorless, but may
  be bluish. Index of refraction a little lower than quartz (_n′_ =
  1.539, α = 1.535, γ = 1.544), hence _relief_ low and surface smooth.
  Cleavage very variable, parallel to brachy pinacoid (010), especially
  noticeable when decomposition has taken place. Inclusions of
  sillimanite, zircon, rutile, etc., may be seen. Pleochroism usually
  not observed, but noticed in blue sections (yellowish white ∥ _ć_ to
  blue). Pleochroic halos (yellow) surrounding inclusions common, see p.
  59.

  ▄Crossed Nicols▄: Double refraction weak (γ − α =0.009), like quartz.
  Interference colors middle first order, white to yellow. _Extinction_
  in general parallel to cleavage cracks. In _convergent light_, Ax. pl.
  ∥ (100), Bx_{_a_}. ∥ _ć_; axial angle large (hyperbolas only seen
  without ellipses) (2_E_ = 64° to 150°); optical character (−).

  ▄Alteration▄: Takes place readily, forming greenish mica-like
  decomposition products, the decomposition commencing along the
  crevices or about the inclusions.

  ▄Distinguished from▄: QUARTZ by observation in convergent light
  (quartz is uniaxial), decomposition and pleochroism or pleochroic
  halos. The section can also be treated with hydrofluosilicic acid,
  when the evaporated solution yields characteristic prismatic crystals
  of magnesium fluosilicate.

  REMARKS: Found in gneiss, hornstone, granite, granulite, etc., and in
  some volcanic rocks. It is often associated with garnet, biotite,
  sillimanite, etc. In a thick section heating to redness makes the
  pleochroism more distinct. Iolite is only slightly acted on by acids.
  H., 7 to 7.5. Sp. gr., 2.6. It is hard to make a mechanical separation
  from quartz, on account of similarity in sp. gr.


                               NATROLITE.

           ANISOTROPIC.                BIAXIAL.         ORTHORHOMBIC.
           COMPOSITION:                _ć_ = c.       ELONGATION ∥ c′.
    Na_{2}Al_{2}Si_{2}O_{10} +
             2H_{2}O.


  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Aggregates of colorless, fibrous
  crystals, which may have sphærulitic structure, showing a dark cross
  between crossed nicols. Index of refraction lower than balsam (_n′_ =
  1.483, α = 1.478, γ = 1.490), hence (in large crystals) the surface
  would appear rather rough.

  ▄Crossed Nicols▄: Double refraction weak (γ − α = 0.012). Interference
  colors the middle first order (yellow, etc.), a little higher than
  those of quartz. _Extinction_ parallel to fibres. Optical character
  (+).

  REMARKS: Never a primary mineral in rocks, but found in igneous rocks
  filling amygdaloidal cavities, and also as a very common alteration
  product of sodalite, noselite, nephelite and acid plagioclases. It
  gelatinizes easily with hydrochloric acid. H., 5 to 5.5. Sp. gr., 2.2.


                            OTHER ZEOLITES.


  COMPOSITION: Hydrous silicates; Al, Ca and Na being the chief bases.

  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: The form depends on the individual
  mineral species, but the majority appear in elongated crystals or
  fibers. They are all colorless and most of them have a small index of
  refraction, hence no _relief_ (prehnite has distinct relief).

  ▄Crossed Nicols▄: The double refraction is generally very weak
  (between that of nephelite and quartz), giving very low order
  interference colors (prehnite and thomsonite have strong double
  refraction).

  REMARKS: The zeolites are always secondary minerals in rocks. They
  gelatinize with hydrochloric acid.


                                GYPSUM.

           ANISOTROPIC.                BIAXIAL.          MONOCLINIC.
 COMPOSITION: CaSO_{4} + 2H_{2}O.


  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Colorless grains or fibers. May be
  colored, however, by inclusions of carbonaceous matter, iron oxides,
  etc. Index of refraction about the same as orthoclase (_n′_ = 1.525, α
  = 1.521, γ = 1.531), hence no _relief_ and surface smooth. Twinning
  lamellæ abundant. Cleavage parallel to (010) gives abundant cracks,
  other cleavages may also be noticed.

  ▄Crossed Nicols▄: Double refraction weak (γ − α = 0.010), the same as
  quartz. Interference colors middle first order, white to yellow.
  _Extinction_ parallel to most perfect cleavage cracks in sections
  parallel to _b_ axis; large extinction angles noticed with reference
  to less perfect cleavages. In _convergent light_, Ax. pl. ∥ (010),
  _i.e._, ∥ to most distinct cleavages; Bx_{_a_}. (c) Λ = 54° front;
  2_E_ = 104°; optical character (+). As the characters of gypsum are
  not always very marked it may be necessary to employ micro-chemical
  tests.

  REMARKS: Forms a rock by itself, often associated with rock salt. It
  also occurs as an alteration product of anhydrite. Gypsum is soluble
  in hydrochloric acid. H., 1.5 to 2. Sp. gr., 2.2 to 2.4.


                   MONOCLINIC PYROXENES, Augite, etc.


  Including the monoclinic minerals of the Pyroxene Group, which show
  distinctly the characteristic cleavage parallel to an almost
  right-angled prism.


           ANISOTROPIC.                BIAXIAL.          MONOCLINIC.
                                     ELONGATION ∥
                                       c′.[91]

COMPOSITION: RSiO_{3}, R = Ca, Mg, Mn, Fe, Al chiefly, with the Ca
predominating over the Mg.

▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Both in crystals and more or less
irregular grains, Figs. 4 and 12, the habit varying with the chemical
composition as follows:

_Diopside_ (Ca, Mg varieties), long columnar crystals and grains.

_Augite_ (ditto, but containing also Al and Fe), short prismatic
crystals and grains.

_Diallage_, granular or lamellar (|| (100)), may show fibrous structure
∥ _ć_.

Prism angle = 87° 06′ (important in cross-sections). Sections of
crystals nearly at right angles to the vertical axis _ć_ are octagonal
or square with truncated corners, Figs. 4 and 53, while those parallel
to the _ć_ axis are lath-shaped. Pyroxene also occurs in skeleton
crystals and acicular microlites in eruptive rocks.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 52.—Augite, section parallel to _ć_ axis showing prismatic
    cleavage, in leucite-basal. (From Cohen.)
]

Zonal structure (especially in augites) may be marked by differences in
color or extinction, and in some basalts the crystals have the
“hour-glass” structure.

_Twinning._—Common, usually the twinning plane being the ortho pinacoid
(100). Twin lamellæ may be noticed. Intergrowths occur with orthorhombic
pyroxene and amphibole.

_Color._—From almost colorless through green (diopsides, Na pyroxenes,
etc.) to brown (augites); the red to brownish-red color of certain
augites has been considered due to manganese. Yellow color very rare.

_Index of Refraction._—_n′_ = 1.68 to 1.72 (α = 1.671 to 1.706, γ =
1.700 to 1.728), hence _relief_ high and surface rough.

_Cleavage._—More or less perfect parallel to prism of 87° 06′. Cleavage
cracks distinct and numerous, but not generally running uninterruptedly
through crystal, Figs. 12 and 52. Cleavage not so perfect as that of
amphibole.

_Parting._—Diallage and diopside have distinct parting parallel to ortho
pinacoid (100), Fig. 53. Some crystals may show parting parallel to base
(001).

_Inclusions._—Tabular microscopic interpositions, similar to those in
bronzite, may occur in diallage. The iron ores, apatite, etc., may occur
in augite.

▄Polarized Light▄:

[Illustration:

  FIG. 53.—Diallage, cross-section.
]

_Pleochroism._—Usually not noticed, and in general only appearing as
different shades of the same color. In some cases (diallage, fassaite
and Na rich augite) well marked, a and c green to yellowish green and b
brownish to reddish-brown; hence pleochroism not intense in sections
showing extinction angles. When Ti is present, violet parallel to _b_.

▄_Crossed Nicols_▄:

_Double Refraction._—Strong (γ − α = 0.022 to 0.029), being stronger in
the pale or colorless pyroxenes.

_Interference Colors._—Second order, hence always bright tints.

_Extinction._—Symmetrical in sections (through _b_ axis) showing
intersecting cleavage lines, in such cases bisecting the angles of the
cleavage. In sections showing parallel cleavage lines, only parallel in
ortho pinacoid (100) sections, in all other sections an extinction angle
being observed. The maximum extinction angle is large, lies in the
obtuse angle, varies with the chemical composition from 36° 30′ to 54°,
and is only obtained when the section of the crystal is parallel to the
clino pinacoid (010), Fig. 54, varying from this angle to 0°, when the
section is parallel to the ortho pinacoid (100). In Ti and Na pyroxenes
the inclined dispersion is so great that extinctions are not sharp, but
instead a change takes place in the interference color from bluish to
brownish.

▄_Convergent Light_▄: Axial plane parallel to clino pinacoid (010). Fig.
54. A cleavage flake parallel to ortho pinacoid (100) shows the
emergence of an optic axis (orthorhombic pyroxene parallel to best
pinacoidal cleavage would not show figure). Bx_{_a_}.(c) Λ _ć_ = 36° to
54° front. Axial angles large (2_E_ = 70° to 112°). Optical character
(+). The interference figures are distinct on account of the strong
double refraction.

▄Alteration▄: May take place to chlorite, serpentine or amphibole
(uralitization[92]), depending on the chemical composition and the
conditions producing the change.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 54.—Diopside, clino pinacoid section.
]

▄Distinguished from▄:

(_a_) ORTHORHOMBIC PYROXENES.—By extinction angle, the orthorhombic
pyroxenes having always parallel or symmetrical extinction in sections
parallel to _a_, _b_, or _c_, and by higher order interference colors.
Also from hypersthene by absence of, or much fainter, pleochroism.
Diallage and bronzite might be confused on account of pronounced
pinacoidal parting, fibrous structure and inclusions; but may be
distinguished by the presence or absence of extinction angles and also
by the position of the optic axes relative to the best cleavage plates.

(_b_) AMPHIBOLE.—See under amphibole.

(_c_) EPIDOTE and CHRYSOLITE (Olivine). When light colored and granular,
by examination in convergent light. The plane of the optic axes is
parallel to the clino pinacoid (010), hence to the longitudinal axis and
prismatic cleavage cracks, while in epidote it is at right angles to
these directions and in chrysolite parallel to the base. Also yellow
color is common in epidote but rare in pyroxene.


  REMARKS: Next to the feldspars pryoxene is the most common constituent
  of the igneous rocks. Diopside and fassaite (green) are found in
  contact rocks; also, what appear to be the same pyroxenes, in many
  eruptive rocks, as andesites, monzonites, etc. Malacolite (light
  green) is found in amphibolites and eclogites, where it may be
  associated with a greenish amphibole (smaragdite). Diallage (bladed
  and twinned) occurs in gabbros and pyroxenites. Common augite (brown)
  is found in the remaining basic eruptive rocks. In the schists the
  pyroxene is colorless.

  Finally augite occurs as a secondary product resulting from the
  “magmatic resorption” of hornblende and biotite.

  Chemical corrosion and mechanical deformation may occur. The green and
  brown augites when heated to redness on platinum foil may become red
  in color. In general the pyroxenes are not attacked by acids. H., 5 to
  6. Sp. gr., 3.3 to 3.5. The sp. gr. of the pyroxenes is considerably
  higher than that of the amphiboles of similar composition, hence
  mechanical separations are possible.


_Acmite_ (_Ægirine_) (Na pyroxenes).—Occur in green or brown, elongated
prismatic crystals, often not very transparent and with marked
pleochroism (like amphibole). Zonal coloring is common. When zonally
intergrown with pyroxene the outer zone is ægirine. The elongation is ∥
a′ (distinction from amphibole whose elongation is ∥ c′). The index of
refraction is higher than in the other pyroxenes (_n′_ = 1.792, α =
1.763, γ = 1.813) and the double refraction stronger (γ − α = 0.050).
The _extinction_ angle is small (5°) and the optical character (—).

The term _Ægirine-augite_ may be used to describe a soda, pleochroic
augite with a large extinction angle.


  These pyroxenes are only found in the eruptive rocks rich in alkalies,
  as elæolite-syenite, phonolite, certain trachytes, etc.; hence are
  associated with elæolite, sodalite, leucite, etc. The small, second
  generation, crystals, in the ground mass of a rock, are always the
  richest in Na of the pyroxenes in that rock.


                      AMPHIBOLE, Hornblende, etc.

           ANISOTROPIC.                BIAXIAL.          MONOCLINIC.
                                   ELONGATION ∥ c′.

COMPOSITION: RSiO_{3}. R = Mg, Ca, Fe chiefly also may contain Al, Na,
Mn. The Mg predominates over the Ca.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 55.—Hornblende, showing twinning between crossed nicols, in
    amphibole-biotite-granite. (From Cohen.)
]

▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Both in crystals and more or less
irregular grains, often fibrous, Figs. 55 and 56, the habit varying with
the chemical composition as follows:

_Tremolite_ (Mg_{3}Ca) and _Actinolite_ ((MgFe)_{3}Ca varieties), in
long columnar to needle-like individuals, with no terminal planes or
with frayed out ends. May be in dense aggregates.

_Pargasite_ in well developed crystals.

_Common green Hornblende_ (aluminous varieties) in crystals, compact
grains or shreds.

_Basaltic Hornblende_ (iron rich, aluminous varieties) in prismatic
crystals of varying length, which may often show “magmatic resorption”
(to augite and magnetite) around outer zone or throughout whole crystal.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 56.—Hornblende, section parallel to _ć_ axis, showing prismatic
    cleavage, in hornblende-diorite. (From Cohen.)
]

Crystals are simple in form of prismatic habit, with prism angle 124°
30′. Cross-sections are acutely rhombic, generally with acute angles
truncated, hence six-sided (pyroxene being eight-sided). Longitudinal
sections are lath-shaped and fibrous structure may be noticed. Skeleton
crystals may also occur, being very fine in certain pitchstones.

Zonal structure and parallel growth may be noticed in the amphiboles.

_Twinning._—Frequent, parallel to ortho pinacoid (100). Twins dual, less
often multiple, Fig. 55. Intergrowths with pyroxene and biotite occur.

_Color._—From colorless (tremolite), through green (actinolite,
pargasite and hornblende) to brown (basaltic hornblende). Yellow in some
varieties and bluish in the soda varieties.

_Index of Refraction._—_n′_ = 1.621 to 1.641 (α = 1.607 to 1.629, γ =
1.634 to 1.653) (1.719, in the basaltic hornblende), hence _relief_
distinct and surface rough.

_Cleavage._—Perfect, parallel to prism of 124° 30′. Generally appears in
thin sections as sharp cracks crowded close together, Figs. 56 and 57.
More perfect than in pyroxene.

Some of the long prisms (actinolite and tremolite) may show transverse
parting.

_Inclusions._—The iron ores, apatite, etc., may be found in hornblende.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 57.—Hornblende, cross-section.
]

▄Polarized Light▄:

_Pleochroism._—All colored amphiboles show pleochroism, which in general
is stronger the darker the color of the variety (actinolite and
pargasite show but little). The absorption is very marked in the
hornblendes, being greatest in the general direction of the cleavage
lines in longitudinal sections. Marked differences in absorption are
also characteristic of the mineral species biotite, tourmaline and
allanite. Pleochroic halos (brownish) surrounding inclusions may be
noticed.

_▄Crossed Nicols▄_:

_Double Refraction._—Quite strong, but a little weaker than in pyroxene
(γ-α = 0.019 to 0.027). Ferruginous basaltic hornblende has strong
double refraction (γ-α = 0.072).

[Illustration:

  FIG. 58.—Actinolite, clino pinacoid section.
]

_Interference Colors._—Second order, hence bright tints, but in darker
colored varieties not so noticeable as in pyroxenes, due to the stronger
absorption of parts of the light. The colors of basaltic hornblende are
so high that they show no bright tints.

_Extinction._—Always symmetrical in sections (through _b_ axis) showing
intersecting cleavage lines, in such cases bisecting the angles of the
cleavage. In sections showing parallel cleavage lines, only parallel in
ortho pinacoid (100) sections, in all other sections an extinction angle
being observed. The maximum extinction angle lies in the acute angle and
is much smaller than in pyroxene, varying with the chemical composition
from 0°–20°. In hornblende, actinolite and tremolite 12°–20°, Fig. 58;
in the basaltic hornblende 0°–10°. The maximum extinction angle is only
obtained when the section of the crystal is parallel to the clino
pinacoid (010), varying from this angle to 0°, when the section is
parallel to the ortho pinacoid (100).

_▄Convergent Light▄_: Axial plane parallel to clino pinacoid (110), Fig.
58. Bx_{_o·_}(c) Λ _ć_ = 0°–20° behind. Axial angles large (2_E_ = 77°
to >180°). Optical character (−). Pargasite is (+).

▄Alteration▄: May take place to chlorite, talc, serpentine, asbestus,
etc., depending on the chemical composition. Amphibole frays out and
becomes fibrous during alteration, and may also lose color.

▄Distinguished from▄:

(_a_) PYROXENE.—By usually much stronger pleochroism in the colored
varieties, and by cleavage and extinction angle. In pyroxene the
cleavage (parallel to prism of 87° 06′) is less perfect; and the
extinction angle is much larger, varying from 36° to 54°.

(_b_) BIOTITE.—By the extinction in the mica being always about parallel
to the cleavage. Both have strong absorption, but biotite shows very
slight pleochroism in sections parallel to the cleavage, and has only
the one cleavage parallel to the base. Also the biotite has lower index
of refraction and generally shows uniaxial interference figure.

Colorless tremolite may be distinguished from muscovite and talc by
extinction angles, relief and lower order interference colors.

(_c_) TOURMALINE.—By presence of cleavage, and by the fact that
absorption is most marked about parallel to the elongation (also
parallel to cleavage lines), while in tourmaline the absorption is
strongest at right angles to the elongation.

(_d_) The ORTHORHOMBIC PYROXENES.—By extinction angles, the latter
having parallel extinction in all sections parallel to _a_, _b_ and _c_,
and by prismatic cleavage of 124° 30′. Pleochroism is strong in the
colored varieties of both species, but in amphibole it appears more
generally as a variation of the same color; while in hypersthene a
change in color is often noticed, from brownish-red to greenish parallel
to _ć_ axis.

(_e_) SILLIMANITE and CYANITE.—See under the latter.


  REMARKS: Amphibole comes next to pyroxene in importance and
  distribution of the dark colored ferruginous rock-forming minerals. As
  a rule it occurs in rocks with a large percentage of SiO_{2},
  associated with quartz and orthoclase; while augite generally occurs
  in rocks of a basic nature, associated with plagioclase and little or
  no free SiO_{2}. Furthermore amphibole contains hydroxyl and is
  therefore naturally found in the deep eruptive rocks; its place being
  taken by augite in the effusives. By application of heat hornblende
  changes to augite, while hydrochemical processes bring about the
  opposite result “uralitization.”

  Tremolite and actinolite are found in contact rocks and crystalline
  schists, also as a result of the alteration of olivine into
  serpentine. Pargasite occurs in contact rocks. Common green hornblende
  is found in the plutonic rocks (Na poor and SiO_{2} rich), also in
  contact rocks and crystalline schists (amphibolites). Brown hornblende
  replaces the green variety in the basic plutonic rocks. Basaltic
  hornblende is found in many effusive rocks.

  The hornblende crystals in eruptive rocks, being among the first
  formed constituents, have often suffered subsequent corrosion by the
  magma, giving rise to the dark border already mentioned. The brown
  primary hornblende in some rocks may be changed by a process analogous
  to “uralitization” into a green, reed-like hornblende. Mechanical
  deformations are found in massive and schistose rocks. Light green
  amphiboles, with weak pleochroism, may often be colored intensely
  reddish-brown and made strongly pleochroic by heating to redness on
  platinum foil. In general the amphiboles are not affected by acids.
  H., 5 to 6. Sp. gr., 2.9 to 3.3.


_Glaucophane_, _Arfvedsonite_, etc. (Na rich amphiboles).—Occur blue to
bluish-green in color, with pleochroism and weaker double refraction
than the other amphiboles. Extinction angles vary from 4°–6°
(glaucophane) to 14° (arfvedsonite). They are found in contact rocks,
crystalline schists, eclogite, etc.

For the rarer and less known members of the amphibole group, resource
should be had to more elaborate works.

_Uralite._—Pyroxene altered to amphibole, having the outward crystal
form of pyroxene and the physical characters and cleavage of amphibole.
The change usually commences on the surface and the uralite does not
form a single compact crystal, but consists of numerous slender columns
parallel to one another. These little columns or fibers have their _c_
and [_=b_] axes parallel to the positions of these axes in the parent
mineral. The color is green and the pleochroism weak to strong.

This change is called “_uralitization_” and results from hydrochemical
processes. When the alteration is not complete, portions of the original
pyroxene may be left, having all the characteristic optical properties
of this latter mineral.

_Anthophyllite_, the orthorhombic amphibole, with always parallel
extinction, is sometimes found in colorless to brownish, blade- to
rod-like aggregates in crystalline schists and serpentine.


                              MICA GROUP.

           ANISOTROPIC.                BIAXIAL.          MONOCLINIC.
                  May appear hexagonal or orthorhombic.
           COMPOSITION:               ELONGATION (∥ cleavage) ∥ c′.

_Biotite_ (black or ferro-magnesium mica) =
(H.K)_{2}(Mg.Fe)_{2}Al_{2}(SiO_{4})_{3}, approx.

_Phlogopite_ = a magnesium mica, near biotite, but containing little Fe.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 59.—Mica. _A_, biotite, showing hexagonal cross-section and zonal
    markings. _Minette_, Freiburg. _B_, Biotite, showing strong
    absorption parallel to cleavage and also zonal marking (_P_ = plane
    of vibration of polarizer). _Minette_, Cumberland. _C_, Muscovite in
    bent shreds in gneiss.
]

_Muscovite_ (white or potash mica) = H_{2}(K.Na)Al_{3}(SiO_{4})_{3},
with some replacement by Mg or Fe.

▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Scales, which may be notched or jagged,
with lateral sections lath-shaped; or shreds, Fig. 59 C. When distinctly
crystallized (magnesium micas) the thin hexagonal plates have plane
angles of 120°, Fig. 59 A. Phlogopite crystals may be extended in
direction of _ć_ axis.

Zonal structure not uncommon in the magnesium micas, Fig. 59 A, which
may also have dark iron ore border like hornblende.

_Twinning._—Common, generally parallel to base; seen in sections showing
cleavage by variations in extinction, in basal sections by distorted
interference figures.

Micas of different kinds often associated together in parallel position,
also intergrown with hornblende, pyroxene, chlorite and quartz.

_Color._—Depends on chemical composition. Biotites, brown, green or red
to almost opaque. Phlogopites, colorless or yellowish. Muscovites
colorless.

_Index of Refraction._—_n′_ = 1.564 to 1.619 (α = 1.541 to 1.580, γ =
1.575 to 1.638), hence somewhat marked _relief_ and surface varies in
appearance from slightly rough to fairly rough. In polarized light the
surface appears roughest when the cleavage cracks are parallel to the
plane of the polarizer.

Biotite has more marked relief.

_Cleavage._—Very perfect, parallel to base (001), Fig. 60. Basal
sections show no cleavage, but all other sections show many sharp,
parallel cleavage cracks.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 60.—Biotite, showing basal cleavage, in biotite-granite. (From
    Cohen).
]

For percussion and pressure figures, see reference given below.[93]

_Inclusions._—May be arranged parallel to lines of pressure figure.
Rutile needles, tourmaline, apatite, etc., common in magnesium mica.
Zircon inclusions often surrounded by pleochroic halos.

▄Polarized Light▄:

_Pleochroism._—Varies with the color, being very marked in the colored
varieties (from pale yellow to chestnut-brown or black). The strong
absorption, about parallel to the cleavage lines, is very characteristic
of the colored mica, Fig. 59 B. Strong absorption is also noticed in
hornblende, tourmaline and allanite. Absorption may even be noticed
around inclusions (pleochroic halos) in colorless, non-pleochroic micas.
Cleavage plates of biotite are not pleochroic unless the axial angle is
large.

_▄Crossed Nicols▄_:

_Double Refraction._—Very strong (γ − α = 0.034 to 0.058).

_Interference Colors._—High order (third). May be very bright in thin
sections of the colorless micas, and at times be so high in order as not
to show any marked color tints. May not be noticeable in sections of the
colored varieties, due to absorption of parts of the light.

_Extinction._—About parallel to cleavage lines. Very small extinction
angles may be noticed in biotites. Basal sections of biotite (the
approximately hexagonal mica) usually appear isotropic.

Mottled appearance (like “Birds-eye” maple) characteristic, caused by
distortion of the flexible laminæ during grinding. Most noticeable in
sections inclined to cleavage and near position of extinction.

_▄Convergent Light▄_: Axial plane[94] and Bx_{_a_}, practically at right
angles to basal cleavage; therefore cleavage plates always show well
defined interference figures, generally biaxial in character. The axial
angles vary greatly, being usually small for biotite and phlogopite (may
appear uniaxial) and large for muscovite (2_E_ = 55° to 90°). Optical
character for all micas (−).

▄Alteration▄: Biotites decompose quite easily, lose color and may become
completely bleached, which appears to be due to a leaching out of the
iron. May also alter to green chlorite, with a fraying out of the mica
and a change to chloritic structure.

Phlogopites may alter to fibrous, scaly masses, apparently chiefly talc.
“Sagenite” webs of rutile may accompany the alteration.

Muscovites are characterized by their freshness, and do not seem to
suffer from weathering.

▄Distinguished from▄:

(_a_) HORNBLENDE.—Magnesium mica has extinction about parallel to the
cleavage, while hornblende may have extinction angles of from 0° to 20°.
Both have strong absorption, but biotite shows very slight pleochroism
in basal sections, which also give approximately uniaxial interference
figures in convergent light.

(_b_) TOURMALINE.—Magnesium mica shreds show absorption parallel to
elongation, while in tourmaline the absorption is at right angles to
elongation. There is also an absence of cleavage in tourmaline.

(_c_) CHLORITE.—By strong double refraction, the very high order colors,
however, being often not noticed. Chlorite also shows aggregate
structure and is almost always greenish in color.

(_d_) TALC.—White mica by large axial angle of scales in convergent
light and by micro-chemical tests. The distinction may be very
difficult.


  REMARKS: Muscovite is a rare primary mineral in eruptive rocks, except
  in two-mica granite, etc. As a secondary mineral it occurs in dense
  scaly aggregates or as pseudomorphs after feldspar, nephelite, etc. It
  is frequent in crystalline schists and is probably also the mica in
  amphibolite and eclogite. Phlogopite is found chiefly in contact
  metamorphic limestone; and may be distinguished from muscovite by
  nearly uniaxial character and less sharp cleavage. Biotite is much
  more widely distributed, occurring especially in eruptive rocks,
  crystalline schists and contact rocks.

  Chemical corrosion occurs in original biotite of porphyritic rocks,
  producing a “resorption border” of augite and magnetite. Mechanical
  deformations, producing bending and slipping along “gliding” planes
  (oblique to cleavage), are common to all varieties of mica and may
  produce change to chlorite. The muscovites, together with the
  feldspars, are the most characteristic minerals of dynamo metamorphic
  origin. Biotites and phlogopites are attacked by sulphuric acid at
  high temperatures. Muscovite is but slightly attacked by acids. H., 2
  to 3. Sp. gr., 2.7 to 3.2. The specific gravity separation between the
  micas is difficult on account of the scaly nature of the minerals.


Other micas occur, some being alteration products of those already
described. Among these may be mentioned:

_Lithia Mica._—Both light and dark colored, occurring in granitic rocks
and often only distinguished chemically from muscovite and biotite.

_Damourite_ (_Sericite_) (hydrous K mica).—A secondary product usually
in colorless, fine scaly aggregates in phillites, sericite-schists, etc.


                            CHLORITE GROUP.


  Embracing the members of the Chlorite Group, commonly occurring in
  rocks.


           ANISOTROPIC.                BIAXIAL.          MONOCLINIC.


  The minerals of this group usually appear uniaxial, and crystallize in
  part with hexagonal symmetry.


COMPOSITION: May be considered as isomorphous mixtures of
H_{4}(MgFe)_{3}Si_{2}O_{9} and H_{4}(MgFe)_{2}(AlFe)_{2}SiO_{9}
(Rosenbusch).

▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Minute, scaly aggregates, which may
incline to radial grouping; or in minute grains as a pigment (veridite)
in other minerals.

_Twinning._—May be seen as in mica.

_Color._—Generally green, varying from greenish white to dark green,
rarely colorless or red.

_Index of Refraction._—_n′_ = 1.567 to 1.589 (α = 1.560 to 1.585, γ =
1.571 to 1.596), hence no marked relief and only slightly rough surface.

_Cleavage._—Like mica, very perfect; parallel to flat face, which is
considered to be the basal plane. This cleavage may not be noticed,
especially in secondary chlorite in rocks.

▄Polarized Light▄:

_Pleochroism._—In green and yellow tints (green ∥ cleavage), being more
marked in dark colored varieties. Basal sections are non-pleochroic, the
mineral being practically uniaxial. Pleochroic halos may be seen.

_▄Crossed Nicols▄_:

_Double Refraction._—Generally very weak (γ − α = 0.001 to 0.011).

_Interference Colors._—Very low first order, gray or white, at times
scarcely noticed. Anomalous colors, however, often seen (deep blue or
brown.)

_Extinction._—Plates parallel to cleavage generally appear isotropic or
only show faint color. In other sections extinction is apparently
parallel to the cleavage in the uniaxial type, but extinction angles may
be noticed when type is biaxial. Complete extinction may not be noticed,
due to aggregate structure.

_▄Convergent Light▄_: Plates parallel to cleavage show, at times, an
indistinct interference cross, which may open into two hyperbolas,
indicating biaxial nature of crystallization. Ax. pl. ∥ (010); Bx_{_a_}.
Λ _ć_ = 0° to 15°; 2_E_ variable. Optical character (±).

▄Distinguished from▄: SERPENTINE.—By general green color (serpentine,
with exception of Fe rich variety, is colorless), pleochroism and
frequent anomalous interference colors; but the distinction between
these two minerals may be very difficult. Chlorite may resemble
decomposed or green mica (mica has, however, strong double refraction).
The different species in the chlorite group cannot usually be
distinguished in rocks.


  REMARKS: The chlorites are essentially secondary minerals, derived
  from the aluminous silicates, biotite, augite, garnet, feldspar, etc.
  They are found abundantly in chlorite-schists, contact rocks, etc.,
  and as pigment (veridite) in altered eruptive rocks. May occur as a
  primary constituent of eruptive rocks, often in parallel growth with
  biotite. Chlorides are acted on by hot hydrochloric acid, and
  decomposed easily by sulphuric acid. H., 2 to 3. Sp. gr., 2.6 to 2.96.
  A thin section heated to redness on platinum foil loses water and
  becomes opaque. Ferruginous varieties are turned reddish-brown to
  black by heating (serpentine, as it contains less iron, may give
  negative results with this test).


_Delessite._—Found in sphærulites, filling cavities in amygdaloidal
basic rocks, and in pseudomorphs. It appears to be much altered to other
minerals.


                                 TALC.

           ANISOTROPIC.                                  MONOCLINIC
                                                     (Pseudo-Hexagonal).
           COMPOSITION:                               ELONGATION ∥ c′.
    H_{2}Mg_{3}(SiO_{3})_{4}.


  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: In fine scaly, colorless aggregates.
  Sections, cutting across the scales, would show rod-like forms. Index
  of refraction only a little higher than balsam (_n′_ = 1.572, α =
  1.539, γ = 1.589), hence no marked _relief_ and only slightly rough
  surface. Cleavage perfect parallel to base, like mica.

  ▄Crossed Nicols▄: Double refraction very strong (γ − α = 0.050).
  Interference colors third order, like muscovite. _Extinction_ parallel
  to basal cleavage lines. In _convergent light_, Ax. pl. ∥ (100),
  Bx_{_a_}. ∥ _ć_; axial angle small (2_E_ = small); optical character
  (−).

  ▄Distinguished from▄: MUSCOVITE (with which it is easily confused) by
  micro-chemical tests, proving absence of alkalies and Al; and often by
  the more aggregate structure of the talc. Also by smaller axial angle
  of scales in convergent light.

  REMARKS: Found mainly in metamorphic schists, etc., always as a
  secondary product. It is insoluble in hydrochloric acid. H., 1 to 1.5.
  Sp. gr., 2.6 to 2.8.


                                EPIDOTE.

           ANISOTROPIC.                BIAXIAL.          MONOCLINIC.
                                  ELONGATION ∥ a′ or
                                         c′.

COMPOSITION: Ca_{2}Al_{2}(AlOH)(SiO_{4})_{3}, with some Fe replacing Al.

▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Columnar to thick tabular crystals, more
or less elongated parallel to ortho axis [_=b_], Fig. 61, or in granular
aggregates.

[Illustration:

  Epidote.

  FIG. 61.            FIG. 62.
  Ortho pinacoid section.      Clino pinacoid section.
]

_Twinning._—May occur but rarely noticed. Irregular interpenetrations
common with other members of the group; also parallel growths.

_Color._—Colorless to yellowish (Fe poor) or yellow to greenish to
yellow-brown (Fe rich).

_Index of Refraction._—_n′_ = 1.751 but may be lower (α = 1.731, γ =
1.768), hence _relief_ high and surface rough.

_Cleavage._—Parallel to base (001), Figs. 61 and 62, imperfect parallel
to ortho pinacoid (100). Basal cleavage cracks not very numerous and
appear parallel to general direction of elongation.

▄Polarized light▄:

_Pleochroism._—Varies with the color, being faint in the light colored
varieties, but strong when the color is marked (Fe rich).

_▄Crossed Nicols▄_:

_Double Refraction._—Variable, often very strong (γ − α = 0.037).

_Interference Colors._—Variable, often high (third) orders. Intergrowths
with other members of the group are clearly shown by the “flecked”
interference colors.

_Extinction._—Parallel to cleavage in sections parallel to [_=b_] axis.
In other sections extinction angles vary, see Fig. 62.

_▄Convergent Light▄_: Axial plane ∥ (010), _i. e._, at right angles to
the elongation of crystal and cleavage cracks, Fig. 61. Bx_{_a_.}-(a) Λ
_ć_= 3° behind. Basal cleavage flakes show the almost ⟂ emergence of an
optic axis. Axial angles very large (2_E_ > 180°). Optical character
(−).

▄Alteration▄: Does not take place readily.

▄Distinguished from▄: Light colored MONOCLINIC PYROXENE.—By having plane
of optic axes at right angles to cleavage cracks and direction of
elongation; while in pyroxene plane of optic axes is parallel to
parallel prismatic cleavage cracks or bisects the angle between
intersecting cracks. Furthermore the yellow color is rare in pyroxene.


  REMARKS: Epidote is essentially a secondary mineral, resulting from
  the alteration of the feldspars and the ferro-magnesium silicates. It
  is found in crystalline schists (especially those containing
  hornblende), gneiss, gabbro, diorite, diabase, lime-silicate
  hornstones, contact rocks, etc. Epidote is partially decomposed by
  hydrochloric acid. The Fe rich epidote can be changed to an intense
  color by “glowing” in the air. H., 6 to 7. Sp. gr., 3.32 to 3.45.


_Piedmontite_ (containing Mn).—Red in color. Very pleochroic, red to
yellow. Found in crystalline schists, the porphyrite of Scotland, the
famous “Porfido rosso antico” of Egypt and in certain Japanese mica
schists.


                                ZOISITE.


         Essentially orthorhombic? members of Epidote group.[95]

  COMPOSITION: Like epidote but without any Fe.

  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Similar to epidote or in columnar
  aggregates. Often intergrown with epidote.

  Distinguished from epidote by general absence of color (colorless to
  yellowish) and pleochroism; by slightly lower refractive index (_n′_ =
  1.699 to 1.720) and by much weaker double refraction (γ − α = 0.005
  and less). The interference colors are very low order, gray to white,
  but anomalous colors are often seen (yellow or prussian blue).
  Extinction is in general parallel to pinacoidal cleavage cracks
  (except in clinozoisite).

  The plane of the optic axes may be parallel or at right angles to
  cleavage cracks, and the optical character is (+).

  REMARKS: Generally a secondary mineral. Found in crystalline schists,
  amphibolites, contact rocks, eclogite, etc., and in “saussurite.” May
  be hard to distinguish from vesuvianite and apatite.


                           ALLANITE, Orthite.


                   Monoclinic member of Epidote group.

  COMPOSITION: Like epidote but containing cerium.

  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Similar to epidote in form; but
  distinguished by brown color (may be also almost colorless), strong
  pleochroism and absorption, and medium to weak double refraction (γ −
  α = 0.002 to 0.030). Lamellar twinning clearly seen on account of
  oblique extinction. When included in hornblende and mica it is
  surrounded by pleochroic halos. _n′_ = 1.78 about. Optical character
  (±). Usually perfectly fresh.

  REMARKS: Found as an accessory mineral in SiO_{2} rich eruptive rocks
  and connected crystalline schists, and (light colored) in amphibolite
  and eclogite.


                           TITANITE, Sphene.

           ANISOTROPIC.                BIAXIAL.          MONOCLINIC.
    COMPOSITION: CaTiSiO_{5}.                           ELONGATION ∥
                                                           a′.[96]

▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Wedge-shaped crystals (in Na rich rocks,
more prismatically developed); grains, which may be elongated; and
aggregates of small rounded particles, which appear nearly opaque.
Sections of crystals commonly acute rhombs, Fig. 63.

_Twinning._—Occurs, the twinning boundary bisecting the acute angles of
the rhomb (only noticed between crossed nicols), Fig. 64.

_Color._—Reddish-brown to yellowish to colorless.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 63.—Titanite, showing acute rhombic cross-section.
]

_Index of Refraction._—_n′_ = 1.920 to 1.963 (α = 1.888 to 1.913, γ =
1.978 to 2.054), hence _relief_ very marked and surface very rough.

_Cleavage._—Imperfect and not parallel to predominant form, hence only
appears as a few rough cracks, which are not parallel to any
crystallographic boundary, Fig. 63. Cleavage rarely observed in
secondary grains.

▄Polarized Light▄:

_Pleochroism._—Varies with the color, being more distinct in colored
crystals, yellowish (the lighter color) ∥ a′ and reddish-brown ∥ c′.
Scarcely noticed when the color is light.

_▄Crossed Nicols▄_:

_Double Refraction._—Very strong (γ − α = 0.090 to 0.141).

[Illustration:

  FIG. 64.—Titanite, showing twinning in nepheline-syenite. (From
    Cohen.)
]

_Interference Colors._—Very high order, like those of calcite. Due to
the fact that the refractive indices of two of the rays are very nearly
alike, some sections may show very low order colors.

_Extinction._—Extinction angles not characteristic. There may be no
complete extinction in white light, owing to dispersion.

_▄Convergent Light▄_: On account of the very strong characteristic
dispersion of the optic axes (ρ > ν), the axial angle varies a good deal
with the color of the light used, (St. Gotthard) 2_E_{IA}_ = 57°,
2_E_{Tl}_ = 47°. By using colored glasses this variation in the axial
angle can be seen. The axial plane lies in the clino pinacoid (010),
hence bisects the obtuse angle in the rhombic cross-section, Fig. 63.
Bx_{_a_}.(c) Λ _ć_ = 51° front. The optical character is (+).

▄Alteration▄: May take place.

▄Distinguished from▄:

(_a_) STAUROLITE.—In convergent light the axial plane is shown to be in
the shorter diagonal of the rhombic cross-section, while in staurolite
it is in the longer diagonal.

(_b_) RUTILE.—By biaxial character.

(_c_) CALCITE.—The light colored titanite (sphene), in absence of
twinning, by higher index of refraction.

Titanite may easily be confused with some of the rarer minerals.


  REMARKS: Titanite is always an accessory mineral and is found
  distributed in all rocks, except SiO_{2} rich eruptive and magnesia
  silicate rocks. As a secondary mineral it forms rims around other
  titanium minerals or pseudomorphs after them and also the principal
  part of _leucoxene_. It is partly soluble in hot hydrochloric acid and
  completely decomposed by sulphuric acid. H., 5 to 5.5. Sp. gr., 3.3 to
  3.7. In a specific gravity separation it falls with the ferruginous
  minerals (on account of its density) and from these can generally be
  separated by electromagnetic methods.


                            FELDSPAR GROUP.
              Orthoclase, Microcline and the Plagioclases.


                              ORTHOCLASE.

           ANISOTROPIC.                BIAXIAL.          MONOCLINIC.
                                    ELONGATION (∥
                                   cleavage) ∥ a′.

COMPOSITION: KAlSi_{3}O_{8}, with some replacement by Na.

▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: In crystals and grains. In porphyritic
rocks habit of crystals more or less tabular parallel to clino pinacoid
(010), or rectangular much extended parallel to clino axis _à_, with
cross-sections six-sided, or rectangular to long lath shape, Figs. 65
and 66. Crystals may be changed into rounded or looped grains by
chemical corrosion, Fig. 6. Adularia crystals more prismatically
developed, giving rhombic sections. Dimensions of crystals vary
extremely; microlites occur, at times forming sphærulitic structure. The
very fine grained ground-mass “microfelsite” (not resolved by the
microscope) consists largely of feldspar.

[Illustration:

  Orthoclase cleavage plates.

  FIG. 65.—Basal.      FIG. 66.—Clino pinacoid.
]

Intergrowths with microcline and plagioclase common, forming
“microperthite” when lamellæ are microscopic. May be in zonal formation
with plagioclase (the orthoclase on the periphery). Also intergrown with
quartz[97] forming “pegmatite” and “micro-pegmatite,” Fig. 67.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 67.—Micro-pegmatitic structure, in granophyric quartz-porphyry.
    (From Cohen.)
]

Zonal structure often seen, Fig. 20, especially when decomposition has
commenced; and in fresh crystals may be indicated by zonal arrangement
of inclusions.

_Twinning._—Very common, generally after _Carlsbad_ law, Figs. 18 and
69; the twinning boundary, dividing the section longitudinally, either
being parallel to edges of crystal or bent or jagged. Twinning after
_Baveno_ (twinning boundary diagonal, with the two parts extinguishing
at the same time, but having a and c directions crossed in the two
portions) and _Manebach_ laws less common.[98]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 68.—Orthoclase, ortho pinacoid section showing cleavages
    intersecting at 90°, in augite-syenite.
]

_Color._—Colorless or tinged by oxide of iron. Cloudy if decomposed.

_Index of Refraction._—_n′_ = 1.523 (α = 1.519, γ = 1.526), hence no
_relief_ and surface smooth.

_Cleavage._—Varies and sometimes only seen in very thin sections, but is
an important character and should always be searched for. It occurs
perfect, parallel to base (001), and almost as perfect parallel to clino
pinacoid (010). The two cleavages intersect at 90° in section parallel
to the [_=b_] axis, Fig. 68.

_Inclusions._—May be present and arranged in regular or zonal order, but
not important. Do not occur in individuals of a second generation.

▄Polarized Light▄:

_Pleochroism._—None.

_▄Crossed Nicols▄_:

_Double Refraction._—Very weak (γ − α = 0.007).

_Interference Colors._—Lower first order, gray, white, etc., not quite
so bright as colors of quartz and plagioclase.

_Extinction._—Being monoclinic the extinction angle on base (001), with
reference to clino pinacoid (010) cleavage cracks, is 0°. On clino
pinacoid with reference to basal cleavage cracks, it is 5°. Some
sections (notably in glassy sanidine grains) may appear dark during
complete rotation. This is due to the fact that the axial angle is very
small and the sections act approximately like those of a uniaxial
mineral at right angles to the optic axis.

_▄Convergent Light▄_:[99] Plane of optic axes in general at right angles
to clino pinacoid (010) (plane of symmetry), Fig. 65, hence parallel to
trace of basal cleavage; but in some sanidines parallel to plane of
symmetry. Bx_{_a_} (a) Λ _a_ = 5° above. Axial angles vary, 2_E_ = 125°
(orthoclase), 0°–50° (sanidine).[100] May appear uniaxial when axial
angle is very small. Optical character (−).

▄Alteration▄: Very common to clay,[101] muscovite, hydrargillite, etc.
Generally commences along the cleavage cracks, and when it has
progressed very far the whole feldspar appears opaque or cloudy, and no
perceptible change may take place between crossed nicols. As
decomposition is very prevalent in many rocks, the orthoclase is rarely
clear or pellucid. Epidote is often formed when accessory solutions are
present.

▄Distinguished from▄:

(_a_) The other FELDSPARS and MELILITE.—See under the latter minerals.

(_b_) QUARTZ.—Feldspar is biaxial but when occurring in clear glassy
grains (notably sanidine), which appear uniaxial in convergent light,
may resemble quartz. When tested the optical character is (−), while
that of quartz is (+).


  REMARKS: The members of the feldspar group are the widest distributed
  of the rock-forming minerals and their recognition is of the utmost
  importance on account of their bearing on the systematic
  classification of rocks. Orthoclase is found as an essential
  constituent in the more acid plutonic and older volcanic rocks, as
  granite, syenite, trachyte, porphyry, and also in gneiss, crystalline
  schists, more seldom in contact rocks and subordinate in clastic
  rocks.

  Chemical corrosion (producing rounded or looped grains), Fig. 6, and
  mechanical deformation (producing angular, sharp-edged, broken grains,
  bending and undulatory extinction[102]), Fig. 7, occur in orthoclase.
  When a rock containing feldspar crystals is shattered, the orthoclase
  breaks parallel to basal cleavage and plagioclase parallel to twinning
  plane. Orthoclase is practically insoluble in acids. H., 6 to 6.5. Sp.
  gr., 2.56.


[Illustration:

  FIG. 69. —Sanidine, showing Carlsbad twin and cross-parting, in
    nepheline-phonolite. (From Cohen.)
]

_Sanidine._—This clear, glassy variety of orthoclase occurs in the later
eruptive rocks, rhyolite, trachyte, obsidian, etc. Sanidine often has a
parting parallel to ortho pinacoid (100), which may be noticed in
sections so thick that the cleavage is not seen, Fig. 69. In general it
shows no sign of decomposition, and has a smaller axial angle than
orthoclase. Inclusions of glass are more abundant than in orthoclase.


                              MICROCLINE.

           ANISOTROPIC.                BIAXIAL.          TRICLINIC.
   COMPOSITION: KAlSi_{3}O_{8}.

▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: As a rock constituent in irregular
grains.

In general characters like orthoclase and _distinguished_ from it and
the plagioclases by characteristic “_gridiron_” structure between
crossed nicols, resulting from the polysynthetic twinning after both
_Albite_ and _Pericline_ laws, Fig. 19. This crossed twinning will show
in all sections except those parallel to the brachy pinacoid (010). The
lamellæ are generally thinner than in the plagioclases and more
“spindle-shaped.”[103]

Furthermore the rather obscure triclinic crystallization is shown by an
extinction angle of + 15° on basal cleavage plates with reference to
brachy pinacoid (010) cleavage lines (distinction from orthoclase, which
has O° extinction angle).


  REMARKS: Found with orthoclase, often almost replacing it, in granite,
  syenite, gneiss, etc., and is one of the last minerals to form. It is
  notably resistant to decomposition. A structure like the microcline
  twin structure may be produced in orthoclase by dynamic action.[104]


                           THE PLAGIOCLASES.
              Albite, Oligoclase, Labradorite, Anorthite.

           ANISOTROPIC.                BIAXIAL.          TRICLINIC.

ELONGATION (∥ Albite twin lamellæ) ∥ a′ (except in anorthite when it may
be ∥ a′ or c′).

COMPOSITION:[105]

Albite, NaAlSi_{3}O_{8}.

Oligoclase, _n_(NaAlSi_{3}O_{8}) + CaAl_{2}Si_{2}O_{8}, or _n_ Ab + An,
_n_ = 2 to 6.

Labradorite, NaAlSi_{3}O_{8} + _n_(CaAl_{2}Si_{2}O_{8}), or Ab + _n_ An,
_n_ = 1, 2 or 3.

Anorthite, CaAl_{2}Si_{2}O_{8}.

▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Much the same as orthoclase.
Lath-shaped[106] forms and microlites very common, especially in the
acid series.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 70.—Plagioclase, showing narrow lamellæ, in diabase. (From
    Cohen.)
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 71.—Plagioclase, showing broad lamellæ, in gabbro. (From Cohen.)
]

_Twinning._—Polysynthetic, after _Albite_ law, almost universal; the
twinning appearing between crossed nicols as a series of dark and light
bands, bounded by parallel edges, Figs. 70 and 71. The twin lamellæ are
parallel to brachy pinacoid (010), hence not observed in sections
parallel to this pinacoid. The lamellæ may appear irregular and
interrupted, and seem to be broader in the basic than in the acid
series. When this twinning fails, however, as in the basic plagioclases
in certain metamorphic rocks, the determination becomes very difficult.
In some cases polysynthetic twinning, after both _Albite_ and
_Pericline_ laws, may take place at the same time, giving rise to a
structure somewhat similar to that of microcline, Fig. 72. In addition
the polysynthetic crystals may be twinned like orthoclase after
_Carlsbad_ and _Baveno_ laws.


The general characters are the same as in orthoclase with the following
                              differences:

 _Indices of Refraction_: _n′_ = 1.535 (α = 1.532, γ = 1.540) Albite.
                          _n′_ = 1.541 (α = 1.537, γ = 1.545)
                            Oligoclase, Ab_{4}An_{1}.
                          _n′_ = 1.559 (α = 1.555. γ = 1.563)
                            Labradorite, Ab_{1}An_{1}.
                          _n′_ = 1.582 (α = 1.575, γ = 1.588) Anorthite.

The surface of anorthite appears slightly rougher than that of
orthoclase.

_Cleavages_, parallel to base (001) and brachy pinacoid (010), never
intersect at right angles, as is the case in sections of orthoclase
parallel to [_=b_] axis. This is due to the triclinic system of
crystallization, but the divergence from a right angle is small (93° 36′
to 94° 10′).

[Illustration:

  FIG. 72.—Plagioclase, showing crossed lamellæ, in olivine-gabbro.
    (From Cohen.)
]

_Inclusions_ at times may be quite important, as the vitreous inclusions
of oligoclase in andesites, etc., and the iron ore inclusions and other
microlites in labradorite. The arrangement of these inclusions may be
zonal or in parallel orientation.

_Double refraction_ is a little stronger than for orthoclase (γ − α =
0.008 to 0.013 (anorthite)), hence producing slightly brighter
interference colors in sections of the same thickness.

_Extinction_ takes place in all sections unsymmetrically with respect to
crystallographic, twinning or cleavage lines (as these minerals are
triclinic); hence extinction angles are always observed.

_▄Convergent Light▄_: All plagioclases show the emergence of a
bisectrix,[107] more or less oblique, on brachy pinacoid (010) cleavage
faces. These cleavage faces show no twin lamellæ, unless twinning after
_Pericline_ law occurs, in which case the determination is much more
complicated. The axial angle is large, 2_E_ = 155° (Albite). Optical
character, depending on variety, (+) or (−).

▄Alteration▄: Partly the same as in orthoclase, forming clay, muscovite,
etc. Calcite and epidote are more common as side-products, and
zeolitization also occurs in some rocks. The plagioclases decompose more
easily than orthoclase.

▄Distinguished from▄:

(_a_) ORTHOCLASE.—By repeated twinning after _Albite_ law, giving
between crossed nicols a series of alternate dark and light bands.

When _Albite_ twinning is absent the distinction is very difficult.

(_b_) MICROCLINE.—By common absence of the microcline “_gridiron_”
structure between crossed nicols.


      Methods for Optical Determination of the Plagioclases.[108]

The correct determination of the particular plagioclase is of the
greatest importance in the classification of rocks, and it is no longer
sufficient to simply determine the feldspar as either orthoclase or
plagioclase.

A quantitative analysis of isolated material would lead most surely to
the desired result, but has many objections.

Modern optical methods now permit of a very accurate and convenient
determination under ordinary circumstances. But of course these methods
involve a knowledge of the approximate orientation of the section
tested. When this section is not a definite cleavage fragment, its
orientation can best be determined by convergent light tests.

Only an outline of these methods can be here given, and reference should
be made to more complete works for an elaborate discussion of the
subject.

It is very convenient to have at hand a set of glass models of the
plagioclases, showing location of plane of optic axes, vibration
directions and crystal axes.[109]

(1) _Schuster’s_ method of recognizing the different feldspars by
extinction angles measured on the cleavage plates[110] is very precise,
but not always applicable for crystals in rock sections.

EXTINCTION ANGLES:

                           EXTINCTION ANGLES:
   ON BASE, MEASURED FROM TRACE OF    ON BRACHY PINACOID, MEASURED FROM
        PINACOIDAL CLEAVAGE.              TRACE OF BASAL CLEAVAGE.
 Albite                      + 4°    Albite                      +19½°
 Oligoclase, Ab_{4}An_{1}    + 2°    Oligoclase, Ab_{4}An_{1}    + 8°
 Labradorite, Ab_{1}An_{1}   − 5½°   Labradorite, Ab_{1}An_{1}   −20°
 Anorthite                   −36½°   Anorthite                   −41½°

Confusion may here arise between albite and labradorite if disregard be
had to signs, but the more acid oligoclase is readily distinguished from
the basic anorthite.

By convention the angles on base and pinacoids are (+) when the
direction of extinction has apparently moved as the hands of a watch,
with reference to the upper right hand edge (between base and pinacoid)
of the crystal. When the reverse is true the angles are (−), see Fig.
73.

(2) The statistical method of _Michel Lévy_ and others is often
applicable, especially in the following case:

Sections at right angles to the brachy pinacoid (010) and hence showing
_Albite_ twinning.—These sections, as nearly perpendicular to the
lamellæ as possible, are known by the sharp dividing lines, by the
extinction angles on each side of the trace of the twinning plane being
approximately equal and by the fact that the two adjacent lamellæ are of
the same color when the trace of the twinning plane is parallel to the
plane of vibration of either nicol. Also in the 45° position the lamellæ
are exactly the same color and the dividing lines disappear. Measure the
extinction angles in as many sections thus selected as possible and take
the maximum value.[111] This should be very close to the maximum
extinction angle, which is a constant for each kind of feldspar.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 73.—Showing conventional signs of extinction angles.
]

                     MAXIMUM EXTINCTION ANGLES IN
                       SECTIONS PERPENDICULAR TO
                             ALBITE TWINS.
                     Albite                    16°
                     Oligoclase, Ab_{4}An_{1}   5°
                     Labradorite, Ab_{1}An_{1} 27°
                     Anorthite                 53°

In the determination of rod-like microlites,[112] oligoclase
extinguishes almost parallel to its length, while anorthite may show
extinction angles of over 27°. When these microlites show _Albite_
twinning use the method just described.

(3) _Fouqué’s_ method[113] can be used when the optical orientation of
the section is known (as the result of a test with convergent light).
The extinction angles of these known sections are of great diagnostic
importance.

The best sections are those at right angles to the two bisectrices, and
these may be obtained by rapidly testing those sections, in the rock,
which show an interference color about half as high as the maximum color
in the rock section, in this way avoiding the sections parallel to the
optic axes.

Having found such a section, test it with a gypsum or ¼ undulation mica
plate to prove whether the bisectrix is ⟂ a or c. If ⟂ a (these sections
show sharp twinning striations) measure extinction angle between trace
of axial plane and _albite_ twinning; if ⟂ c measure extinction angle
between trace of axial plane and basal cleavage cracks.

                   EXTINCTION ANGLES IN SECTIONS:[114]
      ⟂ a, MEASURED FROM ALBITE STRIATIONS.         ⟂ c, MEASURED FROM
                                                     CLEAVAGE CRACKS.
 Albite                             74°                    19½°
 Oligoclase, Ab_{4}An_{1}           88°                     5°
 Labradorite, Ab_{1}An_{1}          60°                    22°
 Anorthite                          55½°                   48°

When both extinction angles can be obtained, the determination of the
plagioclase is very certain, but the result cannot be regarded as
definite when only one is found; and the method becomes more difficult
as the crystals become smaller.

The position of the axial plane should be determined by convergent light
test and not simply by the direction of extinction in parallel polarized
light.

(4) _Michel Lévy’s_ method[115] can be employed when twinning is present
after both _Carlsbad_ and _Albite_ laws.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 74.—Extinction Angles in the Zone normal to (010) in Carlsbad
    Twins of the Plagioclases.
]

The section to be tested should be in the zone perpendicular to (010).
Such sections show sharp boundary lines between the twin lamellæ and,
between crossed nicols, the _Albite_ lamellæ show the same interference
color when the trace of (010) is parallel to the cross-wires of the
ocular, and also in the 45° position the lamellæ are the same color and
no dividing lines show. The two parts of the _Carlsbad_ twin exhibit
different interference colors in the 45° position, this difference being
more marked as the composition approaches that of Anorthite. The
extinction angles are measured from the trace of the _Albite_ twinning
plane (010), paying regard to the + and − signs, and the _concurrent
series_ of angles are to be obtained from the two parts of the
_Carlsbad_ twin. The range of these angles (for four type compositions,
Ab, Ab_{4}An_{1}, Ab_{1}An_{1} and An) is given in the accompanying
diagram for all positions of the section in the zone normal to (010).

In the curves of this diagram (Fig. 74) the vertical distances are the
extinction angles for every ten degrees measured from the trace of the
_Albite_ twinning plane, and the horizontal distances represent varying
positions of the section in the zone normal to (010) for every ten
degrees of rotation from the position ∥ to the edge (100)(010) (that is
∥ _ć_ axis), through a revolution of 180° to again ∥ to the same
position. The concurrent angles in one part of a _Carlsbad_ twin are
represented by a heavy line and in the other part by a broken line. It
will be observed that the difference between these concurrent angles is
very small in Albite (3°) and increases markedly towards Anorthite
(60°).

                      TABLE FOR BECKE METHOD.[116]
 Orthoclase                     │   α   │< ω Quartz
 Microcline                     │   β   │               „
 Albite                         │   γ   │               „
 ───────────────────────────────┼───────┼───────────────────────────────
 Oligoclase, Ab_{4}An_{1}       │   α   │< ω; γ > ω Quartz.
 ───────────────────────────────┼───────┼───────────────────────────────
 Labradorite, Ab_{1}An_{1}      │   α   │>ε Quartz
 Anorthite                      │   β   │               „
                „               │   γ   │               „

(5) _Becke’s_ method may be employed to identify the feldspar, by
determining the relative values of the indices of refraction of the
feldspar grain when it lies in contact with a quartz grain (best
results) or with the balsam (not such good results.) The grains should
have vibration directions in parallel position.

Other methods that may be employed are here simply referred to:
Determination (in convergent light) of the emergence of an optic axis
with reference to a known plane, the basic plagioclases show an optic
axis about parallel to _ć_ of the crystal; determination of total
reflection by Wallerant’s total reflectometer; determination of the
value of the mean index of refraction of crushed isolated grains by
Schrœder van der Kolk’s method;[117] determinations by specific gravity
separations with use of heavy solutions, and by chemical and
micro-chemical tests (for the relative amounts of K, Na and Ca).[118]


  REMARKS: The plagioclases may have the same two general habits as
  orthoclase, being glassy and colorless in the younger eruptive rocks,
  and dull and cloudy in the granular and porphyritic, older, massive
  and schistose rocks. They occur in rocks of intermediate and basic
  composition.

  Albite is found in granite (commonly intergrown with orthoclase),
  gneiss, etc., and frequently as a secondary constituent (secondary
  feldspar[119]) in the feldspar-quartz mosaic of mechanically
  metamorphosed rocks. It may also be present in acid eruptive rocks.

  Oligoclase is very frequent in granite, syenite, gneiss, diorite,
  trachyte, andesite, diabase, etc.; and particularly accompanies
  orthoclase.

  Labradorite is confined more to the gabbros,[120] basic eruptive rocks
  and crystalline schists, rich in amphibole and pyroxene.

  Anorthite occurs in gabbros, the most basic porphyrites, basalts, etc.

  Chemical corrosion and mechanical deformation[121] may take place as
  in orthoclase.

  Anorthite and labradorite are more or less decomposed by hydrochloric
  acid, while albite and oligoclase are not acted on by the acid.

  Especially interesting is the alteration of the plagioclase that takes
  place in gabbros, accompanied by “uralitization” of the pyroxene,
  forming “_saussurite_.” This consists of a white to greenish confused
  aggregate, chiefly of zoisite, grossularite, vesuvianite, chlorite,
  secondary feldspar (albite), etc.


_Anorthoclase_ (a Na K, triclinic, feldspar).—Shows between crossed
nicols intersecting areas of exceedingly fine composite twin structure
and others of homogeneous structure, producing a watery or “moiré”
appearance. The twin structure may be only seen in very thin sections.
All possible kinds of perthitic intergrowth occur. Further distinguished
from orthoclase by small extinction angle (4°) on base and by smaller
axial angle (2_E_ = 72° to 88°).


  Replaces orthoclase in the Na rich eruptives. Found in augite-syenite
  and “Rhombenporphyr” of Norway (with rhombic cross-section), acid
  augite-andesite of Pantelleria and in the porphyries of the Hartz.


                           CYANITE, Disthene.

           ANISOTROPIC.                BIAXIAL.          TRICLINIC.
   COMPOSITION: Al_{2}SiO_{5}.                        ELONGATION ∥ c′.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 75.—Cyanite, macro pinacoid cleavage section.
]


  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Blade-like crystals without terminal
  planes, but with cross-section (six-sided) showing two long parallel
  edges and four shorter edges; also in columnar aggregates. Twinning
  common, with generally twinning plane parallel to macro pinacoid
  (100). Colorless or bluish and spotted. The index of refraction is
  high (_n′_ = 1.720, α = 1.712, γ = 1.728), hence _relief_ marked and
  surface rough. Cleavage perfect, parallel to macro pinacoid (100),
  appearing as sharp cracks, parallel to longest edges in
  cross-sections; less distinct, parallel to brachy pinacoid (010).
  Fibrous parting parallel to base (001), Fig. 75. Pleochroism
  (colorless to blue ∥ c′) not noticed except in colored crystals.

  ▄Crossed Nicols▄: Double refraction quite strong (γ − α = 0.016).
  Interference colors upper first order, yellow, red, violet, etc.
  _Extinction_ angles observed in all sections (being triclinic),
  reaching a maximum of 30° on macro pinacoid (100), Fig. 75. Extinction
  on base, about parallel to most perfect cleavage. In _convergent
  light_ axial angle large; axial plane and Bx_{_a_}. about
  perpendicular to best cleavage (100); optical character (−).

  ▄Alteration▄: Seldom observed, but may take place to mica.

  ▄Distinguished from▄:

  (_a_) AMPHIBOLE by cleavage (intersecting cleavages at 124° in
  amphibole and 90° in cyanite) and by (100) cleavage plates of cyanite
  showing emergence of acute bisectrix.

  (_b_) CORUNDUM by being biaxial.

  Distinction from similar appearing minerals may be difficult.

  REMARKS: Found in gneiss, granulite, metamorphic schists, ecolgite,
  etc., commonly associated with garnet. It is not attacked by acids.
  H., 5 to 7. Sp. gr., 3.6.


                              SERPENTINE.

                                      AGGREGATE.
                      ELONGATION (of fibers) ∥ c′.

COMPOSITION: H_{4}Mg_{3}Si_{2}O_{9}, with replacement by Fe.

▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Dense, fibrous (chrysotile) or scaly
(antigorite) aggregates.

_Color._—Colorless to light greenish, except the Fe rich variety which
is green.

_Index of Refraction._—_n′_ = 1.55 to 1.56 (α = 1.56, γ = 1.571 for
antigorite), hence no _relief_ and surface smooth.

▄Polarized Light▄:

_Pleochroism._—Not seen or very feeble, except in the Fe rich variety.

_▄Crossed Nicols▄_:

_Double Refraction._—Rather weak (γ − α = 0.009 to 0.011).

_Interference Colors._—Middle first order, gray, white, yellow, etc.
Anomalous colors do not appear. The aggregate structure is distinctly
seen between crossed nicols. Due to compensation aggregates may appear
isotropic.

▄Distinguished from▄: CHLORITE.—By more usual absence of color,
pleochroism and anomalous interference colors; but this distinction may
be very difficult.


  REMARKS: Serpentine (both antigorite and chrysotile) is essentially a
  secondary mineral, resulting in most cases from the alteration of
  chrysolite (olivine), Fig. 22, more rarely of pyroxene or
  amphibole.[122] The alteration of olivine to antigorite leads to the
  characteristic “lattice structure,” the alteration to chrysotile to
  “mesh structure.” In the case of the “mesh” formation the alteration
  starts from the surface and cracks, producing fibres of chrysotile,
  which stand at right angles to these edges and cracks. As
  serpentinization proceeds new cracks form, due to increase in volume,
  and the process may continue until complete pseudomorphism takes
  place. When this subsequent serpentinization of the meshes takes place
  the resulting serpentine may appear almost isotropic[123] and is
  certainly different from the chrysotile of the first formed veins
  (Weinschenk). Pieces of the parent mineral are often present.

  Serpentine is found in ophiolites, the altered basic igneous rocks,
  pyroxenites, peridotites, etc., and as a primary mineral in the
  Central Alps peridotite, intergrown with fresh olivine (Weinschenk).
  It may also form a rock by itself. Serpentine is attacked quite
  strongly by hydrochloric acid, still more so by sulphuric acid. Common
  serpentine is not altered by heating (distinction from chlorite), but
  the Fe rich variety becomes brown and opaque. H., 2.5 to 4. Sp. gr.,
  2.5 to 2.7.


                             CLAY, Kaolin.

           COMPOSITION:                                  AGGREGATE.
      H_{4}Al_{2}Si_{2}O_{9}
           (kaolinite).


  ▄Usual Appearance in Sections▄: Fine, scaly, colorless aggregates,
  which appear opaque (due to porous structure). The scales show basal
  cleavage. Index of refraction is about the same as balsam (_n′_ =
  1.55), hence no _relief_. The double refraction is weak (γ − α =
  0.008).

  ▄Distinguished from▄: Colorless MICA and HYDRARGILLITE [(Al(OH)_{3}),
  which as an alteration product of the feldspars is often confused with
  clay] by weak double refraction.

  REMARKS: Clay results from the alteration of the feldspars (especially
  the plagioclases), elæolite, scapolite and other silicates. Kaolinite
  is insoluble in hydrochloric but decomposed by sulphuric acid. H.,
  2.5. Sp. gr., 2.6.




                               CHAPTER V.
                  METHODS OF PREPARING SECTIONS.[124]


The methods described will be those used in making rock sections. The
general principles involved are the same for both rock and crystal
sections; although more difficulties are encountered in making the
latter, due to the sections being required in some definite direction or
of some precise thickness, or on account of the possibly fragile or
brittle character of the crystals.

In the case of rock sections any section, taken “at will” through the
rock, will generally do.


                  Cutting and Grinding Machines.[125]

Many different kinds are used, the power being furnished by steam,
electric motor[126] or by the hand or foot.

The chip or fragment of rock to be sliced should be comparatively small
in size, and may be cut by either a vertical diamond saw or by a
horizontal emery-disc. The fragment is held in position by suitable
guides. The moistened emery can be kept in the tray and fed to the disc
by a spoon or some other device. Diamond saws are only needed in the
case of hard rocks.

For cutting sections of crystals in definite directions a form of small
hand apparatus[127] is shown in Fig. 76.

This cut shows how the plate, to which the crystal is cemented, can be
given definite rotation in two directions. The simpler crystal holder,
appearing loose on the stand, may be used when a section is required
parallel to the face of the crystal cemented to the holder.

In these machines the cutting is done with rotating saws of sheet-tin,
usually charged with either diamond dust or emery.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 76.
]

In the case of a very small crystal a section, parallel to any desired
face, can be obtained by cementing this face to a suitable frame or
holder and grinding down by hand on a glass plate with emery, the final
polish being given with rouge. When the section required is not parallel
to a crystallographic face or cleavage it must be verified geometrically
with reference to other faces. If the crystals are soluble in water,
some other liquid, as α bromnaphthalin or benzine, must be used in
grinding; and very fragile crystals are rubbed down on a ground glass
plate without emery or rouge, simply using bromnaphthalin or some other
appropriate liquid.

When sections of a crystal are desired with strictly parallel faces, the
form of grinding apparatus shown in Fig. 77 can be used.

This apparatus consists of a cylinder, held within a suitable frame
supported on three set-screws, _a_{1}_, _a_{2}_ and _a_{3}_, of hard
steel. The lower surface of the frame and consequently the bottom of the
cylinder can be adjusted by the wedge _k_ and the set-screws so that it
is exactly parallel to the grinding surface of the glass plate. The
crystal to be ground down, _p_, is cemented to the bottom of the
cylinder, and the whole apparatus rubbed over the grinding surface of
the plate. The pressure of the hand on the upper part of the cylinder
regulates the pressure of the crystal on the grinding surface. In this
way a surface is obtained which is exactly parallel to the surface
cemented to the cylinder.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 77.
]

Sections of definite thickness can also be obtained by using this
apparatus; for the adjustments with the wedge _k_ may be so arranged
that, when the stop _t_ in the cylinder has reached the bottom of the
slot in the frame, the lower surface of the cylinder will be the
required distance from the grinding surface of the glass plate. The
wedge is graduated so that the value of one division on the sloping top
is known in _mm._ of vertical distance.


                                 Saws.

Saws,[128] of about six inches in diameter made from ¹⁄₃₆ inch
sheet-tin, are convenient for general work, and may be charged with
diamond dust by the operator as follows:[129] Crush one or two carats of
rough crystals of diamond-bort in a small steel mortar to about the
condition of fine sand, care being taken not to reduce the diamond to
powder. Transfer the dust to a piece of flat iron and, after collecting
it in a heap, moisten with a drop of oil. The cutting edge of the tin
disk must now be prepared by making a series of incisions (¹⁄₁₆ inch
deep) on the outer margin. This can be done by striking the disk with a
sharp, thin knife edge. The larger the number of incisions and the
closer they are together the better. Charging the saw is accomplished by
gently hammering the edge against the iron plate, upon which is the
paste of diamond dust and oil. The disk must be slowly rotated during
this charging process, which should be continued until all portions of
the edge have been gone over two or three times.

Instead of charging with diamond dust the saws may be used with emery.
The edges of the saws should first be “upset,” as just described, and
then while rotating charged with emery. The emery in the state of mud
can be applied with the thumb and fingers, or the saw can be allowed to
pass through a tray of emery mud. The finer grades of emery (Nos. 100 to
120) should be used.

The method of mounting saws, of course, depends on the way the saws and
spindles are constructed. It is well, however, to have the hole in the
center of the saw-disk sufficiently large to allow of adjustment for
accurate centering.


                                Cutting.

During the process of cutting a lubricant must be used on the saw.
Petroleum has been recommended by some, but water seems to be the most
used. Holding a piece of soap against the cutting edge will also reduce
friction. It is convenient to carry the water to the saw through a very
small lead pipe, which permits of easy adjustment, so that the water can
be delivered at just the right spot, the flow of water, of course, being
regulated by a stop-cock.

Another method for cutting sections is used by the U. S. Geological
Survey at Washington, D. C. The apparatus consists of an endless wire of
soft iron, about ³⁄₃₂ inch in diameter, revolving over two pulleys or
wheels, one of which is driven by steam-power. The wire is charged by
dipping the fingers in water, taking up a little fine (120 grade) emery
and holding the fingers against the wire above the section. The wire
revolves so as to cut downwards, thus carrying with it the emery taken
from the fingers.

In cutting sections the thickness, of course, depends on the character
of the rock; the more porous and fragile the rock the thicker the
section should be made, an ordinary section being about as thick as a
silver quarter of a dollar.

Very often by skill and practice a suitably shaped chip or fragment can
be detached from the specimen with a hammer or with a hammer and
cleavage chisels, thus avoiding the delay and trouble involved in the
use of the section cutter.


                        Grinding Plates or Laps.

Copper laps, about 7–8 inches in diameter and ½ inch thick, seem to be
best for general purposes; although laps made of lead or cast iron are
also used. A lead lap, being soft, holds the emery well and thus hastens
the grinding away of the section; but at the same time its own smooth
surface is soon destroyed. A cast iron lap is much harder and retains
its smooth surface better, but does not hold the emery so well and
therefore retards the process of grinding. Copper, being intermediate in
hardness between lead and iron, seems to combine the advantages of both.

It is always good practice to have at least two laps, one for the
preliminary grinding with coarse emery and the other for the final
grinding with the finest grades of emery. In this way one lap is always
kept with a smooth surface, making it possible to give a uniform, plane
finish to the section.

The surface of the laps should not be exactly plane, but turned or
finished so as to be a little higher (¹⁄₃₂ of an inch for diameter of 8
inches) at the axis than at the periphery; the idea being to compensate
for the more rapid abrasive action towards the periphery.


                               Cementing.

For grinding down to a proper thinness for transparency it is necessary
to _cement_ the fragment of rock to a holder, which consists of a small
piece of plate-glass about ⅛ inch thick. If the piece of rock has been
cut by a good diamond saw the surface will be comparatively smooth and
uniform, and may only need polishing (described under _grinding_) before
cementing. When, however, the piece of rock is in the shape of a chip or
rough fragment it is first necessary to prepare a smooth ground surface
on one side (described under _grinding_) before it can be cemented to
the glass holder.

The pieces of plate-glass used should be free from flaws, bubbles or
anything tending to destroy uniformity of surface, and should be a
little larger than the chips and slices of rock for which they are to
act as holders. Hardened Canada balsam, or better yet, a cement made of
a mixture of shellac and Venice turpentine,[130] should be used.

The process of cementing is carried on as follows: Heat the glass
support over an alcohol lamp or a Bunsen burner, place it on a good
non-conductor of heat, as a piece of wood, and rub it with a stick of
the cement until a sufficient quantity has been melted off. The piece of
rock should then be treated in the same manner, applying the cement to
the smooth finished portion. Care must be taken that neither the glass
nor rock preparation are heated too much, as this would cause the cement
to smoke or bubble. After placing the rock preparation and plate
together, use quite a little pressure in order to drive out all
superfluous cement. Examine now, through the glass, the contact surface
and see that it is entirely free from bubbles, etc.

Bubbles are usually caused by overheating of the parts before cementing.
If only very few bubbles are seen, they may generally be removed by
moving the rock preparation rapidly back and forth over the glass plate.
If the bubbles are numerous or cannot be removed in the manner just
described, the rock preparation must be separated from the glass plate
and the cementing done over again.

Bubbles must _not_ be allowed to remain, as the portions of the rock
over them, not having any cement backing, are ground away leaving holes
in the section.


                               Grinding.

After the rock preparation has been cemented to its glass holder it is
ready for the grinding process, for which are used horizontal laps,
mounted on a vertical spindle in the tray _T_, Fig. 76. The copper lap
for the first grinding is put in place, and, after it has commenced to
rotate, is charged with emery and water. This can conveniently be done
by dropping on the emery and water, either with the fingers or with a
small bunch of rags at the end of a stick. A large camel’s hair brush
may be used for putting on the finest emery. The emery is distributed
over the rotating lap by the motion of the rock preparation during
grinding. The kind of emery used for this first grinding depends
somewhat on the character of the rock section. If the section is
composed of a hard, compact, fine grained rock, the first emery used may
be quite coarse; the coarser the emery the more rapid being the grinding
down. For rough, quick work, Nos. 80 to 100 emery can be used until the
section becomes quite thin; then, still using the same lap, substitute
the finest corn emery (next coarsest to flour emery) and continue
grinding until the section becomes quite translucent. The lap must then
be changed, and the grinding finished with the finest emery dust.

Too great care cannot be given to cleanliness while doing this sort of
work. A single grain of coarse emery, getting on the lap or section
during the final grinding, will often spoil the whole work by making a
bad scratch. In grinding down the section, great care must be taken to
see that the grinding surface is kept parallel to the surface cemented
to the glass. The section is firmly pressed against the lap by means of
two or three fingers, depending on its size, and uniform pressure should
be maintained over all parts.

The section should be examined frequently, and if it is noticed that one
part is thicker than another, place the section on the lap so that the
thicker part is towards the periphery, and put a little more pressure
upon this part. Gutting or grooving the copper laps is prevented by
moving the section from center to periphery and back, at the same time
giving to it a slight rotary motion. It is best to have the lap revolve
from right to left (in the opposite way from the hands of a watch), as,
holding the section on the right side of the lap, it is easier to keep
it in place by a pulling motion rather than by pushing it against the
motion of the lap. In the final stages of grinding and polishing great
precaution must be exercised, as one or two turns too many of the lap
will often tear away a large part of the very thin section. The section
should be frequently examined, by transmitted light, with a small, low
power microscope, a drop of water or oil being put on the section to
render it more transparent. If the section is thick and fastened to the
plate-glass with a good deal of cement, it will be found convenient,
after the section has been ground quite thin, to remove most of this
cement from around its edges. If this is not done, it may delay the
final work of grinding down. A good rock section should be made so thin
that all the transparent and translucent component minerals can be
examined and studied. Well made rock sections average in thickness from
0.03 to 0.05 _mm._ The last part of the final grinding and polishing can
be done by the hand on a ground glass plate, using the finest emery dust
or rouge and water.

Flour emery may also be used entirely for grinding, and the finest emery
dust for polishing. The finer emery makes better work, although it takes
more time, and is much safer for porous or brittle sections, as the
danger of tearing away pieces of the section is avoided. In the case of
a porous or decomposed rock it is well before grinding to boil the
section in Canada balsam or other equivalent material so as to fill all
the pores and interstices, thus making the section more compact and less
liable to chip away. Sometimes it may even be best before grinding to
mount the section on its permanent glass slide, so that when it has been
ground thin enough the cover can be put on without running any risk in
transferring the section. The only objection is that the glass slide may
be a little scratched by the emery.


                               Mounting.

When the section is sufficiently thin and has a smooth uniform surface
it is ready to be transferred and mounted upon its permanent glass
slide. The glass plate, which has held the section during the grinding,
is gently heated, and, as soon as the cement begins to soften, the
section is very gently pushed off into a shallow cup or evaporating dish
containing turpentine or alcohol. Turpentine is convenient for general
use, because common alcohol (on account of the water it contains) unites
with the shellac to form a kind of white pasty substance, which is
sometimes hard to remove from the section. The section should be
carefully cleaned in the turpentine or alcohol bath by means of fine
camel’s hair brushes. A section-lifter, made from a piece of broad, flat
watch-spring fastened to a small handle, is then gently placed under the
section, which is lifted out of the bath in an inclined position so as
to allow the liquid to drain off. If a drop still adheres it can be
removed by touching it gently with the finger.

The section is now placed in a tray, upon a piece of white, unglazed
paper, so that it may thoroughly dry; after which process it is
transferred to a glass slide, and, if necessary, its rough edges chipped
off with a knife.

If the section is very large, and it is desired to mount it in two
pieces, it can easily be divided by holding one half tightly between two
glass slides and gently bending the other half with the fingers. The
fracture will take place along the edges of the glass slides.

A mixture of gum damar and benzole is recommended for mounting, the
claim being made that gum damar does not turn yellow with age, whereas
Canada balsam may do so. Two solutions of gum damar and benzole are
used. One very thin, about the consistency of water, the other quite
thick, about the consistency of mucilage. Both solutions are prepared by
dissolving the gum damar in benzole and filtering through a linen or
silk rag. If the solution is too thin it can be thickened by placing the
bottle in a warm place and allowing the excess of benzole to evaporate,
or if too thick, more benzole can be added. It is convenient to keep the
solutions in short glass bottles, with wide necks and glass covers
instead of corks. The solutions can be applied with glass rods.

When the section is all ready for its final mounting it is carefully
centered with a coarse needle on the glass slide,[131] and a drop of the
thin solution placed at the edge of the section. Capillary attraction
will cause it to flow over the glass slide under the section, and while
it is soft the section can be again adjusted in place. The slide is then
placed in a cool, dust proof place and allowed to stand for about twelve
hours, when the cement will be set and the section held firmly in place.
The upper surface of the section is then washed with a drop of benzine,
and as much as may be necessary of the thick mounting solution placed
upon it with a glass rod. A cover of glass of the right size is gently
heated and placed in position over the section. Care must be taken not
to have the cover too hot, as it would cause bubbles to form in the
cement. It is also best to rest one edge of the cover on the cement
first, and then lower it gently so as to prevent air bubbles from being
included. The cover is adjusted and then held firmly in position by
means of a mounting clamp, which presses out all superfluous cement. If
a few small bubbles remain near the edges they may be let alone, as they
will generally work out by themselves in time. Sometimes a large bubble
can be worked out by local pressure with the finger and gentle heating
with a small iron rod. If the mounting is unsatisfactory the cover
should be removed by heating, the old cement washed off with a camel’s
hair brush and benzole, and a fresh cover put on. After the cement has
set, the clamp may be removed, but the slide should be left for 24
hours, or longer if necessary, until the cement is quite hard. This
takes longer in hot than in cold weather.

The advantage of using two solutions for mounting is that the section is
firmly held in place on the glass slide while the cover is being placed
over it; there is thus no slipping or sliding of the section, and when
the cover is adjusted in place the work is well finished and the section
still in the centre of the slide.

Canada balsam, or balsam in xylol, are also often used for mounting. The
advantage of the latter being its quick drying or “setting.”


                        Cleaning and Finishing.

When the cement has set the superfluous part is singed by means of a
small hot iron rod. Care must be taken not to use too large a rod or to
have it too hot, as the cement under the cover might then soften and
allow the cover to slip or air bubbles to form. The singeing drives off
the more volatile part of the cement, leaving only a brittle residue,
which can be easily scraped off with a knife. In some cases it may be
necessary to singe and scrape twice. The final cleaning is done with a
soft rag and benzole. The slides are now ready to be marked, either with
a diamond pencil or with pasted labels.


     Convenient Apparatus for Work in a Petrographical Laboratory:


  Section lifters made of watch springs, three sizes.

  Section holders or clamps for pressing out superfluous cement.

  Needle points mounted in light handles.

  Easy spring forceps.

  Mounting frame for centering section on glass slide.

  Small iron rod for singeing.

  Small camel’s hair brushes.

  Cutting pliers and forceps.

  Set of wooden section trays.

  Glass stopper bottles for benzole, benzine, turpentine and alcohol.

  Open neck bottles, with covers for two mounting liquids.

  Rotating mounting stand.

  Small microscope for testing transparency of section.

  Glass rods.

  Small squares and rectangles of plate-glass.

  Round, oval and square cover-glasses.

  Glass slides with ground edges.




                              CHAPTER VI.
                     CHEMICAL AND MECHANICAL TESTS.


These tests may be necessary to confirm an optical determination or to
assist in the differentiation of the closely related species of a group,
as for example, the different plagioclases in the feldspar group. They
may also be useful in the case of opaque substances.

The ordinary chemical methods employed in mineral analyses are often not
applicable, on account of the minute size of the mineral under
investigation and the lack of sharpness in the reactions. Those
methods[132] are to be preferred which produce crystallizations
independent of the relative proportions of the materials taking part in
the reaction and also of the physical conditions invoked.

The tests can be made either on the crystal in a rock section or on the
isolated crystal or fragment, the latter method being preferable when
possible.


               CHEMICAL TESTS MADE ON CRYSTAL IN SECTION.

The part of the section to be tested must be prepared by thorough
washing with alcohol and benzole to remove all traces of balsam. If the
section is covered, the cover-glass can be cut across with a diamond,
and, after heating, the desired portion removed with a knife edge. Any
portion of a section can be isolated by surrounding it with a rim of
viscous balsam or by putting on a new cover-glass, in which a small hole
has been made.[133] This hole can be accurately adjusted over the
special portion of the section and the balsam removed by alcohol and
benzole.

The treatment of rock sections with ordinary acids, such as
hydrochloric, may show the presence of easily soluble minerals[134] and
carbonates, or distinguish silicates that are soluble with jelly, or
produce etched figures on the minerals.

_Test for Carbonates._ When only present in very minute grains the test
can be made as follows: Cover the rock section with a drop of water and
a cover-glass, then allow a drop of acid to slowly diffuse through the
water film. The glass cover will prevent the escape of the gas
bubbles[135] which will thus surely be detected.

If necessary the section can be warmed by heating the projecting part of
a suitable stand, placed under the section on the stage of the
microscope.

_Test for Gelatinizing Silica._ Cover the carefully cleansed section
with a little dilute acid (commonly hydrochloric) and let stand. If too
much acid is used the resultant gelatin will spread over the whole
section and not appear simply on the gelatinizing silicate. Warm the
section, if necessary, and finally rinse off the remaining acid
thoroughly with water. Do not allow the action of the acid to continue
too long, as it is desirable to obtain only a very thin film of
gelatinous silica over the minerals attacked, so that the optical tests
can still be made on these minerals. If after the first trial the action
has not been pronounced enough, the test should be repeated.

The transparent film of gelatinous silica is made more visible by
covering the section with a drop of water, containing a dilute solution
of fuchsine. After standing for some time the section should be washed,
when only those portions covered by the gelatinous film will show the
color stain.


                          ETCHED FIGURES.[136]

The results of etching tests can not be regarded as very satisfactory in
the case of sections of minerals in rock sections, on account of doubt
as to the crystallographic orientation of these sections.

The symmetry of the etched figures depends essentially on the relation
of the crystal faces on which they are obtained to the planes of
symmetry.

The forms of the etched figures differ on the same face of a mineral,
depending on the reagent used, but their degree of symmetry is
independent of the reagent or its degree of concentration. The sharpest
figures are produced on crystal and cleavage faces, the figures being
less perfect on artificially prepared faces, even when polished. The
etching tests may, however, be tried to prove the presence of twinning,
or to distinguish between minerals of similar appearance but belonging
to different systems.[137]

Various acids or alkalies are used to produce the etched figures,
depending on the mineral to be tested. Different factors influence the
formation of good etched figures, and that method must be used which
seems to give most satisfactory results in the given case. The action of
the reagent should be sufficiently pronounced to develop clearly the
etched figures; at the same time the tests must be stopped before the
solvent action has been too powerful.[138] After treatment for etching
the section should be thoroughly washed and examined in some fluid of
weak refraction (with _n_ lower than that of the crystal section), such
as water or air.[139] The objective, of course, must be focused on the
surface of the section.


                   HEATING SECTIONS TO REDNESS.[140]

The part of the section to be tested must be removed from the object
glass, carefully cleansed of balsam, and held on platinum foil in the
oxidizing blowpipe flame. After the test the fragment used may be
remounted in Canada balsam for study.

As a result of heating:

Colorless, hydrous minerals (zeolites and chlorites) become cloudy in
appearance.

Colorless silicates, containing protoxide of iron (as olivine, or
faintly colored pyroxene or amphibole), become red or reddish-brown.

Colored minerals may change their color, chloritic substances becoming
brown or black if heated enough.

Hornblende always becomes pleochroic, and olivine sometimes becomes so.

Members of the sodalite group may be turned blue, if not already of that
color.

The dichroism (yellow to blue) of almost colorless iolite may be
developed.

Carbonaceous particles may be distinguished from the iron oxides by
being consumed.[141]


  METHODS OF ISOLATING CRYSTALS OR MINERAL FRAGMENTS FOR TESTING.[142]

For the application of these methods the rock or aggregate of minerals
should be reduced to homogeneous[143] grains of uniform size (preferably
crystals or cleavages) and not to powder. This is best done by pounding
in a metal mortar, avoiding all grinding motion.

The separations required may be made by specific gravity solutions or
magnetic methods, alone or combined; and in some cases may be assisted
by chemical action.

When other methods fail it may be necessary to separate single grains
from a mixture by hand. A grooved piece of plate-glass, passed beneath
the objective of the microscope, will be found useful. The desired
grains in this groove can be picked out by means of a piece of fine
waxed thread or a fine pointed stick moistened at the end.

The _hardness_ of the homogeneous grains may be obtained by pressing
them firmly into the end of a lead stamp or holder and trying the effect
of scratching upon the faces of minerals of known hardness.

_Specific Gravity Separation._[144] Accomplished by use of fluids of
different specific gravity. These fluids can be made specifically
lighter by dilution, and hence the fragments will fall to the bottom in
order of decreasing density. Dilution of the heavy solutions to any
specific gravity may be affected empirically until the solution will
just suspend a fragment of a mineral having the desired specific
gravity; or the exact specific gravity of the solution may be determined
by the Westphal balance.

The following _indicators_ may be employed to determine the limits of
the specific gravity of the solution to be used for separation purposes
(V. Goldschmidt):

              NO.    NAME.         LOCALITY.      SP. GR.
               1. Sulphur,     Girgenti,            2.070
               2. Hyalite,     Waltsch,             2.160
               3. Opal,        Scheiba,             2.212
               4. Natrolite,   Brevig,              2.246
               5. Pitchstone,  Meissen,             2.284
               6. Obsidian,    Lipari,              2.362
               7. Pearlite,    Hungary,             2.397
               8. Leucite,     Vesuvius,            2.465
               9. Adularia,    St. Gotthard,        2.570
              10. Elæolite,    Brevig,              2.617
              11. Quartz,      Middleville,         2.650
              12. Labradorite, Labrador,            2.689
              13. Calcite,     Rabenstein,          2.715
              14. Dolomite,    Muhrwinkel,          2.733
              15. Dolomite,    Rauris,              2.868
              16. Prehnite,    Kilpatrick,          2.916
              17. Aragonite,   Bilin,               2.933
              18. Actinolite,  Zillerthal,          3.020
              19. Andalusite,  Bodenmais,           3.125
              20. Apatite,     Ehrenfriedersdorf,   3.180

Among the heavy solutions employed may be mentioned:

Thoulet’s solution of potassium-mercuric iodide (KI: HgI_{2} = 1: 1.24),
maximum specific gravity 3.196. Klein’s solution of cadmium
borotungstate (2H_{2}O, 2CdO, B_{2}O_{3}, 9WoO_{3} + 16H_{2}O), maximum
specific gravity 3.6. These two solutions can be mixed with water in any
proportion without being decomposed. Solution of barium mercuric iodide,
maximum specific gravity, 3.588, cannot be diluted with water. Methylene
iodide (CH_{2}I_{2}), specific gravity 3.3243 at 16° C. varying with the
temperature, can be diluted with benzole but not with water.

Nitrates of silver and thallium[145] (AgNO_{3}: TlNO_{3} = 1.1) fuse at
about 75° C. to a clear mobile liquid with specific gravity over 4.5.
Can be mixed while melted with water in all proportions; but cannot be
used for separation of sulphides, as these nitrates are attacked by
them.

Possible chemical action between the minerals and heavy solutions must
not be overlooked in this method of separation.

The funnel-shaped apparatus for these separations must be so arranged,
with stop-cocks, etc., that the heavier material collected at the bottom
can be easily drawn off or removed at any stage of dilution.

These separations, for various reasons, are not always complete, but the
best results are obtained when the processes are repeated several times.

_Electro-magnetic Separation._ All iron-bearing minerals may be
separated from those free from iron by an electro-magnet.

The factors influencing the attraction of a mineral by an electro-magnet
are not definitely known, and do not seem to depend only on the
percentage of iron.

Minerals, such as amphibole, pyroxene, epidote, olivine and garnet
(containing iron), may often be separated by an electro-magnet by
regulating its magnetic intensity.[146]

_Separation by Chemical Means._ Very many different methods may be used,
depending on the nature of the work to be accomplished; but they are
generally only reliable in the hands of a good chemist. The material
should be in the state of fine powder.

As an example may be mentioned the treatment with pure concentrated HFl,
by which the minerals of a rock are attacked in a certain sequence, the
feldspars and related minerals first, then the quartz and finally the
ferro-magnesium silicates, such as amphibole, pyroxene, olivine, etc.


                       MICRO-CHEMICAL REACTIONS.

The first requisite is to bring the substance to be investigated into
solution. This can be done in the case of non-silicates by the ordinary
solvents, while silicates can be decomposed and investigated either by
the methods of Borichy or Behrens. Both methods rest upon the
recognition of the forms, etc., of artificially produced crystals.

The size of a fragment for testing may vary, according to circumstances,
from that of a poppy seed to a pin head. Good results are recorded from
fragments of not more than 0.2–0.7 sq. mm.

The substance to be tested is placed on glass, protected by a film of
balsam, and covered with a spherical drop of the solvent,[147] which
should be allowed to act until all the different elements composing the
sample are in solution (in the case of a very small fragment until it
has all dissolved). Transfer the solution to another protected object
glass, and, after evaporation, the crystallizations characteristic of
the different elements will be seen.

If the evaporation is too rapid and the crystallizations incomplete, the
residue should be redissolved in water, or a very dilute solution of the
solvent employed, transferred to a fresh glass and allowed to
recrystallize.


            Borichy’s Method.[148] (Hydrofluosilicic Acid.)

This method has the advantage of simplicity of manipulation and relative
distinctness in results; but on the other hand these results are only
obtained after several hours, and the temperature has an influence on
the crystalline forms obtained. It is well to make the tests in a
temperature of about 15° C.

Put a spherical drop of pure hydrofluosilicic acid[149] on the fragment
and leave it for some hours in damp air until the action has been
sufficient, then transfer it to a dry air bell-glass and allow
evaporation and crystallization to take place.

For the microscopic examination the objective (200–300 diams. best for
these observations) can be protected with glycerine and a mica disc or
thin cover-glass, or the drop can be all evaporated and the crystals
covered with liquid balsam and a cover-glass.


             Crystallizations Obtained by Borichy’s Method.

_Potassium._ From hydrofluosilicic solutions,[150] isotropic, colorless
crystals of K_{2}SiFl_{6}, in cubes, octahedra or combinations of these
forms with the rhombic dodecahedron. Apparently orthorhombic crystals
may form from acid solutions and at a low temperature, but if these
crystals are dissolved in hot water and recrystallized they will assume
the normal forms.

Platinic chloride will produce under proper conditions sharp, yellow
octahedra of K_{2}PtCl_{6}.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 78.—Fluosilicate of potassium.[151]
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 79.—Fluosilicate of sodium.[151]
]

_Sodium._ From hydrofluosilicic solutions, colorless, very weakly doubly
refracting, hexagonal crystals of Na_{2}SiFl_{6}, which are generally
longer the higher the percentage of sodium in the solution. This test is
very certain even for small amounts.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 80.—Fluosilicate of calcium.[151]
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 81.—Fluosilicate of magnesium.[151]
]

_Calcium._ From hydrofluosilicic solutions, monoclinic crystals of
CaSiFl_{6} + 2H_{2}O of various forms, generally spindle-shaped, with
not very strong double refraction. The crystals have seldom
straight-edged boundaries and are often grouped in rosettes. The
addition of dilute H_{2}SO_{4} decomposes the crystals,
recrystallization yielding long prismatic crystals of gypsum
(distinction from strontium).

Treatment with HFl and dilute H_{2}SO_{4} (in excess), producing on
evaporation characteristic crystals of gypsum, furnishes a very delicate
test for small percentages of calcium.

_Magnesium._ From hydrofluosilicic solutions, rhombohedral crystals of
MgSiFl_{6} + 6H_{2}O with plane faces and sharp edges. The crystals are
colorless and strongly doubly refracting with positive optical
character, Fig. 81.

The formation of struvite crystals (NH_{4}MgPO_{4} + 6H_{2}O), of
coffin-like forms, is very characteristic and takes place from very
dilute solutions (rendered alkaline) on the addition of a grain of salt
of phosphorus or a drop of sodium phosphate.

_Iron._ From hydrofluosilicic solutions, crystals of FeSiFl_{6} +
6H_{2}O, which are isomorphous with those of magnesium salts, with the
same optical characters. They may be differentiated by moistening with
potassium ferrocyanide or ammonium sulphide, in the first case by
turning blue, in the second case black.

_Aluminium._ From hydrofluosilicic solutions, not satisfactory on
account of the gelatinous formation.

When the gelatinous formation is obtained by the action of hydrofluoric
acid on an _aluminous silicate_, the staining test can be used to
distinguish between fine grains of feldspar and quartz or iolite and
quartz.


       Behrens’ Method.[152] (Hydrofluoric and Sulphuric Acids.)

This method depends on common reactions that can be made rapidly, but
has the disadvantage of being rather complicated and requiring delicate
manipulation.

The tests are best made upon about ½ mg. of powder with HFl (pure and
fuming). As soon as the fluorides begin to dry treat with dilute
H_{2}SO_{4} and warm until white fumes of SO_{3} appear. In this way the
HFl and SiFl_{4} are driven off and the sulphates are left. This part of
the test can conveniently be made on a piece of platinum foil. Add
excess of water and concentrate.

Transfer a drop to a clean object glass and, while still liquid, examine
it with the microscope. Do not use a cover-glass over the drop.


             Crystallizations Obtained by Behrens’ Method.

_Potassium._ Add a little platinic chloride when octahedral crystals of
K_{2}PtCl_{6} (size .18 to .30 mm.) will appear, which are clear, bright
yellow in color with strong refraction.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 82.—Potassium platinic chloride.[153]
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 83.—Sulphate of calcium (gypsum).[153]
]

_Sodium._ Use sulphate of cerium and allow a small amount of this
reagent to act through a capillary pipette upon a drop of the solution.
Very small aggregates of brown crystals (size .02 mm.) of the double
sulphate of cerium and sodium are formed, which are clearly visible with
600 diams. If potassium is present the double sulphate of that alkali
will appear in larger, grayish grains (size .05 to .06 mm.). An excess
of H_{2}SO_{4} is to be avoided.

_Calcium._ After a few minutes little gypsum crystals (CaSO_{4} +
2H_{2}O) will appear. In strongly acid solutions the thin acicular
crystals will be grouped in bushes or stars; in neutral solutions the
crystals will have the normal shape of selenite crystals or form
swallow-tailed twins.

_Magnesium._ Use salt of phosphorus dissolved in water and allow it to
mix with the solution (to which has been added ammonium chloride and
ammonia) through a capillary pipette. From a solution containing more
than 5 per cent. of magnesium are first deposited X-shaped skeletons and
rudimentary crystals of Mg.NH_{4}.PO_{4} + 6H_{2}O. If the solution is
more dilute beautiful, sharp, hemimorphic crystals (.10 to .20 mm. in
size) of the orthorhombic system will appear. These crystals often
resemble the roof of a house. The formation of the crystals is assisted
by heat. Iron and manganese phosphates yield crystals of the same type,
but the iron is separated on the addition of ammonia.

_Aluminium._ Use chloride of cæsium. Take a drop of the solution, with
excess of H_{2}SO_{4} driven off, and touch it with a platinum wire that
has been dipped in the melted chloride of cæsium. Large crystals
(.40-.90 mm. in size) of cæsium alum will form, which are octahedral and
cubo-octahedral in shape. Iron does not interfere, as its
crystallization would take place much more slowly. The solution should
not be too concentrated.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 84.—Magnesiumammonium phosphate.[154]
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 85.—Cæsium alum.[154]
]


                             Special Tests.

Distinction between haüynite (contains CaSO_{4}) and noselite (contains
Na_{2}SO_{4}). Treat with HCl and on evaporation the characteristic
crystals of gypsum will be seen if the mineral is haüynite. Dilute acid
should be used and as low a temperature maintained as possible,
otherwise crystals of anhydrite would form instead of gypsum.

Recognition of apatite by test for phosphorus. Treat with a drop of
ammonium molybdate dissolved in HNO_{3}. After complete action remove
the solution to a clean object glass, when after slight warming a large
number of very small yellow crystals (rhombic dodecahedral in shape)
will form. The test may be used to distinguish this mineral from
nephelite, melilite and natrolite. In the presence of soluble silica
evaporate to render it insoluble and treat again with HNO_{3} and the
reagent.

Other micro-chemical tests are not mentioned for the reason that in
elaborate chemical investigations of sections or isolated fragments
recourse should be made to the most complete publications on the
subject.




                               APPENDIX.


 BRIEF SCHEME OF CLASSIFICATION INTO SYSTEMS BY OPTICAL DETERMINATIONS.

 ▄HOMOGENEOUS.▄     The whole substance shows the same optical
                    character, except in the case of twin crystals when
                    the different portions of the twin are affected
                    differently.

 ▄Isotropic▄        All sections of the substance remain dark during a
                    complete rotation between crossed nicols, and no
                    interference figure is produced by convergent light.

   Amorphous        Absence of crystalline form or cleavage.

   Isometric        Presence of crystalline form or cleavage.

 ▄Anisotropic.▄     Sections generally show some interference color and
                    extinguish four times, at 90° apart, during complete
                    rotation.

 _Uniaxial._        Determined by character of interference figures
                    obtained by convergent light from sections which
                    remain dark or nearly so during complete rotation.

                    All sections show parallel or symmetrical
                    extinction.

   Tetragonal       Sections giving interference figures are four- or
                    eight-sided, or show rectangular cleavage.

   Hexagonal        Sections giving interference figures are three-,
                    six- or nine-sided, or show cleavage lines
                    intersecting at 60°.

 _Biaxial_          Determined by character of interference figures
                    obtained by convergent light.

   Orthorhombic     Extinction is parallel or symmetrical in all
                    sections parallel to _ă_, [_=b_] and _ć_. Color
                    distribution is symmetrical to two lines and to the
                    central point, see p. 48.

   Monoclinic       Extinction is only parallel or symmetrical in
                    sections parallel to the ortho axis [_=b_]; all
                    other sections show extinction angles. Color
                    distribution is only symmetrical to one line or to
                    the central point, see p. 48.

   Triclinic        Extinction angles in all sections, although in some
                    minerals these angles may be very small. No symmetry
                    in color distribution, see p. 48.

 ▄AGGREGATE.▄       Not homogeneous, but made up of an aggregation of
                    individuals, all extinguishing at different times.


                   Double Refraction (maximum).[155]

  0.287 Rutile

  0.179 Dolomite

  0.172 Calcite

  0.141 Titanite

  0.090 Titanite

  0.072 Hornblende (basaltic)

  0.062 Zircon

  0.058 Biotite

  0.050 Talc

  0.050 Ægirite

  0.041 Muscovite

  0.037 Epidote

  0.036 Chrysolite (Olivine)

  0.036 Scapolite (Meionite)

  0.034 Tourmaline

  0.034 Phlogopite

  0.030 Allanite (Orthite)

  0.029 Diopside

  0.027 Actinolite

  0.027 Tremolite

  0.024 Hornblende (common)

  0.024 Diallage

  0.024 Anthophyllite

  0.023 Augite

  0.021 Sillimanite (Fibrolite)

  0.018 Glaucophane

  0.017 Tourmaline (precious)

  0.016 Cyanite (Disthene)

  0.013 Hypersthene

  0.013 Scapolite (Marialite)

  0.013 Anorthite

  0.012 Natrolite

  0.011 Chlorite (Clinochlore)

  0.011 Andalusite

  0.011 Topaz

  0.010 Staurolite

  0.010 Gypsum

  0.010 Enstatite

  0.010 Serpentine

  0.009 Corundum

  0.009 Iolite (Cordierite)

  0.009 Quartz

  0.008 Topaz

  0.008 Kaolin

  0.008 Labradorite, Ab_{1}An_{1}

  0.008 Oligoclase, Ab_{4}An_{1}

  0.008 Albite

  0.007 Orthoclase

  0.007 Microcline

  0.006 Vesuvianite

  0.005 Zoisite

  0.004 Nephelite (Elæolite)

  0.003 Apatite

  0.003 Melilite

  0.002 Tridymite

  0.002 Leucite

  0.002 Allanite (Orthite)

  0.001 Chlorite (Penninite)

  0.001 Vesuvianite


                   Indices of Refraction (mean).[155]

  2.712 Rutile

   2.38 Perofskite

   2.00 Spinel (Chrome)

  1.963 Titanite

   1.95 Zircon

  1.920 Titanite

  1.856 Garnet (Melanite)

  1.792 Ægirite

   1.78 Allanite (Orthite)

   1.78 Garnet (Almandite)

  1.766 Corundum

  1.751 Epidote

   1.75 Garnet (Pyrope)

  1.741 Staurolite

  1.723 Hypersthene

   1.72 Spinel

  1.720 Zoisite

  1.720 Cyanite (Disthene)

  1.719 Hornblende (basaltic)

  1.715 Vesuvianite

  1.711 Augite

  1.699 Zoisite

  1.697 Diopside

  1.688 Diallage

  1.675 Chrysolite (Olivine)

  1.665 Enstatite

  1.664 Sillimanite (Fibrolite)

  1.674 Tourmaline

  1.644 Anthophyllite

   1.64 Hornblende (common)

  1.637 Andalusite

  1.635 Apatite

  1.632 Glaucophane

  1.632 Topaz

  1.630 Melilite

  1.633 Tourmaline (precious)

  1.622 Dolomite

  1.621 Actinolite

  1.621 Tremolite

  1.618 Biotite

  1.608 Topaz

  1.588 Chlorite (Clinochlore)

  1.587 Muscovite

  1.582 Anorthite

  1.576 Chlorite (Penninite)

  1.572 Talc

  1.584 Scapolite (Meionite)

  1.564 Phlogopite

   1.56 Serpentine

  1.559 Labradorite, Ab_{1}An_{1}

   1.55 Kaolin

  1.547 Quartz

  1.551 Scapolite (Marialite)

  1.601 Calcite

  1.541 Oligoclase, Ab_{4}An_{1}

 ▄1.54▄ + ▄Canada balsam▄

  1.539 Nephelite (Elæolite)

  1.539 Iolite (Cordierite)

  1.535 Albite

  1.525 Gypsum

  1.525 Microcline

  1.523 Orthoclase

  1.509 Leucite

  1.503 Haüynite

  1.488 Analcite

  1.483 Natrolite

  1.483 Sodalite

  1.477 Tridymite

   1.46 Opal

[Illustration:

  Diagram showing relation between strength of Double Refraction,
    Interference Colors and Thickness of Section.[156]
]


 ORDER OF CONSOLIDATION OF THE CONSTITUENT MINERALS IN PLUTONIC ROCKS.

“There is in plutonic rocks a normal order of consolidation for the
several constituents, which holds good with a high degree of generality.
It is in the main, as pointed out by Rosenbusch, a law of ‘decreasing
basicity.’ The order is briefly as follows:

“1. Minor accessories (apatite, zircon, sphene, garnet, etc.) and iron
ores.

“2. Ferro-magnesian minerals—olivine, rhombic pyroxenes, augite,
ægirine, hornblende, biotite, muscovite.

“3. Felspathic minerals—plagioclase felspars (in order from anorthite to
albite), orthoclase (and anorthoclase).

“4. Quartz, and finally microcline.

“In most rocks such minerals as are present follow the above order. The
most important exceptions are the intergrowth of orthoclase and quartz
and the crystallization of quartz in advance of orthoclase in some acid
rocks, and the rather variable relations between groups 2 and 3 in some
more basic rocks. The order laid down applies in general to parallel
intergrowths of allied minerals; thus when augite is intergrown with
ægirine or hornblende the former mineral forms the kernel of the complex
crystal and the latter the outer shell; when a plagioclase crystal
consists of successive layers of different compositions the layers
become progressively more acid from the center to the margin.

“Certain constituents having variable relations are omitted from the
foregoing list. Thus nepheline (elæolite) and sodalite belong to group
3, but may crystallize out either before or after the feldspar.”[157]




                            OPTICAL SCHEME.


                             INTRODUCTION.


The scheme is designed to furnish the student with a practical method of
           recognizing the common minerals in rock sections.

The arrangement followed has been to group minerals having general
optical characters in common, at the same time giving their specific
characters so as to make it possible to distinguish one from another. In
each rectangle the minerals are arranged in order of their indices of
refraction.

A tabulation of the minerals, with a list of optical characters
appended, is of aid to the skilled investigator, but of very little
assistance to the beginner.

The more common minerals, or those which are important petrographically,
are printed in heavy-faced type; the minerals of less importance in
small capitals.


                  ABBREVIATIONS AND CONVENTIONS USED.


  A. = Amorphous.

  I. = Isometric system.

  T. = Tetragonal system.

  O. = Orthorhombic system.

  M. = Monoclinic system.

  Tri. = Triclinic system.

  H. = Hexagonal system.

  M(H). = Monoclinic, with hexagonal form or characters, as in the case
  of biotite.

  ⟂ = At right angles to.

  El. = Elongation.

  Ex. = Extinction.

  ∥ Ex. = Parallel extinction, as when the crystals extinguish parallel
  to cleavage lines or crystal edges. Extinction which is symmetrical to
  intersecting cleavage lines is also included under this term.

  The mean refractive indices are printed in heavy-faced type.

  The term “grains” is used to describe not only minerals which occur in
  typically granular form, but also those which have coarser
  allotriomorphic form, as elæolite and sodalite in plutonic rocks, such
  as syenite, etc.


                    GENERAL RULES FOR USE OF SCHEME.

The division of the scheme into two vertical columns is based on the
values of the mean refractive indices, as determined by the “relief” and
appearance of the surface. When the refractive index is above 1.60, the
relief is fairly well to distinctly marked and the surface rough to very
rough, depending on the value of the index.

Most of the rock-forming minerals with indices below 1.60 show no relief
and a smooth surface, except in the case of a few of the rarer minerals
(mostly isometric), which have very low indices and hence rough surface.

Mistakes may easily be made in the case of minerals near the limit; but
practice and the use of the Becke test should soon make possible the
classification into the two groups suggested by the scheme, and the
appended descriptions will help to check errors.

When an unknown mineral lies adjacent to one that is known, use the
Becke test for obtaining the relative refractive index of the unknown
mineral; focus sharply on the line of contact between the known and
unknown minerals,[158] then raise the objective slightly and the “bright
line” will appear on the side of the mineral having the higher index.
The method of Schrœder van der Kolk may also be employed, see p. 22.

The horizontal divisions of the scheme depend on the relative strength
of the double refraction based on the observed interference colors.
These colors to be of use in classification must be correctly
recognized. The lower and middle colors of the 1° order, from
bluish-gray through white to yellow, are easily known. The bright red,
blue, green, etc., colors of the 1°, 2° and 3° orders can also be
differentiated without trouble from the very high order colors (4° and
above), which are essentially white in tone with no decided color tint.

When confusion arises, the exact order of the color can be determined by
a quartz wedge, as given on p. 35. Furthermore, a ¼ undulation mica
plate serves to quickly distinguish between the 1° order white and the
practically colorless, high order tint of calcite, titanite, etc.; as
after the insertion of the test-plate the 1° order white suffers a
marked change in color, while the very high order (practically white)
tint shows no appreciable change.

In the determination of these interference colors care must be given to
considerations of orientation and thickness. The section must give the
maximum interference color of all the obtainable sections of the mineral
in the rock section. Such sections will be parallel to the _ć_ axis in
the uniaxial minerals and to the axial plane in the biaxial minerals;
and will, therefore, in convergent light never show the emergence of an
optic axis or bisectrix. Crystal “form,” cleavage, pleochroism, etc.,
may at times aid in the selection of these sections. The thickness of
the section must also be considered, and it is well in all cases to pick
out some known mineral in the section, as quartz, and note its maximum
interference color. Knowing how this varies from the color given by the
scheme for a section 0.03 mm.[159] in thickness, due allowance can be
made for a like variation in the colors given by the other minerals. In
the case of minerals with strong absorption the interference colors may
not be noticeable on account of the absorption of parts of the light.

Under the subhead of pleochroism, the vibration direction of the ray of
a definite color is given and not the direction of transmission of that
ray.

The interference figures in convergent light increase in clearness and
distinctness with the strength of the double refraction. In uniaxial
crystals sections at right angles to the optic axis, _i. e._, sections
which remain dark during a revolution between crossed nicols, show the
best interference figures. In biaxial crystals the most characteristic
interference figures are shown by sections at right angles to the acute
bisectrix.

Crystal sections which are too small do not give very satisfactory
interference figures with convergent light.[160]

Any scheme, however designed, makes a more or less arbitrary
classification of the minerals, and when in doubt it is always safer to
look for the mineral on both sides of the scheme line.

The rarer minerals are not included in this scheme, so when the
determination of a mineral is uncertain or not positive recourse should
be had to more elaborate tables.




                                 INDEX.


                   MINERAL NAMES IN HEAVY-FACED TYPE.

 Abbreviations, ix

 Abnormal interference colors, 30

 Absorption, 26
   directions, 26
   tints, 17

 ▄Acmite▄, 83

 ▄Actinolite▄, 84

 Acute bisectrix, 5

 ▄Ægirine▄, 83

 ▄Ægirine-augite▄, 84

 Aggregate structure, 38

 ▄Albite▄, 103

 ▄Allanite▄, 96

 Allotriomorphic, 15

 Aluminium, test for, by Borichy’s method, 137
   test for, by Behren’s method, 139

 Amorphous bodies, 2

 Amorphous substances, test for, 26

 ▄Amphibole▄, 84

 ▄Analcite▄, 56

 Analyzer, 10

 ▄Andalusite▄, 72

 Anhedron, 15

 Anisotropic character, test for, 27

 Anisotropic crystals, 2

 Anomalies, optical, 27

 ▄Anorthite▄, 103

 ▄Anorthoclase▄, 113

 ▄Anthophyllite▄, 88

 ▄Antigorite▄, 114

 ▄Apatite▄, 68

 Apatite, recognition of, by test for phosphorus, 139

 Apparatus for petrographical laboratory, 127

 Appendix, 141

 ▄Arfvedsonite▄, 88

 ▄Augite▄, 80

 Automorphic, 13

 Axes of elasticity, 4

 Axial angle, 5
   determination of, 47

 Axial plane, 5


 ▄Basaltic Hornblende▄, 85

 ▄Bastite▄, 77

 Becke’s method for determining relative values of refractive indices,
    19

 Behren’s method. (Hydrofluoric and sulphuric acids), 137

 Bertrand lens, 11

 Biaxial crystals, 4, 5
   vibration directions in, 4

 Biaxial interference figures, 43

 ▄Biotite▄, 89

 Bisectrix, acute, 5
   obtuse, 5

 Borichy’s method. (Hydrofluosilicic acid), 135

 Broken or strained crystals, 15

 ▄Bronzite▄, 76


 ▄Calcite▄, 65

 Calcium, test for, by Borichy’s method, 136
   test for, by Behren’s method, 138

 “Cap” nicol, 10

 ▄Carbonaceous Matter▄, 61

 Carbonaceous particles, test for, 132

 Carbonates, test for, 130

 Cement, 122
   for mounting, 126

 Cementing, 121

 Centering stage, 10

 ▄Chalcedony▄, 64

 Characters observed by, convergent light, 40
   crossed nicols, 26
   reflected light, 13
   polarized light, 25

 Characters of opaque minerals, 13
   transparent minerals, 13

 Chemical and mechanical tests, 129

 Chemical (micro) reactions, 134
   separation, 134
   tests on crystal in section, 129

 ▄Chiastolite▄, 72

 ▄Chlorite group▄, 92

 ▄Chromite▄, 52

 ▄Chrysolite▄, 77

 ▄Chrysotile▄, 114

 Circular polarization, 3

 Classification into systems by optical determinations, 141

 ▄Clay▄, 115

 Cleaning and finishing sections, 126

 Cleaning microscope, 11

 Cleavage, 23

 ▄Clinozoisite▄, 96

 Color, 17
   diagram (interference), 143
   fringes, 48

 Condensing lens, 9

 Consolidation of minerals in plutonic rocks, order of, 144

 Conventions, ix

 Convergent light, 40
   characters observed by, 40

 Convergent and parallel light, résumé of uses of, 49

 ▄Cordierite▄, 78

 Corroded crystals, 15

 ▄Corundum▄, 62

 Crossed nicols, characters observed by, 26

 Crossed twinning, 37

 Crystallites, 16

 Crystallizations obtained by Behren’s method, 137
   Borichy’s method, 135

 Crystals bounded by planes, 13

 Crystals without bounding planes, 15

 Cutting, 120

 Cutting and grinding machines, 117

 ▄Cyanite▄, 113


 ▄Damourite▄, 92

 ▄Delessite▄, 94

 Diagram, showing relation between strength of double refraction,
    interference colors and thickness of section, 143

 ▄Diallage▄, 80

 Diamond saws, 119

 ▄Dichroite▄, 78

 ▄Diopside▄, 80

 ▄Dipyre▄, 59

 Directions of elasticity, ix

 Dispersion, 5, 48

 ▄Disthene▄, 113

 ▄Dolomite▄, 67

 Double image, 2

 Double refraction, 2, 27
   estimation of strength of, 30
   strength of, measured by von Federow mica wedge, 35
   table (maximum), 142


 Effects produced by crystals on transmitted light, 2

 ▄Elæolite▄, 69

 Elasticity, axes of, 4
   directions of, ix

 Electric motor for grinding machines, 117

 Electro-magnetic separation, 134

 Emery, grades of, for grinding, 124

 ▄Enstatite▄, 75

 ▄Epidote▄, 94

 Etched figures, 130

 Extinction, 31
   angles, 5, 31
   tests for, 32
   wavy, 31

 Extraordinary ray, 3

 Eye-pieces, 11


 Faster and slower rays, test for vibration directions of, 33

 ▄Fayalite▄, 78

 ▄Feldspar Group▄, 98

 Feldspathoids, 69

 ▄Fibrolite▄, 73

 Finishing and cleaning sections, 126

 Focusing, 11

 Form of crystals, 13

 Fracture, 24


 ▄Garnet▄, 53

 Gelatinizing silica, test for, 130

 Glass slides, 125

 ▄Glaucophane▄, 88

 ▄Graphite▄, 61

 Gravity (specific) separation, 133

 Gridiron twinning, 37

 Grinding, 123

 Grinding and cutting machines, 117
   apparatus for sections with parallel faces, 118
   plates or laps, 121

 ▄Gypsum▄, 80

 Gypsum test-plate, 33


 Hardness of grains, 132

 ▄Haüyne▄, 56

 ▄Haüynite▄, 56

 Haüynite and noselite, micro-chemical distinction between, 139

 Heating sections to redness, 131

 Heavy solutions, 133

 ▄Hematite▄, 61

 Hexagonal crystals, 4

 High relief, 17

 ▄Hornblende▄, 84

 ▄Hyalosiderite▄, 78

 ▄Hydrargillite▄, 115

 Hydrofluosilicic acid test, 135

 ▄Hypersthene▄, 75


 Idiomorphic, 13

 ▄Idocrase▄, 60

 ▄Ilmenite▄, 62

 Inclusions, 24

 Index of refraction, ix, 17
   by Becke’s method, 19
   by Schrœder van der Kolk’s method, 22
   by Sorby’s method, 19

 Indicators for specific gravity separation, 133

 Indices of refraction (mean), table of, 142

 Interference color, determination of order of, 35

 Interference colors, 28

 Interference colors (abnormal), 30

 Interference figures, 40
   biaxial, 43
   uniaxial, 40

 Investigation of microscopic and optical characters of minerals, 13

 ▄Iolite▄, 78

 Iron, test for, by Borichy’s method, 137
   test for, by Behren’s method, 139

 Isolating crystals or mineral fragments for testing, 132

 Isometric crystals, 2

 Isotropic character, 26, 40
   crystals, 2


 ▄Kaolin▄, 115


 ▄Labradorite▄, 103

 Laps for grinding, 121

 ▄Leucite▄, 54

 Leucoxene, 62

 Light, ordinary, 1
   plane polarized, 1

 ▄Limonite▄, 51

 ▄Lithia Mica▄, 92


 Machines for cutting and grinding, 117

 Magnesium, test for, by Borichy’s method, 137
   test for, by Behren’s method, 138

 ▄Magnetic iron ore▄, 52

 ▄Magnetic pyrites▄, 51

 ▄Magnetite▄, 52

 Measuring strength of double refraction by von Federow mica wedge, 35

 Mechanical and chemical tests, 129

 ▄Melilite▄, 61

 ▄Menaccanite▄, 62

 Methods of preparing sections, 117

 ▄Mica Group▄, 89

 Mica plate (quarter undulation), 33

 Mica wedge, von Federow, 35

 Micro-chemical reactions, 134

 ▄Microcline▄, 102

 Microlites, 17

 Microscope (petrographical), 7

 Microscopic and optical characters of minerals, 51

 Minerals and thickness of section, determined by table and diagram, 36

 Monoclinic crystals, 4
   principal vibration directions in, 5

 ▄Monoclinic pyroxenes▄, 80

 Mounting sections, 124
   solutions, 125

 ▄Muscovite▄, 89


 ▄Natrolite▄, 79

 Negative optical character, biaxial, 46
   uniaxial, 42

 ▄Nepheline▄, 69

 ▄Nephelite▄, 69

 Nicol prism, 7

 ▄Nosean▄, 56

 ▄Noselite▄, 56

 Noselite and haüynite, micro-chemical distinction between, 139

 Nose-piece for microscope, 10


 Objectives, 10

 Oblique extinction, 31

 Obtuse bisectrix, 5

 ▄Oligoclase▄, 103

 ▄Olivine▄, 77

 ▄Opal▄, 51

 Opaque minerals, characters of, 13

 Optical, anomalies, 27
   character, biaxial, 46
   character, uniaxial, 42
   classification into systems, 141
   distinctions between orthorhombic, monoclinic and triclinic sections
      (perpendicular to bisectrices), 48, 141
   distinctions between tetragonal and hexagonal sections (perpendicular
      to optic axis), 141
   and microscopic characters of minerals, 51
   principal section, 3, 4
   scheme, 145

 Optic axes, 4

 Optic axis, 3

 Optics for optical mineralogy, 1

 Order of consolidation of minerals in plutonic rocks, 144

 Order of interference color, determination of, 35

 Ordinary light, 1
   ray, 3

 ▄Orthite▄, 96

 ▄Orthoclase▄, 98

 Orthorhombic crystals, 4
   principal vibration directions in, 4

 ▄Orthorhombic pyroxenes▄, 75


 Parallel and convergent light, résumé of uses of, 49

 Parallel extinction, 31

 Parallel face sections, grinding apparatus for, 119

 ▄Pargasite▄, 85

 ▄Perofskite▄, 57

 ▄Perovskite▄, 57

 Petrographical apparatus, 127

 Petrographical microscope, 7

 Phenocryst, 14

 ▄Phlogopite▄, 89

 ▄Picotite▄, 53

 ▄Piedmontite▄, 95

 ▄Plagioclases▄, 103

 Plane polarized light, 1

 Plates, grinding, 121

 Pleochroic halos, 59

 Pleochroism, 25
   test for, 25

 ▄Pleonaste▄, 53

 Polarization colors, 28

 Polarized light, characters observed by, 25
   plane, 1

 Polarizer, 7
   test for vibration plane of, 9

 Polishing sections, 124

 Polysynthetic twinning, 37

 Positive optical character, biaxial, 46
   uniaxial, 42

 Potassium, test for, by Borichy’s method, 136
   test for, by Behren’s method, 138

 Preparation of sections, 117

 Principal section, optical, 3, 4

 Principal vibration directions, 3, 4

 Prism, nicol, 7

 Pseudomorphic structure, 39

 ▄Pyrite▄, 51

 ▄Pyrites▄, 51

 ▄Pyroxenes, monoclinic▄, 80

 ▄Pyroxenes, orthorhombic▄, 75

 ▄Pyrrhotite▄, 51


 Quarter-undulation mica plate, 33

 ▄Quartz▄, 63
   wedge, 34


 Reflected light, characters observed by, 13

 Reflector, 7

 Refraction, double, 2, 27

 Refraction, index of, ix, 17

 Refractive indices (mean), table of, 142

 Relief, 17
   test for, 17, 18

 Resorption border, 15

 Résumé of uses of parallel and convergent light, 49

 Rotating stage of microscope, 10

 ▄Rutile▄, 57


 ▄Sagenite▄, 58

 ▄Sanidine▄, 102

 ▄Saussurite▄, 96, 113

 Saws, 119

 ▄Scapolite Group▄, 59

 Scheme of classification into systems by optical determinations, 141

 Scheme, optical, 145

 Schiller structure, 25

 Schrœder van der Kolk’s method for determining refractive indices, 22

 Sections, methods of preparing, 117
   thickness of rock, 124

 Selenite plate, 33

 Separation, by chemical means, 134
   by electro-magnet, 134
   by specific gravity, 133

 ▄Sericite▄, 92

 ▄Serpentine▄, 114

 Shagreened surface, 17

 ▄Shorl▄, 70

 ▄Sillimanite▄, 73

 Simple twinning, 37

 Single image, 2

 Skeleton forms, 17

 Slides, glass, 125

 Slower and faster rays, test for vibration directions of, 33

 ▄Sodalite▄, 56

 ▄Sodalite Group▄, 56

 Sodium, test for, by Borichy’s method, 136
   test for, by Behren’s method, 138

 Sorby’s method for determining index of refraction, 19

 Special micro-chemical tests, 139

 Specific gravity separation, indicators for, 133

 Sphærulitic structure, 39

 ▄Sphene▄, 96

 ▄Spinel▄, 53

 Stage of microscope, rotating, 10

 ▄Staurolite▄, 74

 Strained or broken crystals, 15

 Strength of double refraction, measure of, 30, 35

 Structure, 37

 Symmetrical extinction, 31

 Systems, classification into, by optical determinations, 141


 Table, double refraction, 142

 Table, indices of refraction, 142

 ▄Talc▄, 94

 Test for vibration plane of polarizer, 9

 Tetragonal crystals, 4

 Thickness of rock sections, 124

 Thickness of section and minerals, determined by table and diagram, 36

 ▄Titanite▄, 96

 Transmitted light, characters observed by, 13
   effect on crystals, 2

 Transparent minerals, investigation of characters of, 13

 ▄Tremolite▄, 84

 Triclinic crystals, 4
   principal vibration directions in, 5

 ▄Tridymite▄, 65

 ▄Topaz▄, 74

 ▄Tourmaline▄, 70

 Twinning, 37


 Uniaxial crystals, vibration directions in, 3

 Uniaxial interference figures, 40

 ▄Uralite▄, 88

 Uralitization, 88

 Uses of parallel and convergent light, 49


 van der Kolk’s, Schrœder, method for determining refractive indices, 22

 ▄Vesuvianite▄, 60

 Vibration direction, 2
   directions of faster and slower rays, test for, 33
   directions, principal, 3, 4
   plane of nicol, 9
   plane of polarizer, test for, 9

 von Federow mica wedge, 35


 Wavy extinction, 16, 31

 Wedge, mica, 35
   quartz, 34

 ▄Wernerite▄, 59


 Xenomorphic, 15


 ▄Zeolites▄, 79

 ▄Zircon▄, 58

 ▄Zoisite▄, 96
   α and β, 96

 Zonal structure, 38




                          ERRATA AND ADDENDA.


P. 33, line 23, _for_ beat _read_ be at.

P. 66, line 10, _after_ appearance _add_ (sometimes called “twinkling”).

Corrections for mean index of refraction _n′_: p. 60, line 1, 1.551 to
1.584; p. 62, line 29, 1.766; p. 66, line 3, 1.601; p. 67, line 24,
1.622; p. 71, line 10, 1.633 to 1.674.

Corrections for Indices of Refraction (mean) in Table on p. 142:
Corundum 1.766; Tourmaline 1.674; Tourmaline (precious) 1.633; Dolomite
1.622; Scapolite (Meionite) 1.584; Scapolite (Marialite) 1.551; Calcite
1.601.

Corrections for mean indices of refraction in Scheme (insert folder):
Scapolite 1.551 to 1.584; Calcite 1.601 and transfer to Dolomite
rectangle; Dolomite 1.622; Corundum 1.766; Tourmaline 1.633 to 1.674.

-----

Footnote 1:

  Often called a direction of maximum elasticity, c′ being a direction
  of minimum elasticity.

Footnote 2:

  Rosenbusch’s _Microskopische Physiographie_, p. 156.

Footnote 3:

  For a more complete discussion of optics, in connection with Optical
  Mineralogy, the student is referred to A. J. Moses’ _Characters of
  Crystals_, p. 85, et seq.; Moses’ & Parsons’ _Mineralogy,
  Crystallography and Blowpipe Analysis_, Chap. XVI., 4th Ed., 1909;
  Miers’ _Mineralogy_, 1902; L. Fletcher’s _Optical Indicatrix_, etc.,
  1892; Groth’s _Physikalische Krystallographie_, 3d Ed.; Rosenbusch’s
  _Mikroskopische Physiographie_, 4th Ed. and Iddings’ _Rock Minerals_,
  1911.

Footnote 4:

  The electromagnetic theory of light is now very generally held, but,
  whatever may be the recurrent change of state to which light is really
  due, the principles of wave motion furnish a satisfactory geometric
  description of optical phenomena.

Footnote 5:

  These sections are supposed to have plane parallel faces, such being
  the case in ordinary practice, and to be examined with parallel
  perpendicularly incident light.

Footnote 6:

  It is interesting to remember in this connection that in the isometric
  system there is also the greatest possible symmetry of “form.”

Footnote 7:

  A. J. Moses, _Characters of Crystals_, pp. 85–97.

Footnote 8:

  For this branch of optical physics, see A. J. Moses, _Characters of
  Crystals_, pp. 97–100.

Footnote 9:

  This can be demonstrated by using a nicol and a plate of calcite which
  shows a double image. If the nicol is held between the calcite plate
  and the observer’s eye it can be so adjusted that only one image is
  seen. If now the nicol is revolved 90° the first image will disappear
  and the other image alone will be seen.

Footnote 10:

  In some cases a peculiar form of double refraction does take place
  parallel to this direction, as in the circular polarization of quartz
  and cinnabar; but in very thin sections these results are not noticed
  and can be disregarded.

Footnote 11:

  A. J. Moses, _Characters of Crystals_, pp. 98, 99.

Footnote 12:

  The terms axes of elasticity are commonly used for these principal
  vibration directions in text-books on petrography.

Footnote 13:

  Instead of ω and ε, for convenience in tables, etc., α and γ are used,
  denoting the indices of refraction of the rays traversing the crystal
  with greatest and least velocity respectively, without regard as to
  which is the _O_ or _E_ ray. A good reason for this convention is that
  the symbol (γ − α) is used to express in decimals the relative
  strength of the double refraction of a crystal, whether uniaxial or
  biaxial. γ is always greater than α.

Footnote 14:

  For most cases in observations with white light the “optics axes” may
  be regarded as approximately fixed in position.

Footnote 15:

  Often spoken of as: a, the axis of maximum; b, the axis of
  intermediate, and c, the axis of minimum elasticity.

  In the more recent American text-books on Optical Mineralogy by
  Iddings, Winchell and Phillips a is denoted by _X_, b by _Y_ and c by
  _Z_.

Footnote 16:

  For a short historical sketch of the use of the microscope in
  connection with Petrology, see G. H. William’s pamphlet, _Modern
  Petrography (Monographs of Education)_, Boston, 1886. For detail
  description and adjustments, see _Methods of Petrographic-Microscopic
  Research_, F. E. Wright, 1911, pp. 11, 61.

Footnote 17:

  For description of the ordinary microscope, eye-pieces, objectives,
  magnification, etc., see _Manipulation of the Microscope_, by Ed.
  Bausch.

Footnote 18:

  Text Book of Mineralogy, by E. S. Dana, 1898 Ed., p. 176.

Footnote 19:

  It is convenient to assume that the vibrations of the polarized light
  are taking place in this plane, called the “plane of vibration,” but
  all the phenomena caused by polarized light could be also explained on
  the assumption that the vibrations were taking place at right angles
  to this plane.

Footnote 20:

  This condensing lens must be removed when very low power objectives
  are used.

Footnote 21:

  Some microscopes are provided with adjusting screws bearing on the
  frame holding the objective, which can then be accurately centered to
  the axis of rotation of the stage.

Footnote 22:

  In the Seibert microscope use objective No. 00 for the first general
  study of a rock section, No. II for general use and No. V for
  observations with convergent light. In the Fuess microscope use
  objective No. 4 for general use and No. 7 for convergent light tests.
  In the case of an English microscope a 1″ to ¾″ objective is used for
  general purposes and a ¼″ to ⅕″ for observations with convergent
  light.

Footnote 23:

  See pp. 33 and 34.

Footnote 24:

  In some microscopes the analyzer is in the form of a “cap” nicol,
  arranged to be fitted over the top of the eye-piece, and not
  introduced in the microscope tube as shown here. This form is not so
  convenient, as the “cap” nicol must be set by hand every time it is
  desired to make observations with crossed nicols. But at the same time
  it avoids any possible refocusing which may be necessary when the
  other type of analyzer is introduced in the tube.

Footnote 25:

  When accurate adjustments are possible of the vibration planes of the
  nicols and the cross-wires parallel to these vibration planes,
  reference should be made to _Methods of Petrographic-Microscopic
  Research_, p. 61, 1911, Fred. E. Wright.

Footnote 26:

  In the Seibert microscope eye-piece No. 0 is used for most purposes.
  Other eye-pieces, Nos. 1 and 2, with cross-wires, are used for
  different degrees of magnification, and one eye-piece, No. 3, without
  cross-wires, is provided to be used in connection with an eye-piece
  micrometer.

Footnote 27:

  With the Seibert microscope, Fig. 2, the No. 0 eye-piece and the No.
  II objective will prove most satisfactory for the following tests.
  With the Fuess microscope use No. 4 objective. With an English
  microscope use an ordinary eye-piece and a 1″ or ¾″ objective.

Footnote 28:

  Twins may be recognized just as in macroscopic specimens, and zonal
  structure noticed if the zones differ in color. When a colorless
  mineral is surrounded by other colorless minerals, of about the same
  index of refraction, its outline is often best brought out by
  observation between crossed nicols.

Footnote 29:

  The term “Anhedron,” meaning without planes, has been suggested by L.
  V. Pirsson to describe in rocks the crystal fragments which have no
  plane faces, as, for example, the augites of augitic rocks. _Science_,
  Jan. 10, 1896, p. 49.

Footnote 30:

  Partial resorption and recrystallization may produce a border of
  secondary minerals, surrounding the original crystal.

Footnote 31:

  The surfaces of all minerals in sections are more or less rough, but
  this roughness is only made visible when there is a marked difference
  between the indices of refraction of the minerals, and the index of
  refraction of the balsam in which the minerals are embedded. The index
  of refraction of balsam is about 1.54, so it is only when the mineral
  has a higher or lower index of refraction that its surface appears
  rough. When internal structure is to be studied, the crystal should be
  surrounded by a fluid of nearly the same index of refraction as that
  of the crystal, and when the exterior of the crystal is to be studied,
  then a fluid should be used with a very different index of refraction.

Footnote 32:

  The Seibert microscope has a very convenient and quick lowering
  adjustment, by means of the lever _d_, for making this test. For
  convenience the lower nicol and condensing lens are generally left in
  place below the stage of the microscope, as polarized light serves as
  well for these investigations as ordinary light. An additional
  advantage in this arrangement is that the condensing lens is always
  ready for the “relief” test and the lower nicol for the pleochroism
  test; but it must be remembered that the polarizer or lower nicol cuts
  out one half of the light, which comes to it from the reflector, and
  this loss is important when high power objectives are to be used. When
  very low power objectives are used, the condensing lens must be
  removed.

Footnote 33:

  _Mem. de l’Acad._, Paris, 1767–68.

Footnote 34:

  _Min. Mag._, Vol. I., p. 193; Vol. II., p. 1.

Footnote 35:

  _Sitzungsberichte der k. k. Akad. der Wiss._, Wien, 1893, I Abt., p.
  358. Translation by L. McI. Luquer in _School of Mines Quarterly_,
  Vol. XXIII., Jan., 1902, No. 2, p. 127. Review by Viola in _Min. Pet.
  Mitt._, Vol. 14, p. 554. _Methods of Petrographic-Microscopic
  Research_, F. E. Wright, 1911, p. 95.

Footnote 36:

  Most of the petrographical microscopes carry over the polarizer a
  convex lens the effect of which is to widen the illuminating cone and
  hence make less visible this phenomenon.

Footnote 37:

  In Seibert student microscope, No. II _a_, use next to smallest
  light-stop. Some of the Fuess microscopes are supplied with an
  iris-blende for limiting the cone of light.

Footnote 38:

  In Seibert microscope use No. V, not sufficiently marked results being
  obtained with No. II.

Footnote 39:

  See Viola’s diagram, _Minn. Pet. Mitt._, Vol. XIV., p. 556.

Footnote 40:

  Seibert, No. II. Fuess, No. 4.

Footnote 41:

  _Kurze Anleitung zur mikrosk._ _Krystallbestimmung_, Wiesbaden, 1898,
  and _Tabellen zur mikrosk._ _Bestimmung_, etc., Wiesbaden, 1900.
  _Methods of Petrographic-Microscopic Research,_ F. E. Wright, 1911, p.
  93.

  This method is particularly favorable for the accurate determination
  of the refractive indices of small isolated fragments or grains, by
  using liquids of known indices. In this case a bright line appears on
  the “near” edge and a dark line on the “far” edge if the grain has a
  higher index than the liquid. The reverse occurs when the index is
  lower than the liquid. When the index is the same (using white light)
  the “far” edge is blue and the “near” edge red and also the contours
  about disappear.

  F. Krantz, of Bonn, furnishes a series of 21 liquids in small bottles,
  with indices from 1.447 to 1.83.

  The indices of a few convenient liquids are: water, 1.34; alcohol,
  1.36; glycerine, 1.41; olive oil, 1.47; nut oil, 1.50; clove oil,
  1.54; aniseed oil, 1.58; almond oil, 1.60; cassia oil, 1.63;
  monobromnapthalene, 1.65; methylene iodide, 1.75.

Footnote 42:

  Crystals that have two good cleavages often develop so that the
  direction of elongation is parallel to the intersection of the two
  cleavages, while in the case of crystals with one good cleavage the
  tendency seems to be towards a tabular habit parallel to the cleavage.

Footnote 43:

  Harker’s _Petrology for Students_, p. 306.

Footnote 44:

  The lower nicol is generally so adjusted that its plane of vibration
  is parallel to the north and south cross-wire in the eye-piece. This
  adjustment can be tested by means of a section of biotite, showing
  cleavage cracks. When the plane of vibration of the polarizer is
  parallel to the N. and S. cross-wire in the eye-piece, the biotite
  section becomes almost dark when its cleavage cracks are parallel to
  the same cross-wire. The upper nicol, or analyzer, must, of course, be
  removed during this test. This method is more convenient than taking
  the nicol out of its frame, in order to ascertain its plane of
  vibration (the direction of its shorter diagonal).

Footnote 45:

  Although the “absorption directions” may not necessarily coincide with
  the principal vibration directions in Monoclinic and Triclinic
  crystals; still for convenience the absorption colors are usually
  given for the light rays vibrating parallel to these principal
  vibration directions.

Footnote 46:

  In the Fuess and Seibert microscopes the analyzer or upper nicol is so
  fitted that it slides in and out of the tube of the microscope with
  its plane of vibration always at right angles to the plane of
  vibration of the polarizer or lower nicol.

Footnote 47:

  Moses’ _Characters of Crystals_, p. 106. Moses and Parsons’ _Min.
  Cryst._ and _B. P. Analysis_, p. 163.

Footnote 48:

  Iddings’ _Rock Minerals_, 1911, p. 172.

Footnote 49:

  These sections always contain the principal vibration directions _a_
  and _c_.

Footnote 50:

  _Methods of Petrographic-Microscopic Research_, F. E. Wright, 1911, p.
  101.

Footnote 51:

  A chart of interference colors can be obtained from Baudry et Cie,
  Paris, and is also published in _Les Minéraux des Roches_, by Lévy and
  Lacroix, _Rock Minerals_ (1911), by Iddings and in Rosenbusch’s
  _Mikroskopische Physiographie_.

Footnote 52:

  Iddings’ _Rock Minerals_, 1911, pp. 141, 183.

Footnote 53:

  _Methods of Petrographic-Microscopic Research_, F. E. Wright, 1911, p.
  132.

Footnote 54:

  The ¼ undulation mica plate consists of a thin cleavage of mica on
  which is marked _c_, the vibration direction of the slower ray, which
  in mica is the line joining the “optic axes.” The thickness is such
  that the slower ray is ¼ wave-length behind the faster and the
  interference color is a bluish-gray. The gypsum plate is a thin
  cleavage of gypsum, on which is usually marked a, the vibration
  direction of the faster ray. The chosen thickness is such as to
  produce the red interference color of the 1° order.

Footnote 55:

  The test-plates are generally introduced in the slot _k_, in a
  microscope of the Seibert type, or if a cap-nicol is used in a slot
  below this. In case no provision is made by the instrument maker for
  these test-plates, the regular analyzer is left out of the tube, and a
  simple nicol prism is used as an analyzer and is held by the observer
  over the eye-piece. Care must be taken to have the plane of vibration
  of this nicol at right angles to that of the polarizer, and to leave
  sufficient room for the introduction, by hand, of the test-plate
  between the eye-piece and the nicol. With care the plates can be
  introduced with sufficient accuracy to make the test practical.

Footnote 56:

  A scale or chart of interference colors, or the interference color
  diagram, should be before the observer in order to avoid any mistakes
  as to whether the new color is higher or lower in the scale.

Footnote 57:

  The quartz wedge is cut so that one of its faces is exactly parallel
  to the _ć_ axis (hence also parallel to the _c_ vibration direction)
  while the other face makes a very small angle with it. The direction
  _c_ is marked on the wedge.

Footnote 58:

  Described under next test.

Footnote 59:

  In applying this rule count the 1° order white as green and the 1°
  order gray as blue.

Footnote 60:

  A. J. Moses, _Trans. N. Y. Acad. Sci._, Vol. XVI., p. 55, Jan., 1897.

Footnote 61:

  E. von Federow, _Zeit. f. Kryst., etc._, Vol. XXXV., p. 340, 1895.

Footnote 62:

  After the first rough determination of the phase difference by the
  mica wedge, the more exact phase difference can be obtained by the aid
  of a good color chart or diagram, see end of book.

Footnote 63:

  It is not safe to use minerals near the edge of the section, as the
  thicknesses are apt to be unequal.

Footnote 64:

  See at end of appendix.

Footnote 65:

  In this way eliminate, so far as possible, the effect of the
  orientation of the mineral section.

Footnote 66:

  The different mineral sections are all supposed to have the same
  thickness throughout the rock section.

Footnote 67:

  Harker’s _Petrology for Students_, 1895, p. 14.

Footnote 68:

  Iddings’ _Rock Minerals_, pp. 153, 173. Moses’ _Characters of
  Crystals_, p. 115.

Footnote 69:

  In the Seibert microscope use No. V objective, in Fuess microscope No.
  7 objective, and in English microscopes a ¼″ or ⅕″ objective.

Footnote 70:

  Each convergent ray will have its vibration direction either in or at
  90° to the plane through the ray and the optic axis. Hence all rays
  vibrating parallel to the vibration planes of both nicols will be
  completely cut out. As the section is rotated new rays successively
  come into these positions, so the same effect is maintained.

Footnote 71:

  In the Seibert microscope there is a little slot _k_ for this purpose
  just above the objective.

Footnote 72:

  The optical character may also be determined in parallel light by
  proving _ć_ = c(+), _ć_ = a(−). The optical character of the principal
  zone or the sign of the elongation is often given in tables. This
  optical character or sign is (+) when the principal zone axis or the
  direction of elongation is parallel to c and (−) when parallel to a.

Footnote 73:

  Iddings’ _Rock Minerals_, 1911, p. 172.

Footnote 74:

  This assumes the optic axes for different colors to emerge about at
  the same points. If there is marked “dispersion” the black bands and
  hyperbolas may be rainbow-hued, as with titanite.

Footnote 75:

  The interference figure, perpendicular to the _obtuse bisectrix_,
  would be of the same type with a larger axial angle. Ordinarily this
  figure would not come within the limits of the field of view of the
  microscope. Confusion may arise, however, but in a section
  perpendicular to the acute bisectrix the cross dissolves more slowly
  into the hyperbolas than in the case of a section perpendicular to the
  obtuse bisectrix. At times it may be necessary to measure the axial
  angle to be sure. When, however, the mineral is known, the section
  perpendicular to the acute bisectrix can be recognized, because if the
  mineral is optically positive the trace of the axial plane is parallel
  to a and if negative parallel to c.

Footnote 76:

  For construction of quartz wedge, see p. 34.

Footnote 77:

  The wedge can be introduced in either of the several ways described
  for the introduction of the test-plates on p. 33.

Footnote 78:

  For methods of measuring the axial angle, see _Methods of
  Petrographic-Microscopic Research_, F. E. Wright, 1911, p. 147.

  For convenience in many cases only 2_E_ is recorded, as then an
  indication is given as to whether the axial angle is visible with an
  ordinary microscope (arranged for observation with convergent light
  for interference figures). If 2_E_ is very large the axial angle can
  only be observed by covering the section with some transparent,
  strongly refracting fluid. For the Seibert microscope with objective V
  the limit for good results is about 2_E_ = 90°–100°.

Footnote 79:

  For dispersion, etc., see A. J. Moses’ _Characters of Crystals_, p.
  140.

Footnote 80:

  The system of crystallization of leucite has been the subject of much
  discussion. Its habit is isometric. The consensus of opinion seems to
  be that leucite crystallizes in the isometric system, but that the
  isometric molecular arrangement, at least of the larger crystals,
  cannot exist for the temperature and pressure at the earth’s surface.
  Hence molecular displacement takes place, giving rise to a more or
  less complicated apparent twinning, and optical anomalies are noticed.
  The isotropic character returns if the section is heated to 500° C.
  Iddings’ _Rock Minerals_, p. 249, 1911.

Footnote 81:

  C. W. Knight, _Canad. Rec. of Sci._, IX, No. 5. 265.

Footnote 82:

  The interference colors of all minerals here recorded are those given
  by sections 0.03 _mm._ in thickness (very thin sections).

Footnote 83:

  Shown by Mügge, Joly, etc., to be caused by radiations emanating from
  U, Th, R, etc. Iddings’ _Rock Minerals_, 1911, p. 189.

Footnote 84:

  Iddings’ _Rock Minerals_, 1911, p. 392.

Footnote 85:

  See page 31.

Footnote 86:

  R. D. Irving, _Am. Jour. Sci._, June, 1883.

Footnote 87:

  Granites of the central Alps, where the calcite crystals are
  intergrown with quartz.

Footnote 88:

  The minerals Nephelite, leucite, sodalite (haüynite and noselite) and
  melilite are often grouped together under the name “_feldspathoides_”;
  on account of their relation in rocks being equivalent to that of the
  feldspars.

Footnote 89:

  Oriented in conformity to the intergrowth with augite, etc., (010) and
  (100) are reversed.

Footnote 90:

  For other alteration processes, see Iddings’ _Rock Minerals_, p. 380.

Footnote 91:

  May be difficult to determine in the case of prism zone sections,
  showing large extinction angles.

Footnote 92:

  See p. 88.

Footnote 93:

  Iddings’ _Rock Minerals_, p. 456, 1911.

Footnote 94:

  Depending on whether the axial plane is parallel or at right angles to
  the clino pinacoid (010) (the plane of symmetry), we have micas of the
  second (biotite) or first order (muscovite).

Footnote 95:

  The distinction between zoisite α and β (essentially orthorhombic, but
  may be composite triclinic twins) and clinozoisite (monoclinic close
  to orthorhombic) depends on differences in position of plane of optic
  axes; axial figures shown by cleavage plates; dispersion; anomalous
  interference colors; etc. See Weinschenk’s _Die Gesteinbildenden
  Mineralien_, p. 83. 1901.

Footnote 96:

  Test not easily made on account of the very high order interference
  colors, resulting from the strong double refraction.

Footnote 97:

  See under quartz, p. 63.

Footnote 98:

  Iddings’ _Rock Minerals_, p. 208, 1911.

Footnote 99:

  On account of the weak double refraction the interference figures are
  not very sharp or well defined in thin sections. In most cases only
  the black hyperbolas are seen, without any colored curves.

Footnote 100:

  By heating feldspar crystals the axial angle decreases to 0° and then
  increases in the plane of symmetry (at right angles to its former
  position). On cooling the axial angle returns to its former position
  if the temperature has not exceeded 500° C. If the temperature has
  been 600°–1000° C. for some time the axial angle will not return to
  its former position. This fact may give some clew as to the
  temperature at which the feldspar crystals formed.

Footnote 101:

  This change to kaolin or clay in granite is called by Dolomieu “_La
  maladie du granit_.”

Footnote 102:

  See p. 31.

Footnote 103:

  Hatch’s _Introduction to the Study of Petrology_, p. 33.

Footnote 104:

  J. W. Judd, _Geol. Mag._ [3], Vol. VI, p. 243, 1889.

Footnote 105:

  The plagioclases have rather a complex composition; but may be
  regarded as forming a series from the composition NaAlSi_{3}O_{8}(Ab)
  to the composition CaAl_{2}Si_{2}O_{8}(An), consisting for the most
  part of isomorphous mixtures of these types, with some replacement by
  KAlSi_{3}O_{8}. The compositions of only a few of the common
  plagioclases are given above.

Footnote 106:

  The lath-shaped feldspars, moulding the augite, give to diabases the
  so-called “ophitic” structure, Fig. 12. The peculiarity of this
  structure is that the feldspars crystallized before the augite, which
  is contrary to the usual order of formation.

Footnote 107:

  For the positions of the optic axes, bisectrices, etc., relative to
  the cleavage plates of the different plagioclases, see Iddings’ _Rock
  Minerals_, p. 222, 1911.

Footnote 108:

  _Die Gesteinsbildenden Mineralien_ (with tables), E. Weinschenk,
  Freiburg, 1901. _Étude sur la Détermination des Feldspaths dans les
  Plaques Minces_, Michel Lévy, Paris, 1894; and _The Determination of
  the Feldspars_, N. H. Winchell, _Am. Geol._, Vol. XXI, No. 1, 1898.
  Iddings’ _Rock Minerals_, Wiley & Sons, 1911. _Étude sur la
  Détermination des Feldspaths_ (troisième fascicule), Michel Lévy,
  Paris, 1904.

Footnote 109:

  Glass models of the feldspars (size 20 × 10 cm.) by F. Krantz, Bonn.
  Diagrams, showing optical orientation in the plagioclases, in _Die
  Gesteinsbildenden Mineralien_, E. Weinschenk, p. 133, 1901.

Footnote 110:

  For this method of investigation little cleavage flakes or plates can
  often be obtained from the crushed mineral, but, on account of Albite
  twinning, plates are more apt to be obtained parallel to the twinning
  plane than to the best basal cleavage. If a fragment with only one
  cleavage surface is obtained, it must be cemented to a glass by this
  surface and ground down to a thin section with parallel sides.

Footnote 111:

  This test is only possible when suitable sections of the given
  feldspar in the rock section can be found. The method, however, can be
  used with great accuracy with the aid of some form of apparatus for
  properly orienting the section. See “Klein’s Apparatus for the
  Orientation of Thin Sections,” _Sitzungsber. Berlin. Akad._, 1895,
  1151; (also in _N. Y. Acad. Sci._, Vol. XVI, p. 51, 1897); and Von
  Federov’s “Universal Table,” _Zeit. für Kryst, etc._, Vol. XXV., p.
  351.

Footnote 112:

  In the determination of feldspar microlites it is well to remember the
  following facts: “Microcline is rarely, or never, seen in the
  condition of microlites, while the associations of labradorite and
  albite are so different that there is little danger of confounding
  them. Labradorite is the commonest product of the consolidation of the
  basic eruptives, and albite almost invariably results from
  metamorphism, frequently from the contact of igneous rocks on the
  calcareous clastics.” N. H. Winchell, Determination of the Feldspars,
  _Am. Geol._, Vol. XXI, No. 1, p. 33, 1898.

Footnote 113:

  These methods (both 2 and 3) are often not applicable on account of
  the tendency of the crystals in an effusive rock to parallel
  orientation, which may be so marked that the rock section does not
  show any favorable sections of the plagioclase.

Footnote 114:

  These extinction angles, as well as those previously given, are those
  of only a few type feldspars of definite composition. As the
  composition varies through a long series, so the extinction angle
  changes, one being a function of the other.

  For a complete list of compositions and related extinction angles, see
  Iddings’ _Rock Minerals_ and Lévy & Lacroix’s _Les Minéraux des
  Roches_.

Footnote 115:

  Iddings’ _Rock Minerals_, p. 228, Wiley & Sons, 1911. _Étude sur la
  Détermination des Feldspaths_ (troisième fascicule), Michel Lévy,
  Paris, 1904.

Footnote 116:

  In quartz ω is the refractive index of the ray with vibration
  direction ∥ a [that is the direction of vibration of the faster ray
  (the ordinary ray)]. Hence ω is direction ∥ a and ε ∥ c. In the
  feldspars; α ∥ a, γ ∥ c and β ∥ b.

Footnote 117:

  _Am. Jour. Sci._, May, 1906. This method is specially useful in
  detecting presence of orthoclase, when plagioclase is the dominant
  feldspar.

Footnote 118:

  These tests are only possible on pure and fresh material. The specific
  gravity increases with the Ca % (albite 2.62, anorthite 2.75).

Footnote 119:

  In clear unstriated granules, which may be distinguished from quartz
  by biaxial interference figure in convergent light.

Footnote 120:

  The tendency of labradorite in gabbros to twinning, after both
  _Albite_ and _Pericline_ laws, is to be noted.

Footnote 121:

  Werveke’s (N. J. B., 1883, II, 97) theory is that a twin lamination
  may be caused by the forces producing mechanical deformations, as
  movement in the magma and mountain making pressure. Such lamellæ are
  characterized by the fact that their extent and course seem to depend
  on fracture lines in the crystal.

Footnote 122:

  The derivation from pyroxene and amphibole appears to be doubtful, see
  Weinschenk’s _Gesteinsbildenden Mineralien_, 1901, p. 121.

Footnote 123:

  Harker’s _Petrology for Students_, p. 63, 1895.

Footnote 124:

  Sections can be obtained from Voight & Hochgesang, Göttingen; C.
  Marchand, rue Censier, 16ter, Paris; W. H. Tomlinson, Swarthmore, Pa.,
  and G. D. Julien, 3 Webster Terrace, New Rochelle, N. Y.

Footnote 125:

  Made by G. D. Julien, 3 Webster Terrace, New Rochelle, N. Y. Price:
  Power lathes (complete), $150.00 up; Foot-treadle lathes, $90.00 up.

Footnote 126:

  A Crocker-Wheeler motor of ¼ to ½ H. P. will be large enough for an
  ordinary laboratory machine.

Footnote 127:

  Made by Voigt and Hochgesang, Göttingen. Price, $15.00.

Footnote 128:

  Saws charged with diamond dust can be obtained from Elisha T. Jenks,
  Middleboro, Mass. Price in 1910, $1.35 per diametrical inch. Foreign
  saws 6″ and 8″ diam. can be bought from G. D. Julien, New Rochelle, N.
  Y.

Footnote 129:

  _School of Mines Quarterly_, Vol. XI, p. 32.

Footnote 130:

  “Half a pound or less of ordinary shellac is melted in a flat-bottomed
  open vessel over a Bunsen burner. Then an equal quantity of Venice
  turpentine is carefully added under constant stirring. The mass should
  be allowed to boil for about ten minutes, during which the stirring is
  continued. Then small quantities are poured in separate heaps on an
  iron plate or other cold surface and rolled into sticks about seven
  inches long and half an inch thick.”

Footnote 131:

  Square or standard 26 × 46 mm. glass slides are recommended instead of
  the oblong slides (1 × 3 inches), which are very apt to project beyond
  the edges of the stage and be struck by the fingers while rotating the
  stage.

Footnote 132:

  Reference can be made to the publications on this subject by: Borichy,
  Behrens (Behren’s translation by Judd), Haushofer, Huysse, Klément,
  Streng, Rénard, etc.

Footnote 133:

  In case an acid is to be used which would attack glass, the
  cover-glass can be replaced by a thin perforated disk of platinum.

Footnote 134:

  The bases in solution can be determined by different methods of
  analysis, for which the student is referred to more elaborate works on
  this subject. In some cases it may be very advantageous to treat the
  section with acid, to remove certain soluble constituents, when other
  minerals not distinctly seen at first may be made more apparent.

Footnote 135:

  The gas may be H_{2}S from a soluble sulphide, in which case the
  solution containing the bubbles will color filter paper moistened with
  lead water.

Footnote 136:

  _Geol. and Nat. History Survey of Minn._, XIX., Ann. Rept., p. 42;
  also A. J. Moses, _Characters of Crystals_, p. 147.

Footnote 137:

  The symmetry of the etched figures would, of course, be related to the
  system of crystallization.

Footnote 138:

  A. J. Moses, _Characters of Crystals_, Chap. XVI.

Footnote 139:

  When it is desired to preserve the section and at the same time to
  study the surface covered with a film of air, the edges alone of the
  cover-glass should be cemented.

Footnote 140:

  _Geol. and Nat. Hist. Survey of Minn._, XIX, Ann. Rept., p. 50. Thin
  sections of 2–3 sq. mm. area are of a convenient size, and they should
  be subjected to a red heat for (1½)-3 minutes. Too long a continuance
  of heat may render the sections too dark or lessen their transparency
  or produce melting.

Footnote 141:

  This test may vary, in many cases graphite not being consumed even
  after long heating.

Footnote 142:

  The isolation of material for investigation is of more interest for
  the lithologist or chemist than for the student of optical mineralogy;
  therefore only a very brief outline of some of the methods employed
  will be given.

Footnote 143:

  The grains passing through different meshes are investigated
  microscopically to ascertain which size grains are homogeneous; the
  rest of the sample should then be reduced to grains of this size.

Footnote 144:

  Further reference can be made to _Iddings’ Rock Minerals_, pp. 25 and
  95, 1911. A convenient form of apparatus is also described in _School
  of Mines Quarterly_, Vol. X., p. 284, 1889.

Footnote 145:

  S. L. Penfield, _Am. Jour. Sci._, Vol. L., p. 446, 1895. In this
  article a convenient form of separating apparatus is also described.

Footnote 146:

  A convenient list of minerals, arranged in the order in which they
  would be attracted by increasing the force of the electro-magnet, is
  given in Weinschenk’s _Tabellen_.

Footnote 147:

  For micro-chemical work the reagents should be applied in very small
  drops, which spread out on glass to discs 2 mm. in diameter. For
  manipulating the reagents use platinum wires, 0.5 mm. in thickness.

Footnote 148:

  _Elemente einer neuen chemisch-mikroskopischen mineral- und
  Gesteins-analyse_, Pragg, 1877.

  Translation of above by Winchell in _Geol. and Nat. Hist. Survey of
  Minn._, Vol. XIX., Ann. Report, 1890.

Footnote 149:

  The strength of the solution should be about 3½%; for if too weak many
  minerals do not give satisfactory results, and if too strong a very
  large number of fluosilicate crystals are formed together with the
  separation of much silica, thus making it impossible to carefully
  differentiate the crystals with a microscope.

Footnote 150:

  As most of the rock-forming minerals that would be investigated are
  silicates, the hydrofluosilicic solutions can also be obtained by
  treatment with HFl.

Footnote 151:

  After Lévy and Lacroix.

Footnote 152:

  _Naturkunde_, Amsterdam, 2, Vol. XVII., 1881. _Chemical News_, Vol.
  LXIII., No. 1647, June 1891, et seq.

  _Micro-chemical Analysis_, Behrens (Judd), Macmillan & Co., London,
  1894.

Footnote 153:

  After Lévy and Lacroix.

Footnote 154:

  After Lévy and Lacroix.

Footnote 155:

  Compiled from Weinschenk’s Tables, as revised in _Petrographic
  Methods_ by Weinschenk-Clark, 1912.

Footnote 156:

  Pirsson and Robinson, _Am. Jour. Sci._, iv, Vol. X, Oct., 1900.

Footnote 157:

  Harker, _Petrology for Students_, p. 28, 1895.

Footnote 158:

  Have the convergent lens or condenser lowered and the analyzer out
  during this test.

Footnote 159:

  The minerals are grouped according to the maximum interference colors
  given by sections of the thickness of 0.03 mm.

Footnote 160:

  In the case of very small crystals, the centering must be accurate and
  a cover with a small hole in the center, should be placed over the top
  of the tube. In this way the eye is brought directly over the axis of
  the microscope and figures can be observed from very minute crystals.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 Page           Changed from                      Changed to

   80 occurs as an alternation product  occurs as an alteration product
      of anhydrite. Gypsum is soluble   of anhydrite. Gypsum is soluble
      in hydrochloric                   in hydrochloric

  136 longer the higher the percentage longer the higher the percentage
      of calcium in the solution       of sodium in the solution

 ● Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.
 ● The author used the old chemical symbol (Fl) for Fluorine.
 ● Corrected the Errata with the exception of the last paragraph
     "Corrections for mean indices of refraction in Scheme (insert
     folder)".
 ● Used numbers for footnotes, placing them all at the end of the last
     chapter.
 ● Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 ● Enclosed bold font in ▄lower half block▄.
 ● The caret (^) serves as a superscript indicator, applicable to
     individual characters (like 2^d) and even entire phrases (like
     1^{st}).
 ● Subscripts are shown using an underscore (_) with curly braces { },
     as in H_{2}O.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MINERALS IN ROCK SECTIONS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


