The Project Gutenberg eBook of The slide rule
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The slide rule
        a practical manual

Author: Charles N. Pickworth

Release date: April 18, 2025 [eBook #75904]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: D. Van Nostrand Co, 1917

Credits: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SLIDE RULE ***





                                  THE
                              SLIDE RULE:
                           A PRACTICAL MANUAL


                                   BY

                          CHARLES N. PICKWORTH

     WHITWORTH SCHOLAR; EDITOR OF “THE MECHANICAL WORLD”; AUTHOR OF
    “LOGARITHMS FOR BEGINNERS”; “THE INDICATOR: ITS CONSTRUCTION AND
  APPLICATION”; “THE INDICATOR DIAGRAM: ITS ANALYSIS AND CALCULATION,”
                                  ETC.

                         _SEVENTEENTH EDITION_

                              MANCHESTER:
                        EMMOTT AND CO., LIMITED,
                            65 KING STREET;

                               NEW YORK:
                          D. VAN NOSTRAND CO.,
                            8 WARREN STREET.

                                LONDON:
                        EMMOTT AND CO., LIMITED,
                        20 BEDFORD STREET, W.C.

                                  AND
                       PITMAN AND SONS, LIMITED,
                     PARKER ST., KINGSWAY, W.C. 2.

                  [_Three Shillings and Sixpence net_]




                         _All rights reserved._




                   PREFACE TO THE FIFTEENTH EDITION.


Several new slide rules for special calculations are described in this
edition, and the contents further extended to include a section dealing
with screw-cutting gear calculations by the slide rule—an application of
the instrument to which attention has been given recently.

Mention should be made of the fact that some of the special slide rules
described in previous editions are no longer obtainable. As, however,
the descriptive notes may be of service to those possessing the
instruments, and are, in some measure, of general interest, they have
been allowed to remain in the present issue.

The author tenders his thanks to the many who have evinced their
appreciation of his efforts to popularise the subject; also for the many
kind hints and suggestions which he has received from time to time, and
with a continuance of which he trusts to be favoured in the future.

                                                                C. N. P.

WITHINGTON, MANCHESTER, _November 1917_.


                  PREFACE TO THE SEVENTEENTH EDITION.

The sustained demand for this very successful work having resulted in
the early call for a new edition, the opportunity has been taken to
introduce descriptions of new slide rules and to effect some slight
revisions.

                                                                C. N. P.

WITHINGTON, MANCHESTER, _December 1920_.




                               CONTENTS.


                                                                    PAGE
 Introductory                                                          5
 The Mathematical Principle of the Slide Rule                          6
 Notation by Powers of 10                                              8
 The Mechanical Principle of the Slide Rule                            9
 The Primitive Slide Rule                                             10
 The Modern Slide Rule                                                12
 The Notation of the Slide Rule                                       14
 The Cursor or Runner                                                 17
 Multiplication                                                       19
 Division                                                             24
 The Use of the Upper Scales for Multiplication and Division          26
 Reciprocals                                                          27
 Continued Multiplication and Division                                28
 Multiplication and Division with the Slide Inverted                  30
 Proportion                                                           31
 General Hints on the Elementary Uses of the Slide Rule               36
 Squares and Square Roots                                             37
 Cubes and Cube Roots                                                 40
 Miscellaneous Powers and Roots                                       45
 Power and Roots by Logarithms                                        45
 Other Methods of Obtaining Powers and Roots                          47
 Combined Operations                                                  49
 Hints on Evaluating Expressions                                      52
 Gauge Points                                                         53
 Examples in Technical Calculations                                   56
 Trigonometrical Application                                          74
 Slide Rules with Log-log Scales                                      84
 Special Types of Slide Rules                                         92
 Long-Scale Slide Rules                                               96
 Circular Calculators                                                101
 Slide Rules for Special Calculations                                109
 Construction Improvements in Slide Rules                            110
 The Accuracy of Slide Rule Results                                  111
 Appendix:—
   New Slide Rules                                                   113
   The Solution of Algebraic Equations                               122
   Screw-Cutting Gear Calculations                                   124
   Gauge Points and Signs on Slide Rules                             126
   Tables and Data                                                   128
   Slide Rule Data Slips                                             133




                            THE SLIDE RULE.




                             INTRODUCTORY.


The slide rule may be defined as an instrument for mechanically
effecting calculations by logarithms. Those familiar with logarithms and
their use will recognise that the slide rule provides what is in effect
a concisely arranged table of logarithms, together with a simple and
convenient means for adding and subtracting any selected values. Those,
however, who have no acquaintance with logarithms will find that only an
elementary knowledge of the subject is necessary to enable them to make
full use of the slide rule. It is true that for simple slide-rule
operations, as multiplication and division, a knowledge of logarithms is
unnecessary; indeed, many who have no conscious understanding of
logarithms make good use of the instrument. But this involves a blind
reliance upon rules without an appreciation of their origin or
limitations, and this, in turn, engenders a want of confidence in the
results of any but the simplest operations, and prevents the fullest use
being made of the instrument. For this reason a brief, but probably
sufficient _résumé_ of the principles of logarithmic calculation will be
given. Those desiring a more detailed explanation are referred to the
writer’s “Logarithms for Beginners.”

The slide rule enables various arithmetical, algebraical and
trigonometrical processes to be performed with ease and rapidity, and
with sufficient accuracy for most practical purposes. A grasp of the
simple fundamental principles which underlie its operation, together
with a little patient practice, are all that are necessary to acquire
facility in using the instrument, and few who have become proficient in
this system of calculating would willingly revert to the laborious
arithmetical processes.




             THE MATHEMATICAL PRINCIPLE OF THE SLIDE RULE.


Logarithms may be defined as a series of numbers in _arithmetical_
progression, as 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, etc., which bear a definite relationship
to another series of numbers in _geometrical_ progression, as 1, 2, 4,
8, 16, etc. A more precise definition is:—The logarithm of a number to
any base, is the _index of the power_ to which the base must be raised
to equal the given number. In the logarithms in general use, known as
_common logarithms_, and with which we are alone concerned, 10 is the
base selected. The general definition may therefore be stated in the
following modified form:—_The common logarithm of a number is the index
of the power to which 10 must be raised to equal the given number._
Applying this rule to a simple case, as 100 = 10^2, we see that the base
10 must be squared (_i.e._, raised to the 2nd power) in order to equal
100, the number selected. Therefore, as 2 is the index of the power to
which 10 must be raised to equal 100, it follows from our definition
that 2 is the common logarithm of 100. Similarly the common logarithm of
1000 will be 3, while proceeding in the opposite direction the common
log. of 10 must equal 1. Tabulating these results and extending, we
have:—

             Numbers    10,000  1000   100     10     1
             Logarithms   4      3      2      1      0

It will now be evident that for numbers

       between    1 and     10 the logs. will be between 0 and 1
          „      10  „     100       „          „        1  „  2
          „     100  „    1000       „          „        2  „  3
          „    1000  „  10,000       „          „        3  „  4

In other words, the logarithms of numbers between 1 and 10 will be
wholly fractional (_i.e._, decimal); the logs. of numbers between 10 and
100 will be 1 _followed by a decimal quantity_; the logs. of numbers
between 100 and 1000 will be 2 followed by a decimal quantity, and so
on. These decimal quantities for numbers from 1 to 10 (which are the
logarithms of this particular series) are as follows:—

 Numbers      1     2     3     4     5     6     7     8     9    10
 Logarithms   0   0·301 0·477 0·602 0·699 0·778 0·845 0·903 0·954 1·000

Combining the two tables, we can complete the logarithms. Thus for 3
multiplied successively by 10, we have:—

          Numbers      3      30    300    3000  30,000  etc.
          Logarithms 0·477  1·477  2·477  3·477  4·477    „

We see from this that for numbers having the _same significant figure_
(or figures), 3 in this case, the decimal part or _mantissa_ of the
logarithm is the same, but that the integral part or _characteristic_ is
always _one less than the number of figures before the decimal point_.

For numbers less than 1 the same plan is followed. Thus extending our
first table downwards, we have:—

          Numbers      1     0·1    0·01  0·001  0·0001  etc.
          Logarithms   0      −1     −2     −3     −4     „

so that for 3 divided successively by 10, we have:—

          Numbers      3     0·3    0·03  0·003  0·0003  etc.
          Logarithms 0·477  ̅1·477  ̅2·477  ̅3·477  ̅4·477    „

Here again we see that with the same significant figures in the numbers,
the mantissa of the logarithm has always the same (_positive_) value,
but the characteristic is _one more_ than the _number of 0’s immediately
following the decimal point_, and is _negative_, as indicated by the
minus sign written over it. Only the decimal parts of the logarithms of
numbers between 1 and 10 are given in the usual tables, for, as shown
above, the logarithms of all tenfold multiples or submultiples of a
number can be obtained at once by modifying the characteristic in
accordance with the rules given.

An examination of the two rows of figures giving the logarithms of
numbers from 1 to 10 will reveal some striking peculiarities, and at the
same time serve to illustrate the principle of logarithmic calculation.
First, it will be noticed that the addition of any two of the logarithms
gives the logarithm of the _product_ of these two numbers. Thus, the
addition of log. 2 and log. 4 = 0·301 + 0·602 = 0·903, and this is seen
to be the logarithm of 8, that is, of 2 × 4. Conversely, the difference
of the logarithms of two numbers gives the logarithm of the _quotient_
resulting from the division of these two numbers. Thus, log. 8 − log. 2
= 0·903 − 0·301 = 0·602, which is the log. of 4, or of 8 ÷ 2.

One other important point is to be noted. If the logarithm of any number
is _multiplied_ by 2, 3, or any other quantity, whole or fractional, the
result is the logarithm of the original number, raised to the 2nd, 3rd,
or other power respectively. Thus, multiplying the log. of 3 by 2, we
obtain 0·477 × 2 = 0·954, and this is seen to be the log. of 9, that is,
of 3 raised to the 2nd power, or 3 _squared_. Again, log. 2 multiplied
by 3 = 0·903—that is, the log. of 8, or of 2 raised to the 3rd power, or
2 _cubed_. Conversely, dividing the logarithm of any original number by
any number _n_, we obtain the logarithm of the _n_th root of the
original number. Thus, log. 8 ÷ 3 = 0·903 ÷ 3 = 0·301, and is therefore
equal to log. 2 or to the log. of the _cube root_ of 8.

Only simple logs. have been taken in these examples, but the student
will understand that the same reasoning applies, whatever the number.
Thus for 20^3 we prefix the characteristic (1 in this case) to log. 2,
giving 1·301. Multiplying by 3, we have 3·903 as the resulting
logarithm, and as its characteristic is 3, we know that it corresponds
to the number 8000. Hence 20^3 = 8000.

In this brief explanation is included all that need now be said with
regard to the properties of logarithms. The main facts to be borne
clearly in mind are:—(1.) That to find the _product_ of two numbers, the
logarithms of the numbers are to be _added_ together, the result being
the logarithm of the product required, the value of which can then be
determined. (2.) That in finding the _quotient_ resulting from the
division of one number by another, _the difference_ of the logarithms of
the numbers gives the logarithm of the quotient, from which the value of
the latter can be ascertained. (3.) That to find the result of _raising
a number to the nth power_, we _multiply_ the logarithm of the number by
_n_, thus obtaining the logarithm, and hence the value, of the desired
result. And (4.) That to find the n_th root of a number_, we _divide_
the logarithm of the number by _n_, this giving the logarithm of the
result, from which its value may be determined.




                       NOTATION BY POWERS OF 10.


A convenient method of representing an arithmetical quantity is to split
it up into two factors, of which the first is the original number, with
the decimal point moved so as to immediately follow the first
significant figure, and the second, 10^{_n_} where _n_ is the number of
places the decimal point has been moved, this index being _positive_ for
numbers greater than 1, and _negative_ for numbers less than 1.[1] In
this system, therefore, we regard 3,610,000 as 3·61 × 1,000,000, and
write it as 3·61 × 10^6. Similarly 361 = 3·61 x 10^2; 0·0361 (=
(3·61)/(100)) = 3·61 × 10^{−2}; 0·0000361 = 3·61 × 10^{−5}, etc. To
restore a number to its original form, we have only to move the decimal
point through the number of places indicated by the index, moving to the
right if the index is positive and to the left (prefixing 0’s) if
negative. This method, which should be cultivated for ordinary
arithmetical work, is substantially that followed in calculating by the
slide rule. Thus with the slide rule the multiplication of 63,200 by
0·0035 virtually resolves itself into 6·32 × 10^4 × 3·5 × 10^{−3} or
6·32 × 3·5 × 10^{4–3} = 22·12 x 10^1 = 221·2. It will be seen later,
however, that the result can be arrived at by a more direct, if less
systematic, method of working.




              THE MECHANICAL PRINCIPLE OF THE SLIDE RULE.


[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

The mechanical principle involved in the slide rule is of a very simple
character. In Fig. 1, A and B represent two rules divided into 10 equal
parts, the division lines being numbered consecutively as shown. If the
rule B is moved to the right until 0 on B is opposite 3 on A, it is seen
that any number on A is equal to the coinciding number on B, plus 3.
Thus opposite 4 on B is 7 on A. The reason is obvious. By moving B to
the right, we add to a length 0·3, another length 0·4, the result read
off on A being 7. Evidently, the same result would have been obtained if
a length 0·4 had been added, by means of a pair of dividers, to the
length 0·3 on the scale A. By means of the slide B, however, the
addition is more readily effected, and, what is of much greater
importance, the result of adding 3 to _any one of the numbers_ within
range, on the lower scale, is _immediately_ seen by reading the adjacent
number on A.

Of course, subtraction can be quite as readily performed. Thus, to
subtract 4 from 7, we require to deduct from 0·7 on the A scale, a
length 0·4 on B. We do this by placing 4 on B under 7 on A, when over 0
on B we find 3, on A. It is here evident that the _difference_ of any
pair of coinciding numbers on the scales is constantly equal to 3.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

An important modification results if the slide-scale B is inverted as in
Fig. 2. In this case, to find the sum of 4 and 3 we require to place the
4 of the A scale to 3 on the B scale, and the result is read on A over 0
on B. Here it will be noted, the _sum_ of any pair of coinciding numbers
on the scales is constant and equal to 7. This case, therefore,
resembles that of the immediately preceding one, except that the _sum_,
instead of the _difference_, of any pair of coinciding numbers is
constant.

To find the difference of two factors, the converse operation is
necessary. Thus, to subtract 4 from 7, 0 on B is placed opposite 7 on A,
and over 4 on B is found 3 on A.

From these examples it will be seen that with the slide _inverted_ the
methods of operation are the reverse of those used when the slide is in
its normal position.

It will be understood that although we have only considered the primary
divisions of the scales, the remarks apply equally to any subdivisions
into which the primary spaces of the scales might be divided. Further,
we note that the length of scale taken to represent a unit is quite
arbitrary.




                       THE PRIMITIVE SLIDE RULE.


The application of the foregoing principles to the slide rule can be
shown most conveniently by describing the construction of a simple form
of slide rule:—Take a strip of card about 11 in. long and 2 in. wide;
draw a line down the centre of its width, and mark off two points, 10
in. apart. Draw cross lines at these points and figure them 1 and 10 on
each side, as in Fig. 3. Next mark off lengths of 3·01, 4·77, 6·02,
6·99, 7·78, 8·45, 9·03 and 9·54 inches, from the line marked 1. Draw
cross lines as before, and figure these lines, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and
9. To fill in the intermediate divisions of the scale, take the logs, of
1·1, 1·2, 1·3, etc. (from a table), multiply each by 10, and thus obtain
the distances from 1, at which the several subdivisions are to be
placed. Mark these 1·2, 1·3, 1·4, etc., and complete the scale, making
the interpolated division marks shorter to facilitate reading, as with
an ordinary measuring rule. Cutting the card cleanly down the centre
line, we have the essentials of the slide rule.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

The fundamental principle of the slide rule is now evident:—Each scale
is graduated in such a manner that the _distance of any number from 1 is
proportional to the logarithm of that number_.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

“We know that to find the product of 2 × 3 by logarithms, we add 0·301,
or log. 2, to 0·477, the log. of 3, obtaining 0·778, or log. 6. With our
primitive slide rule we place 1 on the lower scale to 3·01 in. (which we
have marked 2) on the upper scale (Fig. 4). Then over 4·77 in. on the
lower scale (which we marked 3), we have 7·78 in. (which we marked 6) on
the upper scale. Conversely, to divide 6 by 3, we place 3 on the lower
scale in agreement with 6 on the upper, and over 1 on the lower scale
read 2 on the upper scale. This method of adding and subtracting scale
lengths will be seen to be identical with that used in the simple case
shown in Fig. 1.




                         THE MODERN SLIDE RULE.


The modern form of slide rule, variously styled the Gravêt, the
Tavernier-Gravêt, and the Mannheim rule, is frequently made of boxwood,
but all the leading instrument makers now supply rules made of boxwood
or mahogany, and faced with celluloid, the white surface of which brings
out the graduations much more distinctly than lines engraved on a
boxwood surface. The celluloid facings should not be polished, as a dull
surface is much less fatiguing to the eyes. The most generally used, and
on the whole the most convenient size of rule, is about 10½in. long,
1¼in. wide, and about ⅜in. thick; but 5 in., 8 in., 15 in., 20 in., 24
in. and 40 in. rules are also made. In the centre of the stock of the
rule a movable slip is fitted, which constitutes the slide, and
corresponds to the lower of the two rules of our rudimentary examples.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

From Fig. 5, which is a representation of the face of a Gravêt or
Mannheim slide rule, it will be seen that four series of logarithmic
graduations or scale-lines are employed, the upper and lower being
engraved on the stock or body of the rule, while the other two are
engraved upon the slide. The two upper sets of graduations are exactly
alike in every particular, and the lower sets are also similar. It is
usual to identify the two upper scale-lines by the letters A and B, and
the two lower by the letters C and D, as indicated in the figure at the
left-hand extremities of the scales.

Referring to the scales C and D, these will each be seen to be a
development of the elementary scales of Fig. 3, but in this case each
principal space is subdivided, more or less minutely. The principle,
however, is exactly the same, so that by moving the slide (carrying
scale C), multiplication and division can be mechanically performed in
the manner described.

The upper scale-line A consists of two exactly similar scales, placed
end to end, the first lying between IL and IC, and the second between IC
and IR. The first of these scales will be designated the _left-hand A
scale_, and the second the _right-hand A scale_. Similarly the
coinciding scales on the slide are the _left-hand B scale_ and the
_right-hand B scale_. Each of these four scales is divided (as finely as
convenient) as in the case of the C and D scales, but, of course, they
are exactly one half the length of the latter.

The two end graduations of both the C and D scales are known as the
_left-_ and _right-hand indices_ of these scales. Sometimes they are
figured 1 and 10 respectively; sometimes both are marked 1. Similarly IL
and IR are the left- and right-hand indices of the A and B lines, while
IC is the centre index of these scales. Other division lines usually
found on the face of the rule are one on the left-hand A and B scales,
indicating the ratio of the circumference of a circle to its diameter, π
= 3·1416; and a line on the right-hand B scale marking the position of
(π)/(4) = 0·7854, used in calculating the areas of circles. Reference
will be made hereafter to the scales on the under-side of the slide, and
we need now only add that one of the edges of the rule, usually
bevelled, is generally graduated in millimetres, while the other edge
has engraved on it a scale of inches divided into eighths or tenths. On
the bottom face inside the groove of the rule either one or the other of
these scales is continued in such a manner that by drawing the slide out
to the right and using the scale inside the rule, in conjunction with
the corresponding scale on the edge, it is possible to measure 20 inches
in the one case, or nearly 500 millimetres in the other. On the back of
the rule there is usually a collection of data, for which the slips
given at the end of this work may often be substituted with advantage.




                    THE NOTATION OF THE SLIDE RULE.


Hitherto our attention has been confined to a consideration of the
primary divisions of the scales. The same principle of graduation is,
however, used throughout; and after what has been said, this part of the
subject need not be further enlarged upon. Some explanation of the
method of reading the scales is necessary, as facility in using the
instrument depends in a very great measure upon the dexterity of the
operator in assigning the correct value to each division on the rule. By
reference to Fig. 5, it will be seen that each of the primary spacings
in the several scales is invariably subdivided into ten; but since the
lengths of the successive primary divisions rapidly diminish, it is
impossible to subdivide each main space into the same number of parts
that the space 1–2 can be subdivided. This variable spacing of the
scales is at first confusing to the student, but with a little practice
the difficulty is soon overcome.

With the C or D scale, it will be noticed that the length of the
interval 1–2 is sufficient to allow each of the 10 subdivisions to be
again divided into 10 parts, so that the whole interval 1–2 is divided
into 100. The shorter main space 2–3, and the still shorter one 3–4,
only allow of the 10 subdivisions of each being divided into five parts.
Each of these main spaces is therefore divided into 50 parts. For the
remainder of the scale each of the 10 subdivisions of each main space is
divided into two parts only; so that from the main division 4 to the end
of the scale the primary spaces are divided into 20 parts only.

In the upper scales A or B, it will be found that—as the space 1–2 is of
only half the length of the corresponding space on C or D—the 10
subdivisions of this interval are divided into five parts only.
Similarly each of the 10 subdivisions of the intervals 2–3, 3–4, and 4–5
are further divided into two parts only, while for the remainder of the
scale only the 10 subdivisions are possible, owing to the rapidly
diminishing lengths of the primary spacings.

The values actually given on the rule run from 1 to 10 on the lower
scales and from 1 to 100 on the upper scales, and, as explained on page
9, all factors are brought within these ranges of values by multiplying
or dividing them by powers of 10. By following this plan, we virtually
regard each factor as merely a series of significant figures, and make
the necessary modification due to the “powers of 10” when fixing the
position of the decimal point in the answer.

Many, however, find it convenient in practice to regard the values on
the rule as multiplied or divided by such powers of 10 as may be
necessary to suit the factors entering into the calculation. If this
plan is adopted, the values given to each graduation of the scales will
depend on that given to the left index figure (1) of the lower scales,
this being any multiple or submultiple of 10. Thus IL on the D scale may
be regarded as 1, 10, 100, 1000, etc., or as 0·1, 0·01, 0·001, 0·0001,
etc.; but once the initial value is assigned to the index, the ratio of
value must be maintained throughout the whole scale. For example, if 1
on C is taken to represent 10, the main divisions 2, 3, 4, etc., will be
read as 20, 30, 40, etc. On the other hand, if the fourth main division
is read as 0·004, then the left index figure of the scale will be read
as 0·001. The figured subdivisions of the main space 1–2 are to be read
as 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 and 19—if the index represents 10,—and
as corresponding multiples for any other value of the index.

Independently considered, these remarks apply equally to the A or B
scale, but in this case the notation is continued through the second
half of the scale, the figures of which are to be read as tenfold values
of the corresponding figures in the first half of the scale.

The reading of the intermediate divisions will, of course, be determined
by the values assigned to the main divisions. Thus, if IL on D is read
as 1, then each of the smallest subdivisions of the space 1–2 will be
read as 0·01, and each of the smallest subdivisions of the spaces 2–3 or
3–4 as 0·02, while for the remainder of the scale the smallest
subdivisions are read as 0·05. In the A or B scale the subdivisions of
the space 1–2 of the first half of the scale are (if IL = 1) read as
0·02, 0·04, etc.; for the divisions 2–3, 3–4, and 4–5, the smallest
intervals are read as 0·05 of the primary spaces, and from 5 to the
centre index of the scale the divisions represent 0·1 of each main
interval. Passing the centre index, which is, now read as 10, the
smallest subdivisions immediately following are read 10·2, 10·4, etc.,
until 20·0 is reached; then we read 20·5, 21·0, 21·5 22·0, etc., until
the figured main division 5 is reached. The remainder of the scale is
read 51, 52, 53, etc., up to 100, the right-hand index.

Further subdivision of any of the spaces of the rule can be effected by
the eye, and after a little practice the operator will become quite
expert in estimating any intermediate value. It affords good practice to
set 1 on C to 1·04, 1·09, etc. on D, and to read the values on D, under
4, 6, 8, etc. on C. As the exact results are easily calculated mentally,
the student, by this means, will receive better instruction in
estimating intermediate results than can be given by any diagram.

Some rules will be found figured as shown in Fig. 5; in others, the
right-hand upper scales are marked 10, 20, 30, etc. Again, others are
marked decimally, the lower scales and the left-hand upper scales being
figured 1, 1·1, 1·2, 1·3 ... 2·5, etc. The latter form has advantages
from the point of view of the beginner.

The method of reading the A and B scales, just given, applies only when
these scales are regarded as altogether independent of the lower pair of
scales C and D. Some operators prefer to use the A and B scales, and
some the C and D scales, for the ordinary operations of proportion,
multiplication, and division. Each method has its advantages, as will be
shown, but in the more complex calculations, as involution and
evolution, etc., the relation of the upper scales to the lower scales
becomes a very important factor.

The distance 1–10 on the upper scales is one-half of the distance 1–10
on the lower scales. Hence any distance from 1, taken on the upper
scales, represents _twice the logarithm_ which the same distance
represents on the lower scales. In other words, the length which
represents log. N on D, would represent 2 log. N on A; and, conversely,
the length which represents log. N on A, would represent (log. N)/(2) on
D.

Now we have seen (page 8) that multiplying the log. of a number by 2
gives the log. of the square of the number. Hence, above any number on D
we find its _square_ on A, or, conversely, below any number on A, we
find its _square root_ on D. Thus, above 2 we find 4; under 49, we find
7 and so on. Obviously the same relation exists between the B and C
scales.




                         THE CURSOR OR RUNNER.


All modern slide rules are now fitted with a _cursor_ or _runner_, which
usually consists of a light metal frame moving under spring control in
grooves in the edges of the stock of the rule. This frame carries a
piece of glass, mica or transparent celluloid, about 1 in. square,
across the centre of which a fine reference line is drawn exactly at
right angles to the line of scales. To “set the cursor” to any value on
the scales of the rule, the frame is taken between the thumb and
forefinger and adjusted in position until the line falls exactly upon
the graduation, or upon an estimated value, between a pair of
graduations, as the case may be. Having fixed one number in this way,
another value on either of the scales on the slide may be similarly
adjusted in reference to the cursor line. The cursor will be found very
convenient in making such settings, especially when either or both of
the numbers are located by eye estimation. It also finds a very
important use in referring the readings of the upper scale to those of
the lower, or _vice versa_, while as an aid in continued multiplication
and division and complex calculations generally, its value is
inestimable.

_Multiple Line Cursors._—Cursors can be obtained with _two_ lines, the
distance between them being that between 7·854 and 10 on the A scale.
The use of this cursor is explained on page 57. Another multiple line
cursor has short lines engraved on it, corresponding to the main
graduations from 95 to 105 on the respective scales. This is useful for
adding or deducting small percentages.

_The Broken Line Cursor._—To facilitate setting, broken line cursors are
made, in which the hair-line is not continued across the scales, but has
two gaps, as shown in Fig. 6.

_The Pointed Cursor_ has an index or pointer, extending over the
bevelled edge of the rule, on which is a scale of inches. It is useful
for summing the lengths of the ordinates of indicator diagrams, and also
for plotting lengths representing the logarithms of numbers, sometimes
required in graphic calculations.

_The Goulding Cursor._—It has been pointed out that in order to obtain
the third or fourth figure of a reading on the 10 in. slide rule, it is
frequently necessary to depend upon the operator’s ability to mentally
subdivide the space within which the reading falls. This subdivision can
be mechanically effected by the aid of the Goulding Cursor (Fig. 7),
which consists of a frame fitting into the usual grooves in the rule,
and carrying a metal plate faced with celluloid, upon which is engraved
a triangular scale A B C. The portion carrying the chisel edges E is not
fixed to the cursor proper, but slides on the latter, so that the index
marks on the projecting prongs can be moved slightly along the scales of
the rule, this movement being effected by the short end of the bent
lever F working in the slot as shown. D is a pointer which can be moved
along F under spring control. As illustrating the method of use, we will
assume that 1 on C is placed to 155 on D, and that we require to read
the value on D under 27 on C. This is seen to lie between 4150 and 4200,
so setting the pointer D to the line B C—always the first operation—we
move the whole along the rule until the index line on the lower prong
agrees with 4200. We then move F across the scale until the index line
agrees with 4100, set the pointer D to the line A C, and move the lever
back until the index line agrees with 27 on the slide. It will then be
found that the pointer D gives 85 on A B as the value of the
supplementary figures, and hence the complete reading is 4185.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

[Illustration: FIG. 8.]

[Illustration: FIG. 7.]

[Illustration: FIG. 9.]

_Magnifying Cursors_ are of assistance in reading the scales, and in a
good and direct light are very helpful. In one form an ordinary lens is
carried by two light arms hinged to the upper and lower edges of the
cursor, so that it can be folded down to the face of the rule when not
in use. A more compact form, shown in Fig. 8, consists of a strip of
plano-convex glass, on the under-side of which is the hair-line. In a
cursor made by Nestler of Lahr, the plano-convex strip is fixed on the
ordinary cursor. The magnifying power is about 2, so that a 5 in. rule,
having the same number of graduations as a 10 in. rule, can be read with
equal facility, by the aid of this cursor.

The Digit-registering Cursor, supplied by Mr. A. W. Faber, London, and
shown in Fig. 9, has a semicircular scale running from 0 at the centre
upward to −6 and downward to +6. A small finger enables the operator to
register the number of digits to be added or subtracted at the end of a
lengthy operation, as explained at page 28.




                            MULTIPLICATION.


In the preliminary notes it was shown that by mechanically adding two
lengths representing the logarithms of two numbers, we can obtain the
_product_ of these numbers; while by subtracting one log. length from
another, the number represented by the latter is divided by the number
represented by the former. Hence, using the C and D scales, we have the

RULE FOR MULTIPLICATION.—_Set the index of the C scale to one of the
factors on D, and under the other factor on C, find the product on D._

[Illustration: FIG. 10.]

Thus, to find the product of 2 × 4, the slide is moved to the right
until the left index (1) of C is brought over 2 on D, when under the
other factor (4) on C, is found the required product (8) on D. Following
along the slide, to the right, we find that beyond 5 on C (giving 10 on
D), we have no scale below the projecting slide (Fig. 10). If we imagine
the D scale prolonged to the right, we should have a repetition of the
earlier portion, but, as with the two parts of the A scales, the
repeated portion would be of tenfold value, and 10 on C would agree with
20 on the prolonged D scale. We turn this fact to account by moving the
slide to the left until 10 on C agrees with 2 on D, and we can then read
off such results as 2 × 6 = 12; 2 × 8 = 16, etc., remembering that as
the scale is now of tenfold value, there will be two figures in the
result. Hence, for those who prefer rules, we have the

RULE FOR THE NUMBER OF DIGITS IN A PRODUCT.—_If the product is read with
the slide projecting to the_ LEFT, ADD THE NUMBER OF THE DIGITS IN THE
TWO FACTORS; _if read with the slide to the_ RIGHT, _deduct 1 from this
sum_.


  EX.—25 × 70 = 1750.

  The product is found with the slide projecting to the _left_, so the
  number of digits in the product = 2 + 2 = 4.

  EX.—3·6 × 25 = 90.

  The slide projects to the _right_, and the number of digits in the
  product is therefore 1 + 2 − 1 = 2.

  EX.—0·025 × 0·7 = 0·0175.

  The product is obtained with the slide projecting to the _left_, and
  the number of digits is therefore −1 + 0 = −1.

  EX.—0·000184 × 0·005 = 0·00000092.

  The sum of the number of digits in the two factors = −3 + (−2) = −5,
  but as the slide projects to the _right_, the number of digits will be
  −5 − 1 = −6.


From the last two examples it will be seen that when the first
significant figure of a decimal factor does not immediately follow the
decimal point, the minus sign is to be prefixed to the number of digits,
counting as many digits _minus_ as there are 0’s following the decimal
point. Thus, 0·03 has −1 digit, 0·0035 has −2 digits, and so on. Some
little care is necessary to ensure these minus values being correctly
taken into account in determining the number of digits in the answer.
For this reason many prefer to treat decimal factors as whole numbers,
and to locate the decimal point according to the usual rules for the
multiplication of decimals. Thus, in the last example we take 184 × 5 =
920, but as by the usual rule the product must contain 6 + 3 = 9 decimal
places, we prefix six cyphers, obtaining 0·00000092. When both factors
consist of integers as well as decimals, the number of digits in the
product, and therefore the position of the decimal point, will be
determined by the usual rule for whole numbers.

Another method of determining the number of digits in a product deserves
mention, which, not being dependent upon the position of the slide, is
applicable to all calculating instruments.

GENERAL RULE FOR NUMBER OF DIGITS IN A PRODUCT.—_When the first
significant figure in the product is smaller than in_ EITHER _of the
factors, the number of digits in the product is equal to the_ SUM _of
the digits in the two factors. When the contrary is the case, the number
of digits is 1_ LESS _than the sum of the digits in the two factors.
When the first figures are the same, those following must be compared._

_Estimation of the Figures in a Product._—We have given rules for those
who prefer to decide the number of figures by this means, but experience
will show that to make the best use of the instrument, the result, as
read on the rule, should be regarded merely as the _significant figures
of the answer_, the position of the decimal point, if not obvious, being
decided by a very rough mental calculation. In very many instances, the
magnitude of the result will be evident from the conditions of the
problem—_e.g._, whether the answer should be 0·3 in., 3 in., or 30 in.;
or 10 tons, 0·1 ton, 100 tons, etc. In those cases where the magnitude
of the answer cannot be estimated, and the factors contain many figures,
or have a number of 0’s following the decimal point, the use of notation
by powers of 10 (page 8) is of considerable assistance; but more usually
it will be found, that a very rough calculation will settle the point
with comparatively little trouble. Considerable practice is needed to
work rapidly and with certainty, when using rules. Moreover, the
experience thus acquired is confined to slide-rule work. The same time
spent in practising the “rough approximation” method will enable
reliable results to be obtained rapidly, with the advantage that the
method is applicable to calculations generally. However, the choice of
methods is a matter of personal preference. Both methods will be given,
but whichever plan is followed, the student is strongly advised to
cultivate the habit of forming an idea of the magnitude of the result.


    EX.—33·6 × 236 = 7930.

    Setting 1 on C to 33·6 on D, we read under 236 on D and find 793 on
    D, as the significant figures of the answer. A rough calculation, as
    30 × 200 = 6000, indicates that the result will consist of 4
    figures, and is therefore to be read as 7930.

    EX.—17,300 × 3780 = 65,400,000.

    By factorising with powers of 10

              1·73 × 10^4 × 3·78 × 10^3 = 1·73 × 3·78 × 10^7.

    Setting 1 on C to 1·73 on D, we read, under 3·78 on C, the result of
    the simple multiplication, as 6·54. Multiplying by 10^7 moves the
    decimal point 7 places to the right, and the answer is 65,400,000.


If it is required to find a series of products of which one of the
factors is _constant_, set 1 on C to the constant factor on D and read
the several products on D, under the respective variable factors.

If the factors are required which will give a constant _product_ (really
a case of division), set the cursor to the constant product on D. Then
obviously, as the slide is moved along, any pair of factors found
simultaneously under the cursor line on C, and on D under index of C,
will give the product. A better method of working will be explained when
we deal with the inversion of the slide.

It is sometimes useful to remember that although we usually set the
slide to the rule, we can obtain the result equally well by setting the
rule to the slide. Thus, bringing 1 (or 10) on D to 2 on C, we find on
C, _over_ any other factor, _n_ on D, the product of 2 × _n_. But note
that the slide and rule have now changed places, and if we use rules for
the number of digits in the result, we must now deduct 1 from the sum of
the digits in the factors, when the _rule projects_ to the _right of the
slide_.

With the ordinary 10 in. rule it will be found in general that the
extent to which the C and D scales are subdivided is such as to enable
not more than three figures in either factor being dealt with. For the
same reason it is impossible to directly read more than the first three
figures of any product, although it is often possible—by mentally
dividing the smallest space involved in the reading—to correctly
determine the fourth figure of a product. Necessarily this method is
only reliable when used in the earlier parts of the C and D scales.
However, the last numeral of a three-figure, and in some cases the last
of a four-figure, product can be readily ascertained by an inspection of
the factors.

EX.—19 × 27 = 513. Placing the L.H. index of C to 19 on D, we find
opposite 27 on C, the product, which lies between 510 and 515. A glance
at the factors, however, is sufficient to decide that the third figure
must be 3, since the product of 9 and 7 is 63, and the last figure of
this product must be the last figure in the answer.

EX.—79 × 91 = 7189.

In this case the division line 91 on C indicates on D that the answer
lies between 7180 and 7190. As the last figure must be 9, it is at once
inferred that the last two figures are 89.

When there are more than three figures in either or both of the factors,
the fourth and following figures to the right must be neglected. It is
well to note, however, that if the first neglected figure is 5, or
greater than 5, it will generally be advisable to increase by 1 the
third figure of the factor employed. Generally it will suffice to make
this increase in one of the two factors only, but it is obvious that in
some cases greater accuracy will be obtained by increasing both factors
in this way.

CONTINUED MULTIPLICATION.—To find the product of more than two factors,
we make use of the cursor to mark the position of successive products
(the value of which does not concern us) as the several factors are
taken into the calculation. Setting the index of C to the 1st factor on
D, we bring the line of the cursor to the 2nd factor on C, then the
index of C to the cursor, the cursor to the 3rd factor, index of C to
cursor, and so on, reading the final product on D under the last factor
on C. (Note that the 1st factor and the result are read on D; all
intermediate readings are taken on C.)

If the rule for the number of digits in a product is used, it is
necessary to note the number of times multiplication is effected with
the slide projecting to the right. This number, deducted from the sum of
the digits of the several factors, gives the number of digits in the
product. Ingenious devices have been adopted to record the number of
times the slide projects to the right, but some of these are very
inconvenient. The author’s method is to record each time the slide so
projects, by a minus mark, thus −. These can be noted down in any
convenient manner, and the sum of the marks so obtained deducted from
the sum of the digits in the several factors, gives the number of digits
in the product as before explained.

EX.—42 × 71 × 1·5 × 0·32 × 121 = 173,200.

The product given, which is that read on the rule, is obtained as
follows:—Set R.H. index of C to 42 on D, and bring the cursor to 71 on
C. Next bring the L.H. index of C to the cursor, and the latter to 1·5
on C. This multiplication is effected with the slide to the right, and a
memorandum of this fact is kept by making a mark −. Bring the R.H. index
of C to the cursor and the latter to 0·32 on C. Then set the L.H. index
of C to the cursor and read the result, 1732, on D under 121 on C, while
as a slide again projects to the right, a second − memo-mark is
recorded. There are 2 + 2 + 1 + 0 + 3 = 8 digits in the factors, and as
there were 2 − marks recorded during the operation, there will be 8 − 2
= 6 digits in the product, which will therefore read 173,200
(173,194·56).

For a very rough evaluation of the result, we note that 1·5 × 0·3 is
about 0·5; hence, as a clue to the number of figures we have

                  40 × 70 × 60 = 3000 × 60 = 180,000.




                               DIVISION.


The instructions for multiplication having been given in some detail, a
full discussion of the inverse process of division will be unnecessary.

RULE FOR DIVISION.—_Place the divisor on C, opposite the dividend on D,
and read the quotient on D under the index of C._

EX.—225 ÷ 18 = 12·5.

Bringing 18 on C to 225 on D, we find 12·5 under the L.H. index of C.

As in multiplication, the factors are treated as whole numbers, and the
position of the decimal point afterwards decided according to the
following rule, which, as will be seen, is the reverse of that for
multiplication:—

RULE FOR THE NUMBER OF DIGITS IN A QUOTIENT.—_If the quotient is read
with the slide projecting to the_ LEFT, _subtract the number of digits
in the divisor from those in the dividend; but if read with the slide to
the_ RIGHT, ADD _1 to this difference_.[2]

In the above example the quotient is read off with the slide to the
right, so the number of digits in the answer = 3 − 2 + 1 = 2.

EX.—0·000221 ÷ 0·017 = 0·013.

Here the number of digits in the dividend is −3, and in the divisor −1.
The difference is −2; but as the result is obtained with the slide to
the right, this result must be increased by 1, so that the number of
digits in the quotient is −2 + 1 = −1, giving the answer as 0·013.

If preferred, the result can be obtained in the manner referred to when
considering the multiplication of decimals. Thus, treating the above as
whole numbers, we find that the result of dividing 221 by 17 = 13, since
the difference in the number of digits in the factors, which is 1, is,
owing to the position of the slide, increased by 1, giving 2 as the
number of digits in the answer. Then by the rules for the division of
decimals we know that the number of decimal places in the quotient is
equal to 6 − 3 = 3, showing that a cypher is to be prefixed to the
result read on the rule.

As in multiplication, so in division, we have a

GENERAL RULE FOR NUMBER OF DIGITS IN A QUOTIENT.—_When the first
significant figure in the_ DIVISOR _is greater than that in the_
DIVIDEND_, the number of digits in the quotient is found by subtracting
the digits in the divisor from those in the dividend. When the contrary
is the case, 1_ IS TO BE ADDED _to this difference. When the first
figures are the same, those following must be compared._

ESTIMATION OF THE FIGURES IN A QUOTIENT.—The method of roughly
estimating the number of figures in a quotient needs little explanation.

EX.—3·95 ÷ 5340 = 0·00074.


  Setting 534 on C to 3·95 on D we read under the (R.H.) index of C, the
  significant figures on D, which are 74. Then 3·9 ÷ 5 is about 0·8 and
  0·8 ÷ 1000 gives 0·0008 as a rough estimate.


EX.—0·00000285 ÷ 0·000197 = 0·01446.


  Regarding this as 2·85 × 10^{−6} ÷ 1·97 × 10^{−4} we divide 2·85 by
  1·97 and obtain 1·446. Dividing the powers of 10 we have 10^{−6} ÷
  10^{−4} = 10^{−2}, so the decimal point is to be moved two places to
  the left and the answer is read as 0·01446.


Another method of dividing deserves mention as of special service when
dividing a number of quantities by a _constant divisor_:—Set the index
of C to the divisor on D and over any dividend on D, read the quotient
on C.

For the division of a _constant dividend_ by a variable divisor, set the
cursor to the dividend on D and bring the divisor on C successively to
the cursor, reading the corresponding quotients on D under the index of
C. Another method which avoids moving the slide is explained in the
section on “Multiplication and Division with the Slide Inverted.”

CONTINUED DIVISION, if we can so call such an expression as

             (3·14)/(785 × 0·00021 × 4·3 × 64·4) = 0·0688,

may be worked by repeating as follows:—Set 7·85 on C to 3·14 on D, bring
cursor to index of C, 2·1 on C to cursor, cursor to index, 4·3 to
cursor, cursor to index, 6·44 to cursor, and under index of C read 688
on D as the significant figures of the answer.

For the number of figures in the result, we deduct the sum of the number
of digits in the several factors and add 1 for each time the slide
projects to the right, which in this case occurs once. There are 3 +
(−3) + 1 + 2 = 3 denominator digits, 1 numerator digit, and 1 is to be
added to the difference. Therefore there are 1 − 3 + 1 = −1 digits in
the answer, which is therefore 0·0688. The foregoing method of working
may confuse the beginner, who is apt to fall into the process of
continued multiplication. For this reason, until familiarity with
combined methods has been acquired, the product of the several
denominators should be first found by the continued multiplication
process, and the figures in this product determined. Then divide the
numerator by this product to obtain the result.

As the denominator product will be read on D, we may avoid resetting the
slide by bringing the numerator on C to this product and reading the
result on C _over_ the index of D. The slide and rule have here changed
places; hence if rules are followed for the number of figures in the
result, 1 must be added to the difference of digits, when the _rule
projects_ to the _right of the slide_.

The author’s method of recording the number of times division is
performed with the slide to the right is by vertical memorandum marks,
thus |. The full significance of these memo-marks will appear in the
following section.

For a rough calculation to fix the decimal point, in this example we
move the decimal points in the factors, obtaining

               (3)/(0·8 × 2 × 4 × 6) = (3)/(40) = 0·075.




      THE USE OF THE UPPER SCALES FOR MULTIPLICATION AND DIVISION.


Many prefer to use the upper scales A and B, in preference to C and D.
The disadvantage is that as the scales are only one-half the length of C
or D, the graduation does not permit of the same degree of accuracy
being obtained as when working with the lower scales. But the result can
always be read directly from the rule without ever having to change the
position of the slide after it has been initially set. Hence, it
obviates the uncertainty as to the direction in which the slide is to be
moved in making a setting.

When the A and B scales are employed, it is understood that the
left-hand pair of scales are to be used in the same manner as C and D,
and so far the rules relating to the latter are entirely applicable. But
in this case the slide is always moved to the right, so that in
multiplication the product is found either upon the left or right scales
of A. If it is found on the left A scale, the rule for the number of
digits in the product is found as for the C and D scales, and is equal
to the _sum of the digits in the two factors, minus 1_; but if found on
the right-hand A scale, the number of digits in the product is equal to
the sum of the digits in the two factors.

In division, similar modifications are necessary. If when moving the
slide to the right the division can be completely effected by using the
L.H. scale of A, the quotient (read on A above the L.H. of index B) has
a number of digits equal to the number in the dividend, less the number
in the divisor, _plus 1_. But if the division necessitates the use of
both the A scales, the number of digits in the quotient equals the
number in the dividend, less the number in the divisor.




                              RECIPROCALS.


A special case of division to be considered is the determination of the
_reciprocal_ of a number _n_, or (1)/(_n_). Following the ordinary rule
for division, it is evident that setting _n_ on C to 1 on D, gives
(1)/(_n_) on D under 1 on C. It is more important to observe that by
inverting the operation—setting 1 (or 10) on C to _n_ on D—we can read
(1)/(_n_) on C over 1 (or 10) on D. Hence whenever a result is read on D
under an index of C, we can also read its reciprocal on C over whichever
index of D is available.

_The Number of Digits in a Reciprocal_ is obvious when _n_ = 10, 100, or
any power (_p_) of 10. Thus (1)/(10) = 0·1; (1)/(100) = 0·01;
(1)/(10^{_p_}) = 1 preceded by _p_ − 1 cyphers. For all other cases we
have the rule:—_Subtract from 1 the number of digits in the number._

EX.—(1)/(339) = 0·00295.

There are 3 digits in the number; hence, there are 1 − 3 = −2 digits in
the answer.

EX.—(1)/(0·0000156) = 64,100.

There are −4 digits in the number; hence, there are 1 − (−4) = 5 digits
in the result.




                 CONTINUED MULTIPLICATION AND DIVISION.


By combining the rules for multiplication and division, we can readily
evaluate expressions of the form (_a_)/(_b_) × (_c_)/(_d_) × (_e_)/(_f_)
× (_g_)/(_h_) = _x_. The simplest case, (_a_ × _c_)/(_b_) can be solved
by one setting of the slide.[3] Take as an example, (14·45 × 60)/(8·5) =
102. Setting 8·5 on C to 14·45 on D, we can, if desired, read 1·7 on D
under 1 on C, as the quotient. However, we are not concerned with this,
but require its multiplication by 60, and the slide being already set
for this operation, we at once read under 60 on C the result, 102, on D.
The figures in the answer are obvious.

When there are more factors to take into account, we place the cursor
over 102 on D, bring the next divisor on C to the cursor, move the
cursor to the next multiplier on C, bring the next divisor on C to the
cursor, and so on, until all the factors have been dealt with. Note that
only the first factor and the result are read on D; also _that the
cursor is moved for multiplying and the slide for dividing_.

_Number of Digits in Result in Combined Multiplication and
Division._—For those who use rules the author’s method of determining
the decimal point in combined multiplication and division may be used.
Each time _multiplication_ is performed with the slide projecting to the
_right_, make a − mark; each time _division_ is effected with the slide
to the right, make a | mark; _but allow the_ | _marks to cancel the_ −
_marks as far as they will_. Subtract the sum of the digits in the
denominator from the sum of digits in the numerator, and to this
difference _add_ any uncancelled memo-marks, if of | character, or
_subtract_ them if of − character.

EX.—(43·5 × 29·4 × 51 × 32)/(27 × 3·83 × 10·5 × 1·31) = 1468.

[Sidenote: ⵜ
           ⵜ
           ⵏ
           ⵏ]

Set 27 on C to 43·5 on D, and as with this _division_ the slide is to
the right, make the first ⵏ mark. Bring cursor to 29·4 on C, and as in
this _multiplication_ the slide is to the right, make the first − mark,
cancelling as shown. Setting 3·83 on C to the cursor, requires the
second ⵏ mark, which, however, is cancelled in turn by the
multiplication by 51. The division by 10·5 requires the third ⵏ mark,
and after multiplying by 32 (requiring no mark) the final division by
1·31 requires the fourth ⵏ mark. Then, as there are 8 numerator digits,
6 denominator, and 2 uncancelled memo-marks (which, being 1, are
additive) we have

              Number of digits in result = 8 − 6 + 2 = 4.

Had the uncancelled marks been − in character, the number of digits
would have been 8 − 6 − 2 = 0.

For quantities less than 0·1 the digit place numbers will be _negative_.
The troublesome addition of these may be avoided by transferring them to
the opposite side and treating them as positive.

                                   _2_        _4_
                         0·00356 × 27·1  × 0·08375
                Thus:—   ───────────────────────── = 288
                         0·1426  × 9·85  × 0·00002
                            _2_     _1_       _1_

The first numerator, 0·00356, has −2 digits. Note this by placing 2
_below the lower line_ as shown. 27·1 has 2 digits; place 2 over it.
0·08375 has −1 digit; hence place 1 _below the lower line_. The first
denominator has no digits; the second, 9·85, has 1 digit; hence place 1
under it. 0·00002 has −4 digits; place 4 _above the upper line_. The sum
of the top series is 2 + 4 = 6; of the bottom series 2 + 1 + 1 = 4.
Subtracting the bottom from the top, we have 6 − 4 = 2 digits, to which
1 has to be added for an uncancelled memo-mark, and the result is read
as 288.

Moving the decimal point often facilitates matters. Thus, (32·4 × 0·98 ×
432 × 0·0217)/(4·71 × 0·175 × 0·00000621 × 412000) is much more
conveniently dealt with when re-arranged as (32·4 × 9·8 × 432 ×
2·17)/(4·71 × 17·5 × 6·21 × 4·12) = 141.

To determine the number of figures in the result by rough cancelling and
mental calculation, we note that 4·71 enters 432 about 100 times; 9·8
enters 17·5 about 2; 6·21 into 32·4 about 5; and 2·17 into 4·12 about 2.
This gives (500)/(4) = 125, showing that the result contains 3 digits.
From the slide rule we read 141, which is therefore the result sought.

The occasional traversing of the slide through the rule, to interchange
the indices—a contingency which the use of the C and D scales always
involves—may often be avoided by a very simple expedient. Such an
example as (6·19 × 31·2 × 422)/(1120 × 8·86 × 2.09) = 3·93 is sometimes
cited as a particularly difficult case. Working through the expression
as given, two traversings of the slide are necessary; but by taking the
factors in the slightly different order, (6·19 × 31·2 × 422)/(8·86 ×
2·09 × 1120), _so that the significant figures of each pair are more
nearly alike_, we not only avoid any traversing the slide, but we also
reduce the extent to which the slide is moved to effect the several
divisions.

Such cases as (_a_ × _b_)/(_c_ × _d_ × _e_ × _f_ × _g_) or (_a_ × _b_ ×
_c_ × _d_ × _e_)/(_f_ × _g_) really resolve themselves into (_a_ × _b_ ×
1 × 1 × 1)/(_c_ × _d_ × _e_ × _f_ × _g_) and (_a_ × _b_ × _c_ × _d_ ×
_e_)/(_f_ × _g_ × 1 × 1 × 1), but, of course, if rules are used to
locate the decimal point, the 1’s so (mentally) introduced are not to be
counted as additional figures in the factors.




          MULTIPLICATION AND DIVISION WITH THE SLIDE INVERTED.


If the slide be inverted in the rule but with the same face uppermost,
so that the Ɔ scale lies adjacent to the A scale, and the right and left
indices of the slide and rule are placed in coincidence, we find the
product of any number on D by the coincident number on Ɔ (readily
referred to each other by the cursor) is always 10. Hence, by reading
the numbers on Ɔ as decimals, we have over any unit number on D, its
_reciprocal_ on Ɔ. Thus 2 on D is found opposite 0·5 on Ɔ; 3 on D
opposite to 0·333; while opposite 8 on Ɔ is 0·125 on D, etc. The reason
of this is that the sum of the lengths of the slide and rule
corresponding to the factors, is always equal to the length
corresponding to the product—in this case, 10.

It will be seen that if we attempt to apply the ordinary rule for
multiplication, with the slide inverted, we shall actually be
multiplying the one factor taken on D by the _reciprocal_ of the other
taken on Ɔ. But multiplying by the _reciprocal of a number_ is
equivalent to _dividing_ by that number, and _dividing_ a factor by the
_reciprocal_ of a number is equivalent to _multiplying_ by that number.
It follows that with the slide inverted the operations of multiplication
and division are reversed, as are also the rules for the number of
digits in the product and the position of the decimal point. Hence, in
multiplying with the slide inverted, we place (by the aid of the cursor)
one factor on Ɔ opposite the other factor on D, and read the result on D
under either index of Ɔ. It follows that with the slide thus set, any
pair of coinciding factors on Ɔ and D will give the same constant
product found on D under the index of Ɔ. One useful application of this
fact is found in selecting the scantlings of rectangular sections of
given areas or in deciding upon the dimensions of rectangular sheets,
plates, cisterns, etc. Thus by placing the index of Ɔ to 72 on D, it is
readily seen that a plate having an area of 72 sq. ft. may have sides 8
by 9 ft., 6 by 12, 5 by 14·4, 4 by 18, 3 by 24, 2 by 36, with
innumerable intermediate values. Many other useful applications of a
similar character will suggest themselves.




                              PROPORTION.


With the slide in the ordinary position and with the indices of the C
and D scales in exact agreement, the _ratio_ of the corresponding
divisions of these scales is 1. If the slide is moved so that 1 on C
agrees with 2 on D, we know that under any number _n_ on C is _n_ × 2 on
D, so that if we read numerators on C and denominators on D we have

                 C      1     1·5     2      3      4
               ─────────────────────────────────────────
                 D1     2      3      4      6      8.

In other words, the numbers on D bear to the coinciding numbers on C a
ratio of 2 to 1. Obviously the same condition will obtain no matter in
what position the slide may be placed. The rule for proportion, which is
apparent from the foregoing, may be expressed as follows:—

RULE FOR PROPORTION.—_Set the first term of a proportion on the C scale
to the second term on the D scale, and opposite the third term on the C
scale read the fourth term on the D scale._


  EX.—Find the 4th term in the proportion of 20 ∶ 27 ∷ 70 ∶ _x_. Set 20
  on C to 27 on D, and opposite 70 on C read 94·5 on D. Thus

                             C    20    70
                           ─────────────────
                             D    27   94·5.


It will be evident that this is merely a case of combined multiplication
and division of the form, (20 × 70)/(27) = 94·5. Hence, given any three
terms of a proportion, we set the 1st to the 2nd, or the 3rd to the 4th,
as the case may be, and opposite the other given term read the term
required.[4]

Thus, in reducing vulgar fractions to decimals, the decimal equivalent
of (3)/(16) is determined by placing 3 on C to 16 on D, when over the
index or 1 of D we read 0·1875 on C. In this case the terms are
3 ∶ 16 ∷ _x_ ∶ 1. For the inverse operation—to find a vulgar fraction
equivalent to a given decimal—the given decimal fraction on C is set to
the index of D, and then opposite any denominator on D is the
corresponding numerator of the fraction on C.

If the index of C be placed to agree with 3·1416 on D, it will be clear
from what has been said that this ratio exists throughout between the
numbers of the two scales. Therefore, against any _diameter_ of a circle
on C will be found the corresponding _circumference_ on D. In the same
way, by setting 1 on C to the appropriate conversion factor on D, we can
convert a series of values in one denomination to their equivalents in
another denomination. In this connection the following table of
conversion factors will be found of service. If the A and B scales are
used instead of the C and D scales, a complete set of conversions will
be at once obtained. In this case, however, the left-hand A and B scales
should be used for the initial setting, any values read on the
right-hand A or B scales being read as of tenfold value. With the C and
D scales a portion of the one scale will project beyond the other. To
read this portion of the scale, the cursor or runner is brought to
whichever index of the C scale falls within the rule, and the slide
moved until the other index of the C scale coincides with the cursor,
when the remainder of the equivalent values can then be read off. It
must be remembered that if the slide is moved in the direction of
notation (to the _right_), the values read thereon have a tenfold
_greater_ value; if the slide is moved to the _left_, the readings
thereon are _decreased_ in a tenfold degree. Although preferred by many,
in the form given, the case is obviously one of multiplication, and is
so treated in the Data Slips at the end of the book.

                     TABLE OF CONVERSION FACTORS.
    ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
                       GEOMETRICAL EQUIVALENTS.
    ──────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────┬─────────
             SCALE C.         │         SCALE D.         │If C = 1,
                              │                          │   D =
    ──────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────┼─────────
    Diameter of circle        │Circumference of circle   │3·1416
    „         „               │Side of inscribed square  │0·707
    „         „               │„    equal square         │0·886
    „         „               │„      „   equilateral    │
                              │  triangle                │1·346
    Circum. of circle         │„    inscribed square     │0·225
    „         „               │„    equal square         │0·282
    Side of square            │Diagonal of square        │1·414
    Square inch               │Circular inch             │1·273
    Area of circle            │Area of inscribed square  │0·636
    ──────────────────────────┴──────────────────────────┴─────────
                          MEASURES OF LENGTH.
    ──────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────┬─────────
    Inches                    │Millimetres               │25·40
    „                         │Centimetres               │2·54
    8ths of an inch           │Millimetres               │3·175
    16ths „      „            │„                         │1·587
    32nds „      „            │„                         │0·794
    64ths „      „            │„                         │0·397
    Feet                      │Metres                    │0·3048
    Yards                     │„                         │0·9144
    Chains                    │„                         │20·116
    Miles                     │Kilometres                │1·609
    ──────────────────────────┴──────────────────────────┴─────────
                           MEASURES OF AREA.
    ──────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────┬─────────
    Square inches             │Square centimetres        │6·46
    Circular  „               │„        „                │5·067
    Square feet               │„    metres               │0·0929
    „   yards                 │„      „                  │0·836
    „   miles                 │„    kilometres           │2·59
    „     „                   │Hectares                  │259·00
    Acres                     │„                         │0·4046
    ──────────────────────────┴──────────────────────────┴─────────
                         MEASURES OF CAPACITY.
    ──────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────┬─────────
    Cubic inches              │Cubic centimetres         │16·38
    „     „                   │Imperial gallons          │0·00360
    „     „                   │U.S. gallons              │0·00432
    „     „                   │Litres                    │0·01638
    Cubic feet                │Cubic metres              │0·0283
    „    „                    │Imperial gallons          │6·23
    „    „                    │U.S. gallons              │7·48
    „    „                    │Litres                    │28·37
    „   yards                 │Cubic metres              │0·764
    Imperial gallons          │Litres                    │4·54
    „        „                │U.S. gallons              │1·200
    Bushels                   │Cubic metres              │0·0363
    „                         │„   feet                  │1·283
    ──────────────────────────┴──────────────────────────┴─────────
                          MEASURES OF WEIGHT.
    ──────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────┬─────────
    Grains                    │Grammes                   │0·0648
    Ounces (Troy)             │„                         │31·103
    „    (Avoird.)            │„                         │28·35
    „       „                 │Kilogrammes               │0·02835
    Pounds (Troy)             │„                         │0·3732
    „    (Avoird.)            │„                         │0·4536
    Hundredweights            │„                         │50·802
    Tons                      │„                         │1016·4
    „                         │Metric tonnes             │1·016
    ──────────────────────────┴──────────────────────────┴─────────
                     COMPOUND FACTORS—VELOCITIES.
    ──────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────┬─────────
    Feet per second           │Metres per second         │0·3048
    „       „                 │„    minute               │18·288
    „       „                 │Miles per hour            │0.682
    „      minute             │Meters per second         │0·00508
    „       „                 │„    minute               │0·3048
    „       „                 │Miles per hour            │0·01136
    Yards per „               │„      „                  │0·0341
    Miles per hour            │Metres per minute         │26·82
    Knots                     │„      „                  │30·88
    „                         │Miles per hour            │1·151
    ──────────────────────────┴──────────────────────────┴─────────
                      COMPOUND FACTORS—PRESSURES.
    ──────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────┬─────────
    Pounds per sq. inch       │Grammes per sq. mm.       │0·7031
    „         „               │Kilos. per sq. centimetre │0·0703
    „         „               │Atmospheres               │0·068
    „         „               │Head of water in inches   │27·71
    „         „               │„        „   feet         │2·309
    „         „               │„        „   metres       │0·757
    „         „               │Inches of Mercury         │2·04
    Inches of water           │Pounds per square inch    │0·0361
    „       „                 │Inches of mercury         │0·0714
    „       „                 │Pounds per square foot    │5·20
    Inches of mercury         │Atmospheres               │0·0333
    Atmospheres               │Metres of water           │10·34
    „                         │Kilos. per sq. cm.        │1·033
    Feet of water             │Pounds per square foot    │62·35
    „     „                   │Atmospheres               │0·0294
    „     „                   │Inches of mercury         │0·883
    Pounds per sq. foot       │„       „                 │0·01417
    „        „                │Kilos. per square metre   │4·883
    „        „                │Atmospheres               │0·000472
    Pounds per sq. yard       │Kilos. per square metre   │0·5425
    Tons per sq. inch         │„       square mm.        │1·575
    „    sq. foot             │Tonnes per square metre   │10·936
    ──────────────────────────┴──────────────────────────┴─────────
              COMPOUND FACTORS—WEIGHTS, CAPACITIES, ETC.
    ──────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────┬─────────
    Pounds per lineal ft.     │Kilos. per lineal metre   │1·488
    „ per lineal yd.          │„        „      „         │0·496
    „ per lineal mile         │Kilos. per kilometre      │0·2818
    Tons     „       „        │Tonnes         „          │0·6313
    Feet     „       „        │Metres         „          │1·894
    Pounds per cubic in.      │Grammes per cubic cm.     │27·68
    „  per cubic ft.          │Kilos. per cubic metre    │16·02
    „  per cubic yd.          │„        „     „          │0·593
    Tons per cubic yard       │Tonnes      „     „       │1·329
    Cubic yds. per pound      │Cubic metres per kilo.    │1·685
    „      per ton            │„    „    per tonne       │0·7525
    Cubic inch of water       │Weight in pounds          │0·03608
    Cubic feet of water       │„         „               │62·35
    „          „              │„      kilos              │28·23
    „          „              │Imperial gallons          │6·235
    „          „              │U.S. gallons              │7·48
    Litre of water            │Cubic inches              │61·025
    Gallons of water          │Weight in kilos           │4·54
    Pounds of fresh water     │Pounds of sea water       │1·026
    Grains per gallon         │Grammes per litre         │0·01426
    Pounds per gallon         │Kilos. per litre          │0·0998
    „  per U.S. gal.          │„       „                 │0·115
    ──────────────────────────┴──────────────────────────┴─────────
                  COMPOUND FACTORS—POWER UNITS, ETC.
    ──────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────┬─────────
    British Ther. Units.      │Kilogrammetres.           │108
    „          „              │Joules                    │1058
    „          „              │Calories (Fr. Ther. units)│0·252
    „    „   per sq. ft.      │„     per square metre    │2·713
    „    „   per pound        │„     per kilogramme      │0·555
    Pounds per sq. ft.        │Dynes, per sq. cm.        │479
    Foot-pounds               │Kilogrammetres            │0·1382
    „    „                    │Joules                    │1·356
    „    „                    │Thermal Units             │0·00129
    „    „                    │Calorie                   │0·000324
    Foot-tons                 │Tonne-metres              │0·333
    Horse-power               │Force decheval  (Fr.H.P.) │1·014
    „    „                    │Kilowatts                 │0·746
    Pounds per H.P.           │Kilos. per cheval         │0·447
    Square feet per H. P.     │Square metres per cheval  │0·0196
    Cubic     „      „        │Cubic    „          „     │0·0279
    Watts                     │Ther. Units per hour      │3·44
    „                         │Foot-pounds per second    │0·73
    „                         │„      per minute         │44·24
    Watt-hours                │Kilogrammetres            │367
    „    „                    │Joules                    │3600
    Kilogrammetres            │„                         │9·806
    ──────────────────────────┴──────────────────────────┴─────────

_Inverse Proportion._—If “more” requires “less,” or “less” requires
“more,” the case is one of _inverse_ proportion, and although it will be
seen that this form of proportion is quite readily dealt with by the
preceding method, the working is simplified to some extent by inverting
the slide so that the C scale is adjacent to the A scale. By the aid of
the cursor, the values on the inverted C (or Ɔ) scale, and on the D
scale, can be then read off. These will now constitute a series of
inverse ratios. For example, in the proportion

                              ───────────
                               Ɔ   8   4
                              ───────────
                               D  1·5  3

the 4 on the Ɔ scale is brought opposite 3 on D, when under 8 on Ɔ is
found 1·5 on D.[5]


        GENERAL HINTS ON THE ELEMENTARY USES OF THE SLIDE RULE.

Before the more complex operations of involution, evolution, etc., are
considered, a few general hints on the use of the slide rule for
elementary operations may be of service, especially as these will serve
to enforce some of the more important points brought out in the
preceding sections.

Always use the slide rule in as _direct_ a light as possible.

Study the manner in which the scales are divided. Follow the graduations
of the C and D scales from 1 to 10, noting the values given by each
successive graduation and how these values change as we follow along to
the right. Do the same with the two halves of the A and B scales and
note the difference in the value of the subdivisions, due to the shorter
scale-lengths.

Practise reading values by setting 1 on C to some value on D and reading
under 2, 3, 4, etc., on C, checking the readings by mental arithmetic.
To the same end, find squares, square roots, etc., comparing the results
with the actual values as given in tables. Practise setting both slide
and cursor to values taken at random. Aim at accuracy; speed will come
with practice.

When in doubt as to any method of working, verify by making a simple
calculation of the same form.

Follow the orthodox methods of working until entirely confident in the
use of the instrument, and even then do not readily make a change. If
any altered procedure is adopted, first work a simple case and guard
carefully against unconsciously lapsing into the usual method during the
operation.

Unless the calculation is of a straightforward character, time taken in
considering how best to attack it (rearranging the expression if
desirable) is generally time well spent.

In setting two values together, set the cursor to one of them on the
rule, and bring the other, on the slide, to the cursor line.

In multiplying factors, as 57 × 0·1256, take the fractional value first.
It is easier to set 1 on C to 1256 on D and read under 57 on C, than to
reverse the procedure. When both values are eye-estimated, set the
cursor to the second factor on C and read the result on D, under the
cursor line.

In continuous operations avoid moving the slide further than necessary,
by taking the factors in that order which will keep the scale readings
as close together as possible.


                       SQUARES AND SQUARE ROOTS.

We have seen that the relation which the upper scales bear to the lower
set is such that over any number on D is its square on A, and,
conversely, under any number on A is its square root on D, the same
remarks applying to the C and B scales on the slide. Taking the values
engraved on the rule, we have on D, numbers lying between 1 and 10, and
on A the corresponding squares extending from 1 to 100. Hence the
squares of numbers between 1 and 10, or the roots of numbers between 1
and 100, can be read off on the rule by the aid of the cursor. All other
cases are brought within these ranges of values by factorising with
powers of 10, as before explained.

The more practical rule is the following:—

_To Find the Square of a Number_, set the cursor to the number on D and
read the required square on A under the cursor. The rule for

_The Number of Digits in a Square_ is easily deducible from the rule for
multiplication. If the square is read on the _left_ scale of A, it will
contain _twice_ the number of digits in the original number _less_ 1; if
it is read on the _right_ scale of A, it will contain _twice_ the number
of digits in the original number.


  EX.—Find the square of 114.

  Placing the cursor to 114 on D, it is seen that the coinciding number
  on A is 13. As the result is read off on the _left_ scale of A, the
  number of digits will be (3 × 2) − 1 = 5, and the answer is read as
  13,000. The true result is 12,996.

  EX.—Find the square of 0·0093.

  The cursor being placed to 93 on D, the number on A is found to be
  865. The result is read on the _right_ scale of A, so the number of
  digits = −2 × 2 = −4, and the answer is read as 0·0000865
  [0·00008649].


_Square Root._—The foregoing rules suggest the method of procedure in
the inverse operation of extracting the square root of a given number,
which will be found on the D scale opposite the number on the A scale.
It is necessary to observe, however, that if the number consists of an
_odd_ number of digits, it is to be taken on the _left-hand_ portion of
the A scale, and the number of digits in the root = (N + 1)/(2), N being
the number of digits in the original number. When there is an even
number of digits in the number, it is to be taken on the _right-hand_
portion of the A scale, and the root contains _one-half_ the number of
digits in the original number.


  EX.—Find the square root of 36,500.

  As there is an _odd_ number of digits, placing the cursor to 365 on
  the L.H. A scale gives 191 on D. By the rule there are (N + 1)/(2) =
  (5 + 1)/(2) = 3 digits in the required root, which is therefore read
  as 191 [191·05].

  EX.—Find √(0·0098.)

  Placing the cursor to 98 on the right-hand scale of A (since −2 is an
  _even_ number of digits), it is seen that the coinciding number on D
  is 99. As the number of digits in the number is −2, the number of
  digits in the root will be (−2)/(2) = −1. It will therefore be read as
  0·099 [0·09899+].

  EX.—Find √(0·098).

  The number of digits is −1, so under 98 on the left scale of A, we
  find 313 on D. By the rule the number in the root will be (−1 +1)/(2)
  = 0, and the root is therefore read as 0·313 [0·313049+].

  EX.—Find √(0·149.)

  As the number of digits (0) is _even_, the cursor is set to 149 on the
  right-hand scale of A, giving 386 on D. By the rule, the number of
  digits in the root will be (0)/(2) = 0, and the root will be read as
  0·386 [0·38605+].


Another method of extracting the square root, by which more accurate
readings may generally be obtained, is by using the C and D scales only,
with the slide inverted. If there is an _odd_ number of digits in the
number, the _right_ index, or if an even number of digits the _left_
index, of the inverted scale Ɔ is placed so as to coincide with the
number on D of which the root is sought. Then with the cursor, the
number is found on D which coincides with the same number on Ɔ, which
number is the root sought.


  EX.—Find √(22·2.)

  Placing the left index of Ɔ to 222 on D, the two equal coinciding
  numbers on Ɔ and D are found to be 4·71.


Note that under the cursor line we have the original number, 22·2, on A,
and from this the number of digits in the root is determined as before.

The plan of finding the square of a number by ordinary multiplication is
often very convenient. The inverse process of finding a square root by
trial division is not to be recommended.

To obtain a close value of a root or to verify one found in the usual
way, the author has, on occasion, adopted the following plan:—Set 1 (or
10) on B to the number on the A scale (L.H. or R.H. as the case may
require), and bring the cursor to the number on D. If the root found is
correct, the readings on C under the cursor and on D under the index of
C, will be in exact agreement.

If 1 on B is placed to a number _n_ on the L.H. A scale, the student
will note that while root _n_ is read on D under 1 on C, the root of 10
_n_ is read on D under 10 on B. Hence, if preferred, the number can be
taken always on the first scale of A and the root read under 1 or 10 on
B, according to whether there is an odd or even number of digits in the
number. Obviously the second root is the first multiplied by √(10).


                         CUBES AND CUBE ROOTS.

In raising a number to the third power, a combination of the preceding
method and ordinary multiplication is employed.

TO FIND THE CUBE OF A NUMBER.—_Set the_ L.H. _or_ R.H. _index of C to
the number on D, and opposite the number_ ON THE LEFT-HAND _scale of B
read the cube on the_ L.H. _or_ R.H. _scale of A_.

By this rule four scales are brought into requisition. Of these, the D
scale and the L.H. B scale are _always_ employed, and are to be read as
of equal denomination. The values assigned to the L.H. and R.H. scales
of A will be apparent from the following considerations.

Commencing with the indices of C and D coinciding, and moving the slide
to the right, it will be seen that, working in accordance with the above
rule, the cubes of numbers from 1 to 2·154 (= ∛(10)) will be found on
the first or L.H. scale of A. Moving the slide still farther to the
right, we obtain _on the_ R.H. _A scale_ cubes of numbers from 2·154 to
4·641 (or ∛(10) to ∛(100)). Had we a _third_ repetition of the L.H. A
scale, the L.H. index of C could be still further traversed to the
right, and the cubes of numbers from 4·641 to 10 read off on this
prolongation of A. But the same end can be attained by making use of the
R.H. index of C, when, traversing the slide to the right as before, the
cubes of numbers from 4·641 to 10 on D can be read off _on the_ L.H. _A
scale_ over the corresponding numbers on the L.H. B scale. Hence, using
the L.H. index of C, the readings on the L.H. A scale may be regarded
comparatively as units, those on the R.H. A scale as tens; while for the
hundreds we again make use of the L.H. A scale in conjunction with the
_right-hand_ index of C.

By keeping these points in view, the number of digits in the cube (N) of
a given number (_n_) are readily deduced. Thus, if the units scale is
used, N = 3_n_ − 2; if the tens scale, N = 3_n_ − 1; while if the
hundreds scale be used, N = 3_n_. Placed in the form of rules:—

N = 3_n_ − 2 when the product is read on the L.H. scale of A with the
slide to the _right_ (units scale).

N = 3_n_ − 1 when the product is read on the R.H. scale of A; slide to
the _right_ (tens scale).

N = 3_n_ when the product is read on the L.H. scale of A with the slide
to the _left_ (hundreds scale).

With decimals the same rule applies, but, as before, the number of
digits must be read as −1, −2, etc., when one, two, etc., cyphers follow
immediately after the decimal point.

EX.—Find the value of 1·4^3.

Placing the L.H. index of C to 1·4 on D, the reading on A opposite 1·4
on the L.H. scale of B is found to be about 2·745 [2·744].

EX.—Find the value of 26·4^3.

Placing the L.H. index of C to 26·4 on D, the reading on A opposite 26·4
on the L.H. scale of B is found to be about 18,400 [18,399·744].

EX.—Find the value of 7·3^3.

In this case it becomes necessary to use the R.H. index of C, which is
set to 7·3 on D, when opposite 7·3 on the L.H. scale of B is read 389
[389·017] on A.

EX.—Find the value of 0·073^3.

From the setting as before it is seen that the number of digits in the
number must be multiplied by 3. Hence, as there is −1 digit in 0·073,
there will be −3 in the cube, which is therefore read 0·000389.

The last two examples serve to illustrate the principle of factorising
with powers of 10. Thus

 0·073 = 7·3 × 10^{−2}; 0·073^3 = 7·3^3 × (10^{−2})^3 = 389 × 10^{−6} =
                               0·000389.

_Cube Root_ (_Direct Method_).—One method of extracting the cube root of
a number is by an inversion of the foregoing operation. Using the same
scales, _the slide is moved either to the right or left until under the
given number on A is found a number on the_ L.H. _B scale, identical
with the number simultaneously found on D under the right or left index
of C_. This number is the required cube root.

From what has already been said regarding the combined use of these
scales in cubing, it will be evident that in extracting the cube root of
a number, it is necessary, in order to decide which scales are to be
used, to know the number of figures to be dealt with. We therefore (as
in the arithmetical method of extraction) point off the given number
into sections of three figures each, commencing at the decimal point,
and proceeding to the left for numbers greater than unity, and to the
right for numbers less than unity. Then if the first section of figures
on the left consists of—

1 figure, the number will evidently require to be taken on what we have
called the “units” scale—_i.e._, on the L.H. scale of A, using the L.H.
index of C.

If of 2 figures, the number will be taken on the “tens” scale—_i.e._, on
the R.H. scale of A, using the L.H. index of C.

If of 3 figures, the number will be taken on the “hundreds”
scale—_i.e._, on the L.H. scale of A, using the R.H. index of C.

To determine the number of digits in cube roots it is only necessary to
note that when the number is pointed off into sections as directed,
there will be one figure in the root for every section into which the
number is so divided, whether the _first_ section consists of 1, 2, or 3
digits.

Of numbers wholly decimal, the cube roots will be decimal, and for every
group of _three_ 0s immediately following the decimal point, _one_ 0
will follow the decimal point in the root. If necessary, 0s must be
added so as to make up complete multiples of 3 figures before proceeding
to extract the root. Thus 0·8 is to be regarded as 0·800, and 0·00008 as
0·000080 in extracting cube roots.

EX.—Find ∛(14,000.)

Pointing the number off in the manner described, it is seen that there
are _two_ figures in the first section—viz., 14. Setting the cursor to
14 on the R.H. scale of A, the slide is moved to the right until it is
seen that 241 on the L.H. scale of B falls under the cursor, when 241 on
D is under the L.H. index of C. Pointing 14,000 off into sections we
have 14 000—that is, _two_ sections. Therefore, there are two digits in
the root, which in consequence will be read 24·1 [24·1014+].

EX.—Find ∛(0·162.)

As the divisional section consists of _three_ figures, we use the
“hundreds” scale. Setting the cursor to 0·162 on the L.H. A scale, and
using the R.H. index of C, we move the slide to the left until under the
cursor 0·545 is found on the L.H. B scale, while the R.H. index of C
points to 0·545 on D, which is therefore the cube root of 0·162.

EX.—Find ∛(0·0002.)

To make even multiples of 3 figures requires the addition of 00; we have
then 200, the cube root of which is found to be about 5·85. Then, since
the first divisional group consists of 0s, one 0 will follow the decimal
point, giving ∛(0·0002) = 0·0585 [0·05848].

_Cube Root (Inverted Slide Method)._—Another method of extracting the
cube root involves the use of the inverted slide. Several methods are
used, but the following is to be preferred:—_Set the_ L.H. _or_ R.H.
_index of the slide to the number on A, and the number on ᗺ (i.e., B
inverted), which coincides with the same number on D, is the required
root._

Setting the slide as directed, and using first the L.H. index of the
slide and then the R.H. index, it is always possible to find _three_
pairs of coincident values. To determine which of the three is the
required result is best shown by an example.


  EX.—Find ∛(5,) ∛(50,) and ∛(500.)

  Setting the R.H. index of the slide to 5 on A, it is seen that 1·71 on
  D coincides with 1·71 on ᗺ. Then setting the L.H. index to 5 on A,
  further coincidences are found at 3·68 and at 7·93, the three values
  thus found being the required roots. Note that the first root was
  found on that portion of the D scale lying under 1 to 5 on A; the
  second root on that portion lying under 5 to 50 on A; and the third
  root on that portion of D lying under 50 to 100 on A. In this
  connection, therefore, scale A may always be considered to be divided
  into three sections—viz., 1 to _n_, _n_ to 10_n_, and 10_n_ to 100.
  For all numbers consisting of 1, 1 + 3, 1 + 6, 1 + 9—_i.e._, of 1, 4,
  7, 10, or −2, −5, etc., figures—the coincidence under the first
  section is the one required. If the number has 2, 5, 8, or −1, −4, −7,
  etc., figures, the coincidence under the second section is correct,
  while if the number has 3, 6, 9, or 0, −3, etc., figures, the
  coincidence under the last section is that required. The number of
  digits in the root is determined by marking off the number into
  sections, as already explained.


_Cube Root (Pickworth’s Method)._—One of the principal objections to the
two methods described is the difficulty of recollecting which scales are
to be employed and with which index of the slide they are to be used.
With the direct method another objection is that the readings to be
compared are often some distance apart, the maximum distance intervening
being _two-thirds_ of the length of the rule. To carry the eye from one
to another is troublesome and time-taking. With the inverted scale
method the reading of a scale reversed in direction and with the figures
inverted is also objectionable.

With the author’s method these objections are entirely obviated. The
_same scales and index are always used_, and are read in their normal
position. The three roots of _n_, 10_n_ and 100_n_ (_n_ being less than
10 and not less than 1) are given with one setting and appear in their
natural sequence, no traversing of the slide being needed. The readings
to be compared are always close together, the maximum distance between
them being _one-sixth_ of the length of the rule. The setting is always
made in the earlier part of the scales where closer readings can be
obtained, and finally, if desired, the result may be readily verified on
the lower scales by successive multiplication.

For this method two gauge points are required on C. To conveniently
locate these, set 53 on C to 246 on D; join 1 on D to 1 on A with a
straight-edge and with a needle point draw a short fine line on C. Set
246 on C to 53 on D, and repeat the process at the other end of the
rule. The gauge points thus obtained (dividing C into three equal parts)
will be at 2·154 and 4·641, and should be marked ∛(10) and ∛(100)
respectively.[6]


  EX.—Find ∛(2·86,) ∛(28·6) and ∛(286).

  Set cursor to 2·86 on A and drawing the slide to the right find 1·42
  under 1 on C, when 1·42 on B is under the cursor. Then reading under
  1, ∛(10) and ∛(100,) we have

  ∛(2·86) = 1·42; ∛(28·6) = 3·06 and ∛(286) = 6·59.


It will be seen that factorising with powers of 10, we multiply the
initial root by ∛(10) and ∛(100). Obviously the three roots will always
be found on D, in their natural order and at intervals of one-third the
length of the rule. The number of digits in the roots of numbers which
do not lie between 1 and 1000, is found as before explained.

In any method of extracting cube roots in which the slide has to be
adjusted to give equal readings on B and D, the author has found it of
advantage to adopt the following plan:—The cursor being set to, say, 4·8
on A, bring a near _main_ division line on B, as 1·7, to the cursor;
then 1 on C is at 1·68 on D. The difference in the readings is two small
divisions on D, and moving the slide forward by _one-third the space
representing this difference_, we obtain 1·687 as the root required.
With a little practice it is possible to obtain more accurate results by
this method than by comparing the reading on D with that on the less
finely-graded B scale.


                    MISCELLANEOUS POWERS AND ROOTS.

In addition to squares and cubes, certain other powers and roots may be
readily obtained with the slide rule.

_Two-thirds Power._—The value of N^⅔ is found on A over ∛̅N on D. The
number of digits is decided by the rule for squares, working from the
number of digits in the cube root. It will often be found preferable to
treat N^⅔ as N ÷ ∛̅N, as in this way the magnitude of the result is much
more readily appreciated.

_Three-two Power._—N^{³⁄₂} can be obtained by cubing the square root,
deciding the number of digits in each process. For the reason just
given, it is preferable to regard N^{³⁄₂} as N × √̅N.

_Fourth Power._—For N^4 set the index of C to N on D and over N on C
read N^4 on A; or find the square of the square of N, deciding the
number of digits at each step.

_Fourth Root._—Similarly for ∜̅N, take the square root of the square
root.

_Four-third Power._—N^{⁴⁄₃} = N^{1·33} (useful in gas-engine diagram
calculations) is best treated as N × ∛̅N.

Other powers can be found by repeated multiplication. Thus setting 1 on
B to N on A, we have on A, N^2 over N; N^3 over N^2; N^4 over N^3; N^5
over N^4, etc. In the same way, setting N on B to N on D, we can read
such values as N^¾, N^⅞, etc.


                    POWERS AND ROOTS BY LOGARITHMS.

For powers or roots other than those of the simple forms already
discussed, it is necessary to employ the usual logarithmic process. Thus
to find _a^n_ = _x_, we multiply the logarithm of _a_ by _n_, and find
the number _x_ corresponding to the logarithm so obtained. Similarly, to
find _ⁿ√̅a_ = _x_ we divide the logarithm of _a_ by _n_, and find the
number _x_ corresponding to the resulting logarithm.

_The Scale of Logarithms._—Upon the back of the slide of the Gravêt and
similar slide rules there will be found three scales. One of
these—usually the centre one—is divided equally throughout its entire
length, and figured from right to left. It is sometimes marked L,
indicating that it is a scale giving logarithms. The whole scale is
divided primarily into ten equal parts, and each of these subdivided
into 50 equal parts. In the recess or notch in the right-hand end of the
rule is a reference mark, to which any of the divisions of this
evenly-divided scale can be set.

As this decimally-divided scale is equal in length to the logarithmic
scale D, and is figured in the reverse direction, it results that when
the slide is drawn to the right so that the L.H. index of C coincides
with any number on D, the reading on the equally-divided scale will give
the decimal part of the logarithm of the number taken on D. Thus if the
L.H. index of C is placed to agree with 2 on D, the reading of the back
scale, taken at the reference mark, will be found to be 0·301, the
logarithm of 2. It must be distinctly borne in mind that the number so
obtained is the _decimal part_ or _mantissa_ of the logarithm of the
number, and that to this the characteristic must be prefixed in
accordance with the usual rule—viz., _The integral part, or
characteristic of a logarithm is equal to the number of digits in the
number, minus 1. If the number is wholly decimal, the characteristic is
equal to the number of cyphers following the decimal point, plus 1._ In
the latter case the characteristic is negative, and is so indicated by
having the minus sign written _over_ it.

To obtain any given power or root of a number, the operation is as
follows:—Set the L.H. index of C to the given number on D, and turning
the rule over, read opposite the mark in the notch at the right-hand end
of the rule, the decimal part of the logarithm of the number. Add the
characteristic according to the above rule, and multiply by the exponent
of the power, or divide by the exponent of the root. Place the _decimal
part_ of the resultant reading, taken on the scale of equal parts,
opposite the mark in the aperture of the rule, and read the answer on D
under the L.H. index of C, pointing off the number of digits in the
answer in accordance with the number of the characteristic of the
resultant.


  EX.—Evaluate 36^{1·414}.

  Set 1 on C to 36 on D and read the decimal part of log. 36 on the
  scale of logarithms on the back of the slide. This value is found to
  be 0·556. As there are two digits in the number, the characteristic
  will be 1; hence log. 36 = 1·556. Multiply by 1·414, using the C and D
  scales, and obtain 2·2 as the log. of the result. Set the decimal
  part, 0·2, on the log. scale to the mark in the notch at the end of
  the rule and read 1585 on D under 1 on C. Since the log. of the result
  has a characteristic 2, there will be 3 digits in the result, which is
  therefore read as 158·5.


This example will suffice to show the method of obtaining the nth power
or the _n_th root of _any_ number.




              OTHER METHODS OF OBTAINING POWERS AND ROOTS.


A simple method of obtaining powers and roots, which may serve on
occasion, is by scaling off proportional lengths on the D scale (or the
A scale) of the ordinary rule. Thus, to determine the value of
1·25^{1·67} we take the actual length 1–1·25 on D scale, and increase it
by any convenient means in the proportion of 1 ∶ 1·67. Then with a pair
of dividers we set off this new length from 1, and obtain 1·44 as the
result. One convenient method of obtaining the desired ratio is by a
pair of proportional compasses. Thus to obtain 1·52^{¹⁷⁄₁₆}, the
compasses would be set in the ratio of 16 to 17, and the smaller end
opened out to include 1–1·52 on the D scale; the opening in the large
end of the compasses will then be such that setting it off from 1 we
obtain 1·56 on D as the result sought.

[Illustration: FIG. 11.]

The converse procedure for obtaining the _n_th root of a number N will
obviously resolve itself into obtaining (1)/(_n_)th of the scale length
1-N, and need not be further considered.

Simple geometrical constructions are also used for obtaining scale
lengths in the required ratio. A series of parallel lines ruled on
transparent celluloid or stout tracing paper may be placed in an
inclined position on the face of the rule and adjusted so as to divide
the scale as desired. When much work is to be done which requires values
to be raised to some constant but comparatively low power, _n_, the
author has found the following device of assistance:—On a piece of thin
transparent celluloid a line OC is drawn (Fig. 11) and in this a point B
is taken such that (OC)/(OB) is the desired ratio. It is convenient to
make OB = 1–10 on the A scale, so that assuming we require a series of
values of _v_^{1·35}, OB would be 12·5 cm. and OC, 16·875 cm. On these
lines semi-circles are drawn as shown, both passing through the point O.

Applying this cursor to the upper scales so that the point O is on 1 and
the semi-circle O M B passes through _v_ on A, the larger semi-circle
will give on A the value of _v^n_. Thus for _p_ _v^n_ = 39·5 ×
4·9^{1·35}, set 1 on B to 39·5 on A (Fig. 12) and apply the cursor to
the working edge of B, so that O agrees with 1 and O M B passes through
4·9 on B. The larger semi-circle then cuts the edge of the slide on a
point, giving 337 on A as the result required.

Of course any number of semi-circles may be drawn, giving different
ratios. If a number of evenly-spaced divisions are used as bases, the
device affords a simple means of obtaining a succession of small powers
or roots, while it also finds a use in determining a number of geometric
means between two values as is required in arranging the speed gears of
machine tools, etc. The converse operation of finding roots will be
evident as will also many other uses for which the device is of service.

[Illustration: FIG. 12.]

The lines should be drawn in Indian ink with a very sharp pen and on the
_under_ side of the celluloid so that the lines lie in close contact
with the face of the rule.

_The Radial Cursor_, another device for the same purpose, is always used
in conjunction with the upper scales. As will be seen from Fig. 13, the
body of the cursor P carries a graduated bar S which can be removed in a
direction transverse to the rule, and adjusted to any desired position.
Pivoted to the lower end of S is a radial arm R of transparent celluloid
on which a centre line is engraved.

A reference to the illustration will show that the principle involved is
that of similar triangles, the width of the slide being used as one of
the elements. Thus, to take a simple case, if 2 on S is set to the index
on P, and 1 on B is brought to N on A, then by swinging the radial arm
until its centre line agrees with 1 on C, we can read N^2 on A.
Evidently, since in the two similar triangles A O N^2 and N _t_ N^2 the
length of A O is twice that of N _t_, it results that A N^2 = 2 A N. In
general, then, to find the _n_th power of a number, we set the cursor to
1 or 10 on A, bring _n_ on the cross bar S to the index on the cursor,
and 1 on B to N on A. Then to 1 on C we set the line on the radial arm,
and under the latter read N^{_n_} on A. The inverse proceeding for
finding the _n_th root will be obvious.

[Illustration: FIG. 13.]

An advantage offered by this and analogous methods of obtaining powers
and roots is that the result is obtained on the ordinary scale of the
rule, and hence it can be taken directly into any further calculation
which may be necessary.


                          COMBINED OPERATIONS.

Thus far the various operations have been separately considered, and we
now pass on to a consideration of the methods of working for solving the
various formulæ met with in technical calculations. We propose to
explain the methods of dealing with a few of the more generally used
expressions, as this will suffice to suggest the procedure in dealing
with other and more intricate calculations. In solving the following
problems, both the upper and lower scales are used, and the relative
value of the several scales must be observed throughout. Thus, in
solving such an expression as √((74·5)/(15·8)) = 6·86, the division is
first effected by setting 15·8 on B to 745 on A. From the relation of
the two parts of the upper scales (page 37) we know that such values as
7·45, 745, etc., will be taken on the _left-hand_ A and B scales, while
values as 15·8, 1580, etc., will be taken on the _right-hand_ A and B
scales. Hence, 15·8 on the R.H. B scale is set to 745 on the L.H. A
scale, and the result read on D under the index of C. Had both values
been taken on the L.H. A and B scales, or both on the R.H. A and B
scales, the results would have corresponded to _x_ = √((7·45)/(1·58)) =
2·17, or to _x_ =√((74·5)/(15·8)) = 2·17, _i.e_., to (6·86)/(√(10)).
Hence if a wrong choice of scales has been made, we can correct the
result by multiplying or dividing by √(10) as the case may require. If
the result is read on D, set to it the centre index (10) of B and read
the corrected result under the index of C.

To solve _a_ × _b_^2 = _x_. Set the index of C to _b_ on D, and over _a_
on B read _x_ on A.

To solve (_a_^2)/(_b_) = _x_. Set _b_ on B to _a_ on D by using the
cursor, and over index of B read _x_ on A.

To solve (_b_)/(_a_^2) = _x_. Set _a_ on C to _b_ on A, and over 1 on B
read _x_ on A.

To solve (_a_ × _b_^2)/(_c_) = _x_. Set _c_ on B to _b_ on D, and over
_a_ on B read _x_ on A.

To solve (_a_ × _b_)^2 = _x_. Set 1 on C to _a_ on D, and over _b_ on C
read _x_ on A.

To solve ((_a_)/(_b_))^2 = _x_. Set _b_ on C to _a_ on D, and over 1 on
C read _x_ on A.

To solve √(_a_ × _b_) = _x_. Set 1 on B to _a_ on A, and under _b_ on B
read _x_ on D.

To solve √((_a_)/(_b_)) = _x_. Set _b_ on B to _a_ on A, and under 1 on
C read _x_ on D.

To solve _a_ (_b_)/(_c_^2) = _x_. Set _b_ on C to _c_ on D and over _a_
on B read _x_ on A.

To solve _c_√((_a_)/(_b_)) = _x_. Set _b_ on B to _a_ on A, and under
_c_ on C read _x_ on D.

To solve (√_̅a_)/(_b_) = _x_. Set _b_ on C to _a_ on A, and under 1 on C
read _x_ on D.

To solve (_a_)/(√_̅b_) = _x_. Set _b_ on B to _a_ on D, and under 1 on C
read _x_ on D.

To solve _b_√_̅a_ = _x_. Set 1 on C to _b_ on D, and under _a_ on B read
_x_ on D.

To solve √(_a_^3) = _x_. Treat as _a_√_̅a_.

To solve _a_√(_b_^3) = _x_. Treat as _a_√_̅b_ × _b_.

To solve (√_̅a_^3)/(_b_) = _x_. Treat as (√_̅a_ × _a_)/(_b_).

To solve √((_a_^3)/(_b_)) = _x_. Treat as (√_̅a_ × _a_)/(√_̅b_) =
√((_a_)/(_b_)) × _a_.

To solve √((_a_ × _b_)/(_c_)) = _x_. Set _c_ on B to _a_ on A, and under
_b_ on B read _x_ on D.

To solve (_a_ × _b_)/(√_̅c_) = _x_. Set _c_ on B to _b_ an D, and under
_a_ on C read _x_ on D.

To solve √((_a_^2 × _b_)/(_c_)) = _x_. Set _c_ on B to _a_ on D, and
under _b_ on B read _x_ on D.

To solve (_a_^2 × _b_^2)/(_c_) = _x_. Set _c_ on B to _a_ on D, and over
_b_ on C read _x_ on A.

To solve (_a_√_̅b_)/(_c_) = _x_. Set _c_ on C to _b_ on A, and under _a_
on C read _x_ on D.

To solve ((_a_ × √_̅b_)/(_c_))^2 = _x_. Set _c_ on C to _a_ on D,
and over _b_ on B read _x_ on A.


                    HINTS ON EVALUATING EXPRESSIONS.

As a general rule, the use of cubes and higher powers should be avoided
whenever possible. Thus, in the foregoing section, we recommend treating
an expression of the form _a_√(_b_^3) as _a_ × _b_ × √_̅b_; the
magnitudes of the values thus met with are more easily appreciated by
the beginner, and mistakes in estimating the large numbers involved in
cubing are avoided.


  EX.—7·3 × √(57^3) = 3140.

  Set 1 on C to 57 on D; bring cursor to 57 on B (R.H., since 57 has an
  _even_ number of digits); bring 1 on C to cursor, and under 7·3 on C
  read 3140 on D. As a rough estimate we have √(57), about 8; 8 × 57,
  about 400; 400 × 7, gives 2800, showing the result consists of 4
  figures.


An expression of the form _a_∛(_b_^2), or _a_ _b_^⅔, is better dealt
with by rearranging as _a_ × (_b_)/(∛_b_).


  EX.—3·64∛(4·32^2) = 9·65.

  Set cursor to 4·32 on A, and move the slide until 1·63 is found
  simultaneously under the cursor on B and on D under 1 on C; bring
  cursor to 1 on C; 4·32 on C to cursor, and _over_ 3·64 on D read 9·65
  on C. (Note that in this case it is convenient to read the answer on
  the _slide_; see page 22). From the slide rule we know ∛(4·32) = about
  1·6; this into 4·32 is roughly 3; 3·64 × 3 is about 10, showing the
  answer to be 9·65.


Similarly products of the form _a_ × _b_^{⁴⁄₃} are best dealt with as
_a_ × _b_ × ∛_b_.

Factorising expressions sometimes simplifies matters, as, for instance,
in _x_^4 − _y_^4 = (_x_^2 + _y_^2)(_x_^2 − _y_^2). Here, working with
the fourth powers involves large numbers and the troublesome
determination of the number of digits in each factor; but squares are
read on the rule at once, the number of digits is obvious, and, in
general, the method should give a more accurate result. Take the
expression, D_{1} = ∛((D^4 − _d_^4)/(D)) giving the diameter D_{1} of a
solid shaft equal in torsional strength to a hollow shaft whose external
and internal diameters are D and _d_ respectively. Rearranging as D_{1}
= ∛(((D^2 + _d_^2)(D^2 − _d_^2))/(D)) and taking, as an example, D = 15
in. and _d_ = 7 in., we have D^2 + _d_^2 = 274 and D^2 − _d_^2 = 176;
hence D_1 = ∛((274 × 176)/(15)) = ∛(3210) = 14·75 in.

_Reversed Scale Notation._—With expressions of the form 1 − _x_, or 100
− _x_, it is often convenient to regard the scales as having their
notation reversed, _i.e._, to read the scale backwards. When this is
done the D scale is read as shown on the lower line—

            Direct Notation   1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10
                 D Scale
            Reversed Notation 9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1  0

The new reading can be found by subtracting the ordinary reading from 1,
10, 100, etc., according to the value assigned to the R.H. index, but
actually it is unnecessary to make this calculation, as with a little
practice it is quite an easy matter to read both the main and
subdivisions in the reversed order. Applications are found in plotting
curves, trigonometrical formulæ, etc.


  EX.—Find the per cent. of slip of a screw propeller from

  100 − S = (10133V)/(PR)

  taking the speed, V, as 15 knots, the pitch of the propeller, P, as 27
  ft. 6 in., and the revolutions per minute, R, as 60.

  Set 27·5 on B to 10133 on A (N.B.—Take the setting near the _centre_
  index of A); bring the cursor to 15 on B and 60 on B to cursor.
  Reading the L.H. A scale backwards, the slip, S, = 8 per cent. is
  found on A over 10 on B.


_Percentage Calculations._—To increase a quantity by _x_ per cent. we
multiply by 100 + _x_; to diminish a quantity by _x_ per cent. we
multiply by 100 − _x_. Hence, to add _x_ per cent., set 100 + _x_ on C
to 1 on D and read new values on D under original values on C. To deduct
_x_ per cent. read the D scale backwards from 10 and set R.H. index of C
to _x_ per cent. so read. Then read as before.


                             GAUGE POINTS.

Special graduations, marking the position of constant factors which
frequently enter into engineering calculations, are found on most slide
rules. Usually the values of π = 3·1416 and (π)/(4) = 0·7854—the “gauge
points” for calculating the circumference and area of a circle—are
marked on the upper scales. The first should be given on the lower
scales also. Marks _c_ and _c_^1 are sometimes found on the lower scales
at 1·128 = √((4)/(π)) and at 3·568 = √((40)/(π)). These are useful in
calculating the contents of cylinders and are thus derived:—Cubic
contents of cylinder of diameter _d_ and length _l_ = (π)/(4)_d_^2_l_;
substituting for (π)/(4) its reciprocal (4)/(π), the formula becomes
(_d_^2)/(1·273 × _l_), and by taking the square root of the fractional
part we have (_d_)/(1·128)^2 × _l_. This is now in a very convenient
form, since by setting the gauge point _c_ on C to _d_ on D, we can read
over _l_ on B the cubic contents on A. This example indicates the
principle to be followed in arranging gauge points. Successive
multiplication is avoided by substituting the reciprocal of the
constant, thus bringing the expression into the form (_a_ × _b_)/(_c_),
which, as we know, can be resolved by one setting of the slide. The
advantage of dividing _d_ before squaring is also evident. The mark
_c_^1 = _c_ × √(10) is used if it is necessary to draw the slide more
than one-half its length to the right.

A gauge point, M, at 31·83 = (100)/(π) is found on the upper scales of
some rules. Setting this point on B to the diameter of a cylinder on A,
the circumference is read over 1 or 100 on B or the area of the curved
surface over the length on B.

As another example of establishing a gauge point, we will take the
formula for the theoretical delivery of pumps. If _d_ is the diameter of
the plunger in inches, _l_ the length of stroke in feet, and Q the
delivery in gallons, we have

Q = _d_^2 × (π)/(4) × _l_ × (12)/(277). (N.B.—277 cubic inches = 1
gallon.)

Multiplying out the constant quantities and taking its reciprocal, we
readily transform the statement into Q = (_d_^2_l_)/(29·4) or
((_d_)/(5·42))^2 × _l_. Hence set gauge point 5·42 on C to _d_ on
D and over length of stroke in feet on B, read delivery in gallons per
stroke on A; or over piston speed in feet per minute on B, read
theoretical delivery in gallons per minute on A.

Several examples of gauge points will be found in the section on
calculating the weights of metal (see pages 59 and 60). In most cases
their derivation will be evident from what has been said above. In the
case of the weight of spheres, we have Vol. = 0·5236_d_^3, and this
multiplied by the weight of 1 cubic inch of the material will give the
weight W in lb. Hence for cast-iron, W = 0·5236 × _d_^3 × 0·26, which is
conveniently transformed into W = (_d_ × _d_^2)/(7·35) as in the example
on page 60.

With these examples no difficulty should be experienced in establishing
gauge points for any calculation in which constant factors recur.

_Marking Gauge Points._—The practice of marking gauge points by lines
extending to the working edge of the scale is not to be recommended, as
it confuses the ordinary reading of the scales. Generally speaking,
gauge points are only required occasionally, and if they are placed
clear of the scale to which they pertain, but near enough to show the
connection, they can be brought readily into a calculation by means of
the cursor. Usually there is sufficient margin above the A scale and
below the D scale for various gauge points to be marked. Another plan
consists in cutting two nicks in the upper and lower edges of the cursor
near the centre and about ⅛ in. apart. These centre pieces, when bent
out, form a tongue, which are in line with the cursor line and run
nearly in contact with the square and bevelled edges of the rule
respectively. A fine line in the tongue can then be set to gauge points
marked on these two edge strips, the ordinary measuring graduations
being removed, if desired, by a piece of fine sand-paper.

For gauge points marked on the face of the rule, the author prefers two
fine lines drawn at 45°—thus, ✕—and crossing in the exact point which it
is required to indicate. With the “cross” gauge point the meeting lines
facilitate the placing of the cursor, and an exact setting is readily
made.[7] All lines should be drawn in Indian ink with a very sharp
drawing pen. For a more permanent marking the Indian ink may be rubbed
up in glacial acetic acid or the special ink for celluloid may be used.
If any difficulty is found in writing the distinguishing signs against
the gauge point, the inscription may be formed by a succession of small
dots made with a sharp pricker.


                  EXAMPLES IN TECHNICAL CALCULATIONS.

In order to illustrate the practical value of the slide rule, we now
give a number of examples which will doubtless be sufficient to suggest
the methods of working with other formulæ. A few of the rules give
results which are approximate only, but in all cases the degree of
accuracy obtained is well within the possible reading of the scales. In
many cases the rules given may be modified, if desired, by varying the
constants. In most of the examples the particular formula employed will
be evident from the solution, but in a few of the more complicated cases
a separate statement has been given.


                           MENSURATION, ETC.

Given the chord _c_ of a circular arc, and the vertical height _h_, to
find the diameter _d_ of the circle.

Set the height _h_ on B to half the chord on D, and over 1 on B read _x_
on A. Then _x_ + _h_ = _d_.


  EX.—_c_ = 6; _h_ = 2; find _d_. Set 2 on B to 3 on D, and over 1 on B
  read 4·5 on A. Then 4·5 + 2 = 6·5 = _d_.


Given the radius of a circle _r_, and the number of degrees _n_ in an
arc, to find the length _l_ of the arc.

Set _r_ on C to 57·3 on D, and over any number of degrees _n_ on D read
the (approximate) length of the arc on C.


  EX.—_r_ = 24; _n_ = 30; find _l_.

  Set 24 on C to 57·3 on D, and over 30 on D read 12·56 = _l_ on C.


Given the diameter _d_ of a circle in _inches_, to find the
circumference _c_ in _feet_.

Set 191 on C to 50 on D, and under any diameter in inches on C read
circumference _c_, in feet on D.


  EX.—Find the circumference in feet of a pulley 17 in. in diameter. Set
  191 on C to 50 on D, and under 17 on C read 4·45 ft. on D.


Given the diameter of a circle, to find its area.

Set 0·7854 on B to 10 (centre index) on A and over any diameter on D
read area on B.

When the rule has a special graduation line = 0·7854, on the right-hand
scale of B, set this line to the R.H. index of A and read off as above.
If only π is marked, set this special graduation on B to 4 on A.

On the C and D scales of some rules a gauge point marked _c_ will be
found indicating √((4)/(π)) = 1·1286. In this case, therefore, set 1 on
C to gauge point _c_ on D, and read area on A as above. If the gauge
point _c_′ is used, divide the result by 10. Or set _c_ on C, to
diameter on D, and over index of B read area on A. Cursors are supplied,
having _two_ lines ruled on the glass, the interval between them being
equal to (4)/(π) = 1·273 on the A scale. In this case, if the right hand
of the two cursor lines be set to the diameter on D, the _area_ will be
read on A under the _left_-hand cursor line. For diameters less than
1·11 it is necessary to set the middle index of B to the L.H. index of
A, reading the areas on the L.H. B scale. The confusion which in general
work is sometimes caused by the use of two cursor lines might be
obviated by making the left-hand line in two short lengths, each only
just covering the scales.

Given diameter of circle _d_ in _inches_, to find area _a_ in square
_feet_.

Set 6 on B to 11 on A, and over diameter in inches on D read area in
square feet on B.

To find the surface in square feet of boiler flues, condenser tubes,
heating pipes, etc., having given the diameter in inches and length in
feet.

Find the circumference in feet as above and multiply by the length in
feet.


  EX.—Find the heating surface afforded by 160 locomotive boiler tubes
  1¾in. in diameter and 12 ft. long.

  Set 191 on C to 50 on D; bring cursor 1·75 on C, L.H. index of C to
  cursor; cursor to 12 on C; 1 on C to cursor; and under 160 on C read
  880 sq. ft. of heating surface on D.


If the dimensions are in the same denomination and the rule has a gauge
point M at 31·83 (= (100)/(π)), set this mark on B to diameter of
cylinder on A, and read cylindrical surface on A over length on B.

To find the side _s_ of a square, equal in area to a given rectangle of
length _l_ and breadth _b_.

Set R.H. or L.H. index of B to _l_ on A, and under _b_ on B read _s_ on
D.


  EX.—Find the side of a square equal in area to a rectangle in which
  _l_ = 31 ft. and _b_ = 5 ft.

  Set the (R.H.) index of B to 31 on A, and under 5 on B read 12·45 ft.
  on D.


To find various lengths _l_ and breadths _b_ of a rectangle, to give a
constant area _a_.

Invert the slide and set the index of Ɔ to the given area on D. Then
opposite any length _l_ on Ɔ find the corresponding breadth _b_ on D.


  EX.—Find the corresponding breadths of rectangular sheets, 16, 18, 24,
  36, and 60 ft. long, to give a constant area of 72 sq. ft.

  Set the R.H. index of Ɔ to 72 on D, and opposite 16, 18, 24, 36, and
  60 on Ɔ read 4·5, 4, 3, 2, and 1·2 ft., the corresponding breadths on
  D.


To find the contents in cubic feet of a cylinder of diameter _d_ in
inches and length _l_ in feet.

Find area in feet as before, and multiply by the length.

If dimensions are all in inches or feet, set the mark _c_ (= 1·128) on C
to diameter on D and over length on B, read cubic contents on A.

To find the area of an ellipse.

Set 205 on C to 161 on D; bring cursor to length of major axis on C, 1
on C to cursor, and under length of minor axis on C read area on D.


  EX.—Find the area of an ellipse the major and minor axes of which are
  16 in. and 12 in. in length respectively.

  Set 205 on C to 161 on D; bring cursor to 16 on C, 1 on C to cursor,
  and under 12 on C read 150·8 in. on D.


To find the surface of spheres.

Set 3·1416 on B to R.H. or L.H. index of A, and over diameter on D read
by the aid of the cursor, the convex surface on B.

To find the cubic contents of spheres.

Set 1·91 on B to diameter on A, and over diameter on C read cubic
contents on A.


                           WEIGHTS OF METALS.

To find the weight in lb. per lineal foot of square bars of metal.

Set index of B to weight of 12 cubic inches of the metal (_i.e._, one
lineal foot, 1 square inch in section) on A, and over the side of the
square in inches on C read weight in lb. on A.


  EX.—Find the weight per foot length of 4½in. square wrought-iron bars.

  Set middle index of B to 3·33 on A, and over 4½ on C read 67·5 lb. on
  A.


(N.B.—For other metals use the corresponding constant in column (2),
below).

To find the weight in lb. per lineal foot of round bars.

Set R.H. or L.H. index of B to weight of 12 cylindrical inches of the
metal on A (column (4), below), and opposite the diameter of the bar in
inches on C, read weight in lb. per lineal foot on A.


  EX.—Find the weight of 1 lineal foot of 2 in. round cast steel.

  Set L.H. index of B to 2·68 on A, and over 2 on C read 10·7 lb. on A.


To find the weight of flat bars in lb. per lineal foot.

Set the breadth in inches on C to (1)/(weight of 12 cub. in.) of the
metal (column (3), below) on D, and above the thickness on D read weight
in lb. per lineal foot on C.


  EX.—Find the weight per lineal foot of bar steel, 4½in. wide and ⅝in.
  thick.

  Set 4·5 on C to 0·294 on D, and over 0·625 on D read 9·56 lb. per
  lineal foot on C.


To find the weight per square foot of sheet metal, set the weight per
cubic foot of the metal (col. 1) on C to 12 on D, and

       ────────────┬──────────┬──────────┬──────────┬───────────
                   │   (1)    │(2)       │   (3)    │    (4)
                   │Weight in │Weight of │ (1)/(Wt. │ Weight of
         Metals.   │ lb. per  │12 cubic  │of 12 cub.│    12
                   │cubic ft. │in.       │   in.)   │cylindrical
                   │          │          │          │    in.
       ────────────┼──────────┼──────────┼──────────┼───────────
       Wrought iron│480       │3·33      │0·300     │2·62
       Cast iron   │450       │3·125     │0·320     │2·45
       Cast steel  │490       │3·40      │0·294     │2·68
       Copper      │550       │3·82      │0·262     │3·00
       Aluminium   │168       │1·166     │0·085     │0·915
       Brass       │520       │3·61      │0·277     │2·83
       Lead        │710       │4·93      │0·203     │3·87
       Tin         │462       │3·21      │0·312     │2·52
       Zinc (cast) │430       │2·98      │0·335     │2·34
       „  (sheet)  │450       │3·125     │0·320     │2·45
       ────────────┴──────────┴──────────┴──────────┴───────────

above the thickness of the plate in inches on D read weight in lb. per
square foot on C.


  EX.—Find the weight in lb. per square foot of aluminium sheet ⅜in.
  thick.

  Set 168 on C to 12 on D, and over 0·375 on D read 5·25 lb. on C.


To find the weight of pipes in lb. per lineal foot.

Set mean diameter of the pipe in inches (_i.e._, internal diameter
_plus_ the thickness, or external diameter _minus_ the thickness) on C
to the constant given below on D, and over the thickness on D read
weight in lb. per lineal foot on C.

       ┌────────────┬─────────────────────┬─────────────────────┐
       │  Metals.   │ Constant for Pipes. │Constant for Spheres.│
       ├────────────┼─────────────────────┼─────────────────────┤
       │Wrought iron│       0·0955        │        6·87         │
       │Cast iron   │       0·1020        │        7·35         │
       │Steel       │       0·0936        │        6·73         │
       │Brass       │       0·0882        │        6·35         │
       │Copper      │       0·0834        │        6·00         │
       │Lead        │       0·0646        │        4·65         │
       └────────────┴─────────────────────┴─────────────────────┘


  EX.—Find the weight per foot of cast-iron piping 4 in. internal
  diameter and ½in. thick.

  Set 4·5 on C to 0·102 on D, and over 0·5 on D read 22·1 lb. on C, the
  required weight.


To find the weight in lb. of spheres or balls, given the diameter in
inches. (W = 0·5236_d_^3 × wt. of 1 cub. in. of material).

Set the constant for spheres (given above) on B to diameter in inches on
A, and over diameter on C read weight in lb. on A.


  EX.—Find the weight of a cast-iron ball 7½in. in diameter.

  Set 7·35 on B to 7·5 on A, and over 7·5 on C read 57·7 lb. on A.


To find diameter in inches of a sphere of given weight.

Set the cursor to the given weight in lb. on A, and move the slide until
the same number is found on C under the cursor that is simultaneously
found on A over the constant for the sphere on B.


  EX.—Find diameter in inches of a sphere of cast-iron to weigh 7½lb.

  Setting the cursor to 7·5 on A, and moving the slide, it is found that
  when 3·8 on C falls under the cursor, 3·8 on A is simultaneously found
  over 7·35 on B. The required diameter is therefore 3·8 in.


The rules for cubes and cube roots (page 40) should be kept in view in
solving the last two examples.


                            FALLING BODIES.

To find velocity in feet per second of a falling body, given the time of
fall in seconds.

Set index on C to time of fall on D, and under 32·2 on C read velocity
in feet per second on D.

To find velocity in feet per second, given distance fallen through in
feet.

Set 1 on C to distance fallen through on A, and under 64·4 on B read
velocity in feet per second on D.


  EX.—Find velocity acquired by falling through 14 ft.

  Set (R.H.) index of C to 14 on A, and under 64·4 on B read 30 ft. per
  second on D.


To find distance fallen through in feet in a given time.

Set index of C to time in seconds on D, and over 16·1 on B read distance
fallen through in feet on A.


                           CENTRIFUGAL FORCE.

To find the centrifugal force of a revolving mass in lb.

Set 2940 on B to revolutions per minute on D; bring cursor to weight in
lb. on B; index of B to cursor, and over radius in feet on B read
centrifugal force in lb. on A.

To find the centrifugal stress in lb. per square inch, in rims of
revolving wheels of cast iron.

Set 61·3 on C to the mean diameter of the wheel in feet on D, and over
revolutions per minute on C read stress per square inch on A.


  EX.—Find the stress per square inch in a cast-iron fly-wheel rim 8 ft.
  in diameter and running at 120 revolutions per minute.

  Set 61·3 on C to 8 on D, and over 120 on C read 245 lb. per square
  inch on A.


                           THE STEAM ENGINE.

Given the stroke and number of revolutions per minute, to find the
piston speed.

Set stroke in inches on C to 6 on D, and over number of revolutions on D
read piston speed in feet per minute on C.

To find cubic feet of steam in a cylinder at cut-off, given diameter of
cylinder and period of admission in inches.

Set 2200 on B to cylinder diameter on D, and over period of admission on
B read cubic feet of steam on A.


  EX.—Cylinder diameter 26 in., stroke 40 in., cut-off at ⅝ of stroke.
  Find cubic feet of steam used (theoretically) per stroke.

  Set 2200 on B to 26 on D, and over 40 × ⅝ or 25 in. on B, read 7·68
  cub. ft. on A, as the number of cubic feet of steam used per stroke.


Given the diameter of a cylinder in inches, and the pressure in lb. per
square inch, to find the load on the piston in tons.

Set pressure in lb. per square inch on B to 2852 on A, and over cylinder
diameter in inches on D read load on piston in tons on B.


  EX.—Steam pressure 180 lb. per square inch; cylinder diameter, 42 in.
  Find load in tons on piston.

  Set 180 on B to 2852 on A, and over 42 on D read 111 tons, the gross
  load, on B.


Given admission period and absolute initial pressure of steam in a
cylinder, to find the pressure at various points in the expansion period
(isothermal expansion).

Invert the slide and set the admission period, in inches, on Ɔ to the
initial pressure on D; then under any point in the expansion stroke on Ɔ
find the corresponding pressure on D.


  EX.—Admission period 12 in., stroke 42 in., initial pressure 80 lb.
  per square inch. Find pressure at successive fifths of the expansion
  period.

  Set 12 on Ɔ to 80 on D, and opposite 18, 24, 30, 36 and 42 in. of the
  whole stroke on Ɔ find the corresponding pressures on D:—53·3, 40, 32,
  26·6 and 22·8 lb. per square inch.


To find the mean pressure constant for isothermally expanding steam,
given the cut-off as a fraction of the stroke.

Find the logarithm of the ratio of the expansion _r_, by the method
previously explained (page 46). Prefix the characteristic and to the
number thus obtained, on D, set 1 on C. Then under 2·302 on C read _x_
on D. To _x_ + 1 on D set _r_ on C, and under index of C read mean
pressure constant on D. The latter, multiplied by the initial pressure,
gives the mean forward pressure throughout the stroke. (N.B.—Common log.
× 2·302 = hyperbolic log.)


  EX.—Find the mean pressure constant for a cut-off of ¼th, or a ratio
  of expansion of 4.

  Set (L.H.) index of C to 4 on D, and on the reverse side of the slide
  read 0·602 on the logarithmic scale. The characteristic = 0; hence to
  0·602 on D set (R.H.) index of C, and under 2·302 on C read 1·384 on
  D. Add 1, and to 2·384 thus obtained on D set _r_ (= 4) on C, and
  under 1 on C read 0·596, the mean pressure constant required.


Mean pressure constants for the most usual degrees of cut-off are given
below:—

         Cut-off in fractions of stroke Mean pressure constant
                       ¾                        0·968
                      ⁷⁄₁₀                      0·952
                       ⅔                        0·934
                       ⅝                        0·919
                       ⅗                        0·913
                       ½                        0·846
                       ⅖                        0·766
                       ⅜                        0·750
                       ⅓                        0·699
                      ³⁄₁₀                      0·664
                       ¼                        0·596
                       ⅕                        0·522
                       ⅙                        0·465
                       ⅐                        0·421
                       ⅛                        0·385
                       ⅑                        0·355
                       ⅒                        0·330
                      ¹⁄₁₁                      0·309
                      ¹⁄₁₂                      0·290
                      ¹⁄₁₃                      0·274
                      ¹⁄₁₄                      0·260
                      ¹⁄₁₅                      0·247
                      ¹⁄₁₆                      0·236

To find mean pressure:—Set 1 on C to constant on D, and under initial
pressure on C read mean pressure on D.

Given the absolute initial pressure, length of stroke, and admission
period, to find the absolute pressure at any point in the expansion
period, it being assumed that the steam expands adiabatically. (P_{2} =
(P_{1})/(R^{¹⁰⁄₉}) in which P_{1} = initial pressure and P_{2} the
pressure corresponding to a ratio of expansion R.)

Set L.H. index of C to ratio of expansion on D, and read on the back of
the slide the decimal of the logarithm. Add the characteristic, and to
the number thus obtained on D set 9 on C, and read off the value found
on D under the index of C. Set this number on the logarithmic scale to
the index mark, in the opening on the back of the rule, and under L.H.
index of C read the value of R^{¹⁰⁄₉} on D. The initial pressure divided
by this value gives the corresponding pressure due to the expansion.


  EX.—Absolute initial pressure 120 lb. per square inch; stroke, 4 ft.;
  cut-off ¼. Find the respective pressures when ½ and ¾ths of the stroke
  have been completed.

  In the first case R = 2. Therefore setting the L.H. index of C to 2 on
  D, we find the decimal of the logarithm on the back of the slide to be
  0·301. The characteristic is 0, so placing 9 on C to 0·301 on D, we
  read 0·334 as the value under the R.H. index of C. (N.B.—In locating
  the decimal point it is to be observed that the log. of R has been
  multiplied by 10, in accordance with the terms of the above
  expression.) Setting this number on the logarithmic scale to the back
  index, the value of R^{¹⁰⁄₉} is found on D, under the L.H. index of C,
  to be 2·16. Setting 120 on C to this value, it is found that the
  pressure at ½ stroke, read on C over the R.H. index of D, is 55·5 lb.
  per square inch. In a similar manner, the pressure when ¾ths of the
  stroke is completed is found to be 35·4 lb. per square inch.


For other conditions of expanding steam, or for gas or air, the method
of procedure is similar to the above.

To find the horse-power of an engine, having given the mean _effective_
pressure, the cylinder diameter, stroke, and number of revolutions per
minute.

To cylinder diameter on D set 145 on C; bring cursor to stroke in feet
on B, 1 on B to cursor, cursor to number of revolutions on B, 1 on B to
cursor, and over mean effective pressure on B find horse-power on A.

(N.B.—If stroke is in inches, use 502 in place of 145 given above.)


  EX.—Find the indicated horse-power, given cylinder diameter 27 in.,
  mean effective pressure 38 lb. per square inch, stroke 32 in.,
  revolutions 57 per minute.

  Set 502 on C to 27 on D, bring cursor to 32 on B, 1 on B to cursor,
  cursor to 57 on B, 1 on B to cursor, and over 38 on B read 200 I.H.P.
  on A.


To determine the horse-power of a compound engine, invert the slide and
set the diameter of the _high_-pressure cylinder on Ɔ to the cut-off in
that cylinder on A. Use the number then found on A over the diameter of
the _low_-pressure cylinder on Ɔ as the cut-off in that cylinder,
working with the same pressure and piston speed, and calculate the
horse-power as for a single cylinder.

To find the cylinder ratio in compound engines, invert the slide and set
index of Ɔ to diameter of the low-pressure cylinder on D. Then over the
diameter of the high-pressure cylinder on C, read cylinder ratio on A.


  EX.—Diameter of high-pressure cylinder 7¾in., low-pressure 15 in. Find
  cylinder ratio.

  Set index on Ɔ to 15 on D, and over 7·75 on Ɔ read 3·75, the required
  ratio, on A.


The cylinder ratios of triple or quadruple-expansion engines may be
similarly determined.


  EX.—In a quadruple-expansion engine, the cylinders are 18, 26, 37, and
  54 inches in diameter. Find the respective ratios of the high, first
  intermediate, and second intermediate cylinders to the low-pressure.

  Set (R.H.) index of Ɔ to 54 on D, and over 18, 26, and 37 on Ɔ read 9,
  4·31, and 2·13, the required ratios, on A.


Given the mean effective pressures in lb. per square inch in each of the
three cylinders of a triple-expansion engine, the I.H.P. to be developed
in each cylinder, and the piston speed, to find the respective cylinder
diameters.

Set 42,000 on B to piston speed on A; bring cursor to mean effective
pressure in low-pressure cylinder on B, index of B to cursor, and under
I.H.P. on A read low-pressure cylinder diameter on C. To find the
diameters of the high-pressure and intermediate-pressure cylinders,
invert the slide and place the mean pressure in the low-pressure
cylinder on ᗺ to the diameter of that cylinder on D. Then under the
respective mean pressures on ᗺ read corresponding cylinder diameters on
D.


  EX.—The mean effective pressures in the cylinders of a
  triple-expansion engine are:—L.P., 10·32; I.M.P., 27·5; and H.P., 77·5
  lb. per square inch. The piston speed is 650 ft. per minute, and the
  I.H.P. developed in each cylinder, 750. Find the cylinder diameters.

  Set 42,000 on B to 650 on A, and bring cursor to 10·32 on B. Bring
  index of B to cursor, and under 750 on A read 68·5 in. on C, the L.P.
  cylinder diameter. Invert the slide, and placing 10·32 on ᗺ to 68·5 on
  D, read, under 27·5 on ᗺ, the I.M.P. cylinder diameter = 42 in., on D;
  also under 77·5 on ᗺ read the H.P. cylinder diameter = 25 in., on D.


To compute brake or dynamometrical horse-power.

Set 525 on C to the total weight in lb. acting at the end of the lever
(or pull of spring balance in lb.) on D; set cursor to length of lever
in feet on C, bring 1 on C to cursor, and under number of revolutions
per minute on C find brake horse-power on D.

Given cylinder diameter and piston speed in feet per minute, to find
diameter of steam pipe, assuming the maximum velocity of the steam to be
6000 ft. per minute.

Set 6000 on B to cylinder diameter on D, and under piston speed on B
read steam pipe diameter on D.

Given the number of revolutions per minute of a Watt governor, to find
the vertical height in inches, from the plane of revolution of the balls
to the point of suspension.

Set revolutions per minute on C to 35,200 on A, and over index of B read
height on A.

Given the weight in lb. of the rim of a cast-iron fly-wheel, to find the
sectional area of the rim in square inches.

Set the mean diameter of the wheel in feet on C to 0·102 on D, and under
weight of rim on C find area on D.

Given the consumption of coal in tons per week of 56 hours, and the
I.H.P., to find the coal consumed per I.H.P. per hour.

Set I.H.P. on C to 40 on D, and under weekly consumption on C read lb.
of coal per I.H.P., per hour on D.


  EX.—Find coal used per I.H.P. per hour, when 24 tons is the weekly
  consumption for 300 I.H.P.

  Set 300 on C to 40 on D, and under 24 on C read 3·2 lb. per I.H.P. per
  hour on D.


(N.B.—For any other number of working hours per week divide 2240 by the
number of working hours, and use the quotient in place of 40 as above.)

To find the tractive force of a locomotive.

Set diameter of driving wheel in inches on B to diameter of cylinder in
inches on D, and over the stroke in inches on B read on A, tractive
force in lb. for each lb. of effective pressure on the piston.


                             STEAM BOILERS.

To find the bursting pressure of a cylindrical boiler shell, having
given the diameter of shell and the thickness and ultimate strength of
the material.

Set the diameter of the shell in inches on C to twice the thickness of
the plate on D, and under strength of material per square inch on C read
bursting pressure in lb. per square inch on D.


  EX.—Find the bursting pressure of a cylindrical boiler shell 7 ft. 6
  in. in diameter, with plates ½in. thick, assuming an ultimate strength
  of 50,000 lb. per square inch.

  Set 90 on C to 1·0 on D, and under 50,000 on C find 555 lb. on D.


To find working pressure for Fox’s corrugated furnaces by Board of Trade
rule.

Set the least outside diameter in inches on C to 14,000 on D, and under
thickness in inches on C read working pressure on D in lb. per square
inch.

To find diameter _d_ in inches, of round steel for safety valve springs
by Board of Trade rule.

Set 8000 on C to load on spring in lb. on D, and under the mean diameter
of the spring in inches on C read _d_^3 on D. Then extract the cube root
as per rule.


                     SPEED RATIOS OF PULLEYS, ETC.

Given the diameter of a pulley and its number of revolutions per minute,
to find the circumferential velocity of the pulley or the speed of
ropes, belts, etc., driven thereby.

Set diameter of pulley in inches on C to 3·82 on D, and over revolutions
per minute on D read speed in feet per minute on C.


  EX.—Find the speed of a belt driven by a pulley 53 in. in diameter and
  running at 180 revolutions per minute.

  Set 53 on C to 3·82 on D, and over 180 on D read 2500 ft. per minute
  on C.

  EX.—Find the speed of the pitch line of a spur wheel 3 ft. 6 in. in
  diameter running at 60 revolutions per minute.

  Set 42 in. on C to 3·82 on D, and over 60 on D read 660 ft. per minute
  on C.


Given diameter and number of revolutions per minute of a driving pulley,
and the diameter of the driven pulley, to find the number of revolutions
of the latter.

Invert the slide and set diameter of driving pulley on Ɔ to given number
of its revolutions on D; then opposite diameter of any driven pulley on
Ɔ read its number of revolutions on D.


  EX.—Diameter of driving pulley 10 ft.; revolutions per minute 55;
  diameter of driven pulley 2 ft. 9 in. Find number of revolutions per
  minute of latter.

  Set 10 on Ɔ to 55 on D, and opposite 2·75 on Ɔ read 200 revolutions on
  D.


                            BELTS AND ROPES.

To find the ratio of tensions in the two sides of a belt, given the
coefficient of friction between belt and pulley μ and the number of
degrees θ in the arc of contact (log. R = (μθ)/(132)).

Set 132 on C to the coefficient of friction on D, and read off the value
found on D under the number of degrees in the arc of contact on C. Place
this value on the scale of equal parts on the back of the slide, to the
index mark in the aperture, and read the required ratio on D under the
L.H. index of C.


  EX.—Find the tension ratio in a belt, assuming a coefficient of
  friction of 0·3 and an arc of contact of 120 degrees.

  Set 132 on C to 0·3 on D, and under 120 on C read 0·273. Place this on
  the scale to the index on the back of the rule, and under the L.H.
  index C read 1·875 on D, the required ratio.


Given belt velocity and horse-power to be transmitted, to find the
requisite width of belt, taking the effective tension at 50 lb. per inch
of width.

Set 660 on C to velocity in feet per minute on D, and opposite
horse-power on D find width of belt in inches on C.

Given velocity and width of belt, to find horse-power transmitted.

Set 660 on C to velocity on D, and under width on C find horse-power
transmitted on D.

(N.B.—For any other effective tension, instead of 660 use as a gauge
point:—33,000 ÷ tension.)

Given speed and diameter of a cotton driving rope, to find power
transmitted, disregarding centrifugal action, and assuming an effective
working tension of 200 lb. per square inch of rope.

Set 210 on B to 1·75 on D, and over speed in feet per minute on B read
horse-power on A.


  EX.—Find the power transmitted by a 1¾in. rope running at 4000 ft. per
  minute.

    Set 210 on B to 1·75 on D, and over 4000 on B read 58·3 horse-power
    on A.


Find the “centrifugal tension” in the previous example, taking the
weight per foot of the rope as = 0·27_d_^2.

Set 655 on C to the diameter, 1·75 in., on D, and over the speed, 4000
ft. on C, read centrifugal tension = 114 lb. on A.


                              SPUR WHEELS.

Given diameter and pitch of a spur wheel, to find number of teeth.

Set pitch on C to π (3·1416) on D, and under any diameter on C read
number of teeth on D.

Given diameter and number of teeth in a spur wheel, to find the pitch.

Set diameter on C to number of teeth on D, and read pitch on C opposite
3·1416 on D.

Given the distance between the centres of a pair of spur wheels and the
number of revolutions of each, to determine their diameters.

To twice the distance between the centres on D, set the sum of the
number of revolutions on C, and under the revolutions of each wheel on C
find the respective wheel diameters on D.


  EX.—The distance between the centres of two spur wheels is 37·5 in.,
  and they are required to make 21 and 24 revolutions in the same time.
  Find their respective diameters.

    Set 21 + 24 = 45 on C to 75 (or 37·5 × 2) on D, and under 21 and 24
    on C find 35 and 40 in. on D as the respective diameters.


To find the power transmitted by toothed wheels, given the pitch
diameter _d_ in inches, the number of revolutions per minute _n_, and
the pitch _p_ in inches, by the rule, H.P. = (_n_ _d_ _p_^2)/(400).

Set 400 on B to pitch in inches on D; set cursor to d on B, 1 on B to
cursor, and over any number of revolutions n on B read power transmitted
on A.


  EX.—Find the horse-power capable of being transmitted by a spur wheel
  7 ft. in diameter, 3 in. pitch, and running at 90 revolutions per
  minute.

  Set 400 on B to 3 on D; bring cursor to 84 in. on B, 1 on B to cursor,
  and over 90 revolutions on B read 170, the horse-power transmitted, on
  A.


                             SCREW-CUTTING.

Given the number of threads per inch in the guide screw, to find the
wheels to cut a screw of given pitch.

Set threads per inch in guide screw on C, to the number of threads per
inch to be cut on D. Then opposite any number of teeth in the wheel on
the mandrel on C, is the number of teeth in the wheel to be placed on
the guide screw on D.


                         STRENGTH OF SHAFTING.

Given the diameter _d_ of a steel shaft, and the number of revolutions
per minute _n_, to find the horse-power from:—

H.P. = _d_^3 × _n_ × 0·02.

Set 1 on C to _d_ on D, and bring cursor to _d_ on B. Bring 50 on B to
cursor, and over number of revolutions on B read H.P. on A.


  EX.—Find horse-power transmitted by a 3 in. steel shaft at 110
  revolutions per minute.

  Set 1 on C to 3 on D, and bring cursor to 3 on B. Bring 50 on B to
  cursor, and over 110 on B read 59·4 horse-power on A.


Given the horse-power to be transmitted and the number of revolutions of
a steel shaft, to find the diameter.

Set revolutions on B to horse-power on A, and bring cursor to 50 on B.
Then move the slide until the same number is found on B under the cursor
that is simultaneously found on D under the index of C. This number is
the diameter required.

To find the deflection _k_ in inches, of a round steel shaft of diameter
_d_, under a uniformly distributed load in lb. _w_, and supported by
bearings, the centres of which are _l_ feet apart (_k_ = (_w_
_l_^3)/(78,000_d_^4)).

Modifying the form of this expression slightly, we proceed as
follows:—Set _d_ on C to _l_ on D, and bring the cursor to the same
number on B that is found on D under the index of C. Bring _d_ on B to
cursor, cursor to _w_ on B, 78,800 on B to cursor, and read deflection
on A over index of B.


  EX.—Find the deflection in inches of a round steel shaft 3½in.
  diameter, carrying a uniformly distributed load of 3200 lb., the
  distance apart of the centres of support being 9 ft.

    Set 3·5 on C to 9 on D, and read 2·57 on D, under the L.H. index of
    C. Set cursor to 2·57 on B, and bring 3·5 on B to cursor, cursor to
    3200 on B, 78,000 on B to cursor, and over L.H. index of B read
    0·199 in., the required deflection on A.


To find the diameter of a shaft subject to twisting only, given the
twisting moment in inch-lb. and the allowable stress in lb. per square
inch.

Set the stress in lb. per square inch on B to the twisting moment in
inch-lb. on A, and bring cursor to 5·1 on B. Then move the slide until
the same number is found on B under the cursor that is simultaneously
found on D under the index of C.


  EX.—A steel shaft is subjected to a twisting moment of 2,700,000
  inch-lb. Determine the diameter if the allowable stress is taken at
  9000 lb. per square inch.

    Set 9000 on B to 2,700,000 on A, and bring the cursor to 5·1 on B.
    Moving the slide to the left, it is found that when 11·51 on the
    R.H. scale of B is under the cursor, the L.H. index of C is opposite
    11·51 on D. This, then, is the required diameter of the shaft.


(N.B.—The rules for the scales to be used in finding the cube root (page
42) must be carefully observed in working these examples.)


                          MOMENTS OF INERTIA.

To find the moment of inertia of a square section about an axis formed
by one of its diagonals (I = (_s_^4)/(12)).

Set index of C to the length of the side of square _s_ on D; bring
cursor to _s_ on C, 12 on B to cursor, and over index of B read moment
of inertia on A.

To find the moment of inertia of a rectangular section about an axis
parallel to one side and perpendicular to the plane of bending.

Set index of C to the height or depth _h_ of the section, and bring
cursor to _h_ on B. Set 12 on B to cursor, and over breadth _b_ of the
section on B read moment of inertia on A.


  EX.—Find the moment of inertia of a rectangular section of which _h_ =
  14 in. and _b_ = 7 in.

    Set index of C to 14 on D, and cursor to 14 on B. Bring 12 on B to
    cursor, and over 7 on B read 1600 on A.


                   DISCHARGE FROM PUMPS, PIPES, ETC.

To find the theoretical delivery of pumps, in gallons per stroke.

Set 29·4 on B to the diameter of the plunger in inches on D, and over
length of stroke in feet on B read theoretical delivery in gallons per
stroke on A.

(N.B.—A deduction of from 20 to 40 per cent. should be made to allow for
slip.)

To find loss of head of water in feet due to friction in pipes (Prony’s
rule).

Set diameter of pipe in feet on B to velocity of water in feet per
second on D and bring cursor to 2·25 on B; bring 1 on B to cursor, and
over length of pipe in miles on B, read loss of head of water in feet,
on A.

To find velocity in feet per second, of water in pipes (Blackwell’s
rule).

Set 2·3 on B to diameter of pipe in feet on A, and under inclination of
pipe in feet per mile on B read velocity in feet per second on D.

To find the discharge over weirs in cubic feet per minute and per foot
of width. (Discharge = 214√(_h_^3))

Set 0·00467 on C to the head in feet _h_ on D, and under _h_ on B read
discharge on D.

To find the theoretical velocity of water flowing under a given head in
feet.

Set index of B to head in feet on A, and under 64·4 on B read
theoretical velocity in feet per second on D.


                      HORSE-POWER OF WATER WHEELS.

To find the effective horse-power of a Poncelet water wheel.

Set 880 on C to cubic feet of flow of water per minute on D, and under
height of fall in feet on C, read effective horse-power on D.

For breast water wheels use 960, and for overshot wheels 775, in place
of 880 as above.


                        ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING.

To find the resistance per mile, in ohms, of copper wire of high
conductivity, at 60° F. the diameter being given in mils. (1 mil. =
0·001 in.).

Set diameter of wire in mils. on C to 54,900 on A, and over R.H. or L.H.
index of B read resistance in ohms on A.


  EX.—Find the resistance per mile of a copper wire 64 mils. in
  diameter.

    Set 64 on C to 54,900 on A, and over R.H. index of B read 13·4 ohms
    on A.


To find the weight of copper wire in lb. per mile.

Set 7·91 on C to diameter of wire in mils. on D, and over index of B
read weight per mile on A.

Given electromotive force and current, to find electrical horse-power.

Set 746 on C to electromotive force in volts on D, and under current in
ampères on C read electrical horse-power on D.

Given the resistance of a circuit in ohms and current in ampères, to
find the energy absorbed in horse-power.

Set 746 on B to current on D, and over resistance on B read energy
absorbed in H.P. on A.


  EX.—Find the H.P. expended in sending a current of 15 ampères through
  a circuit of 220 ohms resistance.

  Set 746 on B to 15 on D, and over 220 on B read 66·3 H.P. on A.


                              COMMERCIAL.

To add on percentages.

Set 100 on C to 100 + given percentage on D, and under original number
on C read result on D.

To deduct percentages.

Set R.H. index of C to 100 − the given percentage on D, and under
original number on C read result on D.


  EX.—From £16 deduct 7½ per cent.

    Set 10 on C to 92·5 on D and under 16 on C, read 14·8 = £14, 16s. on
    D.


To calculate simple interest.

Set 1 on C to rate per cent. on D; bring cursor to period on C and 1 on
C to cursor. Then opposite any sum on C find simple interest on D.

For interest per annum.

Set R.H. index on C to rate on D, and opposite principal on C read
interest on D.


  EX.—Find the amount with simple interest of £250 at 8 per cent., and
  for a period of 1 year and 9 months.

    Set 1 on C to 8 on D; bring cursor to 1·75 on C, and 1 on C to
    cursor; then opposite 250 on C read £35, the interest, on D. Then
    250 + 35 = £285 = the amount.


To calculate compound interest.

Set the L.H. index of C to the amount of £1 at the given rate of
interest on D, and find the logarithm of this by reading on the reverse
side of the rule, as explained on page 46. Multiply the logarithm, so
found, by the period, and set the result, on the scale of equal parts,
to the index on the under-side of the rule; then opposite any sum on C
read the amount (including compound interest) on D.


  EX.—Find the amount of £500 at 5 per cent. for 6 years, with compound
  interest.

    Set L.H. index of C to £1·05 on D, and read at the index on the
    scale of equal parts on the under-side of rule, 0·0212. Multiply by
    6, we obtain 0·1272, which, on the scale of equal parts, is placed
    to the index in the notch at the end of the rule. Then opposite 500
    on C read £670 on D, the amount required, including compound
    interest.


                      MISCELLANEOUS CALCULATIONS.

To calculate percentages of compositions.

Set weight (or volume) of sample on C, to weight (or volume) of
substance considered, on D; then under index of C read required
percentage on D.


  EX.—A sample of coal weighing 1·25 grms. contains 0·04425 grm. of ash.
  Find the percentage of ash.

    Set 1·25 on C to 0·04425 on D, and under index on C read 3·54, the
    required percentage of ash on D.


Given the steam pressure P and the diameter _d_ in millimetres, of the
throat of an injector, to find the weight W, of water delivered in lb.
per hour from W = (_d_^2√̅P)/(0·505).

Set 0·505 on C to P on A; bring cursor to _d_ on C and index of C to
cursor. Then under _d_ on C read delivery of water on D.

To find the pressure of wind per square foot, due to a given velocity in
miles per hour.

Set 1 on B to 2 on A, and over the velocity in miles per hour on D read
pressure in lb. per square foot on B.

To find the kinetic energy of a moving body.

Set 64·4 on B to velocity in feet per second on D, and over weight of
body in lb. on B read kinetic energy or accumulated work in foot-lb. on
A.




                      TRIGONOMETRICAL APPLICATIONS


_Scales._—Not the least important feature of the modern slide rule is
the provision of the special scales on the under-side of the slide, and
by the use of which, in conjunction with the ordinary scales on the
rule, a large variety of trigonometrical computations may be readily
performed.

Three scales will be found on the reverse or under-side of the slide of
the ordinary Gravêt or Mannheim rule. One of these is the evenly-divided
scale or scale of equal parts referred to in previous sections, and by
which, as explained, the decimal parts or mantissæ of logarithms of
numbers may be obtained. Usually this scale is the centre one of the
three, but in some rules it will be found occupying the lowest position,
in which case some little modification of the following instructions
will be necessary. The requisite transpositions will, however, be
evident when the purposes of the scales are understood. The upper of the
three scales, usually distinguished by the letter S, is a scale giving
the logarithms of the sines of angles, and is used to determine the
natural sines of angles of from 35 minutes to 90 degrees. The notation
of this scale will be evident on inspection. The main divisions 1, 2, 3,
etc., represent the degrees of angles; but the values of the
subdivisions differ according to their position on the scale. Thus, if
any primary space is subdivided into 12 parts, each of the latter will
be read as 5 minutes (5′), since 1° = 60′.

_Sines of Angles._—To find the sine of an angle the slide is placed in
the groove, with the under-side uppermost, and the end division lines or
indices on the slide, coinciding with the right and left indices of the
A scale. Then over the given angle on S is read the value of the sine of
the angle on A. If the result is found on the left scale of A (1 to 10),
the logarithmic characteristic is −2; if it is found on the right-hand
side (10 to 100), it is −1. In other words, results on the right-hand
scale are prefixed by the decimal point only, while those on the
left-hand scale are to be preceded by a cypher also. Thus:—

              Sine 2° 40′ = 0·0465; sine 15° 40′ = 0·270.

Multiplication and division of the sines of angles are performed in the
same manner as ordinary calculations, excepting that the slide has its
under-face placed uppermost, as just explained. Thus to multiply sine
15° 40′ by 15, the R.H. index of S is brought to 15 on A, and opposite
15° 40′ on S is found 4·05 on A. Again, to divide 142 by sine 16° 30′,
we place 16° 30′ on S to 142 on A, and over R.H. index of S read 500 on
A.

The rules for the number of integers in the results are thus determined:
Let N be the number of integers in the multiplier M or in the dividend
D. Then the number of integers P, in the product or Q, in the quotient
are as follows:—

 When the result is found to the right of M or D,   │P = N − 2│Q = N
   and in the same scale                            │         │
 When the result is found to the right of M or D,   │P = N − 1│Q = N + 1
   and in the other scale                           │         │
 When the result is found to the left of M or D, and│P = N − 1│Q = N + 1
   in the other scale                               │         │
 When the result is found to the left of M or D, and│P = N    │Q = N + 2
   in the same scale                                │         │

If the division is of the form (20° 30′)/(50), the result cannot be read
off directly on the face of the rule. Thus, if in the above example 20°
30′ on S, is placed to agree with 50 on the right-hand scale of A, the
result found on S under the R.H. index of A is 44° 30′. The required
numerical value can then be found: (1) By placing the slide with all
indices coincident when opposite 44° 30′ on S will be found 0·007 on A;
or (2) In the ordinary form of rule, by reading off on the scale B
opposite the index mark in the opening on the under-side of the rule.
The above rules for the number of integers in the quotient do not apply
in this case.

If it is required to find the sine of an angle simply, this may be done
with the slide in its ordinary position, with scale B under A. The given
angle on scale S is then set to the index on the under-side of the rule,
and the value of the sine is read off on B under the right index of A.

Owing to the rapidly diminishing differences of the values of the sines
as the upper end of the scale is approached, the sines of angles between
60° and 90° cannot be accurately determined in the foregoing manner. It
is therefore advisable to calculate the value of the sine by means of
the formula:

Sine θ = 1 − 2 sin^2 (90 − θ)/(2).

To determine the value of sin^2 (90 − θ)/(2). With the slide in the
normal position, set the value of (90 − θ)/(2). on S to the index on the
under-side of the rule, and read off the value _x_ on B under the R.H.
index of A. Without moving the slide find _x_ on A, and read under it on
B the value required.


  EX.—Find value of sine 79° 40′.

  Sine 79° 40′ = 1 − 2sin^2 5° 10′.

  But sine 5° 10′ = 0·0900, and under this value on A is 0·0081 on B.
  Therefore sine 79° 40′ = 1 − 0·0162 = 0·9838.


The sines of very small angles, being very nearly proportional to the
angles themselves, are found by direct reading. To facilitate this, some
rules are provided with two marks, one of which, a single accent (′),
corresponds to the logarithm of (1)/(sine 1′) and is found at the number
3438. The other mark—a double accent (″)—corresponds to the logarithm of
(1)/(sine 1″) and is found at the number 206,265. In some rules these
marks are found on either the A or the B scales; sometimes they are on
both. In either case the angle on the one scale is placed so as to
coincide with the significant mark on the other, and the result read off
on the first-named scale opposite the index of the second.

In sines of angles under 3″, the number of integers in the result is −5;
while it is −4 for angles from 3″ to 21″; −3 from 21″ to 3′ 27″; and −2
from 3′ 27″ to 34′ 23″.


  EX.—Find sine 6′.

  Placing the significant mark for minutes coincident with 6, the value
  opposite the index is found to be 175, and by the rule above this is
  to be read 0·00175. For angles in seconds the other significant mark
  is used; while angles expressed in minutes and seconds are to be first
  reduced to seconds. Thus, 3′ 10″ = 190″.


_Tangents of Angles._—There remains to be considered the third scale
found on the back of the slide, and usually distinguished from the
others by being lettered T. In most of the more recent forms of rule
this scale is placed near the lower edge of the slide, but in some
arrangements it is found to be the centre scale of the three. Again, in
some rules this scale is figured in the same direction as the scale of
sines—viz., from left to right,—while in others the T scale is reversed.
In both cases there is now usually an aperture formed in the back of the
left extremity of the rule, with an index mark similar to that already
referred to in connection with the scale of sines. Considering what has
been referred to as the more general arrangement, the method of
determining the tangents of angles may be thus explained:—

The tangent scale will be found to commence, in some rules, at about
34′, or, precisely, at the angle whose tangent is 0·01. More usually,
however, the scale will be found to commence at about 5° 43′, or at the
angle whose tangent is 0·1. The other extremity of the scale corresponds
in all cases to 45°, or the angle whose tangent is 1. This explanation
will suggest the method of using the scale, however it may be arranged.
If the graduations commence with 34′, the T scale is to be used in
conjunction with the right and left scales of A; while if they commence
with 5° 43′ it is to be used in conjunction with the D scale.

In the former case the slide is to be placed in the rule so that the T
scale is adjacent to the A scales, and, with the right and left indices
coinciding, when opposite any angle on T will be found its tangent on A.
From what has been said above, it follows that the tangents read on the
L.H. scale of A have values extending from 0·01 to 0·1; while those read
on the R.H. scale of A have values from 0·1 to 1·0. Otherwise expressed,
to the values of any tangent read on the L.H. scale of A a cypher is to
be prefixed; while if found on the R.H. scale, it is read directly as a
decimal.


  EX.—Find tan. 3° 50′.

  Placing the slide as directed, the reading on A opposite 3° 50′ on T
  is found to be 67. As this is found on the L.H. scale of A, it is to
  be read as 0·067.


  EX.—Find tan. 17° 45′.

  Here the reading on A opposite 17° 45′ on T is 32, and as it is found
  on the R.H. scale of A it is read as 0·32.


As in the case of the scale of sines, the tangents may be found without
reversing the slide, when a fixed index is provided in the back of the
rule for the T scale.

We revert now to a consideration of those rules in which a single
tangent scale is provided. It will be understood that in this case the
slide is placed so that the scale T is adjacent to the D scale, and that
when the indices of both are placed in agreement, the value of the
tangent of any angle on T (from 5° 43′ to 45°) may be read off on D, the
result so found being read as wholly decimal. Thus tan. 13° 20′ is read
0·237.

If a back index is provided, the slide is used in its normal position,
when, setting the angle on the tangent scale to this index, the result
can be read on C over the L.H. index of D.

The tangents of angles above 45° are obtained by the formula: Tan. θ =
(1)/(tan. (90 − θ)). For all angles from 45° to (90° − 5° 43′) we
proceed as follows:—Place (90 − θ) on T to the R.H. index of D, and read
tan. θ on D under the L.H. index of T. The first figure in the value
thus obtained is to be read as an integer. Thus, to find tan. 71° 20′ we
place 90° − 71° 20′ = 18° 40′ on T, to the R.H. index of D, and under
the L.H. index of T read 2·96, the required tangent.

The tangents of angles less than 40′ are sensibly proportional to the
angles themselves, and as they may therefore be considered as sines,
their value is determined by the aid of the single and double accent
marks on the sine scale, as previously explained. The rules for the
number of integers are the same as for the sines.

Multiplication and division of tangents may be quite readily effected.


  EX.—Tan. 21° 50′ × 15 = 6.

  Set L.H. index of T to 15 on D, and under 21° 50′ on T read 6 on D.


  EX.—Tan. 72° 40′ × 117 = 375.

  Set (90° − 72° 40′) = 17° 20′ on T to 117 on D, and under R.H. index
  of T read 375 on D.


_Cosines of Angles._—The cosines of angles may be determined by placing
the scale S with its indices coinciding with those of A, and when
opposite (90 − θ) on S is read cos. θ on A. If the result is read on the
L.H. scale of A, a cypher is to be prefixed to the value read; while if
it is read on the R.H. scale of A, the value is read directly as a
decimal. Thus, to determine cos. 86° 30′ we find opposite (90° − 86°
30′) = 3° 30′ on S, 61° on A, and as this is on the L.H. scale the
result is read 0·061. Again, to find cos. 59° 20′ we read opposite (90°
− 59° 20′) or 30° 40′ on S, 51 on A, and as this is found on the R.H.
scale of A, it is read 0·51.

In finding the cosines of small angles it will be seen that direct
reading on the rule becomes impossible for angles of less than 20°. It
is advisable in such cases to adopt the method described for determining
the _sines_ of the _large_ angles of which the complements are sought.

_Cotangents of Angles._—From the methods of finding the tangents of
angles previously described, it will be apparent that the cotangents of
angles may also be obtained with equal facility. For angles between 5°
45′ and 45°, the procedure is the same as that for finding tangents of
angles greater than 45°. Thus, the angle on scale T is brought to the
R.H. index of D, and the cotangent read off on D under the L.H. index of
T. The first figure of the result so found is to be read as an integer.

If the angle (θ) lies between 45° and 84° 15′, the slide is placed so
that the indices of T coincide with those of D, and the result is then
read off on D opposite (90 − θ) on T. In this case the value is wholly
decimal.

_Secants of Angles._—The secants of angles are readily found by bringing
(90 − θ) on S to the R.H. index of A and reading the result on A over
the L.H. index of S. If the value is found on the L.H. scale of A, the
first figure is to be read as an integer; while if the result is read on
the R.H. scale of A, the first _two_ figures are to be regarded as
integers.

_Cosecants of Angles._—The cosecants of angles are found by placing the
angle on S to the R.H. index of A, and reading the value found on A over
the L.H. index of S. If the result is read on the L.H. scale of A, the
first figure is to be read as an integer; while if the result is found
on the R.H. scale of A, the first _two_ figures are to be read as
integers.

It will be noted that some of the rules here given for determining the
several trigonometrical functions of angles apply only to those forms of
rules in which a single scale of tangents T is used, reading from left
to right. For the other arrangements of the scale, previously referred
to, some slight modification of the method of procedure in finding the
tangents and cotangents of angles will be necessary; but as in each case
the nature and extent of this modification is evident, no further
directions are required.




                THE SOLUTION OF RIGHT-ANGLED TRIANGLES.


From the foregoing explanation of the manner of determining the
trigonometrical functions of angles, the methods of solving right-angled
triangles will be readily perceived, and only a few examples need
therefore be given.

Let _a_ and _b_ represent the sides and _c_ the hypothenuse of a
right-angled triangle, and _a_° and _b_° the angles opposite to the
sides. Then of the possible cases we will take

(1.) Given _c_ and _a_°, to find _a_, _b_, and _b_°.

The angle _b_° = 90 − _a_°, while _a_ = _c_ sin _a_° and _b_ = _c_ sin
_b_°. To find _a_, therefore, the index of S is set to _c_ on A, and the
value of _a_ read on A opposite _a_° on S. In the same manner the value
of _b_ is obtained.


  EX.—Given in a right-angled triangle _c_ = 9 ft. and _a_° = 30°. Find
  _a_, _b_, and _b_°.

  The angle _b_° = 90 − 30 = 60°. To find _a_, set R.H. index of S to 9
  on A, and over 30° on S read _a_ = 4·5 ft. on A. Also, with the slide
  in the same position, read _b_ = 7·8 ft. [7·794] on A over 60° on S.


(2.) Given _a_ and _c_, to determine _a_°, _b_°, and _b_.

In this case advantage is taken of the fact that in every triangle the
sides are proportional to the sines of the opposite angles. Therefore,
as in this case the hypothenuse c subtends a right angle, of which the
sine = 1, the R.H. index (or 90°) on S is set to the length of _c_ on A,
when under _a_ on A is found _a_° on S. Hence _b_° and _b_ may be
determined.

(3.) Given _a_ and _a_°, to find _b_, _c_, and _b_°.

Here _b_° = (90 − _a_°), and the solution is similar to the foregoing.

(4.) Given _a_ and _b_, to find _a_°, _b_°, and _c_.

To find _a_°, we have tan. _a_° = _a_/_b_, which in the above example
will be (4·5)/(7·8) = 0·577. Therefore, placing the slide so that the
indices of T coincide with those of D, we read opposite 0·577 on D the
value of _a_° = 30°. The hypothenuse _c_ is readily obtained from _c_ =
_a_/(sin _a_°).




               THE SOLUTION OF OBLIQUE-ANGLED TRIANGLES.


Using the same letters as before to designate the three sides and the
subtending angles of oblique-angled triangles, we have the following
cases:—

(1.) Given one side and two angles, as _a_, _a_°, and _b_°, to find _b_,
_c_, and _c_°.

In the first place, _c_° = 180° − (_a_° + _b_°); also we note that, as
the sides are proportional to the sines of the opposite angles, _b_ =
(_a_ sine _b_°)/(sine _a_°) and _c_ = (_a_ sine _c_°)/(sine _a_°).

Taking as an example, _a_ = 45, _a_° = 57°, and _b_° = 63°, we have _c_°
= 180 − (57 + 63) = 60°. To find _b_ and _c_, set _a_° on S to _a_ on A,
and read off on A above 63° and 60° the values of _b_ (= 47·8) and _c_
(= 46·4) respectively.

(2.) Given _a_, _b_, and _a_°, to find _b_°, _c_°, and _c_.

In this case the angle _a_° on S is placed under the length of side _a_
on A and under _b_ on A is found the angle _b_° on S. The angle _c_° =
180 − (_a_° + _b_°), whence the length _c_ can be read off on A over
_c_° on S.

(3.) Given the sides and the included angle, to find the other side and
the remaining angles.

If, for example, there are given _a_ = 65, _b_ = 42, and the included
angle _c_° = 55°, we have (_a_ + _b_) ∶ (_a_ − _b_) = tan. (_a_° +
_b_°)/(2) ∶ tan. (_a_° − _b_°)/(2). Then, since _a_° + _b_° = 180° − 55°
= 125°, it follows that (_a_° + _b_°)/(2) = (125°)/(2) = 62° 30′.

By the rule for tangents of angles greater than 45°, we find tan. 62°
30′ = 1·92. Inserting in the above proportion the values thus found, we
have 107 ∶ 23 = 1·92 ∶ tan. (_a_° − _b_°)/(2). From this it is found
that the value of the tangent is 0·412, and placing the slide with all
indices coinciding, it is seen that this value on D corresponds to an
angle of 22° 25′. Therefore, since (_a_° + _b_°)/(2) = 62° 30′, and
(_a_° − _b_°)/(2) = 22° 25′, it follows that _a_° = 84° 55′, and _b_° =
40° 5′. Finally, to determine the side _c_, we have _c_ = (_a_ sin
_c_°)/(sin _a_°) as before.


                PRACTICAL TRIGONOMETRICAL APPLICATIONS.

A few examples illustrative of the application of the methods of
determining the functions of angles, etc., described in the preceding
section, will now be given.

To find the chord of an arc, having given the included angle and the
radius.

With the slide placed in the rule with the C and D scales outward, bring
one-half of the given angle on S to the index mark in the back of the
rule, and read the chord on B under twice the radius on A.


  EX.—Required the chord of an arc of 15°, the radius being 23 in.

  Set 7° 30′ on S to the index mark in the back of the rule, and under
  46 on A read 6 in., the required length of chord on B.


To find the area of a triangle, given two sides and the included angle.

Set the angle on S to the index mark on the back of the rule, and bring
cursor to 2 on B. Then bring the length of one side on B to cursor,
cursor to 1 on B, the length of the other side on B to cursor, and read
area on B under index of A.


  EX.—The sides of a triangle are 5 and 6 ft. in length respectively,
  and they include an angle of 20°. Find the area.

  Set 20 on S to index mark, bring cursor to 2 on B, 5 on B to cursor,
  cursor to 1 on B, 6 on B to cursor, and under 1 on A read the area =
  5·13 sq. ft. on B.


To find the number of degrees in a gradient, given the rise per cent.

Place the slide with the indices of T coincident with those of D, and
over the rate per cent. on D read number of degrees in the slope on T.

As the arrangement of rule we have chiefly considered has only a single
T scale, it will be seen that only solutions of the above problem
involving slopes between 10 and 100 per cent. can be directly read off.
For smaller angles, one of the formulæ for the determination of the
tangents of submultiple angles must be used.

In rules having a double T scale (which is used with the A scale) the
value in degrees of any slope from 1 to 100 per cent. can be directly
read off on A.

To find the number of degrees, when the gradient is expressed as 1 in
_x_.

Place the index of T to _x_ on D, and over index of D read the required
angle in degrees on T.


  EX.—Find the number of degrees in a gradient of 1 in 3·8.

  Set 1 on T to 3·8 on D, and over R.H. index of D read 14° 45′ on T.


Given the lap, the lead and the travel of an engine slide valve, to find
the angle of advance.

Set (lap + lead) on B to half the travel of the valve on A, and read the
angle of advance on S at the index mark on the back of the rule.


  EX.—Valve travel 4½in., lap 1 in., lead ⁵⁄₁₆in. Find angle of advance.

  Set 1⁵⁄₁₆ = 1·312 on B to 2·25 on A, and read 35° 40′ on S opposite
  the index on the back of the rule.


Given the angular advance θ, the lap and the travel of a slide valve, to
find the cut-off in percentage of the stroke.

Place the lap on B to half the travel of valve on A, and read on S the
angle (the supplement of the _angle of the eccentric_) found opposite
the index in the back of the rule. To this angle, add the angle of
advance and deduct the sum from 180°, thus obtaining the _angle of the
crank_ at the point of cut-off. To the cosine of the supplement of this
angle, add 1 and multiply the result by 50, obtaining the percentage of
stroke completed when cut-off occurs.


  EX.—Given the angular advance = 35° 40′, the valve travel = 4½in., and
  the lap = 1 in., find the angle of the crank at cut-off and the
  admission period expressed as a percentage of the stroke.

  Set 1 on B to 2·25 on A, and read off on S opposite the index, the
  supplement of the angle of the eccentric = 26° 20′. Then 180° − (35°
  40′ + 26° 20′) = 118° = the crank angle at the point of cut-off.
  Further, cos. 118° = cos. 62° = sin (90° − 62°) = sin 28°, and placing
  28° on S to the back index, the cosine, read on B under R.H. index of
  A, is found to be 0·469. Adding 1 and placing the L.H. index of C to
  the result, 1·469, on D, we read off under 50 on C, the required
  period of admission = 73·4 per cent. on D.


The trigonometrical scales are useful for evaluating certain formulæ.
Thus in the following expressions, if we find the angle _a_ such that
sin. _a_ = _k_, we can write:—

  (_k_)/(√1 − _k^2_) = tan. _a_; (√1 − _k^2_)/(_k_) = cot. _a_; √(1 −
                        _k^2_) = cos. _a_; etc.

In the first expression, take _k_ = 0·298. Place the slide with the sine
scale outward and with its indices agreeing with the indices of the
rule. Set the cursor to 0·298 on the (R.H.) scale of A, and read 17° 20′
on the sine scale as the angle required. Then under 17° 20′ on the
tangent scale, read 0·312 on D as the result.


                   SLIDE RULES WITH LOG.-LOG. SCALES.

For occasional requirements, the method described on page 45 of
determining powers and roots other than the square and cube, is quite
satisfactory. When, however, a number of such calculations are to be
made, the process may be simplified considerably by the use of what are
known as _log.-log._, _logo-log._, or _logometric_ scales, in
conjunction with the ordinary scales of the rule. The principle involved
will be understood from a consideration of those rules for logarithmic
computation (page 8) which refer to powers and roots. From these it is
seen that while for the multiplication and division of numbers we _add_
their logarithms, for involution and evolution we require to _multiply_
or _divide_ the logarithms of the numbers by the exponent of the power
or root as the case may be. Thus to find 3^{2.3}, we have (log. 3) × 2·3
= log. _x_, and by the ordinary method described on page 45 we should
determine log. 3 by the aid of the scale L on the back of the slide,
multiply this by 2·3 by using the C and D scales in the usual manner,
transfer the result to scale L, and read the value of _x_ on D under 1
on C. By the simpler method, first proposed by Dr. P. M. Roget,[8] the
multiplication of log. 3 by 2·3 is effected in the same way as with any
two ordinary factors—_i.e._, by adding their logarithms and finding the
number corresponding to the resulting logarithm. In this case we have
log. (log. 3) + log. 2·3 = log. (log. _x_). The first of the three terms
is obviously the _logarithm of the logarithm_ of 3, the second is the
simple logarithm of 2·3, and the third the _logarithm of the logarithm
of_ the answer. Hence, if we have a scale so graduated that the
distances from the point of origin represent the logarithms of the
logarithms (the log.-logs.) of the numbers engraved upon it, then by
using this in conjunction with the ordinary scale of logarithms, we can
effect the required multiplication in a manner which is both expeditious
and convenient. Slightly varying arrangements of the log.-log. scale,
sometimes referred to as the “P line,” have been introduced from time to
time, but latterly the increasing use of exponential formulæ in
thermodynamic, electrical, and physical calculations has led to a
revival of interest in Dr. Roget’s invention, and various arrangements
of rules with log.-log. scales are now available.

_The Davis Log.-Log. Rule._—In the rule introduced by Messrs. John Davis
& Son Limited, Derby, the log.-log. scales are placed upon a separate
slide—a plan which has the advantage of leaving the rule intact for all
ordinary purposes, while providing a length of 40 in. for the log.-log.
scales.

In the 10 in. Davis rule one face of the slide, marked E, has two
log.-log. scales for numbers greater than unity, the lower extending
from 1·07 to 2, and the upper continuing the graduations from 2 to 1000.
On the reverse face of the slide, marked -E, are two log.-log. scales
for numbers less than unity, the upper extending from 0·001 to 0·5, and
the lower continuing the graduations from 0·5 to 0·933. Both sets of
scales are used in conjunction _with the lower or D scale of the rule_,
which is to be primarily regarded as running from 1 to 10, and
constitutes a scale of exponents. In the 20 in. rule the log.-log.
scales are more extensive, and are used in conjunction with the upper or
A scale of the rule (1 to 100); in what follows, however, the 10 in.
rule is more particularly referred to.

It has been explained that on the log.-log. scale the distance of any
numbered graduation from the point of origin represents the log.-log. of
the number. The point of origin will obviously be that graduation whose
log.-log. = 0. This is seen to be 10, since log. (log. 10) = log. 1 = 0.
Hence, confining attention to the E scale, to locate the graduation 20,
we have log. (log. 20) = log. 1·301 = 0·11397, so that if the scale D is
25 cm. long, the distance between 10 and 20 on the corresponding
log.-log. scale would be 113·97 ÷ 4 = 28·49 mm. For numbers less than 10
the resulting log.-logs. will be negative, and the distances will be
spaced off from the point of origin in a negative direction—_i.e._, from
right to left. Thus, to locate the graduation 5, we have

   log. (log. 5) = log. 0·699 = ̅1·844; _i.e._, −1 + 0·844 or −0·156;

so that the graduation marked 5 would be placed 156 ÷ 4 = 39 mm. distant
from 10 in a _negative_ direction, and proceeding in a similar manner,
the scale may be extended in either direction. In the -E scale, the
notation runs in the reverse direction to that of the E scale, but in
all other respects it is precisely analogous, the distance from the
point of origin (0·1 in this case) to any graduation _x_ representing
log. [-log. _x_.]. It follows that of the similarly situated graduations
on the two scales, those on the -E scale are the _reciprocals_ of those
on the E scale. This may be readily verified by setting, say, 10 on E to
(R.H.) 1 on D, when turning to the back of the rule we find 0·1 on -E
agreeing with the index mark in the aperture at the right-hand extremity
of the rule.

In using the log.-log. scales it is important to observe (1) that the
values engraved on the scale are definite and unalterable (_e.g._, 1·2
can only be read as 1·2 and not as 120, 0·0012, etc., as with the
ordinary scales); (2) that the upper portion of each scale should be
regarded as forming a prolongation to the right of the lower portion;
and (3) that immediately above any value on the lower portion of the
scale is found the 10th power of that value on the upper portion of the
scale. Keeping these points in view, if we set 1·1 on E to 1 on D we
find over 2 on D the value of 1·1^2 = 1·21 on E. Similarly, over 3 we
find 1·1^3 = 1·331, and so on. Then, reading across the slide, we have,
over 2, the value of 1·1^{2 × 10} = 1·1^{20} = 6·73, and over 3 we have
1·1^{3 × 10} = 1·1^{30} = 17·4. Hence the rule:—_To find the value of
x^n, set x on E to 1 on D, and over n on D read x^n on E._

With the slide set as above, the 8th, 9th, etc., powers of 1·1 cannot be
read off; but it is seen that, according to (2) in the foregoing, the
missing portion of the E scale is that part of the upper scale (2 to
about 2·6) which is outside the rule to the left. Hence placing 1·1 to
10 on D, the 8th, 9th, etc., powers of 1·1 will be read off _on the
upper part_ of the E scale. In general, then,

If _x_ on the _lower_ line is set to 1 on D, then _x^n_ is read directly
on that line and _x_^{10_n_} on the upper line.

If _x_ on the _upper_ line is set to 1 on D, then _x^n_ is read directly
on that line and _x_^{_ⁿ⁄₁₀_} on the lower line.

If _x_ on the _lower_ line is set to 10 on D, then _x_^{_ⁿ⁄₁₀_} is read
directly on that line and _x^n_ on the upper line.

If _x_ on the _upper_ line is set to 10 on D, then _x_^{_ⁿ⁄₁₀_} is read
directly on that line and _x_^{_ⁿ⁄₁₀₀_} on the lower line.

These rules are conveniently exhibited in the accompanying diagram (Fig.
14). They are equally applicable to both the E and -E scales of the 10
in. rule, and include practically all the instruction required for
determining the _n_th power or the _n_th root of a number. They do not
apply directly to the 20 in. rule, however, for here the relation of the
lower and upper scales will be _x^n_ and _x_^{100_n_}.


  EX.—Find 1·167^{2·56}.

  Set 1·167 on E to 1 on D, and over 2·56 on D read 1·485 on E.


  EX.—Find 4·6^{1·61}.

  Set 4·6 on upper E scale to 1 on D, and over 1·61 on D read 11·7
  (11·67) on E.


  EX.—Find 1·4^{0·27} and 1·4^{2·7}.

  Set 1·4 on E to 10 on D, and over 2·7 on D read 1·095 = 1·4^{0·27} on
  lower E scale and 2·48 = 1·4^{2·7} on upper E scale.


[Illustration: FIG. 14.]


  EX.—Find 46^{0·0184} and 46^{0·184}.

  Set 46 on upper E scale to 10 on D, and over 1·84 on D read 1·073 on
  lower E scale and 2·022 (2·0228) on upper E scale.


  EX.—Find 0·074^{1·15}.

  Using the -E scale, set 0·074 to 1 on D, and over 1·15 on D read 0·05
  on -E.


The method of determining the root of a number will be obvious from the
preceding examples.


  EX.—Find ^{1.4}√(17) and ^{14}√(17).

  Set 17 on E to 1·4 on D, and over 1 on D read 7·56 on upper E scale
  and 1·224 on lower E scale.

  EX.—Find ^{0·031}√(0·914).

  Set 0·914 on -E to 3·1 on D, and over 10 on D read 0·055 on upper -E
  scale.


When the exponent _n_ is fractional, it is often possible to obtain the
result directly with one setting of the slide. Thus to determine
1·135^{¹⁷⁄₁₆} by the first method we find ¹⁷⁄₁₆ = 1·0625, and placing
1·135 on E to 1 on D, read 1·144 on E over 1·0625 on D. By the direct
method we place 1·135 on the E scale on 1·6 on D, and over 1·7 on D read
1·144 on E. It will be seen that since the scale D is assumed to run
from 1 to 10 we are unable to read 16 and 17 on this scale; but it is
obvious that the _ratios_ (1·7)/(1·6) and (17)/(16) are identical, and
it is with the ratio only that we are, in effect, concerned.

Since an expression of the form _x_^{-_n_} = (1)/(_x^n_) or
((1)/(_x_))^{_n_}, the required value may be obtained by first
determining the reciprocal of _x_ and proceeding as before. By using
both the direct and reciprocal log.-log. scales (E and -E) in
conjunction however, the required value can be read directly from the
rule, and the preliminary calculation entirely avoided. In the Davis
form of rule, the result can be read on the -E scale, used in
conjunction with the D scale of the rule, _x_ on E being set to the
index mark in the aperture in the back of the rule.


  EX.—Find the value of 1·195^{−1·65}.

  Set 1·195 on E to the index in the left aperture in the back of the
  rule, and over 1·65 on D read 0·745 on the -E scale.


It may be noted in passing that the log.-log. scale affords a simple
means for determining the logarithm or anti-logarithm of a number to any
base. For this purpose it is necessary to set the base of the given
system on E to 1 on D, when _under_ any number on E will be found its
logarithm on D. Thus, for common logs., we set the base 10 on E to 1 on
D, and under 100 we find 2, the required log. Similarly we read log. 20
= 1·301; log. 55 = 1·74; log. 550 = 2·74, etc. Reading reversely, over
1·38 on D we find its antilog. 24 on E; also antilog. 1·58 = 38;
antilog. 1·19 = 15·5, etc.

For logs. of numbers under 10 we set the base 10 to 10 on D; hence the
readings on D will be read as one-tenth their apparent value. Thus log.
3 = 0·477; log. 5·25 = 0·72; antilog. 0·415 = 2·6; antilog. 0·525 =
3.·35, etc.

The logs. of the numbers on the lower half of the E scale will also be
found on the D scale; but a consideration of Fig. 14 will show that this
will be read as _one-tenth_ its face value if the base is set to 1 on D,
and as _one-hundredth_ if the base is set to 10.

For natural, hyperbolic, or Napierian logarithms, the base is 2·718. A
special line marked ε or _e_ serves to locate the exact position of this
value on the E scale, and placing this to 1 on D we read log._{_e_} 4·35
= 1·47; log._{_e_} 7·4 = 2·0; antilog._{_e_} × 2·89 = 18, etc. The other
parts of the scale are read as already described for common logs.
Calculations involving powers of _e_ are frequently met with, and these
are facilitated by using the special graduation line referred to, as
will be readily understood.

If it is required to determine the power or root of a number which does
not appear on either of the log.-log. scales, we may break up the number
into factors. Usually it is convenient to make one of the factors a
power of 10.


  EX.—3950^{1·97} = 3·95^{1·97} × 10^{3 × 1·97} = 3·95^{1·97} ×
  10^{5·91}.

  Then 3·95^{1·97} = 15, and 10^{5·91} (or antilog.) 5·91 = 812,000.
  Hence, 15 × 812,000 = 12,180,000 is the result sought.


Numbers which are to be found in the higher part of the log.-log. scale
may often be factorised in this way, and greater accuracy obtained than
by direct reading.

The form of log.-log. rule which has been mainly dealt with in the
foregoing gives a scale of comparatively long range, and the only
objection to the arrangement adopted is the use of a separate slide.

_The Jackson-Davis Double Slide Rule._—In this instrument a pair of
aluminium clips enable the log.-log. slide to be temporarily attached to
the lower edge of the ordinary rule, and used, by means of a special
cursor, in conjunction with the C scale of the ordinary slide. In this
way both the log.-log. and ordinary scales are available without the
trouble of replacing one slide by the other. Since the scale of
exponents is now on the slide, the value of _x^n_ will be obtained by
setting 1 on C to _x_ on E and reading the result on E under _n_ on C.

By using a pair of log.-log. slides, one in the rule and one clamped to
the edge by the clips, we have an arrangement which is very useful in
deducing empirical formulæ of the type _y_ = _x^n_.

_The Yokota Slide Rule._—In this instrument the log.-log. scales are
placed on the face of the rule, each set comprising three lines. These,
for numbers greater than 1, are found above the A scale while the three
reciprocal log.-log. lines are below the D scale. Both sets are used in
conjunction with the C scale on the slide. Other features of this rule
are:—The ordinary scales are 10 in. long instead of 25 cm. as hitherto
usual; hence the logarithms of numbers can be read on the ordinary scale
of inches on the edge of the rule. There is a scale of cubes in the
centre of the slide and on the back of the slide there is a scale of
secants in addition to the sine and tangent scales.

[Illustration: FIG. 15.]

_The Faber Log.-log. Rule._—In this instrument shown in Fig. 15, the two
log.-log. scales are placed on the face of the rule. One section,
extending from 1·1 to 2·9, is placed above the A scale, and the other
section, extending from 2·9 to 100,000, is placed below the D scale.
These scales are used in conjunction with the C scale of the slide in
the manner previously described. The width of the rule is increased
slightly, but the arrangement is more convenient than that formerly
employed, wherein the log.-log. scales were placed on the bevelled edge
of the rule and read by a tongue projecting from the cursor.

[Illustration: FIG. 16.]

Another novel feature of this rule is the provision of two special
scales at the bottom of the groove, to which a bevelled metal index or
marker on the left end of the slide can be set. The upper of these
scales is for determining the efficiency of dynamos and electric motors;
the lower for determining the loss of potential in an electric circuit.

_The Perry Log.-log. Rule._—In this rule, introduced by Messrs. A. G.
Thornton, Limited, Manchester, the log.-log. scales are arranged as in
Fig. 16, the E scale, running from 1·1 to 10,000, being placed above the
A scale of the rule, and the -E or E^{−1} scale running from 0·93 to
0·0001, below the D scale of the rule. These scales are read in
conjunction with the B scales on the slide by the aid of the cursor.

The following tabular statement embodies all the instructions required
for using this form of log.-log. slide rule:—

                       When _x_ is greater than 1.

 _x^n_        Set 1 on B to _x_ on E; over _n_ on B read _x^n_ on E
 _x_^{-_n_}   Set 1 on B to _x_ on E; under _n_ on B read _x_^{-_n_} on
                E^{−1}
 _x_^{_ⁱ⁄ₙ_}  Set _n_ on B to _x_ on E; over 1 on B read _x_^{_ⁱ⁄ₙ_} on
                E
 _x_^{_⁻ⁱ⁄ₙ_} Set _n_ on B to _x_ on E; under 1 on B read _x_^{_⁻ⁱ⁄ₙ_}
                on E^{−1}

                        When _x_ is less than 1.

 _x^n_        Set 1 on B to _x_ on E^{−1}; under _n_ on B read _x^n_ on
                E^{−1}
 _x_^{-_n_}   Set 1 on B to _x_ on E^{−1}; over _n_ on B read _x_^{-_n_}
                on E
 _x_^{_ⁱ⁄ₙ_}  Set _n_ on B to _x_ on E^{−1}; under 1 on B read
                _x_^{_ⁱ⁄ₙ_} on E^{−1}
 _x_^{_⁻ⁱ⁄ₙ_} Set _n_ on B to _x_ on E^{−1}; over 1 on B read
                _x_^{_⁻ⁱ⁄ₙ_} on E

If 10 on B is used in place of 1 on B, read _x_^{_ⁿ⁄₁₀_} in place of
_x^n_ on E, and _x_^{-_ⁿ⁄₁₀_} in place of _x_^{-_n_} on E^{−1}. If 100
on B is used, these readings are to be taken as _x_^{_ⁿ⁄₁₀₀_} and
_x_^{-_ⁿ⁄₁₀₀_} respectively.

In rules with no -E scale the value of _x_^{-_n_} is obtained by the
usual rules for reciprocals. We may either determine _x^n_ and find its
reciprocal or, first find the reciprocal of _x_ and raise it to the
_n_th power. The first method should be followed when the number _x_ is
found on the E scale.


  EX.—3·45^{−1·82} = 0·105.

  Set 1 on C to 3·45 on E, and under 1·82 on C read 9·51 on C. Then set
  1 on B to 9·5 on A, and under index of A read 0·105 on B.


When _x_ is less than 1 the second method is more suitable.


  EX.—0·23^{−1·77} = ((1)/(0·23))^{1·77} = 4·35^{1·77} = 13·5

  Set 1 on B to 0·23 on A, and under index of A read (1)/(0·23) = 4·35
  on B.

  Set 1 on C to 4·35 on E, and under 1·77 on C read 13·5 on E.


As with the Davis rule, the exponent scale C will be read as ⅒th its
face value if its R.H. index (10) is used in place of 1.


                     SPECIAL TYPES OF SLIDE RULES.

In addition, to the new forms of log.-log. slide rules previously
described, several other arrangements have been recently introduced,
notably a series by Mr. A. Nestler, of Lahr (London: A. Fastlinger, Snow
Hill). These comprise the “Rietz,” the “Precision,” the “Universal,” and
the “Fix” slide rules.

THE RIETZ RULE.—In this rule the usual scales A, B, C, and D, are
provided, while at the upper edge is a scale, which, being three times
the range of the D scale, enables cubes and cube roots to be directly
evaluated and also _n_^{³⁄₂} and _n_^⅔.

A scale at the lower edge of the rule gives the mantissa of the
logarithms of the numbers on D.

THE PRECISION SLIDE RULE.—In this rule the scales are so arranged that
the accuracy of a 20 in. rule is obtainable in a length of 10 in. This
is effected by dividing a 20 in. (50 cm.) scale length into two parts
and placing these on the working edges of the rule and slide. On the
upper and lower margins of the face of the rule are the two parts of
what corresponds to the A scale in the ordinary rule; while in the
centre of the slide is the scale of logarithms which, used in
conjunction with the 50 cm. scales on the slide, is virtually twice the
length of that ordinarily obtainable in a 10 in. rule. The same remark
applies to the trigonometrical scales on the under face of the slide.
Both the sine and tangent scales are in two adjacent lengths, while on
the edge of the stock of the rule, below the cursor groove, is a scale
of sines of small angles from 1° 49′ to 5° 44′. This is referred to the
50 cm. scales by an index projection on the cursor.

If C and C′ are the two parts of the scale on the slide and D and D′ the
corresponding scales on the rule, it is clear that in multiplying two
factors 1 on C can only be set directly to the upper scale D; while 10
on C′ can only be set directly to the lower scale D′. Hence if the first
factor is greater than about 3·2, the cursor must be used to bring 1 on
C to the first factor on D′. Similarly, in division, numerators and
denominators which occur on C and D′ or on C′ and D cannot be placed in
direct coincidence but must be set by the aid of the cursor.

Any uncertainty in reading the result can be avoided by observing the
following rule: _If in setting the index_ (1 _or_ 10) _in
multiplication, or in setting the numerator to the denominator in
division, it is necessary to cross the slide, then it will also be
necessary to cross the slide to read the product or quotient._

THE UNIVERSAL SLIDE RULE.—In this instrument the stock carries two
similar scales running from 1 to 10, to which the slide can be set.
Above the upper one is the logarithm scale and under the lower one the
scale of squares 1 to 100. On the edge of the stock of the rule, under
the cursor groove, is a scale running from 1 to 1000. An index
projecting from the cursor enables this scale to be used with the scales
on the face of the rule, giving cubes, cube roots, etc.

On the slide, the lower scale is an ordinary scale, 1 to 10. The centre
scale is the first part of a scale giving the values of sin _n_ cos _n_,
this scale being continued along the upper edge of the slide (marked
“sin-cos”) up to the graduation 50. On the remainder of this line is a
scale running from right to left (0 to 50) and giving the value of
cos^2_n_. In surveying, these scales greatly facilitate the calculations
for the horizontal distance between the observer’s station and any
point, and the difference in height of these two points.

On the back of the slide are scales for the sines and tangents of
angles. The values of the sines and tangents of angles from 34′ to 5°
44′ differ little from one another, and the one centre scale suffices
for both functions of these small angles.

THE FIX SLIDE RULE.—This is a standard rule in all respects, except that
the A scale is displaced by a distance (π)/(4) so that over 1 on D is
found 0·7854 on A. This enables calculations relating to the area and
cubic contents of cylinders to be determined very readily.

THE BEGHIN SLIDE RULE.—We have seen that a disadvantage attending the
use of the ordinary C and D scales, is that it is occasionally necessary
to traverse the slide through its own length in order to change the
indices or to bring other parts of the slide into a readable position
with regard to the stock. To obviate this disadvantage, Tserepachinsky
devised an ingenious arrangement which has since been used in various
rules, notably in the Beghin slide rule made by Messrs. Tavernier-Gravêt
of Paris. In this rule the C and D scales are used as in the standard
rule, but in place of the A and B scales, we have another pair of C and
D scales, displaced by one-half the length of the rule. The lower pair
of scales may therefore be regarded as running from 10^{_n_} to 10^{_n_
+ 1}, and the upper pair as running from √(10) × 10^{_n_} to √(10) ×
10^{_n_ + 1}. With this arrangement, _without moving the slide more than
half its length_, to the left or right, it is always possible to compare
_all values between_ 1 _and_ 10 _on the two scales_. This is a great
advantage especially in continuous working.

Another commendable feature of the Beghin rule is the presence of a
reversed C scale in the centre of the slide, thus enabling such
calculations as _a_ × _b_ × _c_ to be made with one setting of the
slide. On the back of the slide are three scales, the lowest of which,
used with the D scale, is a scale of squares (corresponding to the
ordinary B scale), while on the upper edge is a scale of sines from 5°
44′ to 90°, and in the centre, a scale of tangents from 5° 43′ to 45°.
On the square edge of the stock, under the cursor groove, is the
logarithm scale, while on the same edge, above the cursor groove, are a
series of gauge points. All these values are referred to the face scales
by index marks on the cursor.

THE ANDERSON SLIDE RULE.—The principle of dividing a long scale into
sections as in the Precision rule, has been extended in the Anderson
slide rule made by Messrs. Casella & Co., London, and shown in Fig. 17.
In this the slide carries a scale in four sections, used in conjunction
with an exactly similar set of scale-lines in the upper part of the
stock. On the lower part of the stock is a scale in eight sections
giving the square roots of the upper values. In order to set the index
of the slide to values in the stock, two indices of transparent
celluloid are fixed to the slide extending over the face of the rule as
shown in the illustration. As each scale section is 30 cm. in length,
the upper lines correspond to a single scale of nearly 4 ft., and the
lower set to one of nearly 8 ft. in length, giving a correspondingly
large increase in the number of subdivisions of these scales, and
consequently much greater accuracy.

In order to decide upon which line a result is to be found, sets of
“line numbers” are marked at each end of the rule and slide and also on
the metal frame of the cursor. In multiplication, the line number of the
product is the sum of the line numbers of the factors if the left index
is used, or 1 more than this sum if the right index is used. The
illustration shows the multiplication of 2 by 4. The left index is set
to 2 (line number, 1), and the cursor set to 4 on the slide (line
number, 2); hence, as the left index is used, the result is found on
line No. 3. Similar rules are readily established for division. The
column of line numbers headed 0 is used for units, that headed 4 for
tens, and so on; one column is given for tenths, headed −4. The square
root scale bears similar line numbers, so that the square root of any
value on the upper scales is found on the correspondingly figured line
below.

[Illustration: FIG. 17.]

THE MULTIPLEX SLIDE RULE differs from the ordinary form of rule in the
arrangement of the B scale. The right-hand section of this scale runs
from left to right as ordinarily arranged, but the left-hand section
runs in the reverse direction, and so furnishes a reciprocal scale. At
the bottom of the groove, under the slide, there is a scale running from
1 to 1000, which is used in conjunction with the D scale, readings being
referred thereto by a metal index on the end of the slide. By this means
cubes, cube roots, etc., can be read off directly. Messrs. Eugene
Dietzgen & Co., New York, are the makers.

THE “LONG” SLIDE RULE has one scale in two sections along the upper and
lower parts of the stock, as in the “Precision” rule. The scale on the
slide is similarly divided, but the graduations run in the reverse
direction, corresponding to an inverted slide. Hence the rules for
multiplication and division are the reverse of those usually followed
(page 30). On the back of the slide is a single scale 1–10, and a scale
1–1000, giving cubes of this single scale. By using the first in
conjunction with the scales on the stock, squares may be read, while in
conjunction with the cube scale, various expressions involving squares,
cubes and their roots may be evaluated.

HALL’S NAUTICAL SLIDE RULE consists of two slides fitting in grooves in
the stock, and provided with eight scales, two on each slide, and one on
each edge of each groove. While fulfilling the purposes of an ordinary
slide rule, it is of especial service to the practical navigator in
connection with such problems as the “reduction of an ex-meridian sight”
and the “correction of chronometer sights for error in latitude.” The
rule, which has many other applications of a similar character, is made
by Mr. J. H. Steward, Strand, London.


                         LONG-SCALE SLIDE RULES

It has been shown that the degree of accuracy attainable in slide-rule
calculations depends upon the length of scale employed. Considerations
of general convenience, however, render simple straight-scale rules of
more than 20 in. in length inadmissible, so that inventors of long-scale
slide rules, in order to obtain a high degree of precision, combined
with convenience in operation, have been compelled to modify the
arrangement of scales usually employed. The principal methods adopted
may be classed under three varieties: (1) The use of a long scale in
sectional lengths, as in Hannyngton’s Extended Slide Rule and Thacher’s
Calculating Instrument; (2) the employment of a long scale laid in
spiral form upon a disc, as in Fearnley’s Universal Calculator and
Schuerman’s Calculating Instrument; and (3) the adoption of a long scale
wound helically upon a cylinder, of which Fuller’s and the “R.H.S.”
Calculating Rules are examples.

FULLER’S CALCULATING RULE.—This instrument, which is shown in Fig. 18,
consists of a cylinder _d_ capable of being moved up and down and around
the cylindrical stock _f_, which is held by the handle. The logarithmic
scale-line is arranged in the form of a helix upon the surface of the
cylinder _d_, and as it is equivalent to a straight scale of 500 inches,
or 41 ft. 8 in., it is possible to obtain four, and frequently five,
figures in a result.

Upon reference to the figure it will be seen that three indices are
employed. Of these, that lettered _b_ is fixed to the handle; while two
others, _c_ and _a_ (whose distance apart is equal to the axial length
of the complete helix), are fixed to the innermost cylinder _g_. This
latter cylinder slides telescopically in the stock _f_, enabling the
indices to be placed in any required position relatively to _d_. Two
other scales are provided, one (_m_) at the upper end of the cylinder
_d_, and the other (_n_) on the movable index.

[Illustration: FIG. 18.]

In using the instrument a given number on _d_ is set to the fixed index
_b_, and either _a_ or _c_ is brought to another number on the scale.
This establishes a ratio, and if the cylinder is now moved so as to
bring any number to _b_, the fourth term of the proportion will be found
under _a_ or _c_. Of course, in multiplication, one factor is brought to
_b_, and _a_ or _c_ brought to 100. The other factor is then brought to
_a_ or _c_, and the result read off under _b_. Problems involving
continuous multiplication, or combined multiplication and division, are
very readily dealt with. Thus, calling the fixed index F, the upper
movable index A, and the lower movable index B, we have for _a_ × _b_ ×
_c_:—Bring _a_ to F; A to 100; _b_ to A or B; A to 100; _c_ to A or B
and read the product at F.

The maximum number of figures in a product is the sum of the number of
figures in the factors and this results when all the factors except the
first have to be brought to B. Each time a factor is brought to A, 1 is
to be deducted from that sum.

For division, as _a_/(_m_ × _n_), bring _a_ to F; A or B to _m_; 100 to
A; A or B to _a_; 100 to A and read the quotient at F.

[Illustration: FIG. 19.]

The maximum number of figures in the quotient is the difference between
the sum of the number of figures in the numerator factors and those of
the denominator factors, _plus_ 1 for each factor of the denominator and
this results when A has to be set to all the factors of the denominator
and all the factors of the numerator except the first brought to B. Each
time B is set to a denominator factor or a numerator factor is brought
to A, 1 is to be deducted.

Logarithms of numbers are obtained by using the scales _m_ and _n_ and
hence powers and roots of any magnitude may be obtained by the procedure
already fully explained. The instrument illustrated is made by Messrs.
W. F. Stanley & Co., Limited, London.

THE “R.H.S.” CALCULATOR.—In this calculator, designed by Prof. R. H.
Smith, the scale-line, which is 50 in. long, is also arranged in a
spiral form (Fig. 19), but in this case it is wrapped around the central
portion of a tube which is about ¾in. in diameter and 9½in. long. A
slotted holder, capable of sliding upon the plain portions of this tube,
is provided with four horns, these being formed at the ends of the two
wide openings through which the scale is read. An outer ring carrying
two horns completes the arrangement.

One of the horns of the holder being placed in agreement with the first
factor, and one of the horns of the ring with the second factor, the
holder is moved until the third factor falls under the same horn of the
ring, when the resulting fourth term will be found under the same (right
or left) horn of the holder, at either end of the slot. In
multiplication, 100 or 1000 is taken for the second factor in the above
proportion, as already explained in connection with Fuller’s rule;
indeed, generally, the mode of operation is essentially similar to that
followed with the former instrument.

The scale shown on one edge of the opening in the holder, together with
the circular scale at the top of the spiral, enables the mantissæ of
logarithms of numbers to be obtained, and thus problems involving powers
and roots may be dealt with quite readily. This instrument is supplied
by Mr. J. H. Steward, London.

THACHER’S CALCULATING INSTRUMENT, shown in Fig. 20, consists of a
cylinder 4 in. in diameter and 18 in. long, which can be given both a
rotary and a longitudinal movement within an open framework composed of
twenty triangular bars. These bars are connected to rings at their ends,
which can be rotated in standards fixed to the baseboard. The scale on
the cylinder consists of forty sectional lengths, but of each scale-line
that part which appears on the right-hand half of the cylinder is
repeated on the left-hand half, one line in advance. Hence each half of
the cylinder virtually contains two complete scales following round in
regular order. On the lower lines of the triangular bars are scales
exactly corresponding to those on the cylinder, while upon the upper
lines of the bars and not in contact with the slide is a scale of square
roots.

[Illustration: FIG. 20.]

By rotating the slide any line on it may be brought opposite any line in
frame and by a longitudinal movement any graduation on these lines may
be brought into agreement. The whole can be rotated in the supporting
standards in order to bring any reading into view. As shown in the
illustration, a magnifier is provided, this being conveniently mounted
on a bar, along which it can be moved as required.

SECTIONAL LENGTH OR GRIDIRON SLIDE RULES.—The idea of breaking up a long
scale into sectional lengths is due to Dr. J. D. Everett, who described
such a gridiron type of slide rule in 1866. Hannyngton’s Extended Slide
Rule is on the same principle. Both instruments have the lower scale
repeated. H. Cherry (1880) appears to have been the first to show that
such duplication could be avoided by providing two fixed index points in
addition to the natural indices of the scale. These additional indices
are shown at 10′ and 100′ in Fig. 21, which represents the lower sheet
of Cherry’s Calculator on a reduced scale. The upper member of the
calculator consists of a transparent sheet ruled with parallel lines,
which coincide with the lines of the lower scale when the indices of
both are placed in agreement. To multiply one number by another, one of
the indices on the upper sheet is placed to one of the factors, and the
position of whichever index falls under the transparent sheet is noted
on the latter. Bringing the latter point to the other factor, the result
is found under whichever index lies on the card. In other arrangements
the inventor used transparent scales, the graduations running in a
reverse direction to those of the lower scale. In this case, a factor on
the upper scale is set to the other factor on the lower, and the result
read at the available index.

[Illustration: FIG. 21.]

PROELL’S POCKET CALCULATOR is an application of the last-named
principle. It comprises a lower card arranged as Fig. 21, with an upper
sheet of transparent celluloid on which is a similar scale running in
the reverse direction. For continued multiplication and division, a
needle (supplied with the instrument) is used as a substitute for a
cursor, to fix the position of the intermediate results. A series of
index points on the lower card enable square and cube roots to be
extracted very readily. This calculator is supplied by Messrs. John J.
Griffin & Sons, Ltd., London.




                         CIRCULAR CALCULATORS.


Although the 10 in. slide rule is probably the most serviceable form of
calculating instrument for general purposes, many prefer the more
portable circular calculator, of which many varieties have been
introduced during recent years. The advantages of this type are: It is
more compact and conveniently carried in the waistcoat pocket. The
scales are continuous, so that no traversing of the slide from 1 to 10
is required. The dial can be set quickly to any value; there is no
trouble with tight or ill-fitting slides. The disadvantages of most
forms are: Many problems involve more operations than a straight rule.
The results being read under fingers or pointers, an error due to
parallax is introduced, so that the results generally are not so
accurate as with a straight rule. The inner scales are short, and
therefore are read with less accuracy. Special scale circles are needed
for cubes and cube roots. The slide cannot be reversed or inverted.

[Illustration: FIG. 22.]

[Illustration: FIG. 23.]

THE BOUCHER CALCULATOR.—This circular calculator resembles a
stem-winding watch, being about 2 in. in diameter and ⁹⁄₁₆in. in
thickness. The instrument has two dials, the back one being fixed, while
the front one, Fig. 22 (showing the form made by Messrs. W. F. Stanley,
London), turns upon the large centre arbor shown. This movement is
effected by turning the milled head of the stem-winder. The small centre
axis, which is turned by rotating the milled head at the side of the
case, carries two fine needle pointers, one moving over each dial, and
so fixed on the axis that one pointer always lies evenly over the other.
A fine index or pointer fixed to the case in line with the axis of the
winding stem, extends over the four scales of the movable dial as shown.
Of these scales, the second from the outer is the ordinary logarithmic
scale, which in this instrument corresponds to a straight scale of about
4¾in. in length. The two inner circles give the square roots of the
numbers on the primary logarithmic scale, the smaller circle containing
the square roots of values between 1 and 3·162 (= √(10)), while the
other section corresponds to values between 3·162 and 10. The outer
circle is a scale of logarithms of sines of angles, the corresponding
sines of which can be read off on the ordinary scale.

On the fixed or back dial there are also four scales, these being
arranged as in Fig. 23. The outer of these is a scale of equal parts,
while the three inner scales are separate sections of a scale giving the
cube roots of the numbers taken on the ordinary logarithmic scale and
referred thereto by means of the pointers. In dividing this cube-root
scale into sections, the same method is adopted as in the case of the
square-root scale. Thus, the smallest circle contains the cube roots of
numbers between 1 and 10, and is therefore graduated from 1 to 2·154;
the second circle contains the cube roots of numbers between 10 and 100,
being graduated from 2·154 to 4·657; while the third section, in which
are found the cube roots of numbers between 100 and 1000, carries the
graduations from 4·657 to 10.

What has been said in an earlier section regarding the notation of the
slide rule may in general be taken to apply to the scales of the Boucher
calculator. The manner of using the instrument is, however, not quite so
evident, although from what follows it will be seen that the operative
principle—that of variously combining lengths of a logarithmic scale—is
essentially similar. In this case, however, it is seen that in place of
the straight scale-lengths shown in Fig. 4, we require to add or
subtract arc-lengths of the circular scales, while, further, it is
evident that in the absence of a fixed scale (corresponding to the stock
of the slide rule) these operations cannot be directly performed as in
the ordinary form of instrument. However, by the aid of the fixed index
and the movable pointer, we can effect the desired combination of the
scale-lengths in the following manner. Assuming it is desired to
multiply 2 by 3, the dial is turned in a backward direction until 2 on
the ordinary scale lies under the fixed index, after which the movable
pointer is set to 1 on the scale. As now set, it is clear that the
arc-length 1–2 is spaced off between the fixed index and the movable
pointer, and it now only remains to add to this definite arc-length a
further length of 1–3. To do this we turn the dial still further
backward until the arc 1–3 has passed under the movable pointer, when
the result, 6, is read under the fixed index. A little consideration
will show that any other scale length may be added to that included
between the fixed and movable pointers, or, in other words, any number
on the scale may be multiplied by 2 by bringing the number to the
movable pointer and reading the result under the fixed index. The rule
for multiplication is now evident.

_Rule for Multiplication._—_Set one factor to the fixed index and bring
the pointer to 1 on the scale; set the other factor to the pointer and
read the result under the fixed index._

With the explanation just given, the process of division needs little
explanation. It is clear that to divide 6 by 3, an arc-length 1–3 is to
be taken from a length 1–6. To this end we set 6 to the index
(corresponding in effect to passing a length 1–6 to the left of that
reference point) and set the pointer to the divisor 3. As now set, the
arc 1–6 is included between 1 on the scale and the index, while the arc
1–3 is included between 1 on the scale and the pointer. Obviously if the
dial is now turned forward until 1 on the scale agrees with the pointer,
an arc 1–3 will have been deducted from the larger arc 1–6, and the
remainder, representing the result of this operation, will be read under
the index as 2.

_Rule for Division._—_Set the dividend to the fixed index, and the
pointer to the divisor; turn the dial until 1 on the scale agrees with
the pointer, and read the result under the fixed index._

The foregoing method being an inversion of the rule for multiplication,
is easily remembered and is generally advised. Another plan is, however,
preferable when a series of divisions are to be effected with a constant
divisor—_i.e._, when _b_ in (_a_)/(_b_) = _x_ is constant. In this case
1 on the scale is set to the index and the pointer set to _b_; then if
any value of a is brought to the pointer, the quotient _x_ will be found
under the index.

_Combined Multiplication and Division_, as (_a_ × _b_ × _c_)/(_m_ × _n_)
= _x_, can be readily performed, while cases of continued multiplication
evidently come under the same category, since _a_ × _b_ × _c_ = (_a_ ×
_b_ × _c_)/(1 × 1) = _x_. Such cases as _a_/(_m_ × _n_ × _r_) = _x_ are
regarded as (_a_ × 1 × 1 × 1)/(_m_ × _n_ × _r_) = _x_; while (_a_ × _b_
× _c_)/(_m_) = _x_ is similarly modified, taking the form (_a_ × _b_ ×
_c_)/(_m_ × 1) = _x_. In all cases the expression must be arranged so
that there is _one more factor in the numerator_ than _in the
denominator_, _1’s being introduced as often as required_. The simple
operations of multiplication and division involve a similar disposition
of factors, since from the rules given it is evident that _m_ × _n_ is
actually regarded as (_m_ × _n_)/(1), while (_m_)/(_n_) becomes in
effect (_m_ × 1)/(_n_). It is important to note the general
applicability of this arrangement-rule, as it will be found of great
assistance in solving more complicated expressions.

As with the ordinary form of slide rule, the factors in such an
expression as (_a_ × _b_ × _c_)/(_m_ × _n_) = _x_ are taken in the
order:—1st factor of numerator; 1st factor of denominator; 2nd factor of
numerator; 2nd factor of denominator, and so on; the 1st factor as _a_
being set to the index, and the result _x_ being finally read at the
same point of reference.


  EX.—(39 × 14·2 × 6·3)/(1·37 × 19) = 134.

  Commence by setting 39 to the index, and the pointer to 1·37; bring
  14·2 to the pointer; pointer to 19; 6·3 to the pointer, and read the
  result 134 at the index.


It should be noted that after the first factor is set to the fixed
index, the _pointer_ is set to each of the _dividing_ factors as they
enter into the calculation, while the _dial_ is moved for each of the
_multiplying_ factors. Thus the dial is first moved (setting the first
factor to the index), then the pointer, then the dial, and so on.

_Number of Digits in the Result._—If rules are preferred to the plan of
roughly estimating the result, the general rules given on pages 21 and
25 should be employed for simple cases of multiplication and division.
For combined multiplication and division, modify the expression, if
necessary, by introducing 1’s, as already explained, and subtract the
sum of the denominator digits from the sum of numerator digits. Then
proceed by the author’s rule, as follows:—

_Always turn dial to the_ LEFT; _i.e._, _against the hands of a watch_.

_Note dial movements only; ignore those of the pointer._

_Each time 1 on dial agrees with or passes fixed index_, ADD _1 to the
above difference of digits_.

_Each time 1 on dial agrees with or passes pointer_, DEDUCT _1 from the
above difference of digits_.

Treat continued multiplication in the same way, counting the 1’s used as
denominator digits as one less than the number of multiplied factors.


  EX.—(8·6 × 0·73 × 1·02)/(3·5 × 0·23) = 7·95 [7·95473+].

  Set 8·6 to index and pointer to 3·5. Bring 0·73 to pointer (noting
  that 1 on the scale passes the index) and set pointer to 0·23. Set
  1·02 to pointer (noting that 1 on the scale passes the pointer) and
  read under index 7·95. There are 1 + 0 + 1 = 2 numerator digits and 1
  + 0 = 1 denominator digit; while 1 is to be added and 1 deducted as
  per rule. But as the latter cancel, the digits in the result will be 2
  − 1 = 1.


When moving the dial to the left will cause 1 on the dial to pass _both_
index and pointer (thus cancelling), the dial may be turned back to make
the setting.

It will be understood that when 1 is the _first_ numerator, and 1 on the
dial is therefore set to the index, no digit addition will be made for
this, as the actual operation of calculating has not been commenced.

In the Stanley-Boucher calculator (Fig. 23) a small centre scale is
added, on which a finger indicates automatically the number of digits to
be added or deducted; the method of calculating, however, differs from
the foregoing. To avoid turning back to 0 at the commencement of each
calculation, a circle is ground on the glass face, so that a pencil mark
can be made thereon to show the position of the finger when commencing a
calculation.

_To Find the Square of a Number._— Set the number, on one or other of
the square root scales, to the index, and read the required square on
the ordinary scale.

_To Find the Square Root of a Number._—Set the number to the index, and
if there is an _odd_ number of digits in the number, read the root on
the inner circle; if an even number, on the second circle.

_To Find the Cube of a Number._—Set 1 on the ordinary scale to the
index, and the pointer (on the back dial) to the number on one of the
three cube-root scales. Then under the pointer read the cube on the
ordinary scale.

_To Find the Cube Root of a Number._—Set 1 to index, and pointer to
number. Then read the cube root under the pointer on one of the three
inner circles on the back dial. If the number has

      1, 4, 7, 10 or −2, −5, etc., digits, use the inner circle.
      2, 5, 8, 11 or −1, −4, etc.,    „      „     second circle.
      3, 6, 9, 12 or −0, −3, etc.,    „      „     third circle.

_For Powers or Roots of Higher Denomination._—Set 1 to index, the
pointer to the number on the ordinary scale, and read on the outer
circle on the back dial the mantissa of the logarithm. Add the
characteristic (see p. 46), multiply by the power or divide by the root,
and set the pointer to the mantissa of the result on this outer circle.
Under the pointer on the ordinary scale read the number, obtaining the
number of figures from the characteristic.

_To Find the Sines of Angles._—Set 1 to index, pointer to the angle on
the outer circle, and read under the pointer the _natural sine_ on the
ordinary scale; also under the pointer on the outer circle of the back
dial read the _logarithmic sine_.

THE HALDEN CALCULEX.—After the introduction of the Boucher calculator in
1876, circular instruments, such as the Charpentier calculator, were
introduced, in which a disc turned within a fixed ring, so that scales
on the faces of both could be set together and ratios established as on
the slide rule. Cultriss’s Calculating Disc is another instrument on the
same principle. The Halden Calculex, of which half-size illustrations
are given in Figs. 24 and 25, represents a considerable improvement upon
these early instruments. It consists of an outer metal ring carrying a
fixed-scale ring, within which is a dial. On each side of this dial are
flat milled heads, so that by holding these between the thumb and
forefinger the dial can be set quickly and conveniently. The protecting
glass discs, which are not fixed in the metal ring but are arranged to
turn therein, carry fine cursor lines, and as these are on the side next
to the scales a very close setting can be made quite free from the
effects of parallax. This construction not only avoids the use of
mechanism, with its risk of derangement, but reduces the bulk of the
instrument very considerably, the thickness being about ¼in.

On the front face, Fig. 24, the fixed ring carries an outer
evenly-divided scale, giving logarithms, and an ordinary scale, 1–10,
which works in conjunction with a similar scale on the edge of the dial.
The two inner circles give the square roots of values on the main scales
as in the Boucher calculator. On the back face, Fig. 25, the ring bears
an outer scale, giving sines of angles from 6° to 90° and an ordinary
scale, 1–10, as on the front face. The scales on the dial are all
reversed in direction (running from right to left), the outer one
consisting of an ordinary (but inverse) scale, 1–10, while the three
inner circles give the cube roots of values on this inverse scale. As
the fine cursor lines extend over all the scales, a variety of
calculations can be effected very readily and accurately.

[Illustration: FIG. 24.]

[Illustration: FIG. 25.]

SPERRY’S POCKET CALCULATOR, made by the Keuffel and Esser Company, New
York (Fig. 26), has two rotating dials, each with its own pointer and
fixed index. The S dial has an outer scale of equal parts, an ordinary
logarithmic scale, and a square-root scale. The L dial has a single
logarithmic scale arranged spirally, in three sections, giving a scale
length of 12½in. The pointers are turned by the small milled head, which
is concentric with the milled thumb-nut by which the two dials are
rotated. The gearing is such that both the L dial and its pointer rotate
three times as fast as the S dial and pointer. All the usual
calculations can be made with the spiral scale, as with the Boucher
calculator, and the result read off on one or other of the three
scale-sections. Frequently the point at which to read the result is
obvious, but otherwise a reference to the single scale on the S dial
will show on which of the three spirals the result is to be found.

[Illustration: FIG. 26.]

_The K and E Calculator_, also made by the Keuffel and Esser Company, is
shown in Figs. 27 and 28. It has two dials, of which only one revolves.
This, as shown in Fig. 27, has an ordinary logarithmic scale and a scale
of squares. There is an index line engraved on the glass of the
instrument. The fixed dial has a scale of tangents, a scale of equal
parts and a scale of sines, the latter being on a two-turn spiral. The
pointers, which move together, are turned by a milled nut and the
movable dial by a thumb-nut, as in Sperry’s Calculator, Fig. 26.

[Illustration: FIG. 27.]

[Illustration: FIG. 28.]


                 SLIDE RULES FOR SPECIAL CALCULATIONS.

ENGINE POWER COMPUTER.—A typical example of special slide rules is shown
in Fig. 29, which represents, on a scale of about half full size, the
author’s Power Computer for Steam, Gas, and Oil Engines. This, as will
be seen, consists of a stock, on the lower portion of which is a scale
of cylinder diameters, while the upper portion carries a scale of
horse-powers. In the groove between these scales are two slides, also
carrying scales, and capable of sliding in edge contact with the stock
and with each other.

This instrument gives directly the brake horse-power of any steam, gas,
or oil engine; the indicated horse-power, the dimensions of an engine to
develop a given power, and the mechanical efficiency of an engine. The
calculation of piston speed, velocity ratios of pulleys and gear wheels,
the circumferential speed of pulleys, and the velocity of belts and
ropes driven thereby, are among the other principal purposes for which
the computer may be employed.

[Illustration: FIG. 29.]

THE SMITH-DAVIS PIECEWORK BALANCE CALCULATOR has two scales, 11 feet
long, having a range from 1d. to £20, and marked so that they can be
used either for money or time calculations. The scales are placed on the
rims of two similar wheels and so arranged that the divided edges come
together. The wheels are mounted on a spindle carried at each end in the
bearings of a supporting stand. The wheels are pressed together by a
spring, and move as one.

To set the scales one to the other, a treadle gear is arranged to take
the pressure of the spring so that when the fixed wheel is held by the
left hand the free wheel can be rotated by the right hand in either
direction. When the amount of the balance has been set to the combined
weekly wage the treadle is released locking the two wheels together,
when the whole can be turned and the amounts respectively due to each
man read off opposite his weekly wage. The Smith-Davis Premium
Calculator is on the same principle but the scales are about 4 feet 6
inches long and the wheels spring-controlled. Both instruments are
supplied by Messrs. John Davis & Son, Ltd., Derby.

THE BAINES SLIDE RULE.—In this rule, invented by Mr. H. M. Baines,
Lahore, four slides carrying scales are arranged to move, each in edge
contact with the next. The slides are kept in contact and given the
desired relative movement one to the other, by being attached (at the
back), to a jointed parallelogram. On this principle which is of general
application, the inventor has made a rule for the solution of problems
covered by Flamant’s formula for the flow of water in cast-iron pipes:—V
= 76·28_d_^{⁵⁄₇}_s_^{⁴⁄₇}, in which _s_ is the sine of the inclination
or loss of head; _d_ the diameter of the pipe in inches and V the
velocity in feet per second. The formula Q = AV is also included in the
scope of the rule, Q being the discharge in cubic feet per second and A
the cross sectional area of the pipe in square inches.

FARMAR’S PROFIT-CALCULATING RULE.—The application of the slide rule to
commercial calculations has been often attempted, but the degree of
accuracy required necessitates the use of a long scale, and generally
this results in a cumbersome instrument. In Farmar’s Profit-calculating
Rule the money scale is arranged in ten sections, these being mounted in
parallel form on a roller which takes the place of the upper scale of an
ordinary rule. The roller, which is ¾in. in diameter, is carried in
brackets secured to each end of the stock, so that by rotating the
roller any section of the money scale can be brought into reading with
the scale on the upper edge of the slide and with which the roller is in
contact. This scale gives percentages, and enables calculations to be
made showing profit on turnover, profit on cost, and discount. The lower
scale on the slide, and that on the stock adjacent to it, are similar to
the A and B scales of an ordinary rule. The instrument is supplied by
Messrs. J. Casartelli & Son, Manchester.


              CONSTRUCTIONAL IMPROVEMENTS IN SLIDE RULES.

The attention of instrument makers is now being given to the devising of
means for ensuring the smooth and even working of the slide in the stock
of the rule. In some cases very good results are obtained by slitting
the back of the stock to give more elasticity.

In the rules made by Messrs. John Davis & Son, a metal strip, slightly
curved in cross section as shown at A (Fig. 30), runs for the full
length of the stock to which it is fastened at intervals. Near each end
of the rule, openings about 1 in. long are made in the metal backing
through which the scales on the back of the slide can be read. To
prevent warping under varying climatic conditions both the stock of the
rule and the slide are of composite construction. The base of the stock
is of mahogany, while the grooved sides, firmly secured to the base, are
of boxwood. Similarly the centre portion of the slide is of mahogany and
the tongued sides of boxwood. Celluloid also enters into the
construction, a strip of this material being laid along the bottom of
the groove in the stock. A fine groove runs along the centre of this
strip in order to give elasticity and to allow the sides of the stock to
be pressed together slightly to adjust the fitting of the slide. As a
further means of adjustment the makers fit metal clips at each end of
the rule, so that by tightening two small screws the stock can be closed
on the slide when necessary.

[Illustration: FIG. 30.]

[Illustration: FIG. 32.]

[Illustration: FIG. 31.]

In the rule made by the Keuffel and Esser Company of New York, one strip
is made adjustable (Fig. 32).


                  THE ACCURACY OF SLIDE RULE RESULTS.

The degree of accuracy obtainable with the slide rule depends primarily
upon the length of the scale employed, but the accuracy of the
graduations, the eyesight of the operator, and, in particular, his
ability to estimate interpolated values, are all factors which affect
the result. Using the lower scales and working carefully the error
should not greatly exceed 0·15 per cent. with short calculations. With
successive settings, the discrepancy need not necessarily be greater, as
the errors may be neutralised; but with rapid working the percentage
error may be doubled. However, much depends upon the graduation of the
scales. Rules in which one or more of the indices have been thickened to
conceal some slight inaccuracy should be avoided. The line on the cursor
should be sharp and fine and both slide and cursor should move smoothly
or good work cannot be done. Occasionally a little vaseline or clean
tallow should be applied to the edges of the slide and cursor.

That the percentage error is constant throughout the scale is seen by
setting 1 on C to 1·01 on D, when under 2 is 2·02; under 3, 3·03; under
5, 5·05, etc., the several readings showing a uniform error of 1 per
cent.

A method of obtaining a closer reading of a first setting or of a result
on D has been suggested to the author by Mr. M. Ainslie, B.Sc. If any
graduation, as 4 on C, is set to 3 on D, it is seen that 4 main
divisions on C (40–44) are equal in scale length to 3 main divisions on
D (30–33). Hence, very approximately, 1 division on C is equal to 0·75
of a division on D, this ratio being shown, of course, on D under 10 on
C. Suppose √(4·3) to be required. Setting the cursor to 4·3 on A, it is
seen that the root is something more than 2·06. Move the slide until a
main division is found on C, which exactly corresponds to the interval
between 2 and the cursor line, on D. The division 27–28 just fits,
giving a reading under 10 on C, of 74. Hence the root is read as 2·074.
For the higher parts of the scale, the subdivisions, 1–1·1, etc., are
used in place of main divisions. The method is probably more interesting
than useful, since in most operations the inaccuracies introduced in
making settings will impose a limit on the reliable figures of the
result.

For the majority of engineering calculations, the slide rule will give
an accuracy consistent with the accuracy of the data usually available.
For some purposes, however, _logarithmic section paper_ (the use of
which the author has advocated for the last twenty years) will be found
especially useful, more particularly in calculations involving
exponential formulæ.




                               APPENDIX.


      NEW SLIDE RULES—FIFTH ROOTS, ETC.—THE SOLUTION OF ALGEBRAIC
 EQUATIONS—GAUGE POINTS AND SIGNS ON SLIDE RULES—TABLES AND DATA—SLIDE
                            RULE DATA SLIPS.

THE PICKWORTH SLIDE RULE.—In this rule, made by Mr. A. W. Faber, the
novel feature is the provision of a scale of cubes (F) in the stock or
body of the rule. From Fig. 33 it will be seen that the scale is fixed
on the bevelled side of a slotted recess in the back of the rule. The
slide carries an index mark, which is seen through the slot and can be
set to any graduation of the scale; in its normal position it agrees
with 1 on the scale. The C scale on the face of the rule is divided into
three equal parts by two special division lines, marked II. and III.,
which, together with the initial graduation 1 of the scale, serve for
setting or reading off values on the D scale. Similar division lines are
marked on the D scale.

[Illustration: FIG. 33.]

In using the rule for cubes or cube roots the slide is drawn to the
right, this movement never exceeding one-third of the length of the D
scale. With this limited movement, and with a single setting of the
slide, the values of ∛_̅a_, ∛(_a_ × 10), and ∛(_a_ × 100)) (_a_ being
less than 10 and not less than 1) are given simultaneously and without
any uncertainty as to the scales to use or the values to be read off.

_To Find the Cube of a Number._—The marks II. and III. on D divide that
scale into three equal sections. If the number to be cubed is in the
first section, I. on C is set to it; if in the second section, II. on C
is set to it; if in the third section, III. on C is set to it. Then,
under the index mark on the back of the slide will be found the
significant figures of the cube on the scale F. If I. on C was used for
the setting, the cube contains 1 digit; if II. was used, 2 digits; if
III. was used, 3 digits. If the first figure of the number to be cubed
is not in the units place, the decimal point is moved through _n_ places
so as to bring the first significant figure into the units place, the
cube found as above, and the decimal point moved in the _reverse
direction_ through 3_n_ places.

_To Find the Cube Root of a Number._—The index mark is set to the
significant figures of the number on scale F, and the cube root is read
on D under I., II. or III. on C, according as the number has 1, 2 or 3
digits preceding the decimal point. Numbers which have 1, 2 or 3 figures
preceding the decimal point are dealt with directly. Numbers of any
other form are brought to one of the above forms by moving the decimal
point 3 places (or such multiple of 3 places as may be required), the
root found and its decimal point moved 1 place for each 3-place
movement, but in the _reverse direction_.

THE “ELECTRO” SLIDE RULE.—In this special rule for electrical
calculations, made by Mr. A. Nestler, the upper scales run from 0·1 to
1000, and are marked “Amp.” and “sq. mm.” respectively. The lower scale
on the slide running from 1 to 10,000 is marked M (metres), while the
lower scale on the rule (0·1 to 100) is marked “Volt.” The latter scale
is so displaced that 10 on M agrees with 0·173 on the Volt scale. The
four factors involved are the current strength (in Amp.); the area of a
conductor (in sq. mm.); the length of the conductor (in metres); and the
permissible loss of potential (in volts). Having given any three of
these, the fourth can be found very readily. On the back of the slide
are a scale of squares, a scale of cubes and a single scale
corresponding to the D scale of an ordinary rule. Hence, by reversing
the slide, it is possible to obtain the 2nd, 3rd and 4th powers and
roots of numbers. In another form of the rule, the scale of metres is
replaced by one of yards, while instead of the area of the conductor in
sq. mm., the corresponding “gauge” sizes of wires are given.

THE “POLYPHASE” SLIDE RULE.—This instrument, made by the Keuffel & Esser
Company, New York, has, in addition to the usual scales, a scale of
cubes on the vertical edge of the stock of the rule, while in the centre
of the slide there is a reversed C scale; _i.e._, a scale exactly
similar to an ordinary C scale but with the graduations running from
right to left. The rule is specially useful for the solution of problems
containing combinations of three factors and problems involving squares,
square roots, cubes, cube roots and many of the higher powers and roots.
It is specially adapted for electrical and hydraulic work.

THE LOG-LOG DUPLEX SLIDE RULE.—The same makers have introduced a log-log
duplex slide rule, in which the log-log scale is in three sections,
placed one above the other, these occupying the position usually taken
up by the A scale. These scales are used in the manner already described
(page 86), but some advantage is obtained by the manner in which the
complete log-log scale is divided, the limits being _e_^{¹⁄₁₀₀} to _e_^⅒
(on Scale L.L. 1); _e_^⅒ to _e_ (on Scale L.L. 2); and _e_ to _e_^{10}
(on Scale L.L. 3), _e_ being the base of natural or hyperbolic
logarithms (2·71828). In this way a total log-log range of from 1·01 to
22,000 is provided, meeting all practical requirements. These log-log
scales are read in conjunction with a C scale placed at the upper edge
of the slide. A similar C scale, but reversed in direction, is placed at
the lower edge of the slide, this having red figures to distinguish it
readily. The adjacent scale on the body of the rule is an ordinary D
scale, and under this is an equally-divided scale giving the common
logarithms of values on D. In the centre of the slide is a scale of
tangents.

It will be understood that a “duplex” rule consists of two side strips
securely clamped together at the two ends, forming the body of the rule,
the slide moving between them; hence both front and back faces of the
rule and slide are available, graduations on the one side being referred
to those on the other by the cursor which extends around the whole. In
this instrument, the scales on the back face are the ordinary scales of
the standard rule with the addition of a scale of sines which is placed
in the centre of the slide. It will be evident that this instrument is
capable of dealing with a very wide range of problems involving
exponential and trigonometrical formulæ.

SMALL SLIDE RULES WITH MAGNIFYING CURSORS.—Several makers now supply 5
in. rules having the full graduations of a 10 in. rule, and fitted with
a magnifying cursor (Fig. 34). This forms a compact instrument for the
pocket, but owing to the closeness of the graduations it is not usually
possible to make a setting of the slide without using the cursor. This,
of course, involves more movements than with the ordinary instrument. It
is also very necessary to use the magnifying cursor in a _direct_ light,
if accurate readings are to be obtained. If these slight inconveniences
are to be tolerated, the principle could be extended, a 10 in. rule
being marked as fully as a 20 in., and fitted with a magnifying cursor.
The author has endeavoured, but without success, to induce makers to
introduce such a rule.

The magnifying cursor, supplied by Messrs. A. G. Thornton, Limited, has
a lens which fills the entire cursor. It has a powerful magnifying
effect, and the change from the natural to the magnified reading is less
abrupt than with the semicircular lens.

[Illustration: FIG. 34.]

THE CHEMIST’S SLIDE RULE.—A slide rule, specially adapted for chemical
calculations, has been introduced recently by Mr. A. Nestler. In this
instrument the C and D scales are as usually arranged; but, in place of
the A and B scales, there are a number of gauge points or marks denoting
the atomic and molecular weights of the most important elements and
combinations. The scales on the back of the slide are similarly
arranged, so that by reversing the slide the operations can be extended
very considerably. The rule finds its chief use in the calculation of
analyses. Thus, to find the percentage of chlorine if _s_ grammes of a
substance have been used and the precipitate of Ag.Cl. weighs _a_
grammes, we have the equation, _x_ = (Cl.)/(Ag.Cl.) × (_a_)/(_s_).
Hence, the mark Ag.Cl. on the upper scale of the slide is set to the
mark Cl. on the upper scale of the rule, when under _a_ on the C scale
is found the quantity of chlorine on D. By setting the cursor to this
value and bringing _s_ on C to the cursor, the percentage required can
be read on C over 10 on D.

The rule is also adapted to the solution of various other chemical and
electro-chemical calculations.

THE STELFOX SLIDE RULE.—This rule, shown in Fig. 35, has a stock 5 in.
long, fitted with a 10 in. slide jointed in the middle of its length by
means of long dowels. By separating the parts the compactness of a 5 in.
rule is obtained. The upper scales on the rule and slide resemble the
usual A and B scales. The D scale on the lower part of the stock is in
two sections, the second portion being placed below the first, as shown
in the illustration. The centre scale on the slide corresponds to the
usual C scale, while on the lower edge of the slide is a similar scale,
but with the index (1) in the middle of its length. The arrangement
avoids the necessity of resetting the slide, as is sometimes necessary
with the ordinary rule, and in general it combines the accuracy of a 10
in. rule with the compactness of a 5 in. rule; but a more frequent use
of the cursor is necessary. This rule is made by Messrs. John Davis &
Son, Limited, Derby.

[Illustration: FIG. 35.]

ELECTRICAL SLIDE RULE.—Another rule by the same makers, specially useful
for electrical engineers, has the usual scales on the working edges of
the rule and slide, while in the middle of the slide is placed a scale
of cubes. A log-log scale in two sections is provided; the power
portion, running from 1·07 to 2, is found on the lower part of the
stock, and the upper portion, running from 2 to 10^3, on the upper part
of the stock. The uppermost scale on the stock is in two parts, of which
that to the left, running from 20 to 100 and marked “Dynamo,” gives the
efficiencies of dynamos; that on the right, running from 20 to 100 and
marked “Motor,” gives the efficiencies of electric motors. The lowest
scale on the stock, marked “Volt,” gives the loss of potential in copper
conductors. The ordinary upper scale on the stock is marked L (length of
lead) at the left, and KW (kilowatts) at the right; the ordinary upper
scale on the slide is marked A (ampères) and mm^2 (sectional area) at
the left, and HP (horse-power) at the right. Additional lines on the
cursor enable the electrical calculations to be made either in British
or metric units.

THE PICOLET CIRCULAR SLIDE RULE.—A simple form of circular calculator,
made by Mr. L. E. Picolet of Philadelphia, is shown in Fig. 36. It
consists of a base disc of stout celluloid on which turns a smaller disc
of thin celluloid. A cursor formed of transparent celluloid is folded
over the discs, and is attached so that the friction between the cursor
and the inner disc enables the latter to be turned by moving the former.
By holding both discs the cursor can be adjusted as required. The
adjacent scales run in opposite directions, so that multiplication and
division are performed as with the inverted slide in an ordinary rule.
The outer scale, which is two-thirds the length of the main scale,
enables cube roots to be found. Square roots are readily determined and
continuous multiplication and division conveniently effected. Modified
forms of this neatly made little instrument are also available.

[Illustration: FIG. 36.]

OTHER RECENT SLIDE RULES.—Among other special types of slide rule,
mention should be made of the _Jakin_ 10 in. rule for surveyors, made by
Messrs. John Davis & Son, Limited, Derby. By the provision of a series
of short subsidiary scales, the multiplication of a sine or tangent of
an angle by a number can be obtained to an accuracy of 1 in 10,000. The
_Davis-Lee-Bottomley_ slide rule, by the same makers, has special scales
provided for circle spacing. The division of a circle into a number of
equal parts, often required in spacing rivets, bolts, etc., and in
setting out the teeth of gearwheels, is readily effected by the aid of
this instrument. The _Cuntz_ slide rule is a very comprehensive
instrument, having a stock about 2¼ in. wide, with the slide near the
lower edge. Above the slide are eleven scales, referable to the main
scales by the cursor. These scales enable squares and square roots,
cubes and cube roots, and areas and circumferences of circles to be
obtained by direct reading. A much more compact instrument could be
obtained by removing one-half the scales to the back of the rule and
using a double cursor.

[Illustration: FIG. 37.]

In one form of 10 in. rule, supplied by Mr. W. H. Harling, London, the
body of the rule is made of well-seasoned cane, with the usual celluloid
facings. The rule has a metal back, enabling the fit of the slide to be
regulated. This backing extends the full length of the rule, openings
about 1 in. long being provided at each end, enabling the scales on the
back of the slide to be set with greater facility than is possible with
the notched recesses usually adopted. The author has long endeavoured,
but without success, to induce makers to fit windows of glass or
celluloid in place of the notched recesses. This would allow the
graduation of the S and T scales to be set more accurately, and enable
both to be used at each end of the rule—an advantage in certain
trigonometrical calculations. It would have the further advantage of
permitting each alternate graduation of the evenly-divided or logarithm
scale to be placed at opposite sides of one central line, enabling the
reading to be made more accurately and conveniently.

Many special slide rules have lately been devised for determining the
time necessary to perform various machine-tool operations and for
analogous purposes, while attention has again been given to rules for
calculating the weights of iron and steel bars, plates, etc.

THE DAVIS-STOKES FIELD GUNNERY SLIDE RULE.—This rule, which is adapted
for calculations involved in “encounter” and “entrenched” field gunnery,
is designed for the 18 pr. quick-firing gun. The upper and lower
portions of the boxwood stock are united by a flexible centre of
celluloid, thus providing grooves front and rear to receive boxwood
slides. Each of the nineteen scales is marked with its name, and
corresponding scales are coloured red or black. The front edge is
bevelled and carries a scale of 1 in 20,000. The rule solves
displacement problems, map angles of sight, changes of corrector and
range corrections for changes in temperature, wind and barometer, etc. A
special feature for displacement calculations is the provision of a 50
yd. sub-base angle scale, by which the apex angle is read at one
setting.

THE DAVIS-MARTIN WIRELESS SLIDE RULE.—In wireless telegraphy it is
frequently necessary to determine wave-length, capacity or
self-induction when one or other of the factors of the equation, λ =
59·6√(LC) is unknown. The Davis-Martin wireless rule is designed to
simplify such calculations. The upper scale in the stock (inductance)
runs from 10,000 to 1,000,000; the adjacent scale on the slide
(capacity) runs from 0·0001 to 0·01 but in the reverse direction. The
lower scale on the stock (wave-length) runs from 100 to 1000, giving
square roots of the upper scale; while on the lower edge of the scale
are several arrows to suit the various denominations in which the
wave-length and capacity may be expressed.

IMPROVED CURSORS.—In some slide-rule operations, notably in those
involved in solving quadratic and cubic equations, it not infrequently
happens that readings are obscured by the frame of the cursor. Frameless
cursors have been introduced to obviate this defect. A piece of thick
transparent celluloid is sometimes employed, but this is liable to
become scratched in use. Fig. 37 shows a recent form of frameless glass
cursor made by the Keuffel & Esser Company, Hoboken, N.J., which is
satisfactory in every way.

Cursors having three hair lines are now fitted to some rules, the
distance apart of the lines being equal to the interval 0·7854–1 on the
A scale.

THE DAVIS-PLETTS SLIDE RULE.—In this rule a single log.-log. scale and
its reciprocal scale are arranged opposite the ordinary upper log.
scale. Thus, common logarithms can be read directly, while by taking
advantage of the properties of characteristics and mantissas of common
logarithms, the scale can be extended indefinitely. As 10 is the highest
number on the log.-log. scale, it is carried down to within 0·025 of
unity. The reading of log.-log. values above 10 is effected in a very
simple manner. There is also a scale in the centre of the slide which,
used in conjunction with the upper log. scale enables the natural
logarithm of any number between 0·0001 and 10,000 to be read direct,
while any number on the upper log. scale can be multiplied or divided by
_e^x_ if the latter is between these limits. On the back of the slide
are scales for all circular and hyperbolic functions, these being used
in conjunction with the upper log. scales.

THE CROMPTON-GALLAGHER BOILER EFFICIENCY CALCULATOR has a stock in the
thickness of which is a slot admitting a chart which can be moved at
right angles to the two separate slides. On the bevelled edge of one
slide, the graduations are continued so as to read against curves on the
chart, through an opening in the stock.

THE DAVIS-GRINSTED COMPLEX CALCULATOR.—This slide rule is of
considerable service in connection with calculations involving the
conversion of complex quantities from the form _a_ + _j_ _b_ to the form
R∠θ, and _vice versa_. The usual process of conversion necessitates
repeated reference to trigonometrical tables, and is both tedious and
time-taking. The Complex Calculator enables the conversions to be
effected without reference to tables and with the minimum expenditure of
time and labour.

The rule, which is about 16 in. long, has five scales. The upper one (A)
is an ordinary logarithmic scale thrice-repeated. The adjacent scales on
the slide comprise (1) a logarithmic scale of tangents (B) ranging from
0·1° to 45°, and (2) a logarithmic scale of secants (C) from 0° to 45°.
The lower scales D and E are identical with the A scale, and are
provided to enable multiplication, etc., to be performed without the
need for a separate slide rule. Readings can be transferred from A to
the lower scales by means of the cursor.

In using the rule to convert _a_ + _j_ _b_ to R∠θ, the index (45°) of
the B scale is set to the larger component and the cursor to the smaller
component, on scale A. Then θ (or its complement if _b_ is greater than
_a_) is read on B under the cursor. The cursor is then set to θ on the C
scale, and R is read on A under the cursor. The rule is made by Messrs.
John Davis & Son, Limited, Derby.


                  THE SOLUTION OF ALGEBRAIC EQUATIONS.

The slide rule finds an interesting application in the solution of
equations of the second and third degree; and although the process is
essentially one of trial and error, it may often serve as an efficient
substitute for the more laborious algebraic methods, particularly when
the conditions of the problem or the operator’s knowledge of the theory
of equations enables some idea to be obtained as to the character of the
result sought. The principle may be thus briefly explained:—If 1 on C is
set to _x_ on D (Fig. 38), we find _x_(_x_) = _x_^2 on D under _x_ on C.
If, however, with the slide set as before, instead of reading under _x_,
we read under _x_ + _m_ on C, the result on D will now be _x_(_x_ + _m_)
= _x_^2 + _mx_ = _q_. Hence to solve the equation _x_^2 + _mx_ − _q_ =
0, we reverse the above process, and setting the cursor to _q_ on D, we
move the slide until the number on C under the cursor, and that on D
under 1 on C, _differ by m_. It is obvious from the setting that the
_product_ of these numbers = _q_, and as their difference = _m_, they
are seen to be the roots of the equation as required. For the equation
_x_^2 − _mx_ + _q_ = 0, we require _m_ to equal the _sum_ of the roots.
Hence, setting the cursor as before to _q_ on D, we move the slide until
the number on C under the cursor, and that on D under 1 on C, are
_together equal to_ _m_, these numbers being the roots sought. The
alternative equations _x_^2 − _mx_ − _q_ = 0, and _x_^2 + _mx_ + _q_ = 0
are deducible from the others by changing the signs of the roots, and
need not be further considered.

[Illustration: FIG. 38.]


  EX.—Find the roots of _x_^2 − 8_x_ + 9 = 0.

  Set the cursor to 9 on D, and move the slide to the right until when
  6·64 is found under the cursor, 1·355 on D is under 1 on C. These
  numbers are the roots required.


The upper scales can of course be used; indeed, in general they are to
be preferred.


  EX.—Find the roots of _x_^2 + 12·8_x_ + 39·4 = 0.

  Set the cursor to 39·4 on A, and move the slide to the right until we
  read 7·65 on B under the cursor, and 5·15 on A over 1 on B. The roots
  are therefore −7·65 and −5.15.


With a little consideration of the relative value of the upper and lower
scales, the student interested will readily perceive how equations of
the third degree may be similarly resolved. The subject is not of
sufficient general importance to warrant a detailed examination being
made of the several expressions which can be dealt with in the manner
suggested; but the author gives the following example as affording some
indication of the adaptability of the method to practical calculations.


  EX.—A hollow copper ball, 7·5 in. in diameter and 2 lb. in weight,
  floats in water. To what depth will it sink?

  The water displaced = 27·7 × 2 = 55·4 cub. in. The cubic contents of
  the immersed segment will be (π)/(3)(3_r_ _x_^2 − _x_^3), _r_ being
  the radius and _x_ the depth of immersion. Hence (π)/(3)(3_r_ _x_^2 −
  _x_^3) = 55·4, and 11·25_x_^2 − _x_^3 = 52·9.

  To solve this equation we place the cursor to 52·9 on A, and move the
  slide until the reading on D under 1 and that on B under the cursor
  together amount to 11·25. In this way find 2·45 on D under 1, with 8·8
  on B under the cursor _c_, _c_, as a pair of values of which the sum
  is 11·25. Hence we conclude that _x_ = 2·45 in. is the result sought.

  With the rule thus set (Fig. 39) the student will note that the slide
  is displaced to the right by an amount which represents _x_ on D, and
  therefore _x_^2 on A; while the length on B from 1 to the cursor line
  represents 11·25 − _x_. Hence the upper scale setting gives
  _x_^2(11·25 − _x_) = 11·25_x_^2 − _x_^3 = 52·9 as required.


[Illustration: FIG. 39.]

When in doubt as to the method to be pursued in any given case, the
student should work synthetically, building up a simple example of an
analogous character to that under consideration, and so deducing the
plan to be followed in the reverse process.


                    SCREW-CUTTING GEAR CALCULATIONS.

The slide rule has long found a useful application in connection with
the gear calculations necessary in screw-cutting, helical gear-cutting,
and spiral gear work.

SINGLE GEARS.—For simple cases of screw-cutting in the lathe it is only
necessary to set the threads per inch to be cut to the threads per inch
in the guide screw (or the pitch in inches in each case, if more
convenient). Then any pair of coinciding values on the two scales will
give possible pairs of wheels.


  EX.—Find wheels to cut a screw of 1⅝ threads per inch with a guide
  screw of 2 threads per inch.

  Setting 1·625 on C to 2 on D, it is seen that 80 (driver) and 65
  (driven) are possible wheels.


COMPOUND GEARS.—When wheels so found are of inconvenient size, a
compound train is used, consisting (usually) of two drivers and two
driven wheels, the product of the two former and the product of the two
latter being in the same ratio as the simple wheels. Thus with 60 and 40
as drivers, and 65 and 30 as driven, we have, (60 × 40)/(65 × 30) =
(2400)/(1950) = (2)/(1·625) as before.

With the slide set as above, values convenient for splitting up into
suitable wheels are readily obtainable. Thus, (1600)/(1300);
(2400)/(1950); (4000)/(3250); (4800)/(3900) are a few suggestive values
which may be readily factorised.

SLIDE RULES FOR SCREW-CUTTING CALCULATIONS.—Special circular and
straight slide rules for screw-cutting gear calculations have long been
employed. For compound gears these usually entail the use of six scales,
two on each of the two slides and two on the stock. The upper scale on
the stock may be a scale of threads per inch to be cut, the adjacent
scale (on the upper slide) a scale of threads per inch in the guide
screw. Setting the guide screw-graduation to the threads to be cut, the
lower slide is adjusted until a convenient pair of drivers is found in
coincidence on the central pair of scales, while a pair of driven wheels
are in coincidence on the two lower scales.

Some years ago, a slide rule was introduced by which compound gears
could be obtained with a single slide. Assuming the set of wheels
usually provided—20 to 120 teeth advancing by 5 teeth—the products of 20
× 25, 20 × 30, etc., up to 115 × 120 were calculated. These products
were laid out along each of the two lower scales. The upper scales were
a scale of threads per inch to be cut and a scale of the threads per
inch of various guide screws. Setting the guide screw-graduation to the
threads to be cut, any coinciding graduations on the lower scales gave
the required pairs of drivers and driven wheels.

FRACTIONAL PITCH CALCULATIONS.—The author has long advocated the use of
the slide rule for determining the wheels necessary for cutting
fractional pitch threads, and it is gratifying to find its value in this
connection is now being appreciated. For the best results a good 20 in.
rule is desirable, but with care very close approximations can be found
with an accurate 10 in. rule. In any case a magnifying cursor or a hand
reading-glass is of great assistance.


  EX.—Find wheels to cut a thread of 0·70909 in. pitch; guide screw, 2
  threads per inch.

  To 0·70909 on D, set 0·5 (guide screw pitch in inches) on C. To make
  this setting as accurately as possible, the method described on page
  112 may be used. Set 10 on C to about 91 on D, and note that the
  interval 77–78 on C represents 0·91 of the interval 70–71 on D. Set
  the cursor to 78 on C and bring 5 to the cursor. The slide is then set
  so that 5 on C agrees with 7·091 on D.


Inspection of the two scales shows various coinciding factors in the
ratio required. The most accurate is seen to be (55 on C)/(78 on D).
These values may be split up into (55 × 50)/(65 × 60) to form a suitable
compound train of gears.


                 GAUGE POINTS AND SIGNS ON SLIDE RULES.

Many slide rules have the sign (Prod.)/(−1) at the right-hand end of the
D scale, while on the left is (Quot.)/(+1.) It is somewhat unfortunate
that these signs refer to rules for determining the number of digits in
products and quotients, which are used to a considerable extent on the
Continent, and conflict with those used in this country. By the
Continental method the number of digits in a product is equal to the sum
of the digits in the two factors, if the result is obtained on the LEFT
_of the first factor_; but if the result is found on the RIGHT of the
first factor, it is equal to this sum − 1. The sign (Prod.)/(−1) the
_right_-hand end of the D scale provides a visible reminder of this
rule.

Similarly for division:—The number of digits in a quotient is equal to
the number of the digits in the dividend, minus those in the divisor, if
the quotient appears on the RIGHT _of the dividend_, and to this
difference + 1, if the quotient appears on the LEFT of the dividend. The
sign (Quot.)/(+1) at the _left_-hand end of the D scale provides a
visible reminder of this rule.

The sign

                                  +ⵏ–
                                  ⟵ⵏ⟶
                                  –ⵏ+

found at both ends of the A scale is of general application but of
questionable utility. It is assumed to represent a fraction, the
vertical line indicating the position of the decimal point. If the
number 455 is to be dealt with in a multiplication on the lower scales,
we may suppose the decimal point moved two places to the left, giving
4·55, a value which can be actually found on the scale. If we use this
value, then to the number of digits in this result, as many must be
added as the number of places (two in this case) by which the decimal
point was moved. If the point is moved to the right, the number of
places must be subtracted. Similarly, in division, if the decimal point
in the divisor is moved _n_ places to the left, then _n_ places must be
subtracted at the end of the operation; while if the point is moved
through _n_ places to the right, then _n_ places must be added. The sign
referred to, which, of course, applies to all scales, completely
indicates these processes and is submitted as a reminder of the
procedure to be followed by those using the method described.

The signs π, _c_, _c′_, and M are explained in the Section on “Gauge
Points,” p. 53.

On some rules additional signs are found on the D scale. One, locating
the value (180 × 60)/(π) = 3437·74 and hence giving the number of
minutes in a radian, is marked ρ′. Another, representing the value (180
× 60 × 60)/(π) = 206265, and hence giving the number of seconds in a
radian is marked ρ″. A third point, marked ρ_{˶}, placed at the value
(200 × 100 × 100)/(π) = 636620, is used when the newer graduation of the
circle is employed.

These gauge points are useful when converting angles into circular
measure, or _vice versa_, and also for determining the functions of
small angles.

A gauge point is sometimes marked at 1146 on the A and B scales. This is
known as the “Gunner’s Mark,” and is used in artillery calculations
involving angles of less than 20°, when, for the purpose in view, the
tangent and circular measure of the angle may be regarded as equal. For
this constant, the angle is taken in minutes, the auxiliary base in
feet, and the base in yards. The auxiliary base in feet on B is set to
the angle in minutes on A when over 1146 on B is the base in yards on A.
The value (1)/(1146) = (π × 3)/(180 × 60).


                            TABLES AND DATA.


                         MENSURATION FORMULAE.


  Area of a parallelogram = base × height.

  Area of rhombus = ½ product of the diagonals.

  Area of a triangle = ½ base × perpendicular height.

  Area of equilateral triangle = square of side × 0·433.

  Area of trapezium = ½ sum of two parallel sides × height.

  Area of any right-lined figure of four or more unequal sides is found
  by dividing it into triangles, finding area of each and adding
  together.

  Area of regular polygon = (1) length of one side × number of sides ×
  radius of inscribed circle; or (2) the sum of the triangular areas
  into which the figures may be divided.

  Circumference of a circle = diameter × 3·1416.

  Circumference of circle circumscribing a square = side × 4·443.

  Circumference of circle = side of equal square × 3·545.

  Length of arc of circle = radius × degrees in arc × 0·01745.

  Area of a circle = square of diameter × 0·7854.

  Area of sector of a circle = length of arc × ½ radius.

  Area of segment of a circle = area of sector − area of triangle.

  Side of square of area equal to a circle = diameter × 0·8862.

  Diameter of circle equal in area to square = side of square × 1·1284.

  Side of square inscribed in circle = diameter of circle × 0·707.

  Diameter of circle circumscribing a square = side of square × 1·414.

  Area of square = area of inscribed circle × 1·2732.

  Area of circle circumscribing square = square of side × 1·5708.

  Area of square = area of circumscribing circle × 0·6366.

  Area of a parabola = base x ⅔ height.

  Area of an ellipse = major axis × minor axis × 0·7854.

  Surface of prism or cylinder = (area of two ends) + (length ×
  perimeter).

  Volume of prism or cylinder = area of base × height.

  Surface of pyramid or cone = ½(slant height × perimeter of base) +
  area of base.

  Volume of pyramid or cone = (⅓)(area of base × perpendicular height).

  Surface of sphere = square of diameter × 3·1416.

  Volume of sphere = cube of diameter × 0·5236.

  Volume of hexagonal prism = square of side × 2·598 × height.

  Volume of paraboloid = ½ volume of circumscribing cylinder.

  Volume of ring (circular section) = mean diameter of ring × 2·47 ×
  square of diameter of section.


               SPECIFIC GRAVITY AND WEIGHT OF MATERIALS.

                                METALS.
 ─────────────────────┬───────────────┬───────────────┬───────────────
        METAL.        │   Specific    │  Weight of 1  │  Weight of 1
                      │   Gravity.    │Cub. Ft. (Lb.).│Cub. In. (Lb.).
 ─────────────────────┼───────────────┼───────────────┼───────────────
 Aluminium, Cast      │           2·56│            160│         0·0927
 Aluminium, Bronze    │           7·68│            475│          0·275
 Antimony             │           6·71│            418│          0·242
 Bismuth              │           9·90│            617│          0·357
 Brass, Cast          │           8·10│            505│          0·293
 „    Wire            │          8·548│            533│          0·309
 Copper, Sheet        │          8·805│            549│          0·318
 „    Wire            │          8·880│            554│          0·321
 Gold                 │         19·245│           1200│          0·695
 Gun metal            │           8·56│            534│          0·310
 Iron, Wrought (mean) │          7·698│            480│          0·278
 „   Cast (mean)      │          7·217│            450│          0·261
 Lead, Milled Sheet   │         11·418│            712│          0·412
 Manganese            │          8·012│            499│          0·289
 Mercury              │         13·596│            849│          0·491
 Nickel, Cast         │           8·28│            516│          0·300
 Phosphor Bronze, Cast│           8·60│          536·8│          0·310
 Platinum             │         21·522│           1342│          0·778
 Silver               │         10·505│            655│          0·380
 Steel (mean)         │          7·852│          489·6│          0·283
 Tin                  │          7·409│            462│          0·268
 Zinc, Sheet          │           7·20│            449│          0·260
 „ Cast               │           6·86│            428│          0·248
 ─────────────────────┴───────────────┴───────────────┴───────────────

                       MISCELLANEOUS SUBSTANCES.
                   ────────────┬──────────┬──────────
                    SUBSTANCE. │ Specific │Weight of
                               │ Gravity. │1 Cub. In.
                               │          │  (Lb.).
                   ────────────┼──────────┼──────────
                   Asbestos    │ 2·1–2·80 │·076-·101
                   Brick       │   1·90   │   ·069
                   Cement      │2·72–3·05 │·0984-·109
                   Clay        │   2·0    │   ·072
                   Coal        │   1·37   │  ·0495
                   Coke        │   0·5    │  ·0181
                   Concrete    │   2·0    │   ·072
                   Fire-brick  │   2·30   │   ·083
                   Granite     │ 2·5–2·75 │·051-·100
                   Graphite    │ 1·8–2·35 │·065-·085
                   Sand-stone  │   2·3    │   ·083
                   Slate       │   2·8    │   ·102
                   Wood—       │          │
                     Beech     │   0·75   │  ·0271
                     Cork      │   0·24   │  ·0087
                     Elm       │   0·58   │   ·021
                     Fir       │   0·56   │  ·0203
                     Oak       │ ·62-·85  │·025-·031
                     Pine      │   0·47   │   ·017
                     Teak      │   0·80   │   ·029
                   ────────────┴──────────┴──────────

                    ULTIMATE STRENGTH OE MATERIALS.
 ──────────────────┬────────────┬────────────┬────────────┬────────────
     MATERIAL.     │ Tension in │Compression │Shearing in │ Modulus of
                   │lb. per sq. │ in lb. per │lb. per sq. │ Elasticity
                   │    in.     │  sq. in.   │    in.     │ in lb. per
                   │            │            │            │  sq. in.
 ──────────────────┼────────────┼────────────┼────────────┼────────────
 Cast Iron         │   11,000 to│   50,000 to│            │  14,000,000
                   │      30,000│     130,000│            │          to
                   │            │            │            │  23,000,000
     „        aver.│      16,000│      95,000│      11,000│
 Wrought Iron      │   40,000 to│            │            │  26,000,000
                   │      70,000│            │            │          to
                   │            │            │            │  31,000,000
      „       aver.│      50,000│      50,000│      40,000│
 Soft Steel        │   60,000 to│            │            │  30,000,000
                   │     100,000│            │            │          to
                   │            │            │            │  36,000,000
 Soft Steel   aver.│      80,000│      70,000│      55,000│
 Cast Steel   aver.│     120,000│            │            │  15,000,000
                   │            │            │            │          to
                   │            │            │            │  17,000,000
 Copper, Cast      │      19,000│      58,000│            │
 „     Wrought     │      34,000│            │            │  16,000,000
 Brass, Cast       │      18,000│      10,500│            │   9,170,000
 Gun Metal         │      34,000│            │            │  11,500,000
 Phosphor Bronze   │      58,000│            │      43,000│  13,500,000
 Wood, Ash         │      17,000│       9,300│       1,400│
 „    Beech        │      16,000│       8,500│            │
 „    Pine         │      11,000│       6,000│         650│   1,400,000
 „    Oak          │      15,000│      10,000│       2,300│   1,500,000
 Leather           │       4,200│            │            │      25,000
 ──────────────────┴────────────┴────────────┴────────────┴────────────

                        POWERS, ROOTS, ETC., OF USEFUL FACTORS.
       _n_       │(1)/(_n_)│ _n_^2 │  _n_^3   │ √_̅n_ │ (1)/(√_̅n_) │ ∛_̅n_ │ (1)/(∛_̅n_)
 ────────────────┼─────────┼───────┼──────────┼──────┬┴───────────┬─┴────┬──┴─────────
    π = 3·142    │    0·318│  9·870│    31·006│ 1·772│       0·564│ 1·465│       0·683
    2π= 6·283    │    0·159│ 39·478│   248·050│ 2·507│       0·399│ 1·845│       0·542
 (π)/(2) = 1·571 │    0·637│  2·467│     3·878│ 1·253│       0·798│ 1·162│       0·860
 (π)/(3) = 1·047 │    0·955│  1·097│     1·148│ 1·023│       0·977│ 1·016│       0·985
 (4)/(3)π = 4·189│    0·239│ 17·546│    73·496│ 2·047│       0·489│ 1·612│       0·622
 (π)/(4) = 0·785 │    1·274│  0·617│     0·484│ 0·886│       1·128│ 0·923│       1·084
 (π)/(6) = 0·524 │    1·910│  0·274│     0·144│ 0·724│       1·382│ 0·806│       1·241
   π^2 = 9·870   │    0·101│ 97·409│   961·390│ 3·142│       0·318│ 2·145│       0·466
   π^3 = 31·006  │    0·032│961·390│29,809·910│ 5·568│       1·796│ 3·142│       0·318
 (π)/(32) = 0·098│   10·186│ 0·0095│     0·001│ 0·313│       3·192│ 0·461│       2·168
   _g_  = 32·2   │    0·031│1036·84│ 33,386·24│ 5·674│       0·176│ 3·181│       0·314
   2_g_ = 64·4   │    0·015│4147·36│   267,090│ 8·025│       0·125│ 4·007│       0·249
 ────────────────┴─────────┴───────┴──────────┴──────┴────────────┴──────┴────────────


                         HYDRAULIC EQUIVALENTS.

  1 foot head = 0·434 lb. per square inch.
  1 lb. per square inch = 2·31 ft. head.
  1 imperial gallon = 277·274 cubic inches.
  1 imperial gallon = 0·16045 cubic foot.
  1 imperial gallon = 10 lb.
  1 cubic foot of water = 62·32 lb. = 6·232 imperial gallons.
  1 cubic foot of sea water = 64·00 lb.
  1 cubic inch of water = 0·03616 lb.
  1 cubic inch of sea water = 0·037037 lb.
  1 cylindrical foot of water = 48·96 lb.
  1 cylindrical inch of water = 0·0284 lb.
  A column of water 12 in. long 1 in. square = 0·434 lb.
  A column of water 12 in. long 1 in. diameter = 0·340 lb.
  Capacity of a 12 in. cube = 6·232 gallons.
  Capacity of a 1 in. square 1 ft. long = 0·0434 gallon.
  Capacity of a 1 ft. diameter 1 ft. long = 4·896 gallons.
  Capacity of a cylinder 1 in. diameter 1 ft. long = 0·034 gallon.
  Capacity of a cylindrical inch = 0·002832 gallon.
  Capacity of a cubic inch = 0·003606 gallon.
  Capacity of a sphere 12 in. diameter = 3·263 gallons.
  Capacity of a sphere 1 in. diameter = 0·00188 gallon.
  1 imperial gallon = 1·2 United States gallon.
  1 imperial gallon = 4·543 litres of water.
  1 United States gallon = 231·0 cubic inches.
  1 United States gallon = 0·83 imperial gallon.
  1 United States gallon = 3·8 litres of water.
  1 cubic foot of water = 7·476 United States gallons.
  1 cubic foot of water = 28·375 litres of water.
  1 litre of water = 0·22 imperial gallon.
  1 litre of water = 0·264 United States gallon.
  1 litre of water = 61·0 cubic inches.
  1 litre of water = 0·0353 cubic foot.

 ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
                    EQUIVALENTS OF POUNDS AVOIRDUPOIS.
 ─┬───────┬────────────┬────────────────┬────────────────┬────────────────
  │  10   │    100     │      1000      │     10,000     │    100,000
 ─┼───────┼────────────┼────────────────┼────────────────┼────────────────
  │qr. lb.│cwt. qr. lb.│ton cwt. qr. lb.│ton cwt. qr. lb.│ton cwt. qr. lb.
 1│  0  10│   0   3  16│  0    8   3  20│  4    9   1   4│ 44   12   3  12
 2│  0  20│   1   3   4│  0   17   3  12│  8   18   2   8│ 89    5   2  24
 3│  1   2│   2   2  20│  1    6   3   4│ 13    7   3  12│133   18   2   8
 4│  1  12│   3   2   8│  1   15   2  24│ 17   17   0  16│178   11   1  20
 5│  1  22│   4   1  24│  2    4   2  16│ 22    6   1  20│223    4   1   4
 6│  2   4│   5   1  12│  2   13   2   8│ 26   15   2  24│267   17   0  16
 7│  2  14│   6   1   0│  3    2   2   0│ 31    5   0   0│312   10   0   0
 8│  2  24│   7   0  16│  3   11   1  20│ 35   14   1   4│357    2   3  12
 9│  3   6│   8   0   4│  4    0   1  12│ 40    3   2   8│401   15   2  24
 ─┴───────┴────────────┴────────────────┴────────────────┴────────────────


                       TRIGONOMETRICAL FUNCTIONS.


                        RIGHT-ANGLED TRIANGLES.

[Illustration: [Right-angled Triangle]]

Sin. A = (_a_)/(_b_) Sec. A = (_b_)/(_c_) Tan. A = (_a_)/(_c_)

Cos. A = (_c_)/(_b_) Cosec. A = (_b_)/(_a_) Cotan. A = (_c_)/(_a_)

Versin. A = (_b_ − _c_)/(_b_). Coversin. A = (_b_ − _a_)/(_b_).

 ───────┬─────────┬─────────────────────────────────────────────────────
 Given. │Required.│                      Formulæ.
 ───────┼─────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────────────────
 _a_,_b_│ A,C,_c_ │Sin. A = (_a_)/(_b_)    Cos. C = (_a_)/(_b_)    _c_ =
        │         │                √((_b + a_)(_b − a_))
        │         │
 _a_,_c_│ A,C,_b_ │Tan. A = (_a_)/(_c_)  Cotan. B = (_a_)/(_c_)    _b_ =
        │         │                  √(_a_^2 + _c_^2)
        │         │
  A,_a_ │C,_c_,_b_│     C = 90° − A    _c_ = _a_ × Cotan. A  _b_ =
        │         │                   (_a_)/(Sin. A)
        │         │
  A,_b_ │C,_a_,_c_│C = 90° − A    _a_ = _b_ × Sin. A    _c_ = _b_ × Cos.
        │         │                          A
        │         │
  A,_c_ │C,_a_,_b_│     C = 90° − A    _a_ = _c_ × Tan. A    _b_ =
        │         │                   (_c_)/(Cos. A)
        │         │
 ───────┴─────────┴─────────────────────────────────────────────────────


                       OBLIQUE-ANGLED TRIANGLES.

_s_ = ½(_a + b + c_)

[Illustration: [Oblique-angled Triangle]]

 ───────────┬─────────┬─────────────────────────────────────────────────
   Given.   │         │                    Formulæ.
 ───────────┼─────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────────────
  A,B,C,_a_ │  Area=  │(_a_^2 × Sin. B × Sin. C) ÷ 2 Sin. A
  A,_b_,_c_ │    „    │½(_c_ × _b_ × Sin. A)
 _a_,_b_,_c_│    „    │√(_s_(_s_ − _a_)(_s_ − _b_)(_s_ − _c_))
 ───────────┼─────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────────────
   Given.   │Required.│                    Formulæ.
 ───────────┼─────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────────────
   A,C,_a_  │   _c_   │           _c_ = _a_(Sin. C)/(Sin. A)
 ───────────┼─────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────────────
  A,_a_,_c_ │    C    │           Sin. C = (_c_ Sin. A)/(_a_)
 ───────────┼─────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────────────
  _a_,_c_,B │    A    │    Tan. A = (_a_ Sin. B)/(_c_ − _a_ Cos. B)
 ───────────┼─────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────────────
 _a_,_b_,_c_│    A    │Sin. ½A = √(((_s_ − _b_)(_s_ − _c_))/(_b_ × _c_))
      „     │    „    │   Cos. ½A = √((_s_(_s_ − _a_))/(_b_ × _c_));
      „     │    „    │ Tan. ½A = √(((_s_ − _b_)(_s_ − _c_))/(_s_(_s_ −
            │         │                     _a_)))
 ───────────┴─────────┴─────────────────────────────────────────────────


                            COMPOUND ANGLES.

  Sin. (A + B) = Sin. A Cos. B + Cos. A Sin. B.
  Sin. (A − B) = Sin. A Cos. B − Cos. A Sin. B.
  Cos. (A + B) = Cos. A Cos. B − Sin. A Sin. B.
  Cos. (A − B) = Cos. A Cos. B + Sin. A Sin. B.

Tan. (A + B) = (Tan. A + Tan. B)/(1 − Tan. A Tan. B).

Tan. (A − B) = (Tan. A − Tan. B)/(1 + Tan. A Tan. B).


       SLIDE RULE DATA SLIPS, COMPILED BY C. N. PICKWORTH, WH.SC.

 (_It is suggested that this page be removed by cutting through the above
 line, and selected portions of the Sectional Data Slips attached to the
                        back of the Slide Rule._)

                             ¹⁄₃₂  │0·03125
                             ¹⁄₁₆  │0·0625
                             ³⁄₃₂  │0·09375
                               ⅛   │0·125
                             ⁵⁄₃₂  │0·15625
                             ³⁄₁₆  │0·1875
                             ⁷⁄₃₂  │0·21875
                               ¼   │0·25
                             ⁹⁄₃₂  │0·28125
                             ⁵⁄₁₆  │0·3125
                             ¹¹⁄₃₂ │0·34375
                               ⅜   │0·375
                             ¹³⁄₃₂ │0·40625
                             ⁷⁄₁₆  │0·4375
                             ¹⁵⁄₃₂ │0·46875
                             ¹⁷⁄₃₂ │0·53125
                             ⁹⁄₁₆  │0·5625
                             ¹⁹⁄₃₂ │0·59375
                               ⅝   │0·625
                             ²¹⁄₃₂ │0·65625
                             ¹¹⁄₁₆ │0·6875
                             ²³⁄₃₂ │0·71875
                               ¾   │0·75
                             ²⁵⁄₃₂ │0·78125
                             ¹³⁄₁₆ │0·8125
                             ²⁷⁄₃₂ │0·84375
                               ⅞   │0·875
                             ²⁹⁄₃₂ │0·90625
                             ¹⁵⁄₁₆ │0·9375
                             ³¹⁄₃₂ │0·96875

Circ. of circle = 3·1416 _d_.

Area „ „ = 0·7854 _d_^2.

Sq. eq. area to cir., _s_ = 0·886 _d_.

Circle eq. to sq., _d_ = 1·128 _s_.

Sq. inscbd. in circ., _s_ = 0·707 _d_.

Circsb. circ. of sq., _d_ = 1·414 _s_.

Area of ellipse = 0.7854 _a_ × _b_.

Surface of sphere = 3·1416 _d_^2.

Volume „ „ = 0·5236 _d_^3.

  „ „ cone = 0·2618 _d_^2 _h_.

Radian = (180°)/(π) = 57·29 deg.

Base of nat. or hyp. log. = e = 2·7183.

Nat. or hyp. log. = com. log. × 2·3026.

g (at London) 32·18 ft. per sec., per sec.

Abs. temp. = deg. F. + 461° = deg. C. + 274°.

C.° = (5)/(9)(F.° − 32°); F.° = (9)/(5)C.° + 32°.

Cal. pr.—Ther. units per lb.: Coal, 14,300;

  petrol’m, 20,000; coal gas per cu. ft., 700.

Sp. heat:—Wt. iron, 0·1138; C.I., 0·1298;

  copper, brass, 0·095; lead, 0·0314.

Inch = 25·4 mil’metres; mil’metre = 0·03937 in.

Foot = 0·3048 metres; metre = 3·2809 feet.

Yard = 0·91438 metre; metre = 1·0936 yards.

Mile = 1·6093 kilomtrs.; kilomtr. = 0·6213 mile.

Sq. in. = 6·4513 sq. cm.; sq. cm. = 0·155 sq. in.

Sq. ft. = 9·29 sq. decmtr.; sq. decmtr. = 0·1076 sq. ft.

Sq. yd. = 0·836 sq. metre; sq. metre = 1·196 sq. yds.

Sq. ml. = 258·9 hectares; hectare = 0·00386 sq. ml.

Cu. in. = 16·386 c. cm.; c. cm. = 0·06102 cu. in.

Cu. ft. = 0·0283 c. metre; c. metre = 35·316 cu. ft.

Grain = 0·0648 gramme; gram. = 15·43 grs.

Ounce = 28·35 grams.; „ = 0·03527 oz.

Pound = 0·4536 kilogm.; kilogm. = 2·204 lb.

Ton = 1·016 tonnes; tonne = 0·9842 ton.

Mile per hr. = 1·466 ft., or 44·7 cm., per sec.

Lb. per cu. in. = 0·0276 kilogram per cu. cm.

Kilogram per cu. cm. = 36·125 lb. per cu. in.

Lb. per cu. ft. = 16·019 kilogm. per cu. mtre.

Grain per gall. = 0·01426 gramme per litre.

Gramme per litre = 70·116 grains per gall.

                   Ultimate Strength│Lb. per Sq. in.
                           „        │Tens’n.│Comp’n.
                   ─────────────────┼───────┼───────
                   Wt. iron         │ 50,000│ 50,000
                   Cast „           │ 16,000│ 95,000
                   Steel            │ 80,000│ 70,000
                   Copper           │ 21,000│ 50,000
                   Brass            │ 18,000│ 10,500
                   Lead             │  2,500│  7,000
                   Pine             │ 11,000│  6,000
                   Oak              │ 15,000│ 10,000

           Weight of Metals.│ Cub. In. │ Cub. Ft. │12 Cu. In.
           ─────────────────┼──────────┼──────────┼──────────
           Wt. iron         │     0·277│       480│      3·33
           Cast „           │     0·260│       450│      3·12
           Steel            │     0·283│       490│      3·40
           Copper           │     0·318│       550│      3·82
           Brass            │     0·300│       520│      3·61
           Zinc             │     0·248│       430│      2·98
           Alumin’m         │     0.096│       168│      1·16
           Lead             │     0.411│       710│      4·93

 Lb. per sq. in. = 2·31 ft. water = 2·04 in. mercury = 0·0703 kilo. per
    sq. cm.
 Atmosphere = 14·7 lb. per sq. in. = 33·94 ft. water = 1·0335 „ „
 Ft. hd. water = 0·433 lb. per sq. in. = 62·35 lb. per sq. ft. = 0·0304 „
    „
 Cub. ft. of water = 62·35 lb. = 0·0278 ton = 28·315 litres = 7·48 U.S.
    galls.
 Gall. (Imp.) = 277·27 cu. in. = 0·1604 cu. ft. = 10 lb. water = 4·544
    litres.
 Litre = 1·76 pints = 0·22 gall. = 61 cu. in. = 0·0353 cu. ft. = 0·264
    U.S. gall.
 Horse-power = 33,000 ft.-lb. per min. = 0·746 kilowatt = 42·4 heat units
    per min.
 Heat unit = 778 ft.-lb. = 1055 watt-sec. = 107·5 kilogrammetres = 0·252
    calorie.
 Foot-pound = 0·00129 heat unit = 1·36 joules = 0·1383 kilogrammetres.
 Kilowatt = 1·34 H.P. = 44,240 ft.-lb. per min. = 3412 heat units per
    hour.

-----

Footnote 1:

  It will be recognised that n is the characteristic of the logarithm of
  the original number.

Footnote 2:

  The special case in which the numerator is 1, 10, or any power of 10
  must be treated by the rule for reciprocals (page 27).

Footnote 3:

  The possible need for traversing the slide, to change the indices,
  when using the C and D scales, is not considered as a setting.

Footnote 4:

  The reader may be reminded that cross-multiplication of the factors in
  any such slide rule setting will give a constant product, _e.g._, 20 ×
  94·5 = 27 × 70.

Footnote 5:

  In this case cross _dividing_ gives a constant quotient, _e.g._, 8 ÷ 3
  = 4 ÷ 1·5. Since the upper scale is now a scale of reciprocals, the
  ratio is really

                               O   ⅛   ¼
                              ───────────
                               D  1·5  3

Footnote 6:

  These lines should not be brought to the working edge of the scale but
  should terminate in the horizontal line which forms the border of the
  finer graduations, their value being read into the calculation by
  means of the cursor (see page 55).

Footnote 7:

  The same principle may be applied to the cursor.

Footnote 8:

  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, 1815.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                         _BY THE SAME AUTHOR._


                       LOGARITHMS FOR BEGINNERS.

“An extremely useful and much-needed little work, giving a complete
explanation of the theory and use of logarithms, by a teacher of great
clearness and good style.”—_The Mining Journal._

                           1s. 8d. Post Free.


                        THE INDICATOR HANDBOOK.

Comprising “The Indicator: Its Construction and Application” and “The
Indicator Diagram: Its Analysis and Calculation.” Complete in One
Volume.

                          7s. 10d. Post Free.

“Mr. Pickworth’s judgment is always sound, and is evidently derived from
a personal acquaintance with indicator work.”—_The Engineer._


          POWER COMPUTER FOR STEAM, GAS AND OIL ENGINES, Etc.

“Accurate, expeditious and thoroughly practical.... We can confidently
recommend it, and engineers will find it a great boon in undertaking
tests, etc.”—_The Electrician._

                           7s. 6d. Post Free.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            ADVERTISEMENTS.


                        LOGARITHMS FOR BEGINNERS

For a full and intelligent appreciation of the Slide Rule and its
various applications an elementary knowledge of logarithms is necessary.
All that is required will be found in this little work, which gives a
simple, detailed and practical explanation of logarithms and their uses,
particular care having been taken to elucidate all difficult points by
the aid of a number of worked examples.

                  Seventh Edition, 1s. 8d. Post Free.


                             POWER COMPUTER
                                  for
                   STEAM, GAS, AND OIL ENGINES, Etc.

Gives The Indicated Horse-Power of Steam, Gas, and Oil Engines—The Brake
Horse-Power of Steam, Gas, and Oil Engines—The Size of Engine Necessary
to Develop any Given Power—The Mechanical Efficiency of an Engine—The
Ratio of Compound Engine Cylinders—The Piston Speed of an Engine—The
Delivery of Pumps with any Efficiency—The Horse-Power of Belting—The Rim
Speeds of Wheels, Speeds of Ropes, Belts, etc.—Speed Ratios of Pulleys,
Gearing, etc.

       Pocket size, in neat case, with instructions and examples.

                        Post Free, 7s. 6d. net.


                C. N. PICKWORTH, Withington, Manchester

 ┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
 │         W. P. THOMPSON,                     G. C. DYMOND,           │
 │ F.C.S., M.I.Mech.E., F.I.C.P.A.        M.I.Mech.E., F.I.C.P.A.      │
 │                                                                     │
 │                        W. P. Thompson & Co.,                        │
 │                    12 CHURCH STREET, LIVERPOOL,                     │
 │                      CHARTERED PATENT AGENTS.                       │
 │                                                                     │
 │           H. E. POTTS,                     J. V. ARMSTRONG,         │
 │  M.Sc., Hon. Chem., F.I.C.P.A.          M.Text.I., F.I.C.P.A.       │
 │                                                                     │
 │                        W. H. BEESTON, R.P.A.                        │
 └─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                BRITISH
                              SLIDE RULES

                                                           for all
                                                             ARTS and
                                                             INDUSTRIES

                                                               including

[Illustration: [Slide Rule]]

  _LOG-O-LOG
  DR. YOKOTA’S
  SURVEYORS’
  WIRELESS
  GUNNERY
  ELECTRICAL RULES, Etc._

                            SEND FOR LIST 55

MADE BY—

                     JOHN DAVIS & SON (Derby), Ltd.
                        ALL SAINTS’ WORKS, DERBY

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                           K & E Slide Rules

are constantly growing in popularity, and they can now be obtained from
the leading houses in our line throughout the United Kingdom.

[Illustration: [Slide Rule]]

  We manufacture a complete line of ENGINE-DIVIDED SLIDE RULES, and call
special attention to our Patent Adjustment, ensuring smooth working of
the Slide; also to our new “Frameless” Indicator, which hides no figures
on the Rule.

[Illustration: [Thacher’s Calculating Instrument]]

THACHER’S CALCULATING INSTRUMENT, for solving problems in
multiplication, division, or combinations of the two; has upwards of
33,000 divisions. Results can be obtained to the fourth and usually to
the fifth place of figures with a surprising degree of accuracy.

                              We also make

 ALL METAL, CIRCULAR, STADIA, CHEMISTS’, ELECTRICAL, and OTHER SPECIAL
                              SLIDE RULES
                   _DESCRIPTIVE CIRCULARS ON REQUEST_

                          KEUFFEL & ESSER CO.
  127 Fulton St., NEW YORK      General Office and Factories, HOBOKEN,
                                  N.J.
             CHICAGO − ST. LOUIS − SAN FRANCISCO − MONTREAL

                          _DRAWING MATERIALS_
                _MATHEMATICAL and SURVEYING INSTRUMENTS_
                           _MEASURING TAPES_

------------------------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration: 6 in. Standard with magnifying Cursor complete in pocket
case, 5/-]

                                 NORTON
                                   &
                                GREGORY
                                  LTD.


                              Head Office

          CASTLE LANE, WESTMINSTER,            LONDON, S.W. 1

                                Branches

                       71 QUEEN STREET, GLASGOW.
   PHOENIX HOUSE, QUEEN STREET and       SANDHILL, NEWCASTLE-ON-TYNE.


                SLIDE RULES in Stock, from 17/6 to 27/6

             Special Quotations to the Trade for Quantities


  For particulars of Surveying, Measuring and Mathematical Instruments,
      Appliances and Material of all kinds for the Drawing Office, write
      to the Head Office.

[Illustration: NORTON & GREGORY LTD]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                        NORTON & GREGORY, LTD.,
                                London.


                               “DIAMOND”
                          DRAWING INSTRUMENTS
                   Manufactured at our London Works.

                   CENTRE SCREW SPRING BOW HALF SET.

[Illustration: [Centre Screw Spring Bow Half Set]]

4 inch Spring Bow Half Set centre screw adjustment, with interchangeable
needle, pen, and pencil points Price 17/6

The Centre Screw Spring Bow Half Set of Compasses, as illustrated,
possesses the advantage of COMBINING IN ONE INSTRUMENT THE SET OF THREE
SEPARATE SPRING BOWS hitherto in use, while the centre screw makes for
ease and accuracy of manipulation, at the same time providing a radius
of over 2 inches, or double that of the old pattern.

This instrument is less expensive than the set of 3 bows, while
considerably stronger in construction.

The fixed needle point is shouldered.

This illustration is given as an indication of the various Drawing
Instruments manufactured by us.

Illustrated Booklet giving full particulars and prices of other
Instruments and Cases of Instruments sent on application.


   Specially arranged Sets of Instruments made for Colleges, Schools,
                          Technical Institutes

                  Estimates submitted on Application.


                      _Write to our Head Office_:
               CASTLE LANE, WESTMINSTER, LONDON, S.W. 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


                   DRAWING AND SURVEYING INSTRUMENTS

                           A. G. THORNTON Ltd.
     SLIDE RULES FOR          Paragon Works        ACCURATE SECTIONAL
        ENGINEERS            2 King St. West        PAPERS AND CLOTHS
                               MANCHESTER

  D 1916 Illustrated Catalogue, just published, in two editions; Drawing
     Office (448 pages); Draughtsman’s (160 pages): the most complete
                         Catalogues in the trade.

              _CONTRACTORS TO H.M. WAR OFFICE AND ADMIRALTY_
 _Manufacturers also of Drawing Materials and Drawing Office Stationary._

          (ALSO AT MINERVA WORKS AND ALBERT MILLS, MANCHESTER.)


                        MATHEMATICAL INSTRUMENTS
                         SURVEYING INSTRUMENTS
                              SLIDE RULES
                       For Students and Engineers

     MANNHEIM, POLYPHASE, DUPLEX, ELECTRICAL, LOG-LOG, AND CALCULEX

                           J. H. STEWARD LTD.
                      Scientific Instrument Makers

                    406 STRAND, and 457 WEST STRAND
                             LONDON, W.C. 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                    _A True Friend and Trusty Guide_


                                  THE
                           ‘HALDEN CALCULEX’

[Illustration: [Halden Calculex]]

                     ACTUAL SIZE| | | BRITISH MADE

           The handiest and most perfect form of Slide Rule.
            Does all that can be done with a straight rule.
              Complete in Case, with book of instructions,
                            27/6 post free.

           J. HALDEN & CO., LTD., 8 ALBERT SQUARE MANCHESTER

   _Depots_—London, Newcastle-on-Tyne, Birmingham, Glasgow, and Leeds

------------------------------------------------------------------------


[Illustration: [Rope]]

                              ENGINEERING,
                               SURVEYING
                                  AND
                              MATHEMATICAL
                              INSTRUMENTS,
                                  ETC.


                              SLIDE RULES.

                        JOSEPH CASARTELLI & SON,
                     43 MARKET STREET, MANCHESTER.
               Tel. No. 2958 City.| | | Established 1790.

ROPE DRIVING

  Is the most EFFICIENT and most ECONOMICAL METHOD of Power
  Transmission.

The LAMBETH Cotton Driving Rope

  Is the most EFFICIENT and most ECONOMICAL ROPE for Power Transmission.

[Illustration: Made 4 Strand or 3 Strand.]

SPECIAL FEATURES:

  LESS STRETCH THAN ANY OTHER ROPE. MORE PLIABLE THAN ANY OTHER ROPE.
  GREATER DRIVING POWER THAN ANY OTHER ROPE.

              THOMAS HART LTD., Lambeth Works, BLACKBURN.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 Page           Changed from                      Changed to

   24 the right, so the number of      the right, so the number of
      digits in the answer = 3 − 2 × 1 digits in the answer = 3 − 2 + 1
      = 2                              = 2

  116 grammes, we have the equation,   grammes, we have the equation,
      _x_ × (Cl.)/(Ag.Cl.) ×           _x_ = (Cl.)/(Ag.Cl.) ×
      (_a_)/(_s_). Hence, the mark     (_a_)/(_s_). Hence, the mark

 ● Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.
 ● Used numbers for footnotes, placing them all at the end of the last
     chapter.
 ● Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 ● Enclosed bold font in =equals=.
 ● The caret (^) serves as a superscript indicator, applicable to
     individual characters (like 2^d) and even entire phrases (like
     1^{st}).
 ● Subscripts are shown using an underscore (_) with curly braces { },
     as in H_{2}O.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SLIDE RULE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


