The Project Gutenberg eBook of When Oriole traveled westward
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: When Oriole traveled westward

Author: Amy Bell Marlowe

Release date: June 4, 2025 [eBook #76223]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1921

Credits: Aaron Adrignola, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHEN ORIOLE TRAVELED WESTWARD ***





                     When Oriole Traveled Westward

                          By AMY BELL MARLOWE

                               AUTHOR OF
               "WHEN ORIOLE CAME TO HARBOR LIGHT," "THE
                OLDEST OF FOUR," "WYN'S CAMPING DAYS,"
                "THE GIRLS OF RIVERCLIFF SCHOOL," ETC.

                               NEW YORK
                           GROSSET & DUNLAP
                              PUBLISHERS

                          COPYRIGHT, 1921, BY
                           GROSSET & DUNLAP

                    _When Oriole Traveled Westward_




                               CONTENTS


                          I. AN ADVENTURE ON THE ICE

                         II. TEDDY FORD

                        III. STRANGE ACTIONS

                         IV. ORIOLE IS WORRIED

                          V. WHAT HAPPENED IN THE NIGHT

                         VI. TEDDY FORD'S STORY

                        VII. OTHER PEOPLE'S TROUBLES

                       VIII. ORIOLE'S OWN TROUBLES

                         IX. A GREAT CHANGE COMING

                          X. PARTINGS

                         XI. A GREAT DEAL THAT IS NEW

                        XII. EXCITING TIMES

                       XIII. AT THE RANGE CAMP

                        XIV. CHING FOO

                         XV. MOLLY

                        XVI. THE SPRING ROUND-UP

                       XVII. THE BIRD OF FREEDOM

                      XVIII. A NEW DEAL

                        XIX. AN EXCITING FISHING PARTY

                         XX. BRUIN ON THE LINE

                        XXI. NEWS OF MOMENT

                       XXII. SOMETHING GOING ON

                      XXIII. SUSPICION IS RIFE

                       XXIV. THE TWINS IN TROUBLE

                        XXV. NATURE'S WONDERS

                       XXVI. AT CLOSE QUARTERS

                      XXVII. THE WRIST WATCH

                     XXVIII. SHALL ORIOLE BE TOLD?

                       XXIX. OF COURSE!

                        XXX. THE PROMISE OF THE FUTURE




                     WHEN ORIOLE TRAVELED WESTWARD




                               CHAPTER I

                        AN ADVENTURE ON THE ICE


Christmas had been so fair, if not balmy, that Oriole Putnam, for the
first time spending the principal New England holidays at Littleport,
scarcely expected the black frost that followed close on the heels of
New Year's Day.

Indeed, the tale of that local celebrity, "the oldest inhabitant," was
that for forty years previous the bays and inlets about Littleport had
not been so chained by the Frost King as they were now.

Littleport Harbor was frozen over so solidly that a Government
ice-breaker was sent to open a channel for the Paulmouth packet to get
in and out of the port. This channel, however, did not offer a safe way
for Oriole to reach Harbor Island Light in Nat Jardin's power dory.

"And I _am_ so worried about Uncle Nat's rheumatism, and whether Ma
Stafford has recovered from that felon she had on her finger," Oriole
told Lyddy Ann, the maid-of-all-work at Mrs. Rebecca Joy's house and
Oriole's confidante and friend. "I just _must_ find some way of getting
over to the island."

During the open season, and ever since she had come to stay with Mrs.
Joy, in the big old Dexter mansion on State Street, Oriole had driven
the dory back and forth between the port and Harbor Light at least once
a week. To be debarred from this habit and association was really a
trial for the girl.

Oriole was an active and ingenious girl, and this, her first winter
away from her semi-tropical home near Bahia, Brazil, was a most
marvelous experience for her. The fun and frolic to be had in her
present environment was neglected in no particular by the girl.

Although she was quite familiar with roller-skating, for the first time
that she could remember she now saw ice skating. It was not a difficult
matter for the girl to become proficient upon ice skates.

Before the bay was frozen over, as it now was, she had learned to skate
on a shallow pond near Mrs. Joy's, in company with Minnie and Flossy
Payne and other members of the Busy Bees, as their school society was
called. Minnie and Flossy were Oriole's closest chums of her own age.
But since Mr. Harvey Langdon had come from the West to claim his twin
children, Myron and Marian, Oriole Putnam had spent much time with them
every day. And now, while the skating was so good, she took the little
ones out on the ice quite frequently.

The ranchman could not do too much for the twins, and he fully trusted
them in Oriole's care. That is how it came about that, on this rather
bleak if sunshiny afternoon, Oriole was drawing the twins on their sled
swiftly over the pebbly ice toward Harbor Light Island.

They were going to have supper with Nat Jardin and his housekeeper,
Ma Stafford, and the pleasure in prospect was almost as great, in the
opinion of the twins, as that which they were having on the ice.

"Say, Oriole!" shouted the boy twin from his seat on the sled. "Do you
s'pose Ma Stafford will have hot cakes for supper?"

"M-m-m!" chanted Marian. "I des _love_ hot cakes. With syrup, too."

"Everybody does," declared Oriole, replying first to the little girl.
"And of course Ma Stafford will have hot cakes. She always does this
time of year."

"I hope she will have plenty of 'em," Myron added. "If she doesn't----"

"Well, what if she doesn't?" asked Oriole.

"I'll have to give part of mine to Mawyann, and she's such a little
pig."

"I'm not a pig!" wailed his sister. "But I like hot cakes."

"You should not say that about Marian," admonished Oriole. "Suppose
your papa heard you?"

"He can't hear me clear out here on the ice," Myron said confidently.
"And anyway, he's gone to see Nurse Brown. He couldn't hear me."

"That does not matter," Oriole told him, still with seriousness. "What
are you? Just an eye-server?"

"What's that?" asked the little boy, startled. "My--my eyes are all
right."

"I got sumfin in my eye once," cried Marian. "It was a singer. Nursie
got it out with the corner of her han'kercher. She did!"

"I guess it was a cinder, not a singer," commented Oriole. She had
halted with her back to the wind, the better to talk to and hear the
twins. "But an 'eye-server,' Myron, is what Mrs. Rebecca Joy calls
those people that you can't trust to do as well out of your sight as
they do when you watch 'em. You ought to speak just as nicely of your
sister when you are away from your papa as you do when he can hear."

"You're talking about hearing, not seeing, Oriole Putnam," said the
young culprit promptly.

"It amounts to the same thing. But I can't stand here all day and argue
because you are naughty, Myron Langdon. We must get on," and she caught
up her stroke again and jerked the sled into motion.

Oriole was skating rapidly toward the island, the sled following her
swift pace at the end of a long rope. Head down, breathing deeply, eyes
and cheeks aglow, the girl pursued her flight at top speed while the
twins on the sled screamed their delight.

Although Myron and Marian were not many months past their fourth
birthday, they were plucky little youngsters. Myron was especially a
brave child. He clung to the hand-lines of the sled while his sister
sat close behind him, her plump, gaitered legs astraddle and clinging
with both hands to the belt of her brother's coat.

There were a good many other skaters on the ice besides Oriole Putnam;
but they were not so far down the harbor. But the several iceboats
raced from the wharves to the edge of the Tide Flow where the current
was always so strong that ice never formed.

Oriole was well away from the Flow and far from the channel the
ice-breaking steamer had made, so that there was no danger of either
her or the twins going into the water. At least, any one with judgment
would have said the trio were quite safe.

There were, however, thin patches in the harbor ice. Usually they were
to be observed rods away. The lift of the tide had opened holes here
and there, and these holes had been skimmed over again with thin ice.
These blue patches Oriole very carefully avoided. She was not the girl
to take risks with her own life or that of her charges.

The objects before her on Harbor Light Island stood out distinctly
in the afternoon sunshine. The tall white staff of the light, in the
little barnacle-like cottage at the foot of which she had lived when
she first came to the island, was an object that could be seen far, far
at sea.

But now Uncle Nat and Ma lived in the old house at the northern end of
the island, overlooking the main entrance to Littleport Harbor. Oriole
was steering for the tiny cove just below the bluff on which this
cottage stood.

The girl and the sled were not a quarter of a mile from her destination
when Anson Cope's _Bluebird_, the biggest ice-craft on the bay, came
whirling down upon them. It did not seem that the steersman of the
huge craft could escape seeing Oriole and the sled. And of course he
did not. But he ran dangerously close to the small figures on the ice.

Marian looked over her shoulder and began to scream with terror. But it
was several seconds before Oriole was aware of the close approach of
the ice-craft. Then the peak of the big sail seemed to be hanging right
over her head.

Oriole screamed, too, but she was not stricken helpless. She swerved in
her course and tried to get the sled off to one side. The _Bluebird_
tacked, and as the mainsail swung over, the steersman caught another
glimpse of the girl and the sled and its burden.

The peril was too imminent then for the master of the iceboat to change
his course. He had the Tide Flow directly ahead. In a moment he must
tack again to escape disaster.

His starboard runners crashed through the thin ice upon the pool which
Oriole was skirting. It was a terrific smash and the water flew high in
the air--a regular geyser.

In falling, the deluge overwhelmed the girl. She fell upon her knees,
and, sliding and scrambling, plunged suddenly into the cold sea. She
could not cast off the drag-rope; and even that would not have saved
the twins from a ducking. The sled was aimed right at the open water
and it followed Oriole through the broken ice.

The force of the wind had driven the iceboat a mile on its way back
toward the port by the time Oriole and the twins were actually in the
water. The boatmen were too far away to render the least assistance.
By the time they could return, the three in the water would have been
under the ice.

But Oriole Putnam was not helpless. Fearful as she was for her own
safety, she thought at once of Myron and Marian. She went down in her
first plunge far below the surface of the sea; but during the previous
summer while living at Harbor Light she had learned to swim and was not
afraid of the water itself.

She made her way to the surface and rose as high as she could among
the broken cakes of ice. The entire surface ice of the pool had been
crushed by the weight of the iceboat. Its swift passage was all that
had saved it from wreck.

There was nothing stable for Oriole to cling to. Nor was she at once
looking for escape. She looked for the little heads of the twins.

She saw the sled. Two little blue-coated arms were about it, the
mittened hands clinging fast.

She dashed the splintered ice out of her way and plunged toward the
sled. One of the twins clung fast. Where was the other?

Oriole was sobbing in her throat, despairing and afraid. What should
she say to Mr. Langdon, who had trusted the twins to her care? Oriole
felt at this moment that she must be judged guilty for the accident.

She plunged forward and caught one of the blue arms. Myron's head
popped up. The boy was actually self-possessed!

"I can't see Mawyann!" he sputtered. "I can't see her!"

"Wait! Wait!" begged Oriole. "She must be here--she must!"

"She ain't," said Myron. "She's so silly! She went right down under the
ice."

His own teeth were chattering, but he managed to speak quite plainly.
Oriole had all she could do to hold him up and keep above the surface
herself. Had she caught sight of little Marian she would have had to
desert Myron to get his sister.

Oriole could see nobody on the ice near enough to aid them in their
terrible predicament. Little Marian did not appear upon the surface of
the troubled water. As the moments slipped by the girl felt that here
was tragedy. The little Langdon girl, who had been as much her care as
Myron, must be drowned!




                              CHAPTER II

                              TEDDY FORD


Holding Myron Langdon up in the crook of one arm, Oriole clung to the
floating sled with her other hand and tried to kick herself and Myron
toward the edge of the thicker ice. This was no light task. She was not
at all sure that both Myron and herself would not sink as Marian had.

The girl from Bahia had been through so much tragedy during these last
months that she did not give up hope easily. But the chill of the sea
and the helplessness of her charge hampered Oriole dreadfully. Her
progress in pushing the sled before her was slow indeed.

She had not tried to cry out for help. What would be the use? The
iceboat was a long distance away and it would take many minutes for
anybody aboard that craft to return to aid Oriole and the twins. And
the girl had seen nobody else in the vicinity.

Suddenly, however, she saw a figure scrambling over the thick ice
toward the hole where she struggled with her burden. The newcomer was
a boy--a boy not much older than Oriole herself, she felt sure; and at
this instant Oriole thought him the very handsomest boy she had ever
seen!

He did not wear skates and he had some trouble in reaching the edge of
the hole; but he came on with determination, and soon she heard him
shouting:

"Hold on! Hold on! I'll get you out!"

"Get Marian! Oh, do, please, save Marian!" shrieked Oriole Putnam. "I
can hang on to Myron a long time yet. And we've got the sled. Save
Marian."

The boy, who had curly brown hair and a pink and white complexion,
reached the edge of the broken ice and peered over the surface of the
hole. Something dark rose almost to the surface and not very far out.

"I see it!" cried the stranger, who was already drawing off his coat.

Just as though it were summer and he was in his bathing suit, the boy
dived into the ice-strewn water. Oriole was smitten with the thought
that perhaps she had urged him to disaster. The chill of the sea was
fast paralyzing her own limbs and the pressure about her heart was like
that of a tightly drawn band.

She feared that she had encouraged this very good-looking boy to risk
his life--and in an impossible attempt to drag forth the little girl.
Oriole had not seen Marian's body rise so near the surface.

But when the big boy came up with a great splutter not far from Oriole
and the sled, he bore the unconscious little girl in his arms. He
trod water, standing almost erect, dashed the spray from his eyes and
actually grinned at Oriole.

"I got her! The poor kid!" he cried.

It was when he smiled that Oriole saw he had such nice white teeth and
that the expression of his face was very winning. She thought, even in
this dangerous moment:

"He's ever so much better looking than Billy Bragg--and Billy was a
nice boy, too."

Billy Bragg had been connected with the first great adventure of
Oriole's life.

Brought up as she had been in the suburbs of the city of Bahia, a
Brazilian metropolis, her quiet life with her mother and father, who
had gone there years before from the United States, had scarcely
prepared Oriole for what happened to her when the Putnam family decided
to return to their own country.

Sailing on the British steamship _Helvetia_, the family expected to
be in New York in a very few days. But the _Helvetia_ met another
and unknown ship in collision in mid-ocean and had the purser's boat
not been picked up by the _Adrian Marple_, with Oriole as one of its
rescued passengers, Oriole certainly would never have seen Harbor
Light, and of course she would not have known Billy Bragg.

Billy was the cabin boy aboard the _Adrian Marple_. Billy was, Oriole
had often told Nat Jardin and her other friends, the very nicest boy
she had ever known. In spite of the fact that the cabin boy's character
seemed to fit his name very closely--Bragg--the girl from Brazil always
remembered Billy with interest.

Misfortune seemed to have followed hard upon Oriole Putnam. She
believed her mother and father had been rescued by the ship that had
collided with the _Helvetia_; but of this neither she nor anybody else
could be positive.

The _Adrian Marple_, Boston bound from Mediterranean ports, suffered
disaster, as well as the ship on which Oriole had sailed from Bahia,
although in a different way. She "stubbed her toe," as old Nat Jardin,
the lightkeeper, said, upon the Camper Reef off Harbor Island, and
although Billy Bragg and Oriole were together when the steamship struck
and Oriole was saved by the lightkeeper himself, she had never seen
Billy since the hour of the wreck.

She often thought of Billy Bragg, as well as of her own dear mother and
father. The uncertainty of her parents' safety had at first made Oriole
very sad, although the lightkeeper and Ma Stafford, his housekeeper,
loved and protected the girl as though she were their very own.

The fresh environment of Harbor Island gradually cheered Oriole and she
came to the conclusion that her mother and father had been carried away
around the world by the ship that had collided with the _Helvetia_.
That ship might be a sailing vessel, and she knew that if it was so,
and Mr. and Mrs. Putnam were aboard of it, it might be months and
months before they reached an American port.

As related in a previous volume entitled "When Oriole Came to Harbor
Light," many adventures had come to Oriole since she had landed
upon the rock-riven island near which she was now struggling in the
icy water. But nothing had really been as serious as this present
predicament.

She feared that she could not much longer bear Myron, the boy twin,
up above the sea. She tried to place him on the sled, but failed. If
she had not been able to cling to the sled she would have gone down
herself.

And what could she ever say to Mr. Harvey Langdon if she allowed either
of the twins to drown? The big Western ranchman had only recently come
East to recover his children after the wreck of the Portland steamboat.
Myron and Marian had been saved from that disaster by Nat Jardin and
Oriole; but the children's nurse, who had been with them, had received
a heavy blow on the head and had not as yet recovered her memory.

Much against Oriole's and Nat Jardin's desires, the twins had been
placed in the town orphan asylum and might never have been discovered
by their father had not Oriole written and paid for an advertisement in
the newspapers that drew the ranchman East in his search for his lost
children.

That Mr. Langdon trusted her so fully with the twins was the
thought that now so keenly rasped Oriole's mind. If the twins were
lost--drowned! The thought was indeed shocking.

And then she saw this handsome boy who had come to her help lift the
little saturated body of Marian out upon the thick ice. He turned
swiftly and reached the sled in two strokes. He seized Myron just as
Oriole's hold was slipping.

"Hang on to that sled, girl!" commanded the boy earnestly. "I'll come
back for you."

"My--my name's Oriole Putnam," gasped Oriole faintly. But the boy
evidently did not hear.

He raised Myron, who struggled a little and sputtered too, high in his
arms and cast the boy out upon the ice beside his sister. Oriole began
to kick again and force the sled nearer the thick ice.

"All right, girl!" shouted the very vigorous and able boy. "I'm going
to lift you up, and you grab hold of the ice and try to pull yourself
out."

He did as he said he would and Oriole tried to do as he commanded.
It was a hard struggle, but it did not last many seconds. She found
herself face downward on the ice, her feet still in the water, and
kicking vigorously.

Oriole never had seen such a quick and muscular boy as this one. Even
Billy Bragg had not been able to perform such feats of strength and
agility. The stranger raised himself quickly upon the sled, which sank
slowly under him; and then the boy scrambled out to the ice and drew
the sled up after him.

"There!" he chattered, yet grinning, too. "I've saved the whole crew
and the sled into the bargain. Where--where shall we take these kids?"

"Oh! To the island. Up there to Ma Stafford and Uncle Nat," cried
Oriole, and she struggled to her feet and pointed to the bluff on which
stood the old house where Nat Jardin and Ma Stafford now lived.

"Come on, girl," said the stranger, offering her a hand to steady her
on her feet. "If you can carry yourself I'll take the kids."

"Can you carry both Myron and Marian?"

"I reckon," said the boy carelessly. "Gee! ain't it cold?"

"My name is--is Oriole Putnam," chattered the girl.

"Don't be so particular," said the boy, hurriedly grabbing at Myron and
Marian. "My name's Teddy Ford. And I guess nobody knows me much around
here, so there isn't anybody to introduce us. Come on! You'll freeze
stiff."

Little Marian's coat had already frozen to the ice. She looked so blue
in the face, with her eyes shut so tight, that Oriole was terribly
frightened about her. Myron sputtered and squalled his objections when
Teddy Ford dropped him on the ice again to tear his sister loose from
the frost-hold.

"Run!" commanded the boy. "You'll get your death of cold. What's your
name?"

"I--I tell yu-yu-you it--it's Oriole," chattered the girl.

"All right. You're a bird, Oriole. Fly!"

Thus adjured Oriole started at a rather stiff-legged trot across the
ice. She had lost her skates in the water (and it was lucky for her she
had) and found plowing over the ice a very uncertain procedure. But
Teddy Ford seemed to be as sure footed as a cat!

He hugged a twin under each arm and ran after Oriole, soon overtaking
her.

"Where's that place you are going to? Is there a fire?" he demanded.

"The cottage. Up there. On the island."

"Not to the lighthouse?" panted the boy.

"No, no! Uncle Nat and Ma are at this cottage. It is nearer, anyway."

"That is what we want--the nearest place. Gee! don't fall."

"I wish you would--wouldn't say that," admonished the chattering Oriole.

"Say what?"

"'Gee.' It sounds like driving ox--oxen. And I'm no--not an ox."

"Gee!" ejaculated Teddy Ford. Then: "Oh! I didn't meanter. I mean 'mean
to.' You're--you're awful particular, ain't you?"

But Oriole was too cold to answer. This was no time and place, after
all, to be "particular."

She fell down once--flat on her face and bumped her chin. But she
scrambled up again before the boy could drop the twins to help her.

"Go on! Go on!" she begged. "Don't stop for me!"

"You see that you come, then," he shouted back at her, and hurried
ahead, landing and climbing up the path to the top of the bluff several
rods ahead of Oriole.

He had not actually known how very badly off Oriole Putnam was. She was
as brave as girl could be, but she was chilled to the very marrow (or
so Ma Stafford would have said) and when the boy had left her she made
but slow headway.

Indeed, the girl was well nigh exhausted--she scarcely had breath to
cry out--when the door of the old house opened and Nat Jardin put his
head out to see who was approaching.




                              CHAPTER III

                            STRANGE ACTIONS


Oriole Putnam did not have breath to introduce Teddy Ford to the old
lightkeeper. She just panted as she staggered to the open door of the
cottage. But Nat Jardin did not need to be introduced to Myron and
Marian.

"Sho! I wanta know what's happened to them babies?" he demanded. "You
been trying to drown 'em? The poor leetle things! Bring 'em right in
here----"

"For the good land's sake!" broke in Ma Stafford from behind the
lightkeeper's rather bulky figure. "What's the meaning of such things,
I want to know? Give me that child! She's as blue as indigo and nigh
about gone!"

Ma Stafford grabbed Marian out of the boy's arms. Uncle Nat seized the
other twin. For the minute the two old people scarcely noticed the
boy and Oriole, both quite as wet as the twins--their clothing indeed
already stiffening in the cold air.

But Jardin did shout for them to come in and shut the door. There
was a hot fire in the kitchen stove and it was just like coming into
a conservatory to enter that room from the open air. Oriole and the
strange boy hurried to the stove.

"You all been in the water," clucked Ma Stafford. "I knew well enough
that ice warn't safe, 'Thaniel. Now, didn't I tell you so?"

"'Twarn't safe where they got, sure 'nough," agreed Jardin. "This boy's
all right, Ma. His eyes is open--and he's a plucky little feller, like
I always said he was. Ain't you, Myron?"

"Is--is Mawyann all right?" gasped the twin.

"Sure she is," declared Jardin warmly. "Ma'll fix her up."

"Oriole!" cried the old woman, "you get me rough towels out of the
dresser drawer. You know where they be. For the land's sake! You ain't
fitten to do anything yourself, you are so sopping."

"Both she and this boy better git their wet clothes off," advised the
old man, beginning to strip little Myron before the kitchen stove.

"I'm going to take this child into the sittin' room. There's a good
fire in the base-burner. You come, too, Oriole, child," urged Ma.
"There must be something dry of yours here that you can put on. How
ever did it happen?"

That was what Uncle Nat wanted to know of Teddy Ford when they were
left alone with Myron in the kitchen.

"I came over from Paulmouth on that boat of Captain Diggers. He said
there might be a job over this way for a boy. And I started down toward
that life saving station you can see from out yonder----"

"Cap'n Petty's station at the Flow," interjected Nat Jardin.

"I heard there was a man down there could use a boy. I think I would
like to work on a boat, or alongshore. You see, I never saw the ocean
before."

"Sho, now! That so?" queried the old man, interested.

"And I was walking on the ice because it was the shortest cut, they
said, and it seemed so. I saw that big iceboat make that dive for this
girl and the sled----"

"Whose boat was it?" asked Jardin quickly.

"I don't know. But it was a big one. It just slued right around, almost
hitting that girl and the sled she was dragging, and the ice smashed
right in--a big splotch of it. Gee! but they didn't have a chance. They
all went into the water together."

"That's purt' serious, I cal'late," said Jardin, now, having stripped
the little trembling body of Myron Langdon. "Gimme that towel. I got to
rub this boy till he shines! You use that other one. What did ye say
your name was?"

"Teddy Ford. I don't belong around here."

"No, I see ye don't. Not if you never saw the sea before," chuckled Nat
Jardin. "You come from away back in the tall timber, I cal'late?"

"I ain't no greenhorn," declared Teddy Ford quickly, but he smiled, and
Nat Jardin found that smile, as Oriole had found it, most winning. "But
I come a long way to get here."

"And why did you come?" asked the old man, rubbing Myron until he was
all in a pink glow.

The bigger boy flashed the lightkeeper a curious look. "Oh--I got
restless, I guess. Seems to me I wanted to get as far away from my old
stamping grounds as possible. And I guess I have. Gee!"

"H'm," considered the lightkeeper. "You look like a purt' nice boy. But
that's kind of a swear-word you use so frequent, and I'd rather you
didn't say it before this here little feller. Myron imitates just like
a parrot."

"Oh!" exclaimed Teddy Ford. "I'm always saying 'gee,' but it don't mean
anything."

"Then don't use it," advised the lightkeeper, quite unaware that he
used exclamatory expressions himself at times that were quite as
meaningless. "You getting warm?"

"Yes, sir."

"There's coffee in that pot. You shove it for'ard. You'll have a cup
and it'll warm you up. Ma will make some cocoa or hot milk for these
young ones and Oriole."

He wrapped Myron in a big shawl of Ma's, told him to sit still on the
kitchen settee and not wriggle, and went off to his own room to find
some dry garments for the strange boy.

"You--you are an awful good boy," stammered Myron, gazing at the other
rubbing himself down. Myron was what Ma called "a noticing child,"
which meant that he was thoughtful for his age. "You saved Mawyann."

"'Marian'?" repeated Teddy Ford. "And your name is Myron? Say, that's
funny, too!" and Ted stared at the little fellow reflectively.

"What is funny?" asked Myron.

But just then Nat Jardin came back with under-garments, socks, a pair
of canvas shoes, and a suit of overalls that would at least cover the
strange boy if they did not well fit him. Ted put them on, staring most
of the time at little Myron.

By and by Oriole appeared in some of the old clothes she had left on
the island when, several months before, she had gone to live with Mrs.
Rebecca Joy on the mainland. She began to smile the moment she saw
Teddy Ford.

"Oh, dear me!" she said, "how funny you look in those dungarees of
Uncle Nat's. But I guess you were just as wet as I was, Teddy Ford."

"I went into the same water," he told her, grinning again.

Oriole thought that smile of the curly-haired boy quite entrancing. She
really could not help looking at him.

"How's little Marian getting on?" asked Nat Jardin.

"She is going to be all right," was Oriole's reassuring reply. "Ma says
she only swallowed a little water, and she is as warm as toast now."

"The poor child----"

"Sa-ay!" burst out Teddy Ford suddenly, "are these kids twins?"

"Of course they are," said Oriole.

"And their names are Myron and Marian?" insisted the big boy.

"Of course. You saved Marian, and her father will be _so_ thankful to
you--you wait and see."

"I want to know what their last name is," said the boy, growing
suddenly very red in the face. "It can't be--Gee!"

"There you go again, son," said Nat Jardin. "I cal'late it is going to
be some hard for you to break yourself of saying that."

But now Teddy Ford paid no attention to the old lightkeeper. He was
staring at Oriole.

"Say!" he demanded, "does the father of these kids live around here?"

"He is living at the Littleport Inn. Yes, sir," replied the surprised
girl.

"And--and their mother?"

Oriole put a finger upon her own lips and shook her head. "No, no!" she
whispered. "They don't know anything about their mother. She--she is
dead."

Oriole said this almost in Teddy Ford's ear so that Myron should not
overhear what she said.

"Oh!" said the boy. "But they _do_ live around here, then? What's their
name?"

"Why! Myron and Marian."

"Gee! Don't I know that?" muttered Teddy Ford. "But the rest of it?
Their family name?"

"Their father is Mr. Harvey Langdon----"

This time Teddy interrupted her with a very emphatic "Gee!" indeed.
His face turned from fiery red to white, and his eyes glowed with what
Oriole correctly guessed was anger.

"S-s-s-say!" he stuttered hoarsely, "you don't mean to say the father
of these two kids is Harvey Langdon, the ranchman?"

"Why, yes. That is exactly who he is," said Oriole, her own eyes wide
with wonder.

"I--I didn't know--I hadn't the first idea he was in the East,"
stammered Teddy Ford.

"He came on here to Littleport to find Myron and Marian. They were
lost----"

"Yes, I heard talk about that," muttered the boy.

"You never came from away out West where Mr. Langdon and the twins
live?" gasped Oriole.

"Never mind where I came from," growled Teddy Ford, seizing his still
wet cap that he had hung behind the stove to dry. "I know these
Langdons--you bet I do!"

"Why, Teddy Ford! you sound just as though you did not like them. And
you saved Marian--and Myron and me too--from drowning."

"I would never have saved that kid if I'd known she was Harvey
Langdon's!" exclaimed the boy angrily. "You can just bet I wouldn't!"

"Oh! How wicked!"

"I don't care!" muttered the boy. "Let it be wicked. Gee! if you'd gone
through what _I_ have----"

"But surely these little children never harmed you," began Oriole.

"Never mind. I know what their father is. I don't want to have a thing
more to do with Harvey Langdon--nor those kids, either!"

Oriole was too amazed to speak. Uncle Nat had gone into the other room
to see for himself how Marian was, while Myron was snuggled down on the
settee almost asleep.

Teddy Ford started for the outer door, pulling his damp cap down over
his curls. He carried his coat over his arm. That garment had not been
in the sea.

"Oh! Oh!" cried Oriole.

"Never you mind. I'm not going to hang around here where Harvey Langdon
may show up any minute. Not me!"

The next moment he had dashed out of the cottage. Oriole ran after him
and looked out. But she could not see him, so fast had the strange boy
moved. Besides, it was past sunset and fast growing dark.

"Well! did you ever?" murmured the amazed Oriole. "Such strange
actions! That Teddy Ford is just the funniest boy I ever saw!"




                              CHAPTER IV

                           ORIOLE IS WORRIED


Nat Jardin was quite as amazed as Oriole when he came out of the
sitting room and found that Teddy Ford had departed. But when he
considered the boy's garments drying around the stove, and the fact
that those Teddy had on were quite too ridiculous for him to wear very
far, the old lightkeeper was relieved.

"I cal'late he ain't gone far," he said to Oriole soothingly. "He'll
come back. How did you get him mad?"

"I never, Uncle Nat!" cried the girl. "I never said a thing to him.
But----" and she volubly told her old friend the strange things Teddy
Ford had said about the father of the twins. "Did you ever?" was her
conclusion.

"Never heard the beat of that," agreed Nat Jardin. "Looks like he
came from clear out West--like Mr. Langdon did. Knowed him at home, I
cal'late."

"Why--why, Teddy Ford must be a Western cowboy, too!" Oriole cried.

"He's a boy all right; and I cal'late he's from the West," chuckled Nat
Jardin. "What he knows about cows is another matter. And I cal'late I
better go milk our'n right now. 'Tis time."

He got his storm hat and coat and started out with the milk pail to
do the chores. But actually he was more anxious to find out what had
become of Teddy Ford than anything else. The night was bound to be a
cold one, and the strange boy was but thinly dressed.

But he found him nowhere among the outbuildings which were nearer to
the lighthouse tower than they were to the cottage on the northern
bluff which Nat Jardin now occupied. During this winter, because of
an accident that had occurred and a long siege of rheumatism he had
suffered, Nat Jardin had been replaced in the care of the light by a
substitute lightkeeper. But he expected to go back to his old job in
the spring.

For more than twenty years Nat Jardin had lived on Harbor Island and
had kept the Harbor Light. He would have been "fair on his beam ends"
if he had been obliged to go elsewhere to live, as he often declared.
But old as he was, he was of a vigorous constitution and save when the
rheumatism took him down, he was quite able to attend to the lamp and
to the heavier chores about the island. Finally Nat Jardin brought in
the milk, announcing that everything was "shipshape" for the night.

"But I cal'late that boy laid a course for the main," he added. "And
him only half dressed. I don't understand it, Oriole."

"He seemed like such a nice boy," sighed the girl.

"I guess if he plunged right into that water and saved you all, as he
did, he must be nice," said Ma Stafford briskly.

"But we know Mr. Harvey Langdon is a nice man," said Oriole warmly.

Myron and Marian had been given bread and milk and were now in bed,
with a hot flatiron at their feet. Ma Stafford was taking no chances in
the matter of the twins taking cold after their exposure.

Marian had cried for "cakes." The ducking had not caused her to forget
those delicacies, and she was an insistent little thing when she was
roused.

"Never see the beat!" Ma exclaimed. "Let that young one see a new moon
and she'd think 'twas a silver spoon and would cry for it. But bread
and milk is all they are going to have this hour of the night. No
knowing how much their stomachs are upsot."

Then she gave further attention to the discussion about the strange
boy and his stranger actions.

"Mr. Langdon is a nice feller," said Nat Jardin reflectively. "But
mebbe this boy don't know him as well as we do."

"He can't know him," cried Oriole. "And yet he spoke as though he came
right from where Mr. Langdon lives."

"That he did," admitted the lightkeeper. "Well, 'tis a mystery. But I
cal'late it'll be cleared up like most mysteries."

Oriole sighed again. "Like most mysteries 'cepting the whereabouts of
my dear mother and father," she whispered. But neither Nat Jardin nor
Ma Stafford heard this.

Oriole considered that she had many worries--and this was possibly
true, when one considered her age; and this mystery about the
curly-haired boy, Teddy Ford, was an added burden of anxiety. She could
not understand anybody not liking Mr. Harvey Langdon. And that strange
boy spoke as though he actually hated the father of the twins.

Ma Stafford said that Myron and Marian could not be taken back to the
mainland that night. This began to worry Oriole.

"It will worry Mrs. Joy and Lyddy Ann if I don't get back," she said
thoughtfully. "But it will be worse for Mr. Langdon when he returns to
the hotel to-night and doesn't find the children in his rooms."

"Where did Langdon go?" asked Uncle Nat, smoking in the corner of the
settee by the stove, while Ma fried fishcakes and watched a bannock
turning golden brown in the oven.

"He went to the county seat, to the hospital there to see how Sadie
Brown, the nurse, is getting along," explained Oriole. "He can't get
back until after supper time. But he will expect me to be back with the
twins by the time the train arrives."

"That poor creeter," said Ma Stafford, referring to the twins' nurse,
who had been badly injured when Myron and Marian were rescued from the
wreck of the Portland steamboat. "How is she gettin' on, anyway?"

"The doctors say she will recover. She is anxious to go back to the
ranch with Mr. Langdon too. That is why he has waited so long before
returning home."

Nat and Ma looked at each other. Oriole thought that was the whole
reason for Harvey Langdon's delay in starting West with his recovered
children. But the lightkeeper and his housekeeper knew better than that.

Ma suggested, however, that Mr. Langdon might not be much alarmed if
he came back to the inn and found the twins and Oriole not there.
"He will think, maybe, that you have taken them to Mrs. Joy's until
morning."

"But what will Mrs. Joy and Lyddy Ann think?" demanded Oriole. "They
will expect me back by bedtime."

"I never! I suppose that's so," murmured the housekeeper.

"And Mr. Langdon will go to Mrs. Joy's to make sure."

"I don't see for the life of me, then," said Ma, "what we're to do. We
can't get word to the main."

"If only that boy hadn't run away----"

"I cal'late," put in Nat Jardin firmly, "that I can get over to the
main somehow."

"I cal'late you _won't_," declared Ma. "I won't hear to your going,
'Thaniel."

"News travels fast around Littleport--'specially what ye might call bad
news. The iceboat-men will tell about the accident all right. They see
Oriole and the twins in the water."

"And they must have seen Teddy Ford pull us all out, too," said Oriole
hopefully.

"They must be pretty funny folks," murmured Ma Stafford, "to sail
right away and never try to stop and save you children. Reg'lar Floyd
Iresons--that's what _they_ are."

"Oh, my!" cried Oriole, who had a retentive memory, "you mean 'Old
Floyd Ireson, for his har-rd hear-rt'--_I_ know about him."

"And you know wrong about him--like Ma and other folks. That's an
exploded doctrine," said Nat Jardin, puffing more quickly on his pipe.
"_If_ Cap'n Ireson ever left the crew of another craft without standin'
by, 'twas 'cause his own crew or the weather wouldn't admit of it. And
the women o' Marblehead ne'er tarred and feathered him, nor drug him in
no cart. They was ladies, same as the women of Littleport air, and they
wouldn't do such an unseemly thing.

"But that ain't neither here nor there. Them iceboats can't be stopped,
as Ma supposes, within their own length. You can't tack, or back your
wagon, just in a second or two. By the time they could have gone about
in that racer and run down to the hole again, Oriole and the twins
would have been fathoms deep."

"Don't talk of it, 'Thaniel," said Ma, shuddering.

"Anyhow," said Uncle Nat, "they'll take news of the accident back to
town and it'll spread there like wildfire. Mr. Langdon will hear of it
first thing he lands off that train. And I wager Becky Joy has heard
the news before now."

"She will be dreadfully scared," said Oriole.

"I cal'late," said Uncle Nat, but smiling broadly, "that that Lyddy Ann
woman will be wuss scare't than she was when she took Marm Joy for a
ghost."

Ma clucked her tongue again at this, but Oriole smiled--then giggled.

"That was _so_ funny," she said. "You ought to have seen poor Lyddy Ann
with her apron over her head. But, dear me! wasn't it lucky we saw Mrs.
Joy that time? Otherwise the silver casket might never have been found
and lots of people would still think I stole it."

This mention was of a very serious incident in Oriole's career at Mrs.
Joy's house, and one that she was not likely soon to forget.

While they were at supper a step sounded upon the porch. Oriole jumped
up, hoping it might be the strange boy returning. But Uncle Nat boomed
out:

"Ahoy, Payton Orr! Come aboard, shipmate. What's the good word?"

The substitute lightkeeper--a young, tanned, smiling and smooth-faced
man--pushed open the door and entered. He was bundled up in a knitted
"comforter" and mittens, as well as a thick pea-coat.

"Mighty cold, Nat," he declared. "How-de-do, Ma? And here's Oriole! I
declare, Oriole, what you been doing now?"

"Er--why--eating," admitted Oriole.

"'Tain't to be wondered at. Anybody would eat Ma's fishcakes and Injun
bannock. No, no! Don't you ask me! I stowed away a cargo o' biscuit and
corned-beef hash 'fore I went up to light the lamp. Now I'm over here
to get the news--not anything to eat."

"What kind of news are ye after?" chuckled Nat Jardin.

"I want to know what Oriole is falling into the breathin' holes out
there for? And who it was that got her out, and then she chased off the
island so fast? I want to know."

"Oh, Mr. Orr! did you see Teddy Ford? Did you see where he went to?"

"I don't know him by name," said the other. "But I seen where that boy
run to, if you want to know that."

"Oh, I do!" gasped the girl. "If--if anything has happened to him----"

"And him not half dressed," put in Ma Stafford.

"Does seem as though the lad might not have been just right in his
mind," ruminated Jardin, "to have gone off like that."

"There warn't nothin' the matter with his legs, if there is with his
mind," said Payton Orr. "He run down and across the ice like a scare't
rabbit."

"And where 'did he go, Mr. Orr?" begged Oriole.

"He made the Flow station--and he got there all right, too," said Orr.
"I watched him close from the lamp gallery. He's some runner, that boy.
Who did you say he was?"

"Said his name was Ford," Uncle Nat observed. "Stranger about here. But
a real civil-spoken boy."

"And he certainly did snatch Oriole out o' the water. I seen that,"
said the caller.

"And the twins. He saved the twins, too," said Oriole emphatically, and
proceeded to tell the story of the adventure in full.

"He's something of a boy, I do say!" declared Orr. "But what made him
run away? 'Fraid to be thanked for what he done?"

Oriole was silent, but Uncle Nat nodded slowly. "I shouldn't wonder,"
he said composedly enough. "'Fraid to meet Mr. Langdon--and be
thanked--like enough."

The old lightkeeper had mixed truth with guile. Ma stared at him, but
Oriole was secretly delighted. Payton Orr had one very big fault. He
was a dreadful gossip.

"What Payt Orr don't know won't ever hurt him--nor nobody else," said
Nat Jardin, when the younger man had gone. "Tell him the particulars
of what that boy said to us about Langdon, and the whole world and his
wife will know it all. I cal'late a little caution is allowable with
Payt."

"Humph! I'm thinkin' you're runnin' pretty close to the wind,
'Thaniel," admonished Ma. "You want to have a care what you're doin'
on. Right before Oriole, too."

"I hope Oriole will take after my virtues not after my faults,"
chuckled Uncle Nat, smiling broadly at the girl he loved so well.

Oriole was getting sleepy and she nodded more than once before supper
was over. Ma made her go to bed in her own little room upstairs without
helping with the dish wiping.

"If you ain't got your death of cold plungin' into that icy water, it's
more by good luck than good management," said the old woman. "You take
a hot flat to bed with you, too. If you got sick, Oriole, what would
happen to them little twins? I cal'late Mr. Langdon just about depends
on you to look after them till that nurse of theirs gets on to her feet
again."

"But he didn't expect me to drag them overboard in that sled," said
Oriole, in an anxious tone. "I don't know what he _will_ say. And about
that Teddy Ford----"

She went off to bed rather stumblingly without finishing her speech.
She was very sleepy indeed.

"Funny about that boy," Ma Stafford said to the old lightkeeper when
Oriole was gone.

"You're right."

"He does seem to dislike Mr. Langdon, doesn't he? Do you suppose Mr.
Langdon is a bad man, 'Thaniel?"

"Ain't none of us perfect," answered Nat Jardin.

"No. I s'pose not. But those Western men--they are pretty tough
characters, ain't they?"

"They be in the movies," chuckled the old man. "But I wouldn't worry
about Langdon none, if I was you, Ma. He seems a pretty nice feller."

"But he wants to take Oriole along with the twins--you know he does,
'Thaniel. Do you think it's safe? P'r'aps we ought to know more about
him first. If Oriole's parents do turn up----"

Uncle Nat made a clucking noise with his tongue and shook his head,
intimating that he could not hope much for this wished-for occurrence.

"Well, 'Thaniel, they _might_. And we are responsible for her. Besides
loving her," Ma said earnestly. "We must not let her get into bad
hands. Maybe that boy knows more about Harvey Langdon than we do."

"Maybe."

"Then we ought to find out," she said vigorously.

"Sho, Ma!" murmured the old lightkeeper, "you are as hungry for gossip
as Payt Orr himself."

Ma sniffed angrily at this, but said no more.




                               CHAPTER V

                      WHAT HAPPENED IN THE NIGHT


Oriole slept so heavily when she first went to bed that an earthquake
might have shaken Harbor Island without awaking her. The exposure to
the cold and the heat of the kitchen afterward, together with the
hearty supper she ate, served to deaden her senses.

If she dreamed--of the twins or of the strange boy, Teddy Ford, in
whom she had become so greatly interested--the dream did not become a
nightmare. She slept calmly even when some disturbance rose outside the
cottage on the bluff.

Uncle Nat and Ma Stafford heard this noise however; for it came before
they had thought of bed. First it was the creaking of sail-blocks and
runners on the frozen harbor. Uncle Nat got his coat and hat and went
to the door.

"Another o' them pesky iceboats, 'Thaniel?" asked Ma, busily threading
a needle under the Argand lamp.

"I cal'late," agreed the lightkeeper, as he opened and shut the door
quickly, himself on the outside.

He saw the falling sail of the ice-craft down in the cove. One of the
men tumbled off and started across the ice and up the path.

"Sho!" muttered Nat Jardin, "it's Mr. Langdon, and he's some disturbed,
now, ain't he?"

The burly ranchman seized upon Nat Jardin the moment he reached his
side, crying in a muffled voice:

"My babies? What's happened to them, Mr. Jardin? Are they----"

"No, they ain't," said the lightkeeper coolly. "You can slat your sails
and lash the tiller. Ain't a thing to worry about."

"Thank God!" ejaculated Harvey Langdon. "And Oriole?"

"Right as can be. Don't fret yourself."

"They told me that all the children had been in the water."

"And they didn't tell you no lie--for once," said the old man, leading
the ranchman toward the cottage door. "But Ma's fixed them all up and
they are abed."

"Oriole! She got them out of the water, did she?" said Langdon. "She is
a wonder, that girl."

"Well, I cal'late she helped save the twins," said Nat Jardin,
loyally. "Yes, Oriole is some girl."

"I can never repay her. But, Nat Jardin, I want to do much for that
girl."

"Way it looks," muttered the lightkeeper, "somebody ought to do a lot
for her. I don't cal'late her mother or father will ever show up this
side of the River Jordan, Mr. Langdon."

"I am afraid you are right," admitted the ranchman. "I have been trying
to find out about them on my own account, and it seems there is nothing
to discover. The _Helvetia_ sank, I am afraid, with all that were left
aboard her."

"Sho!" muttered Nat Jardin, "I begun to believe that long ago."

"I must take the children back to the port at once," said Mr. Langdon,
when he welcomed Ma Stafford. "They have no dry clothes here and I can
take care of them better at the hotel. Besides, I shall not feel secure
until the doctor has seen them. And Oriole----?"

"Now," said Ma, with conviction, "you wouldn't disturb the girl out
of her first sleep. Just you send word to Becky Joy. Oriole can get
back all right to-morrow. The twins is dif'rent. Though for my part I
wouldn't risk them, nor myself, on one o' them iceboats."

"I have sailed those sort of things before," Mr. Langdon said
carelessly. "You don't think the children have taken cold, Mrs.
Stafford?"

"Not at all. You take 'em wrapped in blankets I'll give ye, and they
will come to no harm--though 'tis a master cold night outside."

Nobody chanced to say anything about Teddy Ford, the boy who had really
saved the twins and helped Oriole out of the sea. Langdon was anxious
to get back to town. He had great faith in doctors, and he wanted
Doctor Simms to look at the twins.

Marian did not even awaken when they lifted her out of Uncle Nat's bed;
and as for Myron, he was too brave a boy to fuss. Their father carried
them down to the ice without assistance, and Oriole did not even dream
that the twins were disturbed. Uncle Nat and Ma Stafford went to bed
and all was quiet about the cottage on the bluff when Oriole did awake.

She had no idea what time it was, only that it was pitch dark--or
seemed to be--outside. Her first thought was of the twins. But, then,
she supposed they were all right downstairs. Then she thought of that
strange boy--Teddy Ford. She hoped he was all right over at the Flow
station.

But what a strangely acting and talking boy he was! Oriole was worried
about what he had said in regard to Mr. Langdon. Not for a moment did
she believe that Mr. Langdon was not a good and kind man. Of course,
there was some mistake. Yet, how earnest that boy had been when he
spoke of the ranchman so bitterly.

"I have just got to _know_ about that," Oriole said decidedly. "And
there must be some way of straightening out the trouble. Of course
Mr. Langdon will be anxious to do something fine for that boy.
And--he's--so--handsome----"

Oriole yawned and snuggled down and would have been off to sleep again
in a moment had her sharp ear not heard a noise below. It was outside
the house. She sat up in the cold room, shivering. It was a step on the
porch.

"Now, who can that be coming to the house this time of night?" Oriole
asked herself. She was not at all alarmed. There was nothing or nobody
to frighten her on Harbor Island, as she very well knew.

"Maybe Mrs. Orr is sick--or the baby," murmured Oriole, slipping out
of bed and beginning to pull on a pair of warm stockings and afterward
Ma's slippers that the old woman had given her. "Perhaps Payton Orr has
come for Ma."

Oriole was interested in the Orr baby, too. She wanted to know if
anything was wrong with the family of the substitute lightkeeper.

She hurried into a petticoat and gown, wrapped a fleecy shawl about
her, and hastened downstairs. She had heard the person--whoever it
was--enter the kitchen. But there was no sound of voices.

"Why! isn't that funny?" murmured Oriole Putnam, and, creeping down the
well-carpeted stairs and tiptoeing across the narrow entry, she peered
into the warm but dimly lighted kitchen. There was a certain glow from
the stove in which there was banked a good fire; but not even a candle
was lit.

She could see the figure at the stove, however, quite plainly. Nor was
she uncertain in her recognition of it. There stood Teddy Ford, the
strange boy who had saved the twins and her from the bay, just putting
on his vest. His garments had all been left by Ma Stafford hanging
about the stove, and by this time they must have been completely dry.

"Why, Teddy Ford!" gasped Oriole. "What are you doing now?"

"Oh, gee!" ejaculated the strange boy. "Are you up?"

"Well, I'm _down_," said Oriole. "And I guess Uncle Nat and Ma haven't
heard you----"

"I didn't mean to wake any of you up," said the boy.

"I just happened to wake up. Then I heard you come in. But what do you
mean to do? I thought you were at the Flow station?"

"Yes, I went there. And I helped the cook clean up after supper and he
gave me a bunk. But I snuck out when the morning watch was called----"

"'Snuck out!'" gasped Oriole. "That--that's worse than saying 'gee'! I
do believe."

"Gee! is it?"

"You _mustn't_ say that so much," Oriole cried. "And what are you
trying to do? You can't go away from here like that. I won't let you,
Teddy Ford."

She closed the door into the entry so that they should not be heard by
Uncle Nat in his room, or by Ma Stafford upstairs. Teddy looked at her
curiously, and then grinned again.

"Ain't you a bossy girl?" he inquired. "You can't stop me from going."

"I guess I can stop you if I really try," said Oriole. "I'm pretty
strong."

The boy laughed. "Pooh!" he said.

Now, under certain circumstances, there is no verbal sound in the
language as aggravating as "Pooh!"

"Don't 'Pooh!' me. I am strong. So now!" Oriole cried quite furiously.

"Needn't get so huffed about it," said Teddy Ford, more mildly. "But
girls ain't ever as strong as boys. They can't be."

"I--I don't think you're so awfully polite," announced Oriole. "And
girls _are_ strong like boys--sometimes. You just try to get me away
from this door!" she challenged.

"Say! I don't fight girls. I was brought up better than that, I hope!
Now, you let me go."

"But there is no reason why you should go. We mean well by you," said
Oriole, using an old-fashioned expression that she had learned of late.
"I am sure Uncle Nat and Ma----"

"Oh, say! I know you folks are all right. But that Harvey Langdon----"

"When Mr. Langdon hears what you did for the twins, he will do
_any_thing for you," she emphatically declared.

"That's all you know about it," said Teddy Ford sullenly.

"I guess I know as much about Mr. Langdon as you do!" cried Oriole,
with considerable heat.

"I don't believe you do. You know only one side of him--the good side."

"Well!" she challenged, "do you know any more? You say you only know
his bad side. Though it doesn't seem to me that the twins' papa can
have much of a bad side."

"Gee!"

"I _wish_ you'd stop using that word," complained Oriole again. "And I
am sure if you would let him, Mr. Langdon would--would----"

"Gee! Send me to jail, maybe," and this time the boy smiled ruefully.

"Why, Teddy Ford! what have you ever done?" demanded Oriole.

"There _you_ go!" exclaimed the boy. "You're just as quick to believe
me in the wrong as the next one," and he started for the door.

But Oriole placed herself before him. She was both earnest and
sympathetic. When she seized him by the wrinkled lapels of his jacket,
he could not very well throw her off.

"Tell me! Please!" she begged. "Tell me all about it, Teddy Ford. Maybe
we can help you. And I am _sure_ Mr. Langdon must feel kindly toward
you after what you have done for Myron and Marian."




                              CHAPTER VI

                          TEDDY FORD'S STORY


"You ain't got no call to bother about me," said Teddy Ford rather
sheepishly and backing away from the pressure of Oriole's hands on his
chest. "I won't ever see you folks again."

"Oh, Teddy Ford! don't say that," murmured Oriole, almost weeping.

"Gee! it wouldn't bother you, would it?"

"Of course it would. We're your friends," declared the girl. "Uncle Nat
admires you--and so does Ma Stafford. And when Mr. Langdon hears about
Myron and Marian and what you did for them----"

"Oh, stop it!" exclaimed the boy. "You don't know Harvey Langdon."

"I do so too!" cried Oriole indignantly.

"How long have you known him?"

"Why--why, ever since he came East. You know he came to find his
children. And now, when their nurse is well again, he is going to take
them back to Montana."

"Huh! I know all about that. We didn't hear nothing else but those lost
kids out on the ranch all last summer."

"Teddy Ford, did you come from away out there?"

"Yes. I came on with a carload of cattle. Several carloads. Export
steers. And I'd have gone across to England with them, only they
wouldn't take me on the cattle boat. Said I was too young."

"What a traveler you are," sighed Oriole. "So am I. _I_ came from South
America--from Brazil."

"That so? Well, I reckon you ain't been up against it like me," said
the boy ruefully.

"I don't know about that," observed Oriole. "I have been wrecked
twice." She said it with a little pride in her voice. "I don't know
what you can call hard luck if _that_ isn't."

"I say!" he said earnestly, "that sounds as though you _had_ been
through something. But I ain't afraid of being wrecked, or anything
like that. When folks say you are a thief----"

"Oh, Teddy Ford!" gasped Oriole.

"Yes. I thought you'd change your tune when you heard they called me a
thief," muttered the boy.

"Why, Teddy!" murmured the girl, tears in her eyes now, "I guess I
ought to know what _that_ means. Folks said I was a thief, too!"

"Gee! They never?" cried the boy. "Not a nice little thing like you?"

His face turned very red again and his eyes sparkled. Oriole thought
that when he was indignant he was even better looking than before.

"Yes, they did. They said I stole that casket from Mrs. Joy. But she
hid it herself when she was asleep."

"Look here!" demanded Ted. "Who said you did it? I bet I know! That
Harvey Langdon."

"Oh, he never! He never, neither!" gasped the emphatic Oriole.

"Well, it would be just like him," grumbled Teddy.

"Teddy Ford! I don't believe you know Mr. Langdon at all."

"I ought to. I worked on his ranch. I worked there three months. And
he said I stole the family silver--a whole chest full of it. Why! I
couldn't have lifted it," choked the boy. "He is an awful mean man."

"How terrible! I am sure there must be some mistake," murmured Oriole.

"You bet there was a mistake," growled the boy again. "I never stole
that plate. I told 'em so. But because I was seen around the ranch
house when there was nobody else supposed to be there, Harvey Langdon
hopped on me and said I knew all about it."

"And you didn't know a thing?" asked Oriole.

"No, I didn't. But I don't expect anybody to believe me," and the boy
hung his head again.

"I do. I believe you," whispered Oriole, coming close to him again and
putting her hand upon his sleeve. "Oh, Teddy! there must have been
somebody out there on Mr. Langdon's ranch who believed in you."

"If they did they didn't mention it," said Teddy with scorn. "The only
fellow out there that didn't think I was a thief was the fellow that
stole that silver plate himself. Believe me!"

"Oh, Teddy! I can't imagine Mr. Langdon not being kind," sighed Oriole.

"That so? Well, you haven't much of an imagination then," scoffed the
Western boy.

"How did you come to be working for Mr. Langdon?"

"'Cause he wanted hands and would take anybody that came along. I'd
been working all through that region. You see, my mother died when I
was a kid. Dad was a pocket hunter----"

"What is that?" demanded Oriole. "Why did he hunt pockets? Did--didn't
he have any pockets of his own?"

"Gee! ain't you green?" ejaculated the boy. "I mean my father was a
prospector. A gold miner."

"Oh! Then you must be very rich. Of course you wouldn't need to steal
that silver from Mr. Langdon."

"How do you figure that?" the boy demanded. "Pocket hunters don't often
get rich. They are just lone prospectors who wander about the hills
trying to find gold. Dad never struck it rich--nor ever will!" declared
Teddy Ford, with much emphasis.

"Anyway, he wandered off the last time in search of an old Indian mine
somebody told him of, and he never came in again. So I had to leave
school in Helena and hustle for myself. I ain't got any folks now at
all."

"No more than I have--till my mother and father come back," murmured
Oriole. "I understand."

"Well, that's how I wandered out to the Langdon ranges. I got a job
around the corrals. He's got a big ranch and is worth oodles of money.
He spent a fortune with detectives, so they say, trying to find the
twins."

"He loves them dearly," said the girl. "And he loves them so much that
no matter what he _thinks_ you have done, if you will let him he will
treat you right because you saved the twins from drowning."

"Gee!" scoffed Ted, "you're sure of him, aren't you? Maybe he treats
girls different from what he does men. But believe me, he is a hard
boss and a hard man.

"I don't want him to give me anything for saving his kids--if I saved
them. And he never will give me a fair deal."

"I cannot believe that, Teddy Ford," whispered Oriole, shaking her
head. "He is so good to me----"

"I don't care. I'm going back there to the Langdon ranch when I've got
me a lot of money, and I'll make him own up that he was wrong. I never
stole that silver," declared Teddy stolidly.

"But won't it be a long time, then, before you go back?"

"Huh?"

"You know, you can't make your fortune in a little while."

"Gee! that's so," admitted the boy. "Well, _when_ I am rich----"

"But money won't help you prove your innocence, will it?" asked the
girl quite sensibly.

"Money will do 'most anything," said Teddy with cheerful optimism.

"I don't know. There are _some_ things--Anyway," said Oriole briskly,
"you can't very well do anything toward proving that you never stole
those things when you are away here in the East."

"Huh!"

"I should think you would want to be right there where it happened, and
hunt for the real thief. I stayed with Mrs. Joy when they all said I
stole her old casket. And finally the truth came out," said Oriole with
satisfaction.

"How's the truth coming out about Harvey Langdon's silver?" demanded
the boy.

"I--I don't know. But of course everything always _does_ come out all
right. Of course it does!"

"Gee! you believe a lot of old-fashioned stuff, don't you?" gruffly
commented Teddy Ford.

"Why, Teddy Ford!" gasped Oriole. "I hope you are not a _bad_ boy.
Don't you believe in Providence?"

"I guess you are real religious, ain't you?" returned the boy. "I
don't know much about it. But I know that a fellow gets a lot of hard
knocks when he is alone in the world. My dad was pretty good to me; but
he went off and left me all alone. Maybe he just had to. Those old
prospectors have just got to keep traveling and looking for 'color,'
like they say, until they drop. But it was pretty hard to be left
alone."

Teddy kicked the toe of one shoe against the heel of the other and
looked down.

"Then that Harvey Langdon treating me so mean----"

"Oh, Teddy!" cried Oriole, softly, "do let me talk to Mr. Langdon. I
know he will listen after all you did, saving the twins."

"And just because I did save them," returned the boy, "he wouldn't
believe I was innocent of that robbery. He'd just give in 'cause you
asked him. No! I came over here to get my clothes and get away so that
none of you folks could tell Harvey Langdon where I was."

"But--but, you won't run away!" cried Oriole, her lips quivering.

"Ain't got to run away. Nobody's got any hold on me. I'm just moving
on."

"Oh, Teddy Ford!"

"Why, you ain't got any call to take on about it," declared the boy,
looking at her wonderingly.

"Of course I have!" cried Oriole, half angrily. "Aren't you my friend?
I feel just as bad for you, about that stolen silver, as though it was
me that was being accused again."

"Gee!" murmured Teddy Ford.

"And you _stop_ saying that word!" commanded the girl. "I won't have
it. And I won't have you keep running away--first from one place and
then another."

"G--Well!" murmured the boy.

"They will of course think you stole Mr. Langdon's silver if you hide
away like a regular burglar," declared Oriole.

"Who's hid away like a burglar?" repeated Teddy Ford indignantly.

"Aren't you? You left Mr. Langdon's ranch----"

"He bounced me," interrupted Teddy, glumly enough.

"But you didn't have to leave that neighborhood, did you?"

"'Neighborhood'! What do you think? The nearest ranch to Langdon's is
forty miles away. And Hempdell, the shipping town, is seventy-five
miles. He takes two weeks to herd a shipment of steers to the railroad,
or they'll lose so much weight they aren't worth shipping. Gee! there
ain't any neighbors."

"Oh, dear me! won't you ever learn to stop saying that word?"

"G--Huh! I forgot," admitted Teddy Ford with real remorse. "You are an
awful nice girl--the nicest girl I ever saw. But you can't change me.
I'm too tough."

"What nonsense you talk!" ejaculated Oriole in her most grown-up way.
"I know you _can't_ be so bad a boy as Shedder Crabbe. And he's changed
a lot--since he almost got drowned and I saved him."

"Mebbe I'd better jump into that hole in the ice down there again, and
you pull me out," said Teddy, grinning.

"Now, don't try to be funny," Oriole told him seriously. "I want you to
give Mr. Langdon a chance to get acquainted with you----"

"Not much! He kicked me off his ranch. That's enough--too much."

"I can't understand it," sighed Oriole. "He is so nice to me and so
loving to the twins."

"You ain't ever got him mad," grumbled Teddy. "He's what they call out
where I come from a regular rip-snorter when he gets mad."

"Oh, dear!"

"Why, Ching Foo, the ranch cook, told me Harvey Langdon ran one puncher
clear off the ranch once--followed him thirty miles. Only the fellow
had the best horse, Harvey would have got him."

Fortunately Oriole did not understand all the terms Ted used. But she
was troubled. She loved Mr. Langdon, and she liked this very good
looking boy from the West. She could not understand the ranchman being
harsh without cause; yet she did not believe that Teddy was dishonest.

Indeed, her very shrewd young mind instantly evolved this question:
"If Teddy Ford was guilty of stealing silver plate why was he dressed
so poorly and why did he want to work on a cattle-boat?" It seemed to
Oriole that he would be living on the proceeds of the robbery if he
were a thief.

But he seemed so hopeless--so desperate! What could she say to him to
make him do what she believed to be the right thing?

On the other hand, how could she influence the ranchman to give the boy
a fair and square deal? Convinced as Mr. Langdon must be that Teddy
Ford was a thief, Oriole Putnam wondered what _she_ could do or say to
change the man's belief.




                              CHAPTER VII

                        OTHER PEOPLE'S TROUBLES


The girl had lived so long among "grown-ups" that she usually
considered matters deserving thought at all with more seriousness than
most children. This trouble Teddy Ford was in was no light matter. Nor
was Mr. Harvey Langdon's side of the question something that could
easily be put aside or ignored.

The boy had been hurt to the quick by the ranchman's angry harshness.
The ranchman (as he believed) had very good reason for being harsh with
Teddy. There the matter stood. Oriole was very, very uncertain.

"Won't you wait and see Mr. Langdon when he comes for the twins,
Teddy?" Oriole finally pleaded. She did not know that the ranchman
had already been to the island and had taken Myron and Marian back to
Littleport on the iceboat.

"Me see Harvey Langdon?" gasped Ted. "Gee! No!"

"But I _know_ he will do something for you."

"I don't want him to do anything for me," said the boy independently.
"Only just one thing. And he won't do that."

"Yes?"

"I want him to say he don't believe I stole that silver," growled Teddy.

"But how can you ever make him see that he--he made a mistake, if you
have run away from the ranch country. You don't give Mr. Langdon a
chance," said Oriole.

"A chance to chase me off his ranch again?"

"Don't you see, if you remained out there, something might turn up to
give you--you a clew. You know what I mean? Of course, _some_body stole
that chest of silver."

"You bet they did. And got away with it slick, too. Nobody but me and
Ching Foo about the ranch house--and I know I didn't see a soul."

"Is--is Mr. Ching Foo a Chinaman?"

"Yes. Cook, I tell you. Oh! _he_ is not to be suspected. Ching Foo has
been at the ranch for twenty years--and sent home long ago for his
coffin and has it stored away in his bedroom."

"Goodness, Teddy Ford! what are you saying?" cried Oriole.

"That's right," said the boy. "Ching Foo is an old-fashioned Chinaman,
and no American-made coffin would do for him. He showed it to me.
All lacquer-work and dragons and fancy doo-dads on it. He will be put
in that when he dies and be shipped back to Canton to sleep with his
fathers. Mr. Langdon has promised him that it shall be done just as he
says. Otherwise he would go back to China himself and die there, for he
has plenty of money saved up."

"Dear me!" said Oriole in a worried tone, "I think that is too, too
dreadful. Are all Chinamen like Mr. Ching Foo?"

"You got me there, Oriole," said the boy. "He's not a half bad old
chap. And he said something funny to me when I was coming away from the
Langdon Ranch. I ain't forgot it."

"What do you mean--funny?" asked the interested girl.

"Why, it sounded as though he might know--or suspect--more about
who was the real thief than he let on. The Chinese are awfully
closemouthed. He only said to Harvey Langdon: 'Me no catchee pidgin;
him no my pidgin.'"

"Goodness me!" ejaculated Oriole. "I thought you said it was silver
that was stolen, not pigeons."

"It was silver plate," chuckled Ted Ford. "But Ching Foo talks what
they call pidgin English sometimes. He is a Canton Chinaman, and he
can't say business. Pidgin is the nearest he can come to saying
business. You see, he meant to tell Langdon it wasn't any of his
business, and he shouldn't ask him about the lost silver."

"Oh!"

"It looked to me as though the old man was scared to tell everything he
knew. I went after him alone in the kitchen, and asked him if he didn't
suspect who stole the plate? He said:

"'Plenty bad mans here. Melican boy get away; mebbe get hurt.' And
then he added the thing that afterward set me thinking. It was: 'Three
topside bad men--alli same talkee-talkee. Melican boy look out!'"

Oriole still looked at the boy curiously.

"You see," said Teddy, his voice lowered, "afterward I remembered that
Ridley, Shaffer and Tom Mudd were always roosting around on the fences
when they weren't working, and talking together out of the corners of
their mouths. Three tough fellows, they were, and don't you forget
it. They had only just come to the ranch and, although they were good
punchers, some of the boys said they were bad eggs."

"Why didn't you tell Mr. Langdon about them?"

"You can't talk to Harvey Langdon when he's mad and his mind is made
up. And, besides, I never thought much about what Ching Foo said till
I was half way across the continent on the cattle train."

"I think that is too bad," said Oriole soberly. "But I wish you would
stay and talk with Mr. Langdon, Teddy Ford."

"Not me!" cried the boy emphatically.

"Then I wish you would go back home and see if you can't find those
three bad men. It must be that they have made some use of the silver."

"Melted it up. Sell it for silver bullion at one of the mining towns.
That would be their game."

"That is terrible! But if you could _prove_ that they did just that?"

"It wouldn't prove they were the robbers," grumbled the boy, shaking
his head.

"But it would _look_ so. Mr. Langdon would believe you were innocent,
then, I am sure."

"Not much he wouldn't. You have to show Harvey Langdon. You can't tell
him. And anyway he would not listen to me."

"But he will listen to me," said Oriole firmly. "And I mean to tell
him all about you--what you say and what you did in saving us from the
water. You go back to Montana and fight this, Teddy Ford--that's what
_you_ do," said the girl earnestly.

"G-g-g--I mean, do you want me to?" he gasped.

"That is the way to do. Stay right there until you have proved your
innocence."

"Well, I can work back that way. I know how," said Teddy, doubtfully.
"Do you think that is the right thing to do?"

"So I believe," Oriole confidently responded.

"I imagine you know more about what's right than I do," said Teddy Ford
soberly. "If you say so----"

"I do say so. And I will tell Mr. Langdon. He will meet you differently
out there I am sure. He might just want to give you money here in the
East and thank you for saving Marian and helping Myron and me. But if
you go right to him at home and tell him you want to clear up that
awful mystery I am sure he will think you really _are_ honest."

And in her shrewd mind Oriole meant to talk to Mr. Langdon in such a
way that he would be sure to meet Teddy Ford in just this way! The boy
was impressed by her words. He nodded his head thoughtfully.

"That sounds right, Oriole. I guess you are giving me the 'real steer,'
as the punchers say. I'm going to do it. I got a chance to go on a boat
around to Boston, and I must start now. Good-by. You'll hear from me
some time--though I ain't much on writing letters."

"Oh, Teddy, be _sure_ to write to me!" Oriole cried, almost in tears as
the boy pushed past her to open the door.

"You bet I will. Good-by!"

He turned back and squeezed her hand, blushing furiously as he did so.
Then he ran out of the house. Oriole watched from the window but could
see nothing of him after he crossed the porch and started down the path
to the cove, it was so dark. Then she sighed.

"I do think other people have so very many troubles," she said, and she
took this thought back to bed with her.

In the morning she certainly was surprised to learn that the twins as
well as Teddy Ford had gone away in the night. Mr. Langdon had been
right here at the island without seeing the boy from the West. Oriole
was much disappointed.

But she made up her mind, nevertheless, to talk to Mr. Langdon about
that lost chest of silver. It was impossible for her to believe that
Teddy Ford was in any measure guilty of the robbery.

She hurried home, dragging the sled with her, and arrived at Mrs. Joy's
before noon, finding that the widow and Lyddy Ann had been informed of
Oriole's safety by Mr. Langdon after his return from the island the
night before.

"I do think that bay is no place for you, Oriole," Mrs. Joy said. "It
is too dangerous for anybody to risk themselves upon it. Now you must
wait for open weather before you go to the island again."

"Tell you what," Lyddy Ann told the girl, "you might's well wait for
one of these flying-machines to take you. 'Tis safer, I do allow. That
Anson Cope ought to be lashed to the mast for ever running you down
that way with his iceboat. You wait till I give him a piece of my mind!"

As Lyddy Ann was forever threatening to give people "a piece of her
mind," Oriole wondered that she had any mind left at all. But of course
she did not say just that.

Her own mind, in fact, was quite occupied with the trouble of Teddy
Ford and how she should broach the subject to Mr. Langdon. She had told
Uncle Nat all about her interview with the youth and what he had said
and what she had advised him to do.

"You got the right idea, Oriole," the old lightkeeper declared. "Let
the boy go back there to that ranch and prove his innocence. He can do
it if he goes about it right. And I believe Mr. Harvey Langdon is a
kind man at heart. You put a flea in _his_ ear."

So Oriole started over to the hotel after the noon dinner to do just
this. She knew the twins were all right, for Mr. Langdon had sent her
word. Neither Myron nor Marian seemed a whit the worse for the plunge
into the icy harbor.

"You are a mighty brave girl, my dear," said Harvey Langdon, warmly. "I
know that few girls of your age could have kept their heads and saved
the children."

"Oh, Mr. Langdon! I didn't save Myron and Marian. At least, little
Marian would have been drowned had it not been for somebody else."

"I did hear from Anson Cope that somebody aided you."

"Why! he _saved_ us. That's what Teddy Ford did. He jumped right in----"

"Who did you say?" broke in Harvey Langdon, with a queer look on his
bronzed face. "What is his name?"

"Ted--Teddy Ford," stammered Oriole.

"Indeed! A boy?"

"Yes, sir. He is a boy. And he jumped right into the water and brought
poor little Marian up from under the loose ice. Then he helped me
with Myron, and finally he got me out and the sled too. Oh, he is a
wonderful boy, Mr. Langdon!"

"He is, is he? And his name is Ford?"

"Yes, sir," hesitated Oriole. "You owe the twins' lives to him, and
that's a fact."

"I do, do I?"

The ranchman continued to look so "funny," as Oriole expressed it in
her thoughts, that she could scarcely tell the details of the rescue as
she had intended to. But she managed to make a considerable impression
on the man's mind--and, she hoped, in Teddy's favor.

"So that's how it was, eh?" commented Langdon. "And you think that this
boy is more to be commended than you are?"

"Oh, yes, sir! For he really saved us."

"Where is he now?"

"He's--he's run away."

"You don't mean it?"

"Yes, Mr. Langdon," said Oriole sorrowfully. "He is afraid of you."

"He is, is he? Humph! And maybe that is so. He is the Teddy Ford who
used to work for me, I suppose?"

"He says he worked on your ranch. And--and he ran away----"

"Because he stole."

"Oh, no, sir! He never! Why, think of it! He has no money and is just
knocking about working for his living. If he had got that silverware of
yours don't you suppose he would be _rich_?"

"Ha! He told you about it, did he?" asked the ranchman sternly.

"Oh, yes, sir. All about it. And he doesn't know a thing about the
robbery, Mr. Langdon. 'Deed and he don't."

"He would not admit it of course. And I don't suppose he did the whole
thing himself. Whoever he was in with cheated him out of his share of
the loot of course--he being only a boy. I am afraid Teddy's a bad egg."

"Just the same he saved Marian's life," Oriole declared with some
sharpness.

"That is right. I owe him a good deal for what he has done. We won't
say anything more about that silver--although it was very valuable and
had been handed down in our family for several generations. Brought
from England by the first Langdons.

"Well, when you see Ted again you tell him not to be afraid of me. All
that is wiped off the slate for what he did yesterday, and I stand
willing to help him all I can. He is nothing but a boy after all."

The ranchman's bluff heartiness pleased Oriole. Yet she felt that it
would be just because he was grateful to Teddy Ford if he helped the
boy--provided the latter would give the ranchman the chance. Langdon
still believed Teddy guilty of complicity in the robbery at the ranch.

She could say nothing more about it. She knew that it was not in her
province to criticize the ranchman or to try to convert him from his
opinion. Time--and Teddy Ford's own efforts--must change the man's
opinions.

Mr. Langdon gave every evidence of being fond of her, and on this very
day he broached a subject that delighted Oriole. She was very fond of
the twins, and Mr. Langdon had told her so much about his ranch and the
Montana country that in her heart there had begun to bud a desire to
see the far-distant plains and mountains.

"I don't see why you shouldn't come out there and see the twins and me
next summer," the ranchman said. "It would please Myron and Marian, I
am sure. I am going to start back very soon with the children and their
nurse. Sadie Brown can travel now, and she wants to go home. I'll have
to run up to Maine for a day or two with the children so that their
grandparents may see the twins, now that we are in the East. But of
course we can't have a visit there now, too much time has gone by and
we must start home as soon as possible. Yes, we must see you out on the
ranch."

"Oh! I'd love to come to see you," cried Oriole.

"Then I guess I can fix it with Mrs. Joy--and Nat Jardin."

"But when my dear mother and father come----"

"We'll hear about it at once by telegraph," Langdon assured her. "I
will make some special inquiries myself, anyway, Oriole, before I leave
for the West. Perhaps we can get some line on what part of the world
they are now in."

"Oh, wouldn't that be glorious!" gasped Oriole, clasping her hands.
"I've been studying my geography. Perhaps, if that ship took them 'way
round the world, they may land at San Francisco. Montana would be much
nearer to them then than Littleport."

"Quite so, my dear," agreed the ranchman.

And so plans were begun for Oriole Putnam's wonderful trip to the
cattle country in which, quite unsuspected by the girl, she was to have
many quite wonderful adventures.




                             CHAPTER VIII

                         ORIOLE'S OWN TROUBLES


School began again and Oriole Putnam was glad, after all, to meet the
boys and girls who, previous to the holidays, had been inclined to
scoff at her because of their suspicion that Oriole had stolen Mrs.
Joy's ancient jewel-casket.

Although she had borne this trouble courageously, the suspicion of
some of her schoolmates had made the girl very unhappy. Her mind was
completely freed of this. But all her mates were not inclined to
welcome Oriole kindly.

May Rabey, whose widowed mother was one of the jealous relatives of
Mrs. Rebecca Joy and feared Oriole's influence with that eccentric
woman, was quite as "snippy" as ever. And Shedder Crabbe had evidently
not been entirely cured of what Lyddy Ann called "his mean streak" when
Oriole had aided him one day out in the open harbor.

"A crab is a crab, no two ways about it," declared Mrs. Joy's
maid-of-all-work. "They'll always travel sideways and be as onsartain
as a cross-eyed man. And that Shadrach!"

Further expression of her opinion of Shedder was beyond Lyddy Ann's
speech. And it was quite beyond Oriole's speech, too, after the first
meeting of the Busy Bees which was held after the vacation.

Minnie and Flossy Payne, who lived on State Street too, but not quite
so far out of town as Mrs. Joy's house, where Oriole lived, invited
the dolls' sewing society to their home for this meeting. There was a
sun parlor on the south side of the Payne house. And behind the Payne
premises, on the next street, was the home of the president of the Town
Council, Mr. Enos Crabbe--the two properties adjoining.

That Shedder was so near a neighbor perhaps was one reason why the
Payne girls disliked him so very much. And it must truthfully be said
that he made himself very annoying to all the girls in Oriole's set.

He was half afraid of Oriole, for she always seemed to get the
best of him in the end. And Shedder respected Oriole's muscle and
determination. Several times she had proved herself to be more than his
equal.

In fact, only once had the son of the storekeeper and councilman
managed really to get the best of Oriole. That was when he had removed
the ladder to the loft of the old cottage on Harbor Light Island and
thus left Oriole marooned in the cupola on the roof of the exposed
structure.

But Shedder got wind of this meeting of the Busy Bees and learned that
the girls were going to sew in the conservatory, as it was warm there
with the sun lying full upon its many windows until sunset.

The end of the room faced the dividing fence between the Payne yard and
that of the Crabbe property. And in this fence was a low gate.

Before Enos Crabbe had bought the place behind Mr. Payne's, the then
owner's family and the Paynes had been the very best of neighbors and
friends. Both families had used the communicating gateway in the high
board fence. When Enos Crabbe had come to live here he had fulfilled
the promise of his name and nailed the gate shut.

"Not that we ever wanted to be friendly with those Crabbes," sniffed
Flossy Payne. "Only our father wouldn't be so impolite as to nail up
the gate that everybody used."

It seemed, however, that Shedder had drawn the nails. The gateway
offered a handy means of egress for him to State Street when he chanced
to want to go that way.

Like most boys, Shedder had pets--a rabbit hutch in the back yard, a
pair of bantam fowls, a squirrel in a cage which Tabby, the house cat,
was quite as much interested in as was Shedder himself. But the boy's
chief possession was a well-grown male sheep named Jingo.

Jingo had been a cosset lamb, and for once Enos Crabbe had been
prevailed upon not to turn Jingo into money at the proper time.

Now Jingo was four years old, well-grown, with curled horns as hard
as iron and "as vicious as sin," the neighbors all declared. Whenever
Jingo got loose in the streets of Littleport even the most savage dogs
made for instant cover.

On this afternoon Shedder, knowing the girls of the Busy Bee society
would soon arrive for their sewing party, slipped through the gateway
in the fence and hung the poster-picture of a shaggy, bearded goat
standing rampant on a barrel, across the lower windows in the end of
the conservatory, the sills of which were not more than a foot above
the ground. The girls did not notice the three-sheet poster outside the
windows. They gathered chatteringly to their party and the sly Shedder
watched them through a crack in the fence till he was confident the
girls were settled to their work and gossip.

Then, giggling delightedly in anticipation of the trick he was about to
play, the Crabbe boy opened the gate in the fence and released from
confinement the ram that was as crabbed of temper as though he had
really been born into the Crabbe family.

Jingo wore a broad leather strap about his neck, and by this Shedder
urged him along to the opening. There were patches of snow on the
ground, and they were just crusting over again, for it had been mild
at noon. Jingo's hard little hoofs clattered through this snow-crust
to the gate. He recognized Shedder as his master, and the boy could
control him when nobody else could.

Now Jingo pushed his black muzzle through the gateway and looked about
the Payne premises. Almost instantly the rampant goat on the poster
caught his eye. It looked enough like another ram to Jingo to rouse in
him the desire for battle.

Jingo stamped his hoofs and shook his head in no uncertain way. Shedder
snickered with delight and urged the big sheep through the gateway.

"Go to it, Jingo!" he yelped. "Go it!"

Once on the Payne side of the fence and with his supposed enemy right
before him, the big ram wasted no time. He needed no further urging.
Head down and bunching his four feet under him, he charged with an
angry blare of his sharp voice.

"Whee!" yelled Shedder, and almost fell to the ground he laughed so.

With a crash that startled the ram as much as it did the girls inside
the sun parlor, his horns smashed through paper and glass and the beast
appeared half through the window. Only his thick wool kept him from
being badly cut by the broken glass.

His nose was scratched a little, and as he stood there, half in and
half out of the sun parlor, with the remains of the poster and part of
a window frame hung about his neck, the girls might have been highly
amused had they not been so frightened.

To Shedder's vast delight they expressed their emotions by screaming
and running. All but Oriole. She was as startled as any of her friends
when Jingo crashed through the glass; but she immediately realized what
it was and who was at the bottom of the trick.

"That mean Shedder Crabbe!" she ejaculated as Minnie and Flossy and the
other girls ran from the place. "This is his Jingo--Oh! The dreadful
thing!" for Jingo made a lunge for her but could not get farther into
the room.

There were heavy curtains at the inner door of the sun parlor looped
back by thick cords and tassels. Oriole ran to the door, pulled out
the knot of one cord and ran back with it to the stamping sheep. He
could only shake his head at her and threaten with his horns, after all.

Oriole drew an end of the cord through the sheep's collar and tied him
fast to a brace under the window sill. When he finally backed out he
could not get away.

Shedder's head popped through the hole in the fence and he bawled:

"You let that ram alone! Here, Jingo! Jingo! That's you, Oriole Putnam!
I see you. If you hurt that sheep I'll tell my father on you."

Oriole opened the outer door of the conservatory and told him
emphatically that "she didn't care whom he told."

"Just wait till Mr. Payne comes home and sees what you did with your
old ram. Your father will have to pay for this glass."

At that Shedder disappeared. He had not thought of that possibility. He
hoped nobody else had seen him at the gate but Oriole. He determined to
deny that he had set the ram free.

But Oriole left Jingo tied and went back into the house to tell the
other girls. Mrs. Payne chanced to be out that afternoon and Flossy and
Minnie were afraid of the sheep and allowed him to stand there in the
cold.

But the incident broke up the sewing party and Oriole went home. To
her surprise she found Mr. Harvey Langdon talking with Mrs. Joy in the
"museum," as Oriole always called the big sitting room.

"Oh, Mr. Langdon, nothing has happened to the twins, has there?" the
girl cried anxiously.

"You see?" the ranchman said to Mrs. Joy. "She is quite given over to
the children. And they think more of Oriole than they ever did of Sadie
Brown." Then to the girl he replied:

"Myron and Marian are all right. It is your personal affairs I must
talk about. I have some news."

Instantly Oriole's face flamed and her lips parted.

"My dear, dear mother!" she cried. "You have heard from her and from
father?"

"No." He said it bluntly and shook his head with gravity. But his
expression of countenance was very sympathetic. "I have heard from
neither of your parents, my dear Oriole. But I believe we have heard of
them."

"Oh!" the girl gasped, and then went speechless. She could just stare
at him pleadingly.

"I was in Boston yesterday. I went there because of something I read in
the Boston paper. It was an account of the rescue of some seamen from
a rocky island off the coast of British Guiana."

"Oh! Castaways?" cried Oriole. "Not my mamma and father?"

"They claim to have been members of the crew of the _Helvetia_; but
none of the passengers had been of their party," Mr. Langdon said, much
moved by the girl's anxiety.




                              CHAPTER IX

                         A GREAT CHANGE COMING


Oriole could not keep back the tears, although she tried hard to do so.
She realized that the ranchman was patting her hands and saying:

"Now, now! Don't take on so, my dear. Let me tell you all I have
learned."

"Ye-yes, sir!" sobbed Oriole. "I want to know the worst!"

She had got that expression from Mrs. Joy herself. That good woman was
now wiping her eyes frankly as she watched Oriole's sorrowful face.

"Well, my dear, maybe it is not as bad as it seems," Mr. Langdon said.
"But I think you ought to know the particulars. I talked with one of
the seamen who was rescued from that rocky island. He is in the East
Boston Hospital. He certainly was a member of the _Helvetia's_ crew. He
remembers you very well."

"Oh, dear!" gasped Oriole. "And my mamma and father?"

"This man says that not long after the purser's boat was sent away with
you and the other passengers that the _Adrian Marple_ saved in it, the
other boats were lowered. The wireless was out of order. That must have
been why so few other vessels knew anything about the _Helvetia's_
trouble.

"Your father, Oriole, planned to go with your mother in the captain's
boat. This seaman remembers Mr. Putnam clearly. He says your father
went to work with some of the seamen to lower that boat--got into it
himself while your mother waited to be lowered by a sling.

"But, my dear," the ranchman pursued, with his arm about the girl's
shoulders, "an accident happened. The fall-block fouled, and one end
of the boat went down suddenly and tipped the men in it into the sea.
Your father was thrown against the hull of the sinking ship and--and he
never came to the surface of the sea again."

"Oh! Oh! My dear daddy!" sobbed Oriole, her face against Mr. Langdon's
coat.

"But listen!" urged the ranchman. "This seaman thinks your mother was
saved. She was put in another boat--one commanded by the first officer
of the _Helvetia_--and the seaman saw that boat picked up by another
ship, not the _Adrian Marple_, of course, on which you were brought to
the States.

"It seems a fog shut down. This seaman thinks that the ship that
rescued the boat your mother was in was what he calls a 'tramp.'
She was a freight ship and perhaps was bound to a distant port. She
probably carried no passengers and possibly no wireless outfit.

"So that is why no word has come from your mother. The shock of your
loss and your father's disappearance may have made it quite impossible
for your mother to take steps to communicate with the steamship company
that owned the _Helvetia_. Her first officer must have neglected to
do so, as well. It is all a mystery as to what became of that strange
freight ship, but there is good reason to hope."

"Oh, but my dear father is dead!" murmured Oriole. "What will mother
do without her Noddy?" and she burst into sobs again. "Out there--all
alone--in that strange--strange ship! What will happen to her?"

"Now, Oriole, don't you take on that-a-way," urged Mrs. Joy, likewise
in tears.

"But, my poor daddy----"

"Don't grieve so, child," urged Mr. Langdon huskily. "I will be a
father to you, Oriole. You shall never want for a thing. You are just
like a sister to Myron and Marian now. They love you dearly."

"And I love them," sobbed the girl. "But I want my mamma so much! I--I
just don't think I can--can live without her!"

"Don't say that. There is a good chance, we believe, of her coming back
to you, my dear," said Mrs. Joy. "Don't lose heart, Oriole. Providence
works in wondrous ways, the hymn book says."

"I am going to take care of you till your mother comes back," declared
Mr. Langdon firmly. "I have talked with Nat Jardin and with Mrs. Joy,
here. They both agree that a change will do you good.

"Sadie Brown is well enough to travel. She is a good woman and will be
fond enough of you when she knows you. And those twins of mine--well!
when I tell them you are going to be their sister--or nearabout--they
are going to be tickled pretty near to pieces."

"I--I know. They--they are just _dears_," gasped Oriole, struggling for
composure.

"Everything will turn out all right, Oriole," said Mrs. Joy again. "Me
and Lyddy Ann will miss you. But you'll be back to visit us some day.
I am sure you will be happy with Mr. Langdon. He is well able to take
care of you--and he's got no hypercritical relatives, I understand,"
and the sea-captain's widow shook her head gravely.

"Yes. He's better able than either Nathaniel Jardin or me to give you
what you ought to have in this world. I shall miss you a good deal. But
at my age I hope I've got past being selfish."

There was much more to be said, but it was all in the same vein. Mr.
Langdon went away before supper time; and then Lyddy Ann must be told.
Lyddy Ann declared she was "taken all aback" by this sudden change in
Oriole's fortunes.

"I thought you was here in this old house for the rest of my nateral
life, at least," grumbled the fleshy maid-of-all-work, after a while
and when Oriole had had another cry. "I don't like changes, Oriole
Putnam. And I am going to miss you a lot. And what Becky Joy will do
without you--Well! I don't see how she can be so foolish as to let you
go."

"But I am going to have lots of good times out on that ranch," said
Oriole, child enough to begin already to anticipate. She dried her
eyes. "Mr. Langdon says I shall have a pony to ride, and----"

"Goodness! A _horse_? I wouldn't no more trust myself on a horse than
I'd think of going into a wild tiger's cage," declared the woman with
emphasis. "No, indeedy! Now, if 'twas a boat you'd ride in--that would
be some sense. A body knows what to expect in a boat."

"But I don't think," said Oriole cautiously, "that Mr. Langdon's ranch
is near enough to the sea for him to have a boat."

"Humph! Funny place, I say! I couldn't imagine anybody from choice
living so far away from blue water. But I hope you'll be happy there,
Oriole. And you can always come back if you don't like it. I've got
some money saved up. Becky Joy has paid me well, and goodness knows I
never get any chance to spend money with all the work there is to do in
this house.

"So if you don't like it out there on that dairy farm----"

"It's not a dairy farm. It's a ranch," corrected Oriole.

"What's the difference? They keep cows, don't they? I got a second
cousin in Hepsbury that keeps a farm like that. And sells butter and
milk to the city. Well, if you don't like the cows--and they ain't much
society for a gal like you, I do allow--you come back here. You sha'n't
suffer none for a dollar as long as I am alive and the Littleport Bank
don't bust."

Oriole kissed the fleshy woman warmly. "Dear me!" she cried, "how good
everybody is to me."

"Sure. They ought to be," replied Lyddy Ann. "You are worth your weight
in ambergris, as my brother who whaled it all his days used to say of
me. I was twenty year younger than him. If he could see me now," added
the woman, shaking with mirth, "I guess he would change his statement.
With ambergris at eighty dollars an ounce I'd be worth some money,
wouldn't I?"

Oriole tried to figure out this enormous sum, knowing that Lyddy Ann
had weighed the fall before at "hog killing time" the huge amount of
two hundred and forty pounds. But she almost fell asleep over the
problem. Mrs. Joy had company in the museum--the room lined with
cabinets of curios and with marine souvenirs on the walls--so Lyddy Ann
and the girl were alone in the kitchen until bedtime.

"I got to take in those clothes before we go to bed," said Lyddy Ann at
last. "I don't care if they be frozen. They won't need sprinkling down
in the morning and I can iron them early. You want to hold the lantern
for me, Oriole?"

"Oh, ow!" yawned the girl, waking up. "Of course I do."

Really, Lyddy Ann did not need the illumination of the barn lantern to
enable her to take down the clothes from the lines in the side yard;
Oriole quite knew that. But she knew likewise that the woman was very
timid, despite her superabundance of flesh and good health. Lyddy Ann
feared "ghosts." To her imagination the old Dexter Mansion and its
surroundings were peopled with the spirits of departed people whose
lives had been spent in or about the place. Nothing could shake her
belief in such intangible visions. But even Oriole Putnam had had
experience enough to scoff at such ideas.

She agreed to hold the lantern, however, and they went out into the
faint gray glow of the star-light. Objects were plainly visible about
the door yard. The white garments hung upon the line might be said to
look ghostly, and there was frost enough in them to make some of the
garments appear to be clothing rather tangible bodies. Oriole mentioned
this and laughed.

"Don't you laugh, child, at such solemn things as ghosts," advised
Lyddy Ann.

"I'm not," said the girl gayly. "I'm only laughing at the _idea_ of
there being such things. Especially in Mrs. Joy's nightgown and my blue
gingham frock."

"Now, don't you laugh," repeated Lyddy Ann, and then she uttered a
muffled scream. She dropped the clothes basket into which she had
already placed several of the garments, and seized Oriole's arm.

"Now! Look at that!" she gasped. "See that sheet--down there at the end
by the old plum tree. _There's something in it._"

Oriole looked. She did not find speech again for a moment. The big
sheet which was hung over the line seemed to be alive! There was no
wind to blow it, but it was jerking about and seemed trying to advance
up the yard just as though there really was something inside of it.

"It _is_ a ghost," murmured Lyddy Ann. "Oh, Oriole! I'm scare't
nearabout to death!"




                               CHAPTER X

                               PARTINGS


Oriole might have become as panic-stricken as the fleshy Lyddy Ann,
only at this moment a rasping voice hailed them from the street, and a
tall and lank figure strode into the yard.

"Is that Oriole Putnam I see there? Say, gal, what do you know about my
boy's pet sheep? He says you stole it on him and wouldn't give it back.
I want to know what sort of actions that is?"

"Oh, I never!" cried Oriole, instantly indignant and so quite
forgetting her fright. "I wouldn't touch that old Jingo."

"You _did_ touch it, didn't you?" demanded the man shrewdly. It was Mr.
Enos Crabbe and it was quite plain that he was angered. "Shaddy says
you tied Jingo with a rope and then when he went back into Payne's yard
for it, you had led it away."

"Oh, I never!" cried Oriole again. "Anyway, I never led it away. I
wouldn't dare."

For the moment Lyddy Ann's attention was attracted from the "ghost."
She turned a scornful look on Enos Crabbe.

"Ought to have led it to the pound--that's what she ought to have done.
What are you Crabbes trying to do to Oriole _now_?"

Mr. Crabbe ignored the fleshy housemaid. He still stared accusingly at
Oriole.

"You have a bad name in this town, gal," he declared, bitterly. "I
wouldn't put stealing sheep past you--no, sir!"

"Oh!" gasped the girl, hurt to the quick.

"Now you stop that, Enos Crabbe!" shouted Lyddy Ann. "Somebody ought to
hit you _hard_ for talking so."

Mr. Crabbe had advanced upon the fleshy woman and Oriole, with the
lantern in her hand, who stood at the end of the clothes-drying yard.
Their backs were now turned to the gyrating sheet at the far end of
the line. But Mr. Crabbe suddenly beheld the strangely behaving sheet
charging up the yard.

"Wha--what's that?" he cried out, shrinking in apparent size and
courage. "Keep off! Help! He-e-lp!"

With this wail he turned and ran for the gate. The motive power of the
charging sheet took his flight as a challenge. It started after Mr.
Crabbe, and although Lyddy Ann, moaning and weeping, backed to the
steps and sat down with a thud, the "ghost" gave her no attention.

The streaming sheet passed Oriole too, and made for the gate after Mr.
Crabbe. Oriole fortunately guessed what the thing was. When it passed
through the gateway all possible misunderstanding was removed.

The sheet caught on either post and was torn from the sheep's horns.
Jingo, in wandering around the neighborhood, had come in contact with
Lyddy Ann's wash. But the sheet did not blind him to Enos Crabbe's
retreat.

Jingo burst from the enfolding sheet and shot out into State Street.
The driveway was empty but for the fleeing storekeeper and councilman.
There was little dignity in the method of Mr. Crabbe's attempted
escape. There was less when Jingo managed to catch up with him.

The head of the angry ram landed just in the bend of the long-legged
man's knees. The shock threw Mr. Crabbe to the hard roadway and he
uttered a terrified shriek, while Jingo ran right over him, never
stopping to see whether his victim recovered or not.

But the victim did recover! Lyddy Ann likewise had recovered her feet
when she was convinced by her own eyesight that it was not a ghost
running through the yard. She stared in evident satisfaction at Mr.
Crabbe when he scrambled up again and turned to run away from the
disappearing sheep.

"For the good land's sake!" she gasped, "I never expected to live to
see such a sight as Enos Crabbe beaten up by that nuisance. It--it's a
pleasure!"

"Oh, Lyddy Ann!" Oriole murmured.

"Don't waste your sympathy on the likes of him," said the housemaid
energetically. "And 'twasn't a ghost after all! Well! But look at that
sheet! I don't know what Becky Joy will say."

"I--I wonder what will happen to Shedder?" said Oriole. "His father is
going to be awfully angry with him about that old Jingo."

This query was quite sufficiently answered by the forlorn appearance of
the redoubtable Shedder the next day at school. He stirred uneasily on
his seat in the schoolroom, too, sitting down and getting up gingerly
as though he bore physical reminders of his father's indignation. It
was noised about, too, before the week was out, that Shedder's pet ram
was made into mutton.

"And the town folks will buy it out of that Enos Crabbe's store and
eat it!" exclaimed Lyddy Ann. "Ain't that a shame? You can't beat that
Crabbe family. If they were Feejees they'd invite the whole tribe to a
dollar-a-plate banquet if their great-grandfather died."

"Oh, Lyddy Ann! that is awful," murmured Oriole, who heard this.

She was by this time, however, so much interested in the plans for her
great change that she could not worry much about the Crabbes' affairs
or Lyddy Ann's comments thereon. It had been fully decided that she
should go West with Harvey Langdon and the twins, Sadie Brown, the
nurse, being a member of the party. And the start would soon be made.

News of her departure for the West spread among the young people of the
town like wildfire. Naturally she was an object of envy to most of the
boys and not a few of the girls; for the Western movies are the delight
of the younger element irrespective of sex. There is an attraction in
out-of-door life for all young folks. The open plains, the mountains,
the broad rivers, the forest and the canyons and gorges of the Rockies
in contemplation make local matters seem tame indeed to the Eastern
youth.

These young people, used only to the shore and the sea that lapped
it, thought of the land to which Oriole was going as a much freer
and wilder locality. When they could they gathered around Mr. Harvey
Langdon and begged him to tell them of his ranch ("farm" some of
them called it) and the wonders of Montana. But the ranchman was wont
to smile broadly when he saw their interest and repeat for them some
doggerel verses which he called "The Western Boy's Lament" and which
began:

    "I wish't I lived away Down East
      Where codfish salt the sea,
    And where the folks have punkin pie
      And apple-sass for tea."

"All the boys out my way," he said, "hanker to come East just the same
as you folks want to go West."

Oriole Putnam had many good-byes to say. First of all she must separate
from her school friends, and she found that this was something of a
wrench, although she had only attended school in Littleport three or
four months. In spite of May Rabey and her clique, Oriole had plenty of
friends at school, including all the teachers with whom she had come in
contact.

Flossy and Minnie Payne and some of the Busy Bees determined to show
their liking for Oriole in an unmistakable way. They arranged with Mrs.
Joy and Lyddy Ann to give Oriole a surprise party in the great Dexter
Mansion on State Street on the following Saturday.

Meanwhile Oriole had gone to the island where Nat Jardin and Ma
Stafford lived (the ice still held) and had spent half the week with
the old people. It might seem that there would be few interests in
common between the lightkeeper and his housekeeper and Oriole Putnam.
But the girl had lived very close to the old couple during the first
months after her arrival from South America. She bore all their sorrows
and interests in her heart. No matter where she might go in the future,
she could never forget the lightkeeper and Ma Stafford.

And could they forget Oriole? Not likely!

"Just you remember, child, that we air thinking of you and praying for
you all the time," said Ma before Oriole came away from Harbor Island.
"I'm only a-hoping none of them cattle of Mr. Langdon's trample on
you--or them cowboys do you any harm. They are rough men, and it's a
wild country."

"I cal'late," said Nat Jardin in his drawling way, "that 'twon't be
many years before them cowboys might be in danger from Oriole, 'stead
of t'other way 'round. She's getting to be a big gal now, for a fact!"

But this speech was enigmatic to Oriole. She had not visualized herself
yet as grown-up. No, indeed! She was just a healthy, moderately happy
girl; and the chance of change after all delighted her.

Nothing more had been heard of Teddy Ford. He had not appeared at the
island again and one of the men from the life saving station told
Oriole that the boy had gone away as he said he would, and had not
returned with the coasting vessel on which he had sailed.

"I do hope he has started back for Montana!" Oriole told herself. "And
if he goes there, won't he be surprised to find me at Mr. Langdon's
ranch?"

The parting came from the old folks on the island, and from Payton Orr
and his wife and the baby. Oriole could scarcely see for tears when she
started on her new skates for the port late that Saturday afternoon.
But she was quite cheerful again by the time she climbed off the ice at
Griffith's dock.

As she went up past the hotel she saw the twins playing in the yard
connected therewith. Abel Hubbard, who was general factotum about the
Brick hotel, as well as liveryman, was renewing the tar-paper strips
on the trunks of the trees in the yard, and Myron and Marian were very
much interested and had asked all about the operation and the reason
for it.

"You see, Oriole," explained Myron earnestly, "when spwing comes and
the fwost isn't in the gwound any more, bugs an' other insects cwawl
up out of the gwound and eat the twee-leaves and buds. But Mr. Abel
stops 'em fwom cwawlin' up by tying _that_ awound the twees. Ain't it
wunnerful?"

"I don't like bugs and things," shuddered Marian, as she and her
brother ran out to join Oriole on the street. "If they cwawl on
_me_--ugh!"

"Never mind. They don't begin to cwawl this time o' year, Mawyann,"
Myron said soothingly. "They are all fwoze up now."

"I wish they'd stay fwozed," declared the little girl. "Oh! See there,
Oriole. Look at that man."

A stranger in the town--evidently a traveling man--was coming out of
Enos Crabbe's store and to him the little girl pointed.

"Just see his arm, Oriole," exclaimed the excited Marian. "He's got
one, too."

"He's got what?" demanded Myron, staring.

Oriole saw immediately what the little girl meant. The stranger wore a
band of crepe about his left arm signifying that somebody near and dear
to him had recently died.

"Oh!" gasped Myron.

"See?" questioned Marian of Oriole quite innocently. "What's to keep
them from cwawling up his other arm?"

This story, told at the surprise party that evening, added much to the
gayety of the occasion. The twins were at the party, too, although Mr.
Langdon took them back to the hotel at an early hour.

Mrs. Joy had seen to it that the plans of the Busy Bees were developed
in such a way that no party for young folk in Littleport that winter
would be longer remembered than this given in Oriole Putnam's honor.
And there was not a person in the house that Oriole did not love!

May Rabey and her crowd had been ignored. Left to choose for herself,
Oriole would undoubtedly have invited all her schoolmates and "played
no favorites." But the Busy Bees were abetted in their desire to make
the affair one exclusively by Oriole's real friends, for Mrs. Joy too
did not admire "Maria Rabey's girl" and her set.

Therefore the party was bound to be a happy time for all who attended.
Lyddy Ann, forewarned in time, had baked for two days and added her
delectable cakes and cookies to the ice-cream and sherbets sent down
from Salem by the caterer. They played games; they danced in the big
"museum room" which was cleared for the occasion of all but the curio
cases. For the last time Oriole led in a "dress-up" pageant, finding
the ancient garments in the mansion garret a treasure-store for
masquerade.

It was, altogether, the nicest party Oriole ever remembered--even
better than the New Year's affair Mr. Langdon had given her. But there
was bitter with the sweet of it too.

When she kissed each girl and shook hands with every boy as they
filed out of the house at eleven o'clock, Oriole knew that this might
be the last opportunity she would have of speaking to them for many
months--perhaps for ever.

For on Monday forenoon Oriole Putnam, with Mr. Langdon and the twins,
who had returned from their short trip to Maine, left Littleport on the
train to meet Sadie Brown at the Junction, and from thence to travel
westward.




                              CHAPTER XI

                       A GREAT DEAL THAT IS NEW


Oriole Putnam knew ships and shipping much better than did most girls
of her age. But traveling on the railroad for any distance was an
entirely new experience. Even the twins, Myron and Marian Langdon,
could remember about their journey eastward from Montana, and were more
familiar with the Pullman car and the stateroom the party occupied, and
other traveling conveniences, than was the girl from the sea.

But Oriole was greatly interested from the start of the journey from
Littleport. Of course, they did not get into the fine vestibuled train
until they left Boston. Before that, however, Oriole had begun to see
and wonder at many new things.

In the first place, she met for the first time since she had recovered
the twins' nurse, Sadie Brown. Miss Brown had no remembrance of Oriole,
although the latter had aided Nat Jardin in rescuing the poor woman
from the wreck of the Portland steamboat.

Sadie Brown had heard all about Oriole from Harvey Langdon and she
was eager to meet and to thank Oriole. The latter felt somewhat
embarrassed, Nurse Brown made so much of her share in her rescue from
the wreck. But fortunately it was the first meeting the twins had had
with "Nursie" since their separation from her, and their vociferous
welcome of the woman relieved Oriole's embarrassment to some degree.

"You look like a very capable, up-and-coming sort of girl, I must say,"
said the nurse, who was a product of the West herself and a very frank
person. "I am going to like you, Oriole Putnam, aside from the fact
that without you and that wonderful old man Mr. Langdon tells me about,
I might not be here now."

"Oh, Miss Brown," Oriole murmured, "Uncle Nat Jardin _is_ wonderful.
Indeed he is."

"I shouldn't be surprised. And you are a little wonder yourself,
child," laughed Miss Brown, hugging the girl. "Their father says the
improvement in the twins is partly due to your influence. The dear
little things! How mad I must have been at the time of that wreck. I
can't even remember what happened after the stewardess ran through the
cabin screaming 'We are sinking!' until I awoke in the hospital with
Mr. Langdon beside me, and learned that long months had elapsed.

"Well, this is a strange world. I had promised Mr. Langdon to take
every care of Myron and Marian when we started East to see their
grandparents. But we never know what is going to happen to us, do we?"

"I am sure we do not, Miss Brown," Oriole agreed very earnestly. "My
dear mamma and I did not dream when we went to sea in the _Helvetia_
that we were to be separated, and that my dear father would be--be
lost----"

Oriole choked up here, and could say no more. Nurse Brown patted her
hand.

"Mr. Langdon has told me all about that," she said to the troubled girl
quietly. "Even now there is some hope. Especially hope of the return
of your mother. Nothing can be stranger than my own case, child. I had
lost all memory of my past, for months. And I am well and strong again.
So have hope."

Oriole did have hope--a deal of it. She tried every time she thought
of her dear mother to think of her as alive. Dear daddy was gone. She
felt quite convinced of that. But he had never meant so much to her as
"Sister."

She and her mother had called each other that even when Oriole was
very little. That was because there had been no other children about
for Oriole to play with (the Portuguese-Brazilian children who were
her neighbors did not count in Oriole's mind) and it made it seem less
lonely for the little girl if mother played at being a companion of her
own age.

Why, they had even played dolls together! Oriole had loved her family
of dolls very much. But because they had been lost when she so hastily
left the _Helvetia_ after the collision, she had never cared for
others. Her doll family had been the equal care and joy of "Sister" and
herself. Oriole determined to remember or think only of her dear one as
in health and strength--no matter how far away she was, geographically
speaking.

However, even Sadie Brown's remarks did not make the interested Oriole
dwell at present upon the misfortune of her loss. There was too much
new in this journey to interest her.

After meeting Nurse Brown at the Junction the party went on to Boston
and there boarded the west-bound train in the evening. They pulled
out of the great station at late dinner time, and even the twins were
allowed to go into the brilliantly lighted dining car for the evening
meal.

"It is just like a narrow ship's saloon-cabin," declared Oriole. "And
what nice colored men to wait on the table! We had colored men on the
_Helvetia_; but on the _Adrian Marple_ they were Italians. And _they_
were nice too. Of course, 'most everybody aboard ship is always nice to
you."

"I imagine," chuckled Harvey Langdon, "that most people are nice to
Oriole Putnam everywhere. These waiters are all white teeth and white
eyes when they look at you. Isn't that a fact, Nurse?"

"It would be hard to turn a sour face on the girl, Mr. Langdon,"
replied Miss Brown, who was looking after the needs of Myron and Marian.

They went back to the stateroom--at least, Nurse Brown and Oriole and
the twins did--and Myron and Marian were put to bed in the end berths.
Nurse Brown and Oriole took the side berths, while Mr. Langdon of
course had his berth in another part of the car.

The swing of the car over the rails and the hum of the wheels Oriole
thought very soothing after she got to bed. She had no more fear of
wreck or disaster than she had had at sea. Indeed, it merely seemed as
though she were sleeping in a swing.

She went to sleep finally with this thought in her mind. And whatever
happened to the train--how it was stopped, started, or otherwise was
run--did not disturb her slumber in the least. But at daybreak she
awoke. Not for any outside reason, it seemed; but just because she had
had sleep enough.

The train was standing still. There was a narrow window just above her
eyes, but across the compartment. She rose up and leaned on her elbow
to look out. The narrow panel-window was open and in the twilight of
early morning she could observe the fact that right beside her train
was another.

This other train was not a limited express, however, made up for the
most part of Pullmans. No, indeed! It was the odor that assailed her
nostrils through the open window that first apprised Oriole of the
nature of the car that stood on the other track right beside this
sleeping coach in which the girl lay.

"Why!" murmured the girl, "it--it smells just like our old muley cow's
stable on Harbor Island. I declare! it must be a cattle car. No!" as a
sleek, handsome head, with erect ears, came into view through a narrow
aperture in the other car, "it's a horse car!"

Then she burst into a smothered giggle, for this sounded funny to
Oriole. It was not a _horse car_. She had seen one of those ancient
vehicles in one of the shore towns near Littleport. This car on the
next track was a car in which horses traveled, not one which horses
drew!

She could occasionally see the glossy coat or intelligent head of one
of the horses in the car. There was somebody with the animals too. A
voice said:

"Step over there! Whoa!"

And that voice quite startled Oriole Putnam. She peered through the
narrow window to see if she could see more. Why, the voice sounded just
as familiar! Who that she knew could possibly be with those horses on
the siding?

She told herself that her hearing had deceived her. Yet she continued
to listen and peer through the aperture. A voice she knew! She tried to
think who it could be. Surely nobody she had known at Littleport could
be traveling with horses in that cattle car.

Was it somebody she had known previous to her coming to Harbor Light?
Somebody she had met on shipboard? Even some person Oriole had been
acquainted with away down in Brazil where she had lived with her mother
and father?

She heard the voice again, and with another shock--a real
shock--realized that it was a boy's voice, not a man's.

Oriole swung her feet out of the berth and slid quietly to the floor.
She crossed the stateroom and stood on the bench there to look through
the window. The keen air of out-of-doors made her shiver, but she did
not withdraw for a long moment.

In that moment she saw the very strangest thing! Right across from her
car--not exactly opposite the window, but a little further along--was
the side door of the stock car. It was a slatted door and she could see
in between the slats.

Standing there against the door, with his back toward her, a tight cap
pulled down over his curls, was a boy that looked very much indeed like
Teddy Ford!

Oriole drew back with a little gasp and huddled quickly into her warm
robe that Mr. Langdon had bought for her. She slipped her feet into
downy slippers. All the time she kept saying under her breath:

"Oh, it can't be--it just _can't_ be! I cannot believe it is Teddy
Ford. How would he get here?"

She went to peep again. He had disappeared. Yet she could not overcome
the feeling that the handsome boy she had known such a little time at
Harbor Island was right in the very next car!

"I know what I'll do," murmured Oriole. "I'll wash my face and comb my
hair and get dressed quickly. Then I'll run out on the platform and
call him. I wonder how long this old train will wait here?"

She made her toilet as quickly as possible and then put on her
fur-trimmed coat and tam o' shanter. When she appeared in the car
corridor the black porter gazed upon her in amazement.

"Yo' surely is an early riser, Missy," he said, displaying all his
teeth. "Yo' ticket don't call for yo' gettin' up so early. We ain't got
to Chicago yet--an' de way it looks we won't git there right soon."

"Then I can go out of the car?" asked Oriole eagerly.

"Well, it might be safe enough, but I dunno. I'd better ask the
conductor, Missy. She might start sudden like an' leave you."

"Oh!" cried Oriole, "I wouldn't like that at all. But there is somebody
in that train standing right next to this one that I think I know. I--I
want to talk to him."

"Bless yo', Missy!" exclaimed the porter, "that's a stock train.
Leastways, that car is full o' horses--race horses. They're likely
being took to Bowlin' Green, or some sech place. I's Kentucky bred
myself, Missy, an' I's allus int'rested in racin' stock. So I took note
ob dat car. Yes'm."

He smiled affably and accompanied her into the vestibule. He opened the
door overlooking the freight track on which the stock car stood. Oriole
put out her head. She could see the slatted door of the stock car. She
opened her lips to call Teddy Ford's name.

And just then, with a sudden lurch and bump, the Pullman train started!




                              CHAPTER XII

                            EXCITING TIMES


The train Oriole was on started very slowly, but the girl was at once
afraid that if the boy of whom she had caught a glimpse _was_ Teddy
Ford, she would be carried on so quickly that she could not attract his
attention.

This, Oriole thought, would be a tragedy. Since the boy from the West
had run away from Harbor Light Island she had often thought of him
and wondered where he had gone--what he was doing. A boy like him
traveling around the country alone, with no home and "nobody to be nice
to him!" Oriole had a notion that boys could not really take care of
themselves--not properly. Who would sew his buttons on? Or mend his
jacket? Or darn his socks? These questions were quite serious in her
opinion.

"Oh, Teddy Ford! Teddy Ford!" she shouted, as the slatted door of the
car in which the horses were stabled came nearer and her train gathered
speed. "Teddy Ford!"

"Hey! Hullo!" responded a voice. "Who's callin' me?"

The face of the boy appeared between the slats just as the platform of
the sleeper came opposite. It was Teddy Ford!

"Oh, Teddy!" gasped Oriole.

"Gee! if it ain't that--that Skylark Putnam----"

"_Oriole._"

"Oriole, I mean!" shouted Teddy Ford. "Gee! how'd you get here? Where
you going?"

"I am going to Montana! With Mr. Langdon! And the twins!"

These shouts were in crescendo as the Pullman train gathered speed.
Then, at the very top of her voice, the girl cried:

"_Are you coming, too?_"

"I'm on my way!" was the shrill answer.
"I'll--be--there--by--the--spring--round-up."

Oriole, rosy-faced and with her eyes dancing, took this promise back
into the sleeper and to the stateroom she occupied with the twins and
Nurse Brown. She did not know what a "round-up" was, but the promise
was for the spring. And even beyond the Rockies the spring could not be
so very far away now.

She was so full of this adventure and her sight of Teddy Ford that she
had to awaken Nurse Brown to tell about it. And then the twins woke up
and the day's adventures began. Later, of course, Harvey Langdon had to
hear about it. And he shook his head rather soberly over the incident.

"I wish now that boy had come to see me at Littleport," he told Oriole.
"Of course, he's a tough young chap, but something _might_ happen to
him, roaming around the East here alone, and all."

Oriole was frankly curious.

"Is it more dangerous here in the East than anywhere else--out West,
for instance?" she asked.

"Seems so," Mr. Langdon said seriously. "In the big cities--even on
these railroads. Ain't like our Western country. Not much to harm a boy
there--good, honest, out-of-door work, clean living and good cooking.
Nothing fancy, but _good_, you know."

Oriole wondered if it was the cooking that might hurt Teddy Ford in the
East. But, on the other hand, she was wise enough not to say too much
at this time about the wandering boy from the West. She could see that
Mr. Langdon was "coming around." He held a less harsh opinion of the
boy whom he had accused of the robbery of his ranch home.

Oriole was a loyal soul. Once convinced that Teddy Ford was innocent,
nothing short of his own confession could have changed her opinion of
him. But she was delighted to see that Harvey Langdon was changing his
opinion.

How could he help it, when he really had Teddy to thank for the life of
Marian? Perhaps for the lives of both the twins? Oriole felt very sure
that if she could have got Teddy Ford off that stock car and into the
Pullman it would have all been "made up."

And now, as Mr. Langdon said, something easily might happen to the boy.
She did not see it just as the ranchman did--she could not consider the
East a more dangerous place for a boy than the West. But she had heard
Uncle Nat Jardin tell the old story of the seaman when his bark was in
the midst of a terrible gale, who said: "Heaven help the poor folks
ashore to-night, Bill!" and understood its significance. The dangers we
know seem of much less importance than unknown perils.

To Oriole the range and cattle camps seemed to be breeding-places
for danger and adventure. Since knowing she was going West with the
Langdons she had visualized much that would never happen to her,
perhaps; but she knew her expectations were possible and reasonable.

Sadie Brown, the nurse, grew much more animated, too, as the party
traveled westward. To get back to the open plains and mountain ranges
of her own country she thought promised complete health for herself,
after her sad experience in the Eastern hospital.

"And once you have learned to ride a mustang pony and have scampered
over the Langdon Three-bar Ranch once or twice, you will never care
about the sea and shore again, Oriole. Ugh! I can't think of the water
without a shudder."

Mr. Langdon chuckled. "Going to make it pretty hard for you, Sadie,
ever to even drink water again, isn't it?"

"I don't think I ever shall be very thirsty," she told him, smiling.
"A water-hole is all very well. But I am going to shut my eyes when we
cross the Mississippi River."

But that crossing was made in the night, and even Oriole did not see
it. Before that, however, she saw something of Chicago, and then
something of the great stockyards. She saw a herd of the Three-bar
cattle (that was Mr. Langdon's brand) that had been shipped to market
by the ranch manager whom Mr. Langdon spoke of as "Sol Perkins." In
fact, Oriole in her observant way, noted that most of these Western
people whom she met were inclined to speak of each other by their
first names. Even Nurse Brown almost always prefixed Mr. Langdon's
name with "Harvey." It marked a good-fellowship among the people,
both employers and employees, that seemed to draw them into a closer
alliance.

At Kansas City a tanned, hard-looking man, in a great sombrero and
hairy chaps, came aboard the Pullman for a moment and shook hands with
Mr. Langdon and gave him some message from the ranch. This was George
Belden, the ranch owner said, who was trail foreman and had come on
with a beef herd to the Kansas City market. Oriole liked the man, his
blue eyes were so clear and steady, and his mouth wreathed with such
humorous lines.

"I know that man is going to be a friend of mine," Oriole confided to
Nurse Brown.

"What! George?" cried Sadie Brown. "That fellow is the most reckless
cowpuncher on the Three-bar. I wouldn't make a friend of him, Oriole
Putnam, if I were you," she added with a sniff.

"Oh! he isn't really _wicked_, is he? He can't be, I'm sure, with such
a--a funny mouth and such twinkling eyes."

"'Wicked?' No," said Sadie Brown shortly. "He's just silly. He hasn't
got but a single idea in his head--and that's a nonsensical one."

"What is it?" asked Oriole, her curiosity aroused.

"Just an idea that he wants to get married. It's all he thinks of,"
declared the twins' nurse. "I never did see such a silly man."

Oriole considered this statement in silence. She had never imagined
before that getting married was classed as "silly." Sadie Brown seemed
to have a personal feeling about it--quite a spiteful feeling. Just the
same, Oriole had liked the looks of George Belden.

Two days later the train-tired party alighted from a branch road train
at Teeman's Station, forty miles by the trail from the Langdon Ranch.
That forty miles could only be covered on horseback or in some kind
of vehicle; and the only vehicles in sight were two buckboards for
the twins and Oriole and the baggage. Sadie Brown was supplied with a
rough-and-ready riding costume, and she mounted a fierce little black
mustang that Oriole secretly admitted she would have been afraid of.

Mr. Langdon had a much bigger mount--a thoroughbred that was one of
the prize horses on the ranch. There were several other employees of
the ranch riding along beside the drivers of the buckboards. They made
quite a jolly party, and on the way Oriole began to learn much about
the cattle country and stock raising (Mr. Langdon bred horses for the
market as well as raised cattle) that interested and surprised her.

In a bushy and wild-looking hollow through which they rode, the trail
winding tortuously among the patches of prickly brush, the party
raised a cow with a yearling calf running by her side. Mr. Langdon was
instantly interested.

"Hey!" he shouted to his men, "isn't that a Three-bar cow? One of our
cows?"

"You said it, Boss," agreed one of the punchers, pricking his mount
into a faster stride.

"Then that long-ear is ours," declared the cattleman. "That cow's been
lost two years, I bet. And she's worth sixty dollars of any man's
money. The maverick is worth another twenty just as he runs. Get him!"

The man who had answered and another started after the loping cow and
her calf.

"What will they do to the poor cow?" asked Oriole anxiously of Nurse
Brown.

"Nothing much, honey."

"Oh! They are after the calf, then?"

"Just you watch, honey."

One puncher distanced the other and drew close to the running cow and
her calf. He made his cast and missed it. His mount swerved aside at
the very instant he made the cast and the rope dragged.

"Hi, Lenny!" shouted Mr. Langdon, "I'd massage that horse of yours
a pile with that rope. He ain't a cow-pony any more than he is a
spread-eagle. Look out!"

When the puncher proceeded to slap the horse he rode with the re-coiled
lariat, the creature fell to frantic pitching, and the rider was quite
out of the running for the unbranded yearling.

The second man went at the attack with more success. Ten rods beyond
the scene of the other man's fiasco the second puncher's rope circled
the calf's neck. The puncher flipped the slack before the calf's nose
and the latter crossed it and fell with a crash.

"Oh!" cried Oriole, standing up in the buckboard and clinging to the
broad shoulders of the driver. "They _will_ hurt that poor calf."

"Not 'nough to do damage," the driver of the buckboard assured her.

The man who had roped the yearling got down from his saddle and ran
down the rope, loosing the hogging string hanging from his belt as he
ran. He dropped on his knees, gathered the yearling's struggling feet,
and tied them together most expertly.

The puncher stood up, grinning, and re-coiled his lariat--"la reata,"
to give it its proper, and Spanish, name. He tied the rope to his
saddle horn. From under the horn on the other side he took an iron
three-eighths of an inch in diameter, a foot long, and shaped like a
shepherd's crook.

"That is what we call a 'running iron,'" explained Mr. Langdon to the
round-eyed Oriole.

"Oh! Where does he run with it?" she asked. "And isn't he hurting that
poor calf?"

"Well," the ranchman said slowly, "the yearling doesn't like it, I
imagine. But he won't be hurt--much. It's the only way we have of
keeping run of our stock."

"Oh!"

"They have all to be branded. Otherwise some other brand will get 'em.
We know this chap belongs to the Three-bar now, for he is running with
his mother--Er, where did that cow go, Lenny?"

"Into the brush--My hickey, here she comes! Mad as a hatter! Locoed,
for fair."

There suddenly burst from the chaparral the cow the calf had been
running with. The calf was blatting forlornly, and his cry had brought
the mother back in a desperate temper.

The puncher, Mr. Langdon, and Nurse Brown spurred their mounts out of
the way. The sharp horns of the maddened cow were not to be scorned.
Yet the Westerners were more amused than frightened.

However, the cow plunged straight ahead at the buckboard on which the
twins and Oriole were seated. The driver could not whip up his ponies
in time. They began to dance and snort rather than draw the vehicle out
of the path of the mad cow.

"Look out!" shouted the ranch owner again. "Get a move on you, Long
Jim!"

The half-broken ponies drawing the buckboard would not be urged ahead.
Long Jim laid his quirt along their flanks without avail. Oriole stood
up in excitement if not in fear, and Myron and Marian clung to her,
shrieking.




                             CHAPTER XIII

                           AT THE RANGE CAMP


It really was the very "maddest" cow Oriole Putnam had ever seen. She
was used to the old muley cow on Harbor Light Island and the spotted
cow in the stable behind Mrs. Joy's house in Littleport. Indeed, she
had milked, fed, and been friendly with both of these.

But this outlaw cow--of Hereford stock and wild-eyed and fiery enough,
now she was roused--seemed quite like a wild beast to the girl from
the Atlantic coast town. She was not at all like any cow that had
heretofore crossed Oriole's path.

That she was dangerous was proved by the way Mr. Langdon and Sadie
Brown, though laughing, had spurred out of the creature's path. Those
sharp horns certainly could do a deal of harm to a pony. That the grown
folks were not at first seriously disturbed was because they were such
good riders and understood how to manage their mounts.

But here was quite another thing. The cow aimed for the buckboard
itself, and the three children (for the driver had his hands full with
the cavorting ponies) were in real peril.

Myron and Marian were screaming--either in excitement or fear, it would
be hard to say which. Oriole uttered no word at all, but her round eyes
glared at the charging cow in terror.

That heavy body, backed by the force of the speed it had gathered,
could overturn the rangy vehicle, if nothing worse, and the buckboard
is a wagon not easily tipped over. The cow's forehead collided with the
end of the rear seat--the seat on which Oriole and the twins had been
sitting.

The buckboard groaned, was lifted up, and the spokes of the dry wheels
rattled. Long Jim, the driver, whooping loudly, sailed over the tangle
of harness that held the nigh pony.

Oriole needed nobody to tell her to jump. That was exactly what she
did--and in the very nick of time. As the cow's horns and forehead
collided with the seat the girl leaped out of the vehicle, bearing a
twin under each arm.

[Illustration: ORIOLE LEAPED, BEARING A TWIN UNDER EACH ARM.]

"Hurrah for Oriole!" shouted Harvey Langdon, wheeling his horse in a
narrow circle and charging back toward the overturned buckboard.

"What a nimble child she is!" gasped Sadie Brown.

But it needed strength as well as nimbleness to accomplish what Oriole
did. The twins were heavy, and she saved them from falling to the
ground when she landed herself so solidly. She was jarred all over by
her jump. And even then she and the twins were not safe.

The cow overturned the buckboard, wrecked one hind wheel, and plowed
right through the wreckage in her endeavor to get at the three
children. Their fluttering garments drew the attention, perhaps, of the
mother cow and occasioned such determination to get at the trio.

"Come, children! Run!" Oriole commanded, setting the twins down.

She seized their hands and they scampered over the short sward, away
from the wagon tracks. The cow became entangled in the wreckage of the
buckboard. The cowboy, Lenny, came along with his quirt and drove the
animal, bawling, away from the vicinity. The vehicle could not be used,
however, until it was repaired.

"We'll have to take these children up before us as far as the range
camp," said Mr. Langdon. "Whose outfit is it ahead, Lenny?"

"Rodney Granger's, Mr. Harvey," replied the puncher, in his drawling
way. "'Tain't more'n five mile."

But first Oriole had to watch the puncher who had roped and tied the
calf. There was something enthralling about this branding, although she
hated the idea of the poor calf being hurt. As Mr. Langdon had said,
however, there was no other way to account for the growing cattle.

The puncher had gathered a few dead branches of what was called
"mahogany bush" even while the cow was on the rampage. He now made a
small fire between two stones, cunningly arranged for a quick draft. He
thrust the crooked part of the branding iron into the hottest part of
the fire.

While the iron was heating the calf suddenly began to bawl again. The
puncher had slit one of the animal's ears--"nicked it," he said--which
Oriole thought most unnecessarily cruel. But it didn't bleed much, and
she wiped it carefully with her handkerchief.

"I should think," she said warmly, "if it's absolutely necessary to
mark 'em on the ear, that you'd have some salve, or something. I know
Ma Stafford had salve with which she anointed even the hens' feet when
they got hurt. The poor thing----"

"Well, I tell you how 'tis, Miss," said the puncher, with grave face
but twinkling eyes. "Us cowmen have to carry so much with us--camp
'quipment, and hog-strings, and a rope, and all--that we don't seem
to have no room on horseback for a medicine chest. But you speak to
Harvey Langdon 'bout it. Mebbe he'll give us a pack-mule to trail along
behind us when we're out on the range."

Oriole knew well enough this was jokingly said. And she shut her
hands together ever so tight when that white-hot iron came out of the
fire and the Three-bar mark was put upon the protesting calf. But she
just _had_ to see it done! She had watched the sea in its might, she
had suffered shipwreck and disaster, she had been through some harsh
adventures; why shouldn't she see a yearling branded and learn how it
was accomplished?

She knew girls, at least girls in Littleport, were supposed to shriek
and run away when anything unpleasant like this was done. There was a
man on State Street, a little beyond the Dexter mansion where Oriole
had lived with Mrs. Rebecca Joy, who killed pigs just before Christmas.
She had heard the poor pigs squealing and had stopped her ears with her
fingers just as Flossy Payne did.

Now Oriole thought that she had been rather foolish. The bawling calf
made a lot of noise over his split ear and burned hip; but he would
soon get over it. She was just as tender hearted as girl could be, but
she was perhaps more sensible than most.

At any rate, as before said, Oriole realized that this branding of
cattle was a necessary operation. Otherwise the calves would be lost.
For after a certain time the mother cow would drive the yearling away
from her anyway.

Then she got up astride the saddle before Harvey Langdon. Sadie Brown
carried Marian in her arms, and Lenny, the cowpuncher, bore Myron.
They rode on, leaving the other puncher and the driver to patch up the
buckboard the best way possible and come on slowly to the range camp.

The herd was sighted in half an hour--a great, reddish smudge, it
seemed at first, moving slowly across the rolling plain. But the cattle
were grazing earnestly, as night came on, and soon Oriole saw that they
ate of the newly sprung, succulent grass far from each other. Instead
of closing in together like a driven herd, the cattle covered acres
upon acres of land.

Here and there on the outskirts, statuesque in pose, was a horseman.
Riding around the herd was only followed by night, it seemed. By day
the punchers merely watched. There was nothing much to trouble the herd
here on the uplands, so far from the savage heights or gulches choked
with jungle-growth. Even the chaparral was sparse.

"And did Teddy Ford ride around these cows, and watch them feed, Mr.
Langdon?" Oriole asked doubtfully, after they had all alighted from
their horses.

"Ha, ha!" laughed the ranchman. "Teddy was cook's helper part of the
time; but he could ride. I'll say that much for the kid--he could ride.
You seem to have a deep interest in him, Oriole?"

"Yes, sir. Why shouldn't I? I--I guess he is the first cowpuncher I
ever knew. And I _do_ think they are awfully interesting."

"I'll tell the boys that," chuckled Harvey Langdon. "If there is
anything interesting about herding steers and riding mean-tempered
cayuses, I know the boys will be glad to hear it."

Nevertheless the girl from the East was not disabused of her belief
that riding after cattle must be a most romantic business. Why!
consider this eating at the range camp, and afterward rolling up in
blankets and sleeping in a wagon that looked like the pictures of those
in the old emigrant trains. Oriole was quite entranced by these new
experiences.

It seemed to her as though she had only just closed her eyes when she
opened them again and found a red and windy dawn outside the covered
wagon. How could even a dreamless night have gone so quickly? She
crept out of the roll of her blanket and peered forth from the end of
the wagon.

There was a stir already among the horses and around the cook wagon.
Red flames blinked and sputtered as though the fuel was greasy. Two or
three moving shadows marked the cook and helpers. She saw a tall and
lean man rise like a sapling out of the shadow that masked the earth
and stretch long arms like tree limbs. Then he cupped his hands like a
megaphone and shouted in the high, plainsman's drawl:

"Beds!"

He repeated the word thrice, turning slowly as he did so to all four
points of the compass. All around the camp men roused up sleepily, but
took up the cry weirdly in the half darkness:

"Beds! Beds!"

"What can it mean?" murmured Oriole, hopping out of the end of the
wagon.

She ran, all tousled of hair and sleepy-eyed as she was, to the fires
to ask. She ran into Lenny, the puncher who had come over from the
railway with them the afternoon before.

"Hullo, Sissy," he said. "What do them hombres mean yelling
that-a-way?" and he chuckled. "Why, camp's going to be moved to-day.
Bed-rolls have to be made and chucked into that wagon you been
sleepin' in. See that feller yonder, rolling his bedding and tarp to a
tight cylinder? That's what it is--all your lares and penates, as the
old Greeks called it, eh? The herd's on the way already. We'll camp
to-night by the Joppa water-hole. We'll be on our way shortly. See! The
bobtail's already eat and are saddling up."

"Dear me," asked Oriole in curiosity, "what's a bobtail?"

"The bobtail," explained Lenny, "relieves the last guard watching the
herd, so it can come in and breakfast. Watches on the range are divided
something like watches at sea. I been to sea myself," he added. "This
bobtail is something like the dog-watch--only it comes in the early
morning. There they go."

The rat, tat, tat of the ponies' hoofs announced the departure of the
small group of herdsmen who relieved the more numerous guard. From
another direction came the sound of trotting hoofs. Oriole turned to
look.

"It's the wranglers," went on Lenny, "driving up the horse herd. We-all
got to rope our mounts out o' that bunch. You don't ride yet, Sissy?"

"Oh, but I am going to!" she cried.

"I bet you. Well, there ain't so many quiet ponies in this bunch. Good
cutting-out stock, and wise old critters that can almost herd steers
by themselves. But they ain't gentled much. You'll find a good pony at
headquarters."

"Oh, I hope so!" cried Oriole. "I do want so to ride!"

The camp was becoming very lively now. And the smell of broiling steaks
and boiling coffee, together with the refined air that blew down keenly
from the mountains, sharpened Oriole's appetite to an edge. She went
nearer to the fires and saw the men forking generous steaks out of
the cook's pan, dipping up gravy, adding biscuits to the plate and a
portion of canned corn or tinned baked beans for good measure. The cups
were filled with coffee by one of the helpers, and there was condensed
milk.

"Have it black or tan?" sing-songed the helper pouring the coffee, as
the men lined up.

Delightedly Oriole joined the line, stabbed a beefsteak for herself,
and accepted the other food and a "tan" cup of coffee. But she could
not sit down on one foot as the punchers did to eat. She used the end
of a box for a table, and the cook grinned at her as he spread a clean
hand-towel for a table-cloth.

"Isn't this jolly?" cried Oriole to Harvey Langdon, who had come from
some other part of the camp and joined the breakfast line.

"Like it, do you?" rejoined the ranchman. "Are they treating you right,
Oriole?"

"Oh, yes, sir! It couldn't be nicer! I just know I'm going to enjoy
myself here on the Three-bar, Mr. Langdon," returned the girl, and he
was sure that she meant it.




                              CHAPTER XIV

                               CHING FOO


After the men finished breakfast they surrounded the horse herd and
began roping out their mounts for the day. Oriole hastened her own meal
so as to watch this activity.

They made a circle around the horses, a rope stretching from each to
each on three sides, and the night and day wrangler--the men having the
particular care of the ponies--mounted and guarding the fourth arc of
the circle.

The bobtail were back at the camp before the roping was done, and they
got out their own fresh mounts. Everybody was busy--drivers getting
the mules for the wagons out of the herd, men saddling animals that
objected strenuously to being put to work again, and all shouting and
skylarking.

Just about as the camp was cleaned up and the herd was released in care
of the day wrangler, while the mules started with the chuck and bed
wagons (the latter piled high with bed-rolls), a buckboard rattled in
from the northwest. It was one from headquarters that Mr. Langdon had
sent for the night before after their adventure with the mad cow. Yet
for Oriole's part she would not have minded at all riding before the
ranchman on his saddle.

"I'm just _crazy_," she said to Nurse Brown, "to ride one of these
cunning little ponies all by my lonesome. Will it take long for me to
learn, do you suppose?"

"You are a smart child," answered the Western woman. "Of course you
will learn to ride easily enough. Why, these twins will be cavorting
about the ranch on leather, come a year from now. At least, Myron will."

Before noon the party was in sight of the two-story, sprawling building
which had been built in Indian times and marked then one of the most
advanced posts of the pioneer era. The upper story advanced beyond
the walls of the lower all around the structure. Nurse Brown showed
Oriole the plugged holes in the upper flooring that had originally been
made for the thrusting through of rifles. The Three-bar hacienda had
withstood several stiff attacks by Indians in the old days.

"Nothing like that now," she said, smiling at Oriole's wondering face.
"We are just as civilized here as they are in Boston."

"Only they don't wear the same kind of clothes in Boston that you do
here," returned the girl, smiling suddenly. "Just think what folks
would say if Lenny went riding into Boston--or into Littleport! My!
wouldn't folks run to see him?"

There were many curious things and much to interest the girl in and
about the ranch house. But the most curious, she thought, was Ching
Foo. As it chanced, Oriole Putnam had never before seen a Chinaman. Of
course, there must have been Chinamen in Bahia, for they are everywhere
in the civilized countries. But Oriole had never seen one before she
sailed for the States; and most certainly no Chinese laundryman had
penetrated to Littleport.

Ching Foo was an old-time Chinaman, with hairless face and an oiled
queue. He had not cut this hirsute adornment with the coming in of the
Chinese Republic. And he had lived so long at the Three-bar that he
considered himself as much a part of the household as Harvey Langdon
himself.

The old cook, in his clean blue denim blouse and voluminous trousers,
appeared on the wide veranda when the buckboard arrived with the party
from the East. He stood with his hands buried in his sleeves, his round
black eyes twinkling.

"Hello, Ching Foo!" cried Harvey Langdon. "See what we got? You saby
these twins? How do they look to you?"

"Yes. This number-one tlins b'long you," returned the cook, his yellow
face cracking into a smile. "Vellee fine tlins. More bet' you keepee
lil' boy, lil' gel allee same home. That they b'long," added the
Chinaman more gravely. "You saby Ching Foo?"

"I understand you," laughed Harvey Langdon. "You think they will be
better off at home. I reckon you are right."

"Sure. I talkee stlaight talkee. I go now catchee one piece big, fat
chicken. Make vellee good stew. You saby? Gettee tlins fat."

He trotted off at once to put his words into effect. Ching Foo's main
thought in life was cooking for the purpose of making people fat!
Oriole at first did not understand much of the cook's pidgin English;
but it was not long before she made quite a friend of the old Chinaman.
And she had a particular object in thus getting into Ching Foo's good
graces.

She had by no means forgotten what Teddy Ford had said regarding Ching
Foo's secret knowledge of the robbery at the ranch. Oriole had heard
further particulars of the incident coming across the continent; but
nothing to explain it.

The old silver that had been brought from England by some ancestor of
Harvey Langdon, and which was worth a deal of money because of its
antiquity in addition to its intrinsic value, had disappeared from the
ranch in a most mysterious way.

In the first place, the chest in which it was kept was very heavy.
It was a greater weight than one man could carry. Sadie Brown, the
children's nurse, told Oriole this.

"And yet Mr. Langdon believes that poor boy took it?" cried Oriole.

"Harvey Langdon believes that boy knows who took it--and that he had a
share in the robbery. Oh, yes. Ted Ford is without doubt a young scamp."

"Oh!" cried Oriole, "I don't want to believe that, Nurse Brown."

"Most of these boys that hang around a ranch are bad ones. Tough as
they can be," declared Sadie Brown.

Oriole's opinion was not in the least changed by this statement. She
did not think Teddy Ford was "tough" at all.

Now that she was at the Three-bar and had become acquainted with Ching
Foo, she was determined to pump the Chinaman for information regarding
the robbery. She remembered that Teddy had believed the cook knew
something about it that he had not been willing to tell.

What was it Ching Foo had said to Teddy before the boy ran away from
the ranch? Oriole finally recalled the queer language, as she had now
become used to Ching Foo's pidgin English:

"Plenty bad mans here. Melican boy get away; mebbe get hurt." Oriole
recalled that and his final words to Teddy as well: "Three topside bad
man--allee same talkee-talkee. Melican boy look out!"

These mysterious words puzzled Oriole very much--as they at first had
puzzled Teddy Ford. She tried her best to get the Chinaman interested
in the old story of the lost silver. But Ching Foo seemed to be just as
dense as any Celestial, who did not want to express an opinion, ever
was. And very tantalizing Oriole found the old man could be. One might
as well talk to a wooden man.

"Now," often thought Oriole to herself, "who are the three bad men Mr.
Ching Foo meant? Are they here now? Can I find them and watch them?
Teddy thought he knew who the Chinaman meant. Their names were Ridley,
Shaffer, and Mudd."

She proceeded to put the question to George Belden, the cowpuncher with
whom she had already struck up a warm friendship. This man, who was
one of Mr. Langdon's most trusted foremen, was frequently at the ranch
house. And Oriole soon learned that he came particularly to visit Sadie
Brown.

But the twins' nurse treated Mr. Belden very harshly--at least, so
Oriole thought. There was a look in Belden's blue eyes when he gazed at
Nurse Brown, Oriole observed, like the expression in the eyes of a dog
that has been beaten by its master. And certainly Nurse Brown did lash
the lanky cowman with her tongue in a most unkind way.

"I think Mr. Belden is real nice," the girl ventured again to say to
the nurse. "Do you _have_ to be cross to him?"

"I reckon I've got to be to keep him in his place," said the determined
spinster. "If I don't he'll be roping me and carrying me off to a
parson whether I want to go or not. He's a terribly positive man."

Oriole thought Belden was quite meek. At least, he was not as fierce
looking as some of the other punchers. She was not afraid to ask him on
one occasion:

"Are there men on the ranch named Ridley, Shaffer and Mudd? And will
you point them out to me, please, Mr. Belden?"

"I want to know what you want to be interduced to _them_ for!" demanded
the foreman. "Does beat all! They are as ornery punchers as are on the
payroll, if you ask me."

"I guess I'm just curious, Mr. Belden," said Oriole frankly. "And--and
I heard about them."

"It's little good anybody would be telling you about those three,"
replied Belden, eyeing her aslant. "They are off with the herd--at the
far end of the range. You didn't see them at the cowcamp that time. I
think Sol Perkins has been keeping them away from the ranch house for
his own good reasons."

"Are--are they real _bad_ men?" asked Oriole.

"'Tis little good they are. But if you mean do they tote guns and shoot
up the neighboring towns," and George Belden grinned, "they do not.
They would not be let. But nobody trusts them. They have been with the
Three-bar six months; but I think they were run out of whatever place
they previously worked at. And they stick together like three old
cronies. The other boys don't seem to take to 'em much."

"You don't know a thing really bad against Shaffer and Tom Mudd and
Tony Ridley," declared Nurse Brown, breaking into the discussion. She
seemed to feel it her duty to oppose almost everything that George
Belden said.

"Well, I sure don't know anything good about them," rejoined the
foreman. "And I don't reckon Oriole wants to make friends of them."

Oriole was quite sure this was so when, by chance, she caught a view
of the three men whose names Teddy Ford had first mentioned in her
hearing. But before that the girl had become well enough acquainted
with Ching Foo to ask him about the suspected punchers.

She had already told the cook of her acquaintance with Teddy Ford.
Although it was so difficult for her, a stranger, to understand Ching
Foo's queer speech, she knew that the cook fully understood all
that she said. And as Sadie Brown observed, Oriole was by no means
tongue-tied.

She told Ching Foo all about the accident on the ice when Teddy had
saved the twins and Oriole herself from drowning. And then she wanted
to know if the Chinaman really believed Teddy knew about the robbery of
the ranch silver.

"You know, Mr. Ching Foo," she said earnestly, "Teddy could not have
carried away that chest of plate that Mr. Langdon lost. He just
couldn't!"

"All light," said Ching Foo, in his staccato way. "Missy say who did,
eh?"

That rather nonplused Oriole.

"How do I know?" she asked. "You were here at the time, and I wasn't.
_You_ might know."

"Him not my pidgin," declared Ching Foo, with a blank expression of
face.

"Was any of those three men about the ranch the day the silver was
stolen?" asked Oriole shrewdly.

Ching Foo wagged his head solemnly in reply.

"Me no see," he said.




                              CHAPTER XV

                                 MOLLY


The day after Oriole had arrived at the Three-bar Ranch she was
introduced to Molly. Molly was what Harvey Langdon called a "blue"
pony--almost the color of a Maltese cat--and she was a "dear" as
Oriole immediately declared. The girl from the East had seen plenty of
bucking, snapping, ugly-looking half-broken ponies; but Molly was as
kind looking and affectionate of disposition as a cocker spaniel.

"Oh!" gasped Oriole, "I am just going to _love_ that pony."

"You'd best learn to ride her first," was the comment of the practical
Sadie Brown.

That was not hard work, for Oriole took to the saddle famously. And
Molly was as gentle as a horse could be. Yet she was spirited, too,
and could cover a deal of trail in an hour. In a fortnight Oriole was
riding about the ranch as though born to the saddle.

And how much there was to see! The girl from the East began to realize
that she had come to a very, very busy country. No room for drones on
this ranch. Shedder Crabbe, for instance, would have been given short
shrift here. But Oriole thought that a boy like Teddy Ford must have
been quite in his element at the Three-bar Ranch.

She spent, of course, much of her time with the twins. Sadie Brown was
actually Mr. Langdon's housekeeper as well as the twins' nurse. Oriole
relieved the woman of many small duties, and Myron and Marian were
perfectly contented when the visitor was with them, giving Nurse Brown
time for other duties.

Aside from Ching Foo, the cook, there were several houseboys--all
Mexicans. Not many ranches in this country were as well governed and
the houses as luxuriously furnished as Mr. Langdon's. There was a fine
player-piano and a talking machine in the great living room; and it was
plain that the owner possessed good taste as well as much wealth, or
the house would not have been so comfortable and beautiful.

The twins were well supplied with playthings; but they lived out of
doors most of the time, early as was the season. The middle of the day
was warm, although from the veranda great patches of snow could still
be seen upon the sides of the mountains, and the nights were still
cold.

But the spring had no set-back. The grass flourished and the distant
forest line was as green as green could be. Oriole often rode Molly
out to where one of the herds grazed, and she met most of the
punchers employed on the Three-bar in this way. So she was bound,
before long, to see the three men in whom she had become so deeply
interested--Ridley, Shaffer and Mudd.

Both Harvey Langdon and Nurse Brown believed that there was little to
hurt Oriole when she scampered over the plain on Molly. That is, by
daylight. Even the coyotes slunk into hiding at sight of a mounted
person during the daytime. And unless one penetrated the cañons or
gulches of the foothills, a bear or mountain lion was not to be found.

The girl herself soon gained the impression that no man was to be
feared on the Three-bar Ranch. Sometimes a bunch of Indians passed the
house and corrals; but they were as simple and kindly people as Oriole
had ever seen. And she _did_ love the copper-colored babies!

She wrote Flossy and Minnie Payne--as well as Nat Jardin and Ma, and
Mrs. Joy and her housekeeper, Lyddy Ann--all about her new life and the
strange sights she saw. First of all in interest, she thought, were
the "papoose babies" belonging to the nomadic Indians--some of them
strapped to a board in the old style, for all the Indians were not
modern in their ways.

She scampered away from the house one afternoon on the blue pony and
finally fell upon a trail that she had never traced before. She had
been warned not to venture into the hills at any distance from the
grazing herds; and usually when she rode she could go to the top of any
little ridge and see some of the punchers riding herd. This trail she
chanced to find was only a narrow path, but cut deep in the sod. It was
an ancient water-trail; but of course Oriole could not read signs.

Molly cantered along the path easily, twisting and turning as the path
did, and finally plunged down into a deep coulee and through a patch of
high sage. Instead of coming up directly out of the shallow hollow, the
path followed a gully that at one time must have been a water-course,
and in a few moments the girl was riding through a scrub oak patch and
in as wild a ravine as she had ever seen.

"Oh, my!" murmured Oriole, and drew Molly to a sudden stop. "I must go
back. This is a wild country and I may get lost."

Just then Molly raised her head, stretched forth her nose and gave
every indication of being about to whinny. Oriole had seen the blue
pony do this before, and she knew how to stop her. The girl leaned
forward in the saddle and seized the pony's nose, shutting her nostrils
firmly.

"Be still, you naughty girl!" commanded Oriole. "I don't want you to
call like that. Suppose--suppose somebody we don't like hears you?"

For she was suddenly smitten with the thought that in this unknown
and wild ravine there might lurk some danger--some enemy, although
she could not imagine what kind of enemy there could be here on the
Three-bar Ranch.

But as she whispered to Molly to keep still Oriole suddenly heard a
gruff voice say:

"Do as you like, you two. I'm going to get my time from Harvey Langdon
and beat it out of here. And, be-lieve me! when I split the breeze away
from the Three-bar I aim to visit that old prospect hole first, no
matter what you fellers say."

"You'd better keep away from there, Tom Mudd, unless you're aiming to
peeve me and Shaffer a pile. You know what the agreement was," said a
still gruffer voice.

Oriole listened with more than curiosity. The names she heard spoken
were of two of those very "bad men" of whom Teddy Ford had first told
her. She removed her hand from Molly's nose, but the pony only sneezed
softly. It evidently was not heard by the men in conference beyond the
clump of scrubby trees.

"Be-lieve me!" said the man called Mudd, "I never ought to have agreed
to any such fool idea. And I break the bargain right now! We ought to
have gone to that old pit and made our getaway while Harvey Langdon
was East. Now he is home again and the worry about the kids is off his
mind, he is a-goin' to keep his eyes open. If he sees us pirootin' up
that-a-way toward the Three Sisters, he'll mebbe smell a rat."

"He'll smell a heap more than one rat if you try to double-cross us,
Tom, and go up there to the old pit alone," said a third voice, which
the sharp-eared girl believed must be that of Shaffer.

"Don't you fellers think I'm afraid none of you!" exclaimed Mudd. "You
and Hank can't put nothing over on me----"

"Aw! who is trying to hurt you, Tom?" broke in the second speaker. "It
is you that seems to be wantin' to bust up this here triumvirate, as
the feller said. Hold your horses."

"Well!" grumbled Mudd.

"Well, yourself! If we had left when Harvey Langdon was away, he'd have
been leary of us, sure! Now we better stay till the spring rodeo. After
that we can light out 'most any time. It will be the dark of the moon,
too."

"Golly!" exclaimed the third man, "I couldn't find that pit in the
dark. The trail is as blind as a maze."

"I'll _smell_ it out," said Mudd confidently. "If Hank and you
can't----"

"Don't you go to smellin' too sudden, Tom," advised the voice that
Oriole knew must belong to Hank Ridley. "We agreed to share and share
alike--and that stuff can't be shared in the shape it is."

"Laws, no!" agreed Shaffer. "And we'll have a nice time carting it----"

"Leave that to me," broke in Hank Ridley.

Oriole had finally got Molly turned about and her nose headed for the
direction of the ranch house. She stopped to listen to no more. For
some reason she felt that these men would not be at all friendly to her
if they knew she had overheard this conversation.

Yet she did not understand it at all! There was nothing about an old
"prospect hole" and "the Three Sisters" in the story she had been told
of the robbery of the Langdon Ranch.

Once out upon the open prairie again Oriole drew Molly in. She
hesitated. She had never as yet observed Hank Ridley and his two mates,
and she wanted very much to do so.

She believed the trio--"the triumvirate" as Ridley called them--would
soon appear out of the brush-grown ravine. They might be hunting stray
cattle; but Oriole felt that they must soon return to the open plain.

Nor was she mistaken. From the very path which she had followed
appeared three riders. Molly was bearing the girl by this time well
away from the coulee which was the entrance to the scrub-oak patch.
Oriole circled around and came up to the three men from the rear.

"Hullo!" shouted one of them--a dark-faced, mustached man whom she knew
to be Tom Mudd from his voice. "Here's the gal Harvey Langdon brought
from the East with him and Sade Brown. Hullo, Sissy! How do you like it
out here?"

"Oh, I think it is very pleasant, sir," Oriole replied demurely.

"That's that there blue horse we brought up from the bottoms last horse
round-up," said another of the three. "Likely critter."

"And right gentled, she is," observed the third.

They paid no further attention to Oriole, who rode slowly by. But the
girl scrutinized them all keenly, photographing the three upon her mind
indelibly. So these three rough looking fellows were Ridley, Shaffer
and Mudd! She was quite ready to believe that they were untrustworthy
and that perhaps, as Teddy Ford had intimated, they knew more than
they were willing to tell about the disappearance of the chest of
silver plate from the ranch house.

To George Belden Oriole went again with her questions the next time he
came to make one of his calls upon Sadie Brown. Why he continued to
call upon the twins' nurse Oriole could not imagine, for Miss Brown
showed plainly that she scorned the foreman's attentions.

However, as Sadie Brown treated the man so unkindly, Oriole found
all the more time to talk with him. And she wanted to know now about
certain matters that had assumed importance in her mind since she had
overheard the snatches of conversation between the three "bad men."

"What is a 'prospect hole?'" repeated George Belden. "Why, it's a
prospect hole--that's all," and he chuckled. "The pocket hunters and
prospectors that searched those hills yonder for gold and silver ore
sunk many shafts and the like, hunting for color, or following a vein
of ore that usually petered out before they got very deep. There's
dozens of 'em over there," and he pointed with a flourish toward the
dim, blue hills to the north and west of the ranch house.

Oriole pointed, too. She had suddenly made out three nice, rounded
hilltops quite close together--just as though the trio must encircle a
half-hidden glen.

"What are those?" asked the girl.

"What are what?" drawled Belden, squinting up his eyes in his funny way.

"Those three--hills, are they? They seem taller than the other bumps I
see over there."

"Why, sure, they are," said the foreman, carelessly. "Those are the
Three Sisters."




                              CHAPTER XVI

                          THE SPRING ROUND-UP


Oriole Putnam might have pursued her inquiries about the prospect
hole somewhere near the Three Sisters and have learned something of
importance about these landmarks had it not been that about this time
a number of very interesting things happened at the Langdon ranch.
There really was enough going on to drive out of her thoughts a much
more vivid impression than she had gained from overhearing the broken
sentences spoken between the three rough men she had observed in the
chaparral.

Of course, Oriole did not often ride alone. Harvey Langdon had bought
in the East, and it had now been delivered, a roomy basket-phaeton for
the children's use; and to this was hitched a lazy old pony called
Blooey. Blooey dragged the twins and Oriole over hill and dale,
while Sadie Brown, Mr. Langdon himself, or one of the punchers, rode
alongside. Oriole learned to drive as easily as she had learned to ride
horseback.

They kept to the smoother wagon-trades for these outings, for the
phaeton pitched and tossed like a boat in a heavy sea if the way was at
all rough.

The Chinese cook was always ready to supply picnic lunches. Ching Foo,
as has been shown, approved of any and all attempts to make the already
chubby Langdon twins "grow fat."

"I dess," Marian lisped, "Chinese little girls and boys just _have_ to
be fat."

"Maybe they throw the skinny ones away," suggested Myron, who must have
heard something about pagan sacrifices of babies in the missionary
class at Littleport. "Ching Foo is afraid papa won't want us here if we
don't keep fat."

With Ching's lunches the children traveled far across the ranges. The
driving pony was just as gentle as Oriole's Molly, but nowhere near
as "cute" in the girl's opinion. "That Molly horse," as George Belden
called Oriole's pony, was an intelligent animal. Oriole began to find
out just how smart Molly was at the time of the spring round-up.

This was a busy and exciting season on the Three-bar Ranch. Mr. Langdon
grazed his cattle on both fenced and open ranges.

The herdsmen merely "rode fence" on the home pastures--mending the
wire, driving in the posts after the "heave" of the frost coming out
of the ground, and roping or driving in the stray cattle that broke out
of bounds.

But on the open ranges, farther up in the hills, the cattle business
was conducted differently. There the punchers must stand watch and ward
over the herds by day and ride continually around the herds at night,
alert for trouble.

The whole ranch family went up into the higher range to the
round-up--Sadie Brown and the twins, as well as Mr. Langdon and Oriole.
Ching Foo alone remained at the ranch house, and Oriole wondered if
the conditions were not similar to those at the time when the chest of
silver was stolen.

However, when the party reached the branding camps the girl saw Ridley,
Shaffer and Mudd at work with the other Three-bar punchers, so she
considered that while the three "bad men" were here they could not be
in any mischief.

The brief conversation Oriole had overheard between Hank Ridley and his
mates continued to puzzle the girl. What was in or about the abandoned
mine-shaft, or prospect-hole, up there near the Three Sisters--the
rounded summits of which she could see from any part of the ranch--and
which so interested the men she suspected of bringing about Teddy
Ford's trouble? The question, vaguely insistent, continued to fret the
girl's mind.

Yet, at present, it was merely a fleeting thought. The details of what
was being done hour by hour here on the range was so fascinating that
Oriole could attend to little else.

Besides being a good saddle pony, Molly was trained to range work of
all kinds--was what the punchers called a good "cutting-out horse." If
Oriole had known as much about the work as her mount did, she might
have done a puncher's full part at this heavy season.

She was not the only girl rider on these upper ranges. There were
several women and girls from other ranches, for the cattle of many
different brands were mixed up on the "free grass." There was not much
opportunity for social contact at this time, for the effort was being
made to gather and brand as many steers as possible within a short time.

But Oriole was nothing if not friendly. Nor did these Westerners stand
aside and look at her scornfully as had some of the Littleport people
when Oriole was first introduced to them. The girls, as well as the
boys, of the ranges welcomed her cordially.

Knowing so little about the tasks, however, the girl from the Eastern
coast could not enter into the work as she really desired; so she was
much alone when she rode about on Molly. She practiced continually
with the lariat nevertheless and really improved in this delicate art
from hour to hour.

"You keep on, Oriole," chuckled George Belden, "and you'll be able to
rope the hind leg of a spider. You're going to make some cowgirl, I'll
tell the world!"

Although this was said as a joke, Oriole secretly was made very proud
by the trail-foreman's approval. When she rode out on Molly from the
camp she roped every bush and stub she came to. Once she even tried to
put the loop over the head of a half wild yearling that had not yet
been dragged to the branding-pen.

Fortunately there was no mother cow with this red-and-white "doggy,"
for Oriole actually did get the noose over the creature's head, and he
bawled loudly and dolorously.

"Oh, dear me!" gasped the girl, when Molly lay back on the rope in a
most matter-of-fact way, keeping it taut no matter how the yearling
jumped.

"Oh, dear me! Now I have done it! How am I ever going to let him loose
again?"

She had seen the cowboys "run down the rope" after they had noosed a
steer; but she could not do that. She dismounted gingerly enough and
approached the blatting yearling that had now struggled to its feet.

"Come, bossy! Don't be cross," she urged. "I--I didn't really hurt you,
you know. Soo, boss! Soo, boss!"

That was the way Ma Stafford had spoken to the cow when she was unruly,
but this yearling did not seem to be soothed by the words at all! He
shook his head, blatted again, and then sprang toward Oriole with an
unquestioned determination to butt the girl.

Although the little beast's horns were merely "buttons" at this stage
of his growth, had he been able to hit Oriole he certainly would have
hurt her; for his forehead was hard bone and there was considerable
force behind his charge. The girl saw her danger and screamed as she
tried to spring to one side. Unfortunately she stumbled and fell
backwards. She looked up to see the yearling bearing down upon her,
tail in the air and forefront threatening--and she screamed again.

Whether it was her scream that made Molly move, or (as Oriole frankly
believed) the pony's intelligence, she jumped aside just in the nick of
time and the tautened lariat, fastened to Oriole's saddle, brought the
angry yearling tumbling to the ground again.

Oriole was on her feet in an instant, and she ran several yards from
the struggling yearling.

"Oh, Molly Langdon!" she cried, gazing at the pony, "you are just a
wonderful horse! But--but how am I ever going to get that rope away
from that mean, mean calf?"

The pony eased up on the rope, and again the yearling scrambled to
its legs. Fortunately the noose loosened when the little animal shook
himself, and as it stood there bawling the rope fell down about its
legs and the creature stepped out of the noose.

Oriole ran to leap into the saddle again. But the yearling, when it
found itself free, did not charge her a second time. Instead, tail up
and blatting joyfully, the animal galloped across the range and into a
coulee out of sight.

"Well!" murmured Oriole, "I surely won't do _that_ again. I guess I
will stick to stumps and bushes until I know better how to manage this
rope. I guess Teddy Ford would laugh if he had seen me just now."

She rode on with great enjoyment, having left the twins and Nurse Brown
behind at the branding camp. Above her on the hillsides the herds of
cattle grazed--thousands of them. They looked black in the distance,
but Oriole knew they were almost all red.

"If Uncle Nat or Ma Stafford could see all these cows, what would they
say?" the girl thought.

Already Oriole had learned that there really was nothing on the range
to hurt her--at least, in the nature of wild creatures. For if she left
the cattle alone, they would not trouble her. Occasionally she had
seen a coyote slink away into the brush, but she had been assured that
they were creatures too cowardly to attack human beings, no matter how
helpless the latter might be.

The farther she went along this dim trail, however, the lonelier the
surroundings appeared. Yet she knew by the sun that she was heading
toward the railroad. She had no particular object in view. The chance
of adventure teased her on.

The incident of the aroused yearling did not keep her from trying her
lariat again and yet again. Over first one bush and then another she
flung the whirling coil. Really, she did improve--almost with each cast!

"Won't Mr. Belden and Nurse Brown be surprised when they see how well I
do it?" was Oriole's exclamation at last. "Oh! there's a fine stump to
try."

The stump in question was two feet across and six feet or more tall.
She turned Molly a little nearer, coiling the lariat carefully. Then
whirling the rope with a proper regard for distance, Oriole flung it.

Molly sprang away, eager to tauten the rope as the noose fell. The
stump was caught fairly--the noose encircled it. And then, as Molly
stopped with a jerk, there came a wild yell from behind the stump.
Aghast, Oriole saw a figure struggling in the noose of the lariat.

Some person had been captured as well as the stump, and the taut rope
held that person with painful severity, as his audible outcry proved.




                             CHAPTER XVII

                          THE BIRD OF FREEDOM


The more the unfortunate victim of Oriole's skill struggled, the harder
the pony dragged back upon the rope. And for a few moments the girl did
not know what to do.

"Aw, let up! Yow--yowie!" yelled the person caught with the stump
within the noose of Oriole's lariat. "What do you think you're doin'?
Aw, quit it! Let up!"

It could not be doubted that the victim was being most unmercifully
squeezed. With his last yelp his breath seemed to be quite expelled
from his lungs. Oriole was frightened. She started Molly forward and
thus loosened the strain on the lariat.

"My goodness! who can it be?" the girl cried.

"Ugh! oh!" came from behind the stump. "Do you want to choke me to
death?"

A tousled head appeared around the side of the stump. Oriole drew Molly
to a halt. She stared at the brown face--although it was red with
anger as well as tanned. The eyes framed by the hair sparkled with
wrath. Nor could she blame the victim for being thus excited.

But what amazed Oriole the most and held her at that spot on her pony
was the wonder which rose through her recognition of the victim of her
skill with the lariat.

"My goodness!" she exclaimed again, but faintly, "if it isn't--it
_is_--Teddy Ford! What were you doing behind that stump?"

"Hullo!" ejaculated the boy, and he struggled out of the noose of
the rope and appeared from behind the target of Oriole's attempt at
"roping."

"Hullo!" he exclaimed again, his face finally broadening into that
unforgetable grin which Oriole had thought, at her first meeting
with him, so very attractive. "It's never the bird-girl--what's your
name?--Oriole, is it?"

"I should think you'd remember me," pouted Oriole. "I'm Oriole Putnam.
I sha'n't tell you again."

"Don't get mad," said the boy. "It's _me_ should be sore. You near
about strangled me with that rope. Gee! Oh! you don't like that word,
do you?" he added, showing that he remembered Oriole more clearly than
he had at first admitted. "Then I'll cut it out. But I never looked for
_you_ to come along and rope me when I was just eating my lunch. And,
g--Well! Anyway, that lunch is scattered all over the shop."

"I'm so sorry," Oriole hastened to say. "But if you will come back with
me to the camp, I know you can get something to eat."

"H'm--yes? What camp?"

"The branding camp. You know."

"Are they at it already? I hoped I would get here soon enough to help.
They are always short-handed at round-up time."

"And, dear me, Teddy! you could do so much around the ranch if you
would only stay here."

"Huh!" said the boy, but his eyes twinkled, "didn't I tell you Harvey
Langdon ran me off?"

"He wouldn't now."

"How do you know he wouldn't?"

"Well, I think he feels differently toward you. I--I have tried to
speak about you often to Mr. Langdon, and I know he wants to thank
you----"

"Aw, shucks! What's thanks? I don't want to be thanked. I want a fair
deal."

"Now you know very well, Teddy, that you would not have come back here
if you did not expect him to treat you differently."

"Say! I haven't got to work for him," growled Ted.

But Oriole smiled at him understandingly.

"I am so glad you have come, Teddy," she told him. "You mean to work
for Mr. Langdon again, don't you?"

"I don't know. I am not so fond of him as you 'pear to be," the boy
said. "Ain't you found out his mean traits yet?"

"I don't want you to speak like that of Mr. Langdon. You give him a
chance and he will treat you well."

"Just because I helped you get his young ones out of the water that
time? That ain't all I want of him," said the boy, somewhat sullenly.

"Oh, dear me! I wish you wouldn't be so contrary," cried the girl. "I
am sure Mr. Langdon would give you every chance----"

"You don't know as much about Harvey Langdon as I do," grumbled Teddy.
"But I mean to see him. I'll work for him if he will give me a job. But
I mean to do something else, too. It is what I came back for."

"Oh, I know!" she cried. "You believe you can find that stolen silver?"

"I don't know about that. But I'd like to. If those fellers--Say! are
Shaffer and his side partners around here yet?"

"You mean those three bad men you told me about?"

"Yes. Ridley and Mudd and Shaffer. Hard nuts, they were. Bet if they
had anything to do with that robbery they got away from here with the
loot long ago."

"Oh! Maybe they didn't, after all!" Oriole cried.

"Didn't what?" he demanded.

"Maybe they didn't steal Mr. Langdon's silver plate. For they are here
now. They are helping right now at the branding pens."

"You don't say?" and Teddy Ford's voice revealed his disappointment
too. "Well! Maybe I thought all wrong. I didn't think of them much
anyway till I got run off the ranch that time by Harvey Langdon.
Probably they weren't any more guilty than I was."

"Oh, Teddy," murmured Oriole, frankly disappointed, "who _could_ have
stolen the silver then?"

"Don't know. If Langdon hasn't found out anything about it----"

"But he hasn't!"

"I give it up then. If Ridley and his chums had got the stuff they
would have split the wind away from here long ago. Why, the stuff must
be melted down and sold long ago."

"Suppose--suppose," murmured Oriole, thoughtfully, "that it was only
hidden? Suppose it hadn't been taken far away from the ranch house?"

"But they would have had the chance to get it away off before this,"
scoffed Teddy.

"Well, I suppose so," admitted the girl. "But I really wish the silver
plate could be found. Just like Mrs. Joy's silver casket was found. I
told you about that, Teddy Ford."

"Well," the boy said rather gloomily, "you don't wish Harvey Langdon's
plate could be found any more than I do. That's sure. Where are you
going, Oriole?"

"I'm going back to the branding camp with you," she declared. "Want to
ride?"

"No. I'll walk the rest of the way--I've stuck it out so far. But does
seem as though my feet were near about worn down to stubs, tramping it
from Timmins."

"It is not so far now," she said, still eyeing him with frank
admiration. "How _did_ you find your way clear out West again?"

"G--Shucks! that wasn't hard. I went to Bowling Green with those
horses. That's in Kentucky, you know. From there I got to the river
and worked my way down around Cairo and up to St. Louis. I helped a
candy-butcher on a train running to Kansas City. There I found some
fellers from the Tumbling B Ranch up north of here, and they eased me
along with them in a car and I didn't have to pay any fare. So--I got
here."

"My! you are quite wonderful, _I_ think," murmured Oriole. "I never
could have made my way alone clear across this continent."

"Didn't you tell me you came all the way from Bahia to near Boston,
there? That's lots farther."

"But that is boat-sailing. It's different. I just went where the boat
went. But you worked this out all by yourself."

"G--Shucks, I mean! Don't seem much to me. Guess I take after my
father. He was always traveling around--hunting pockets and the like.
And mostly alone. The Fords come of pioneer stock."

"This is a very wonderful country, and you are all wonderful people,"
sighed Oriole. "How you all learn to ride so well--and throw
lariats----"

"We haven't anything on you in that," chuckled Teddy, coiling up
Oriole's rope as he moved toward her. "Do you ride round roping every
stump you see?"

Oriole began to giggle at that. She told him of her misadventure with
the maverick, and Teddy proceeded to give her a few additional lessons
in rope throwing, for the boy was really a master of that art.

"You see," he explained, "I began when I was about the size of that
little shaver of Harvey Langdon's."

"Oh! Myron?"

"Yes. We kids all made ropes out of our mothers' clotheslines between
washdays, and practiced on every dog in town. Take it from me," and he
grinned, "every time a dog saw a boy with a rope he skun out o' town in
a hurry!"

"The poor dogs!"

"And, oh, say, Oriole, I 'most forgot to tell you something you'll be
mighty glad to know," burst out Teddy suddenly.

"What is that?"

"It's about Billy, that cabin boy of the ship you sailed on--the fellow
you thought was drowned."

"Oh, was Billy saved? Don't tell me he was--was drowned!" and Oriole
gave a gasp.

"He wasn't drowned. I met a sailor on the very day I started westward.
He was from the _Adrian Marple_--that was the name of the ship, you
know--and he told me that Billy Bragg was saved sure."

"Oh, good! good!" cried the girl and her face showed her satisfaction.

"The sailor said Billy Bragg had gone to Boston. That was all he could
tell about him. But he was sure he was saved. I asked him twice,
because I knew you would want to know."

"Billy was a nice boy. I wanted so much to hear what became of him. He
didn't say----"

Oriole broke off short, as Teddy Ford suddenly threw up a hand.

"Look at that, will you!" he shrilled.

They had proceeded toward the hidden camp along the faint trail Oriole
had followed out. But what Teddy called her attention to was in the
sky. It was distant--very high up. But with the sun behind it, the body
and outspread wings of the bird could clearly be seen.

"That's not a buzzard," cried Oriole.

"Guess not! Buzzard! Don't have 'em up here in Montana."

"But it's a big bird," said the puzzled Oriole.

"Just so. It's a big eagle--the bird of freedom. Real American eagle,
Oriole. Look at him sail!"

"I never saw an eagle before. It must be very big."

"Seven or eight feet across his wings, I bet," declared the boy. "Now
look at him! He's spotted game."

The eagle spiraled down for some distance--like an aeroplane. Then
suddenly it slanted and shot down with terrific speed.

Oriole and Teddy were vastly excited. The girl hastened Molly's pace,
and, tired as he was, Teddy began to run. They came to the top of the
ridge they had been mounting. Here they saw a small valley, treeless,
grass-covered, and with a spring of water at its lower part.

Oriole uttered a cry of dismay. Here was the basket phaeton that had
been brought up from the ranch house. Nurse Brown was with it, and
Marian sat in the seat beside her. But Myron, the boy twin, was some
rods away from his companions, picking flowers.

The shadow of the plunging eagle covered Myron Langdon as Oriole and
Teddy Ford came into sight.




                             CHAPTER XVIII

                              A NEW DEAL


The sky was so blue and fleckless, the air so clear, the spring grass
so green, and all nature so tranquil at this moment that there was
little wonder Nurse Brown and little Marian, as well as Myron himself,
suspected no threatening danger. The shadow of the descending eagle
might have been that of a cloud crossing the face of the sun.

But Oriole and Teddy Ford, on the summit of the low ridge overlooking
the glade where the nurse and the twins were, saw Myron's peril
plainly. The great bird of prey was swooping directly upon the little
boy. Its shadow completely mantled Myron, who was stooping with his
back to the direction from which the bird was coming.

"He'll be killed!" shouted Teddy Ford. "That eagle's a killer!"

"Oh, Teddy, save him!" cried Oriole in return.

She knew little about the ferocity of a hungry eagle, or one with a
nestful of eaglets to supply with food. Sheep and even young calves
have been killed or carried away by the Rocky Mountain eagle--the
largest of its tribe in North America. In addition to its strength and
savageness, the eagle knows no fear.

Quite involuntarily Oriole herself started to help Myron. She did not
know what she could do, but she started Molly, the pony, forward and
rode smartly down the slope toward the unsuspecting Myron.

"Why, Oriole Putnam! where did you come from?" was Nurse Brown's
greeting, as she saw the girl flying toward them. "And who is that with
you?"

Oriole could not stop to reply. Molly carried her past the pony
phaeton, and then the horse swerved and snorted. The beat of the
eagle's pinions startled Molly, and she shied.

Oriole, however, kept her seat pluckily. Had she only been able to
stoop from her saddle and whisk Myron out of danger--as one of the
cowboys could have done!

But that feat was quite beyond her power. Indeed, the girl was so
frightened--frightened for Myron--that she scarcely thought of any plan
of action. She merely urged Molly on, hoping that her coming would
drive the great bird away. For she did not understand the courage and
savageness of this, the king of the feathered tribes.

However, her appearance on horseback so near the stooping child made
the eagle swerve. It mounted again, wheeled, and with a hoarse cry
swooped again. At this Myron was startled and stood up to see what was
happening, while Nurse Brown and Marian began to scream.

"Oh! Oh! Shoo that naughty bird away, Oriole!" shrieked little Marian.
"It'll eat up Mywon."

"Use your quirt, child!" commanded Sadie Brown earnestly.

But Oriole had no quirt with her. She had found Molly so gentle and
kind that she had seen no reason for carrying the heavy whip which the
punchers seemed to consider a necessary part of their equipment when
riding.

Now she found out why this was so. Not always was the quirt needed to
discipline the mount. Had she possessed the heavy whip Oriole could
have beaten off the eagle in its second swoop upon the frightened twin.

As it was, Molly leaped aside again, snorting, and the pinions of the
frantic eagle almost swept Oriole from her seat in the saddle. Myron
looked up to see the distended talons of the great bird and its fierce
eyes just overhead. The little boy did not shriek aloud, but he cast
himself face down on the grass.

It was the wisest move he could have made, although without doubt Myron
did it quite involuntarily. The great eagle came down with its legs so
widely astride that it straddled the little blue-clad body of the boy,
with its talons not even touching Myron's clothing!

To Oriole, whirling her pony at a distance of only a few yards to
charge back bravely at the fierce bird, the landing of the latter was
like the landing of an aeroplane. The eagle seemed to rebound from the
force of its contact with the sward. But it stopped directly over the
prostrate Myron.

"Hit him! Oh, if I only had a gun!" screamed Nurse Brown.

But nobody had a weapon--that is, nobody on the spot. And even the
cowpunchers on the Three-bar and the neighboring ranches seldom carried
six-shooters in their belts save on night-watch when wolves or big cats
were likely to come down from the mountains to prey upon the herds.

In any case, there was no chance of killing the eagle right at this
moment, and to drive it away from its prey seemed impossible. But
Oriole urged her pony toward the huge bird, crying out as well for
Myron to lie still. Oriole realized that if the child remained quiet
the bird would be less savage. Somewhere she had heard or read that
these huge birds of prey did not care for dead game--although the idea
has often been exploded in fact. However, Myron's struggles would have
excited the eagle to greater rage.

Molly swerved sharply again. The pony was afraid of the huge bird--and
well she might be! Nor could Oriole do anything in reality to beat off
the eagle.

It was Teddy Ford who not only had it in his power to aid Myron, but
had the self-possession and bravery necessary to do so. He came running
down the slope of the ridge, and as he ran he whirled the loop of
Oriole's lariat about his head.

"Get away, Oriole!" he shouted. "Look out!"

Molly carried Oriole out of the way with no effort on the latter's
part. The coils of the lariat whisked through the air, the loop
hovering for an instant over the big bird. Then the loop settled and
Teddy flung himself backward on the ground, his bootheels digging into
the sod.

[Illustration: THE COIL OF THE LARIAT WHISKED THROUGH THE AIR.]

The eagle vented a scream that fairly made Oriole's blood run cold. She
had no idea that the bird could utter such a savage challenge.

The loop encircled the bird's neck and one of its great wings. Teddy
began pulling in on the rope, and the loop tightened. The eagle was
dragged away from the prostrate Myron, and hopped most awkwardly over
the ground.

Teddy scrambled to his feet, jumping on the slack of the rope. He
shouted again to Oriole:

"Get that kid out of the way! Hurry, now!"

Oriole obeyed eagerly. She got down from the saddle and let Molly
run away if she would--although the pony did not run far--while she
gathered the frightened Myron in her arms.

She ran toward Nurse Brown and the phaeton. She thought they all might
drive away from the vicinity of the huge and angry bird. But Myron
struggled to be put down.

"I'm not going to be carried by a girl!" gasped the little fellow.
"Haven't I got legs of my own?"

His pride was greater than his fear of the eagle, and he would not even
take Oriole's hand as he ran toward his sister and the nurse.

"Look at that crazy boy!" cried Sadie Brown.

She referred to Teddy Ford, not to little Myron Langdon. The boy who
had so promptly come to Myron's aid was playing the great eagle just
as though it were a fish. When it sought to leap into the air, Teddy
dragged hard on the rope and pulled the eagle down. The latter would
gladly have escaped now; but Teddy would not loosen the noose.

The struggle between boy and bird continued for several minutes. Once
the eagle rose so far that he fairly yanked Teddy from the ground. But
either the boy's weight was too great or the entangling rope crippled
the bird's flight too seriously for the flight to be successful.

Altogether it was a strange and threatening struggle to observe. Oriole
and Sadie Brown were thrilled by it, although the twins were too
frightened to feel much admiration for Teddy Ford in his novel act as
eagle tamer.

They were all so interested, however, that at first they did not
observe the approach of another actor on the scene. But down from the
range on which the cattle grazed came a great black horse with a rider
that urged him on with whip and spur when he saw what was happening in
the little valley. Myron spied this riding figure first.

"Here comes daddy! Now that old eagle will get his!" cried the little
boy, with perfect confidence in his father's might and wisdom.

Teddy Ford had too much to do just then to notice the approach of the
ranchman. But Oriole and the nurse were glad indeed to see Mr. Langdon.

The owner of the Three-bar Ranch drew in the black stallion and spun
him around with a skillful manipulation of the reins. He leaped from
his saddle and started for the struggling eagle, quirt in hand,
shouting to Teddy:

"Let her loose, boy! You'll cut the bird to pieces if you drag on the
rope that way. Loosen up!"

"Well, of all things!" ejaculated the plain-speaking Sadie Brown.
"Don't you suppose, Harvey Langdon, that we want to kill that horrid
thing?"

But Teddy Ford had instinctively obeyed the ranchman's command. The
noose once loosened, the eagle hopped away awkwardly. Mr. Langdon, who
wore heavy gauntlets, rushed in, avoided a stroke of the eagle's right
wing, and seized the ruffled neck of the bird.

"Oh, Mr. Langdon, he'll bite you!" cried Oriole.

The ranchman merely laughed, loosened the noose of the lariat, and
threw the rope entirely off the eagle. Then he leaped back, letting the
monster bird go free.

"Oh, Daddy, I wanted that bird!" shrieked Myron, although his little
sister was still hiding her eyes and sobbing with fright.

"I guess not. We don't kill or maim eagles if we can help it," said
Harvey Langdon promptly. "Don't you realize that is an American
eagle--the noblest bird that flies? And the salmon fishers along the
West Coast have all but exterminated them. That sort of people have no
patriotism----"

"'Patriotism!'" scoffed Sadie Brown. "A little more and that eagle
would have carried away Myron and you would never have seen the poor
child again."

"What's that?" exclaimed the ranchman, sharply.

"That's what I'm telling you, Harvey Langdon. If it hadn't been for
this boy--Well, I declare, if it isn't Teddy Ford."

For the first time the nurse looked at Teddy long enough to recognize
him. Mr. Langdon turned, too, and stared at the boy now quietly coiling
Oriole's lariat.

"Hullo, Ted," the ranchman said, after a moment. "Tell us about this.
What's going on here?"

Teddy had been watching the heavy flight of the eagle with something
like disappointment. He dragged his gaze back from the mounting eagle
and looked at Mr. Langdon. Color rose in his tanned cheeks.

But before he could speak Oriole broke in. It was she who explained to
Mr. Langdon the attack of the eagle on Myron and what had followed. And
the girl saw to it that the story lacked nothing in the telling. She
"played up" Teddy Ford's victory over the eagle in a masterly fashion,
and as she talked Mr. Langdon's eyes began to twinkle and a smile
wreathed his lips.

"I see very well, Ted," he finally observed, "that you are bound to
be a good angel to my children. I have just got to look on you in an
entirely different light from that in which I saw you when we met the
last time. We'll let that old trouble slide, if you say so, Ted. This
is a new deal."

He strode forward and offered his hand to the abashed boy.

"This is a new deal," he repeated. "Bygones are bygones. I am very
thankful to you for what you have been able to do for me and mine on
these two occasions. And I am sorry that in the heat of anger I accused
you as I did last fall and drove you away from the Three-bar."

"My goodness!" whispered Sadie Brown to Oriole, who had ridden near to
the phaeton on Molly. "My goodness! I never heard Harvey Langdon own up
he was wrong before."

The ranchman's frank avowal of his mistake impressed Teddy Ford as
well. The boy took the man's hand modestly.

"That's all right, sir," he said gruffly. "Mebbe you ain't so much to
blame. You didn't know me very well. Is--is there a job here for me
now?"

"Surest thing you know!" declared the father of the twins. "You go to
Sol Perkins. I have already spoken to him about you, for Oriole, here,
said you were surely coming."

He chuckled, and his eyes twinkled again with mischief. "That girl has
got a lot of faith in you, boy, if nobody else has."




                              CHAPTER XIX

                       AN EXCITING FISHING PARTY


"That's all right, Oriole. He's mighty nice about it, and treats me
fine, I must say. But right down deep in his heart he still suspects I
know something I haven't told about that lost chest of silver plate.
_That_ is what gets my goat."

"Dear me," sighed Oriole, "I really wish you weren't so slangy, Teddy
Ford. It sounds so----"

"Well?" exclaimed Teddy Ford. "Sounds so _what_?"

"So sort of--er--_rough_. And you know you're not rough--not really,
Teddy. You're awfully nice."

He grinned at her quizzically. This was the day after he had arrived at
the branding camps and had had the adventure with the eagle. Teddy Ford
had gone right to work with the Three-bar outfit, and the older boys
had welcomed him without any reference to his past trouble at the ranch
house. But Teddy felt, as he said, that suspicion still clung to him.

"You are a great little jollier, Oriole," he said. "But I know how
Harvey Langdon feels. When once he makes up his mind, it's made up for
fair! Don't tell me. I happened to save his kids when they were in
trouble. But he's still got it in his mind that I know about his silver
dishes and such. Yes, sir!"

"Well then, all the more reason why you should try to find out just who
did steal that chest," declared Oriole.

"Easy said. Not so easy done. Those fellers----"

"Those fellows," admonished Oriole.

"Huh! that isn't slangy."

"But it's not good English. And you can talk better if you like."

"Gee! I mean--er--well, anyway, you are particular, Oriole. I can't
talk when I have to stop and think about every word--whether it's right
or not. Now, look here, those fellows--Ridley, Shaffer and Mudd--are
still hanging around. And maybe they didn't steal that silver after
all."

"Oh, Teddy! There's something I didn't tell you yet."

"Huh! is that superfine English?" he asked, grinning again.

"Never mind," she returned hastily. "This will interest you. I heard
Hank Ridley and his friends talking once. They didn't see me. Listen!"

She told him in detail about her ride on Molly through the scrub and
how she had met and listened to the three "bad men" discussing their
affairs. Not that she really understood much of what Ridley and his two
companions had said; but the mystery of the prospect hole and the Three
Sisters had continued to puzzle her since that day.

And it puzzled Teddy as well. He acknowledged it.

"If those chaps stole the silver chest, then they have hidden it
somewhere, waiting for a chance to take it out of the country. If Hank
and those others are guilty, they have the stuff hidden. If they could
have got it turned into money, they would never be here yet, punching
cows. That's sure."

"I guess you are right, Teddy," admitted Oriole. "Then they have the
chest hidden somewhere up there by those three hills," and from where
they chanced to stand she could point them out to the boy.

"Humph! Maybe. I'd like to get over there and look for an old mine
shaft. Sure, the hills are pockmarked with 'em. My father used to
prospect around there, I don't doubt."

Oriole sighed. "I wish I knew what my father and my mother were doing,
Teddy. You know that your poor father is dead----"

"Well, I suppose I do. He would have come back from that last
prospecting trip of his if he had lived. I'm sure of that."

"But my mother and father----"

"Shucks! don't worry, Oriole. They will turn up," the boy urged
sympathetically. "You might hear about them almost any time."

"But it has been a year now--more than that," and the girl's eyes
filled with tears. "If only I _knew_ they were safe."

The uncertainty of the fate of Mr. and Mrs. Putnam often depressed
Oriole. Teddy tried his best to counteract her worriment of mind.
But he had a good deal to worry about himself. To feel that one is
suspected of being a thief is not a pleasant experience--not at all!
Naturally the boy was more interested in the possible connection of
Ridley, Shaffer and Mudd with the robbery of the Langdon ranch than he
was in Oriole's trouble.

"If I ever get a chance, I'm going to ride over there to the Three
Sisters and see what the neighborhood looks like," Teddy observed,
after a little silence.

"Oh, Teddy, take me with you?" the girl cried eagerly.

"Yep. If they'll let you go. But it can't be done until after this
branding business is all cleared up."

The idea of searching for the old prospect hole and possibly finding
the depository of the stolen plate charmed both young people. Ted was
quite as confident that something could be discovered of moment up
there near the Three Sisters as was Oriole. Yet, childlike, they shrank
from taking any grown person into their confidence. Young folks shrink
from the possibility of ridicule.

"It would just be great," the boy declared, "if we did find what Mr.
Langdon had stolen from him. It does seem sometimes, Oriole, as though
I can't ever feel right or be content to hang around here if that
silver isn't found."

"Oh, Teddy! don't say that," she urged.

Yet she understood just how he felt. Had she not gone all through it
when she had been accused of taking Mrs. Joy's casket?

It was another week before the great herds were separated and driven in
different directions to fresh pasturage. Before the final day Nurse
Brown with the twins and Oriole had gone back to the ranch house. But
soon Mr. Langdon and even Teddy Ford appeared at headquarters. The boy,
however, was not made to aid Ching Foo again. A "kitchen police" job
was not what Teddy had been looking for.

The boy loved horses, and he had "a way with them," as even George
Belden and the horse wranglers acknowledged. So Teddy was busy around
the corrals, or aided the wranglers in driving fresh riding stock up
into the hills where the various herds belonging to the Three-bar
grazed.

It was some time before Teddy and Oriole managed to attempt a venture
into the hills. And then it was in the nature of a picnic party, of
which Nurse Brown, George Belden, and the twins were members.

Sadie Brown did not much approve of the foreman going along. But at the
last moment Mr. Langdon himself was called away, and he told George to
accompany the children and the woman who considered the big foreman
merely a silly person.

"I do wish you children would not be so determined to go fishing over
there in Squaw Canyon," Miss Brown stated. "And right this very day.
Harvey Langdon could go next week."

"But we do so want to go now, Brownie!" begged Oriole.

"Oh, we do, Brownie!" cried Myron and Marian in chorus.

"Then it means that George Belden will have to go along," groaned the
nurse. "And the goodness knows he's too silly to be good company. It's
hot, too. I'd rather sit right here and turn on the electric fan and
rock while I knit. I never did think much of fishing."

Even the twins paid no more than slight attention to her complaining.
They all knew that Miss Sadie Brown did not so much object to
picnicking--and over-night at that--in the foothills, as she objected
to George Belden being one of the party. Or, did she? Oriole was
beginning to wonder if Miss Brown's objections to the lanky trail
foreman were not a good deal "put on."

Marian, watching the whizzing fan, at last voiced a question not at all
pertinent to Nurse Brown's complaint:

"Where does the wind go when you turn the 'lectric fan off, Nursie?"

But the nurse did not hear, or did not want to hear. She confessed
that sometimes "those children's questions were too much" for her. So
Marian repeated the query. It was her twin who came to the rescue and
furnished the required answer--and who could have done better?

"Why, Marian," he said, "don't you know? It goes where the light goes
when you turn the 'lectric light off."

"Oh!" murmured Marian, but plainly she knew no more than she did
before, and somehow felt cheated.

But in the bustle of departure for the fishing trip up Squaw Canyon
both twins had something besides scientific facts to interest their
inquiring minds. Squaw Canyon was in the direction of the Three
Sisters. In fact, Teddy confided to Oriole that if they went far enough
up the canyon there was a side trail that would lead one directly to
the basin surrounded by the trio of rounded hills in which both he and
the girl were so much interested.

Although Sadie Brown stated her disapproval of the trip, she did
everything she could think of to supply comforts for the venture. And
as for Ching Foo, he packed so many eatables in the hampers slung on
either side of the gray burro that it did seem he expected a famine was
threatening the party.

It was still early when the party started away from the ranch house.
Teddy had to prod the burro along, so he rode slowly on what Belden
called a flea-bitten gray--a gray roan--pony. Oriole tried to ride
beside her boy friend. But there was a lot of "tickle" in Molly's
heels, and she really had to cut up and show off at first; so Oriole
let her out and scampered away along the trail, far ahead of even
Belden.

The latter rode beside the pony phaeton which Sadie Brown drove; but
the woman's tongue was so caustic that before long Belden confessed to
Oriole that he felt as though he had herded sheep. To a cattle man that
occupation is the most despised, so Belden must have felt pretty bad.

However, the young folks had a lot of fun on the journey to Squaw
Canyon. For when Molly felt less eager, Oriole rode back and trotted
sedately beside Teddy and the pack burro.

They camped for an hour or so at noon--just for a bite. Then they
pushed on into the canyon. The shadows in its mouth had looked blue
when they were miles away; but once within its walls the shade was not
blue at all. And they were all glad to be sheltered from the sun.

A coyote stood on an out-thrust rock and eyed them, then slunk away
into the dark. Nothing else of a wild nature save birds was seen by the
party that afternoon. The canyon seemed just as safe as the ranch house
itself.

They came to the mountain stream at last in which it had been reported
that trout were plentiful. This was not more than two hours from
sunset--and sunset came early in the canyon. Beside the stream, which
came tumbling out of a side gulch to flow more placidly through the
canyon to the north, was built a comfortable shack. The woman and
children would be sheltered in this structure; but both the trail
foreman and Teddy Ford had brought their bed rolls.

Oriole and Teddy were eager to see if there really were fish in that
cloudy stream. Oriole had plenty of experience fishing in salt water;
but this was something new. She had to learn how to handle the pole and
reel with which she was furnished.

"Not much like fishing from Uncle Nat's dory, the _Fishhawk_," she said
to Teddy. "And do you really use these funny looking things--_flies_,
do you call them? Why, they are not even meat! The trout must be
awfully hungry to bite at a little bunch of feathers and hair like
that."

"They won't do much biting to-night. It's too near sunset," returned
her boy friend. "But maybe we'll get a mess for supper."

This proved to be the case. Oriole was as sharply interested in the
catching of the trout as were the twins--although she did not dance
up and down at every strike and do what Belden, chuckling, called an
"Injun walk-around" when the struggling fish was landed.

The foreman cleaned and prepared the trout for baking and got a fresh
fire blazing between two rocks. Sadie Brown cooked the supper, and that
brought her into closer contact with the foreman, it seemed, than she
liked, for the young folks heard her scolding him unmercifully.

"I don't see," whispered Oriole to Teddy, "why Mr. Belden really wants
to marry Brownie. She treats him awfully harsh."

"Does he?"

"So she says. Says he is always talking about marrying, and wanting her
to go to the parson with him."

"Gee!" murmured Teddy, "I thought he had more sense than that."

However, marriage and giving in marriage was not the principal topic
in the minds of Oriole and her boy friend. She did not have much luck
fishing that evening; but she was deeply interested in Teddy's success
and in all the new things she saw about the camping place. Very near
was the branch gulch, or canyon, from which the mountain torrent
poured. And Teddy assured her that by following that side-gulch they
might reach the basin guarded by the Three Sisters.

"It looks awfully rough up that path," murmured Oriole.

"Maybe you couldn't make it, but I can," declared Teddy. "And if I can
get away to-morrow I am going to try."

"Oh, Teddy Ford! you would not go without me, would you?"

"What you told me about Ridley and those others being interested in a
prospector's hole up there by the Three Sisters, makes me want to see
the place," complained Teddy. "I've got to go up there--if I can."

Oriole did not like the idea of his going without her. She was just as
eager to solve the mystery of the three "bad men" as Teddy was--or,
so she said. She neglected her pole and line to stare up the rugged
side-gully, in the bed of which the stream foamed and fretted. It was
growing dark up there--much darker than in the bottom of the more open
canyon. But suddenly Oriole saw something moving--some object half
hidden by an outcropping bowlder.

"Oh, Teddy! See there! Is it a man?" she murmured, clutching at his
jacket sleeve.

"Shucks! Don't joggle me so!" whispered Teddy. "I almost had a bite
then. There! It's nibbling again."

"But look up yonder, Teddy," urged Oriole.

"It's--it's watching us--behind that rock. See!"

"Aw, that's like a girl! Maybe it's a bear--and we can't catch a bear
on a fishline," and Teddy suddenly laughed.

"A bear!" gasped Oriole.

"Why not? Didn't you see that George Belden brought his gun along?
Might be a bear. Sure thing, it isn't a man up there. I don't see
anything, anyway."

Neither did Oriole then. The object that had caused her excitement had
disappeared in the shadows. But the idea that a bear might be in the
vicinity gave her a feeling of insecurity that she could not forget all
during supper.




                              CHAPTER XX

                           BRUIN ON THE LINE


Belden dropped a few words at supper time that held the attention of
Oriole and Teddy Ford--and they looked covertly at each other, with
understanding nods.

"You children want to make the most of this picnic," he said soberly,
"because it ain't going to be easy for me, nor mebbe not for Harvey
Langdon either, to get away from work to beau you about on such didoes
as this--not for a spell. Several of the boys have got through, or will
get through, come the end of the month. And hands are hard to get this
time of year."

"We ain't going to worry about your not going picnicking with us,
George Belden," rejoined Sadie Brown promptly, her nose in the air.

"Who's got through?" asked Teddy Ford, trying to cover the woman's
sharpness.

"Them hombres Ridley brought down with him last summer--Shaffer and
Mudd--and Hank himself is leaving. They asked for their time. Besides
some others."

"Ridley, Shaffer and Mudd?" cried Teddy anxiously.

"Yep. And others. The crews will all be short handed. That is what took
Harvey Langdon away to-day. He's gone to town to see if he can pick up
any stray help."

Oriole and Teddy whispered about this a good deal after supper. Nurse
Brown took the twins into the cabin and put them to bed, while the boy
and girl washed the dishes and cleared up the camp. Belden smoked his
pipe by the water's edge.

"I bet those fellows will try to get the silver--if they _did_ hide it
away somewhere," Teddy said, as he and Oriole wiped the dishes. "They
are ready to beat it away from the Three-bar."

"Oh, dear me, can't we stop them somehow?" Oriole said.

"How can we?"

"Let's tell Mr. Langdon."

"And he'd thank us for that, wouldn't he?" scoffed Teddy. "We don't
really _know_ that Hank Ridley and those others are the thieves."

"Well----"

"It would be just as bad for him to pounce on them without any evidence
as it was for him to jump me that time," complained Teddy. "No, it
won't do."

"But we just _can't_ let them get away with Mr. Langdon's silver."

"We've got to be sure first that they stole it," grumbled Teddy.
"That's all there is to that."

This did not satisfy Oriole at all. She seemed even more eager to
discover the real thieves than Teddy himself. But the boy had less hope
of making the discovery in question than Oriole had, that was all. He
was by no means of so sanguine a temperament.

They had ridden a long way and were really tired on this evening, and
both Oriole and Teddy were willing to retire early. But before Oriole
retreated to the shack and her boy friend rolled up in his blanket,
feet to the fire (for the air was chill in these upland places), they
enjoyed a novel sight which increased Oriole's doubt at least of Sadie
Brown's sincerity when she so cruelly criticized George Belden.

The twins being safely disposed of, their nurse had reappeared from the
shack. Oriole and Teddy were out of sight at the moment, and feeling
that she was unobserved "Brownie," as the woman liked to be called by
her friends, deliberately approached the foreman smoking on his lonely
bowlder by the stream.

She stood for some moments behind the man, unobserved. Then she
deliberately cleared her throat to call his attention to her presence!

"Shucks!" muttered Teddy in Oriole's ear, "I thought she had it in for
poor George. And look at her now."

Belden had turned sharply, almost letting his pipe fall in his
surprise. He got up awkwardly, but Miss Brown put out a hand and
gestured for him to be seated again.

"Lovely evening, George," she observed in a voice so honeyed that there
was some doubt if George recognized it as belonging to the nurse.

"Oh--ah--yes, 'tis so," the foreman stammeringly agreed.

"Do sit down, George," said Nurse Brown, edging nearer. "But you might
scrouge over a little. That rock's big enough for two to sit on, ain't
it?"

"Gee!" gasped Teddy, "did you get that? And there isn't any scarcity of
bowlders along that river bank. What do you know about that, Oriole?"

"It's awfully funny, _I_ think," giggled the girl.

"Either she hasn't meant this talk she's been giving him right along or
for some reason she's had a sudden change of heart," grimly said the
boy.

"Maybe it's the moon," whispered Oriole shyly. "Did you ever see such a
beautiful moon, Teddy?"

"Shucks! what's a moon? Just the same as it always is this time of
year," observed the quite unsentimental boy; and _that_ closed Oriole's
lips.

The young friends separated, and Oriole was not long in falling asleep
in a bunk in the shack, over the twins. She would have slept straight
through until daybreak at least, had it not been for a most astonishing
thing that happened before midnight--indeed, long before the trail
foreman and Sadie Brown were ready to give up their seats on the
bowlder and retire for the night.

Oriole, perhaps, heard the pounding of approaching hoofs as soon
as Belden and his companion noticed the sound. Horses--at least a
pair--were coming furiously up the canyon. The trail was plain, and the
horses were galloping as though their riders gave little heed to safety.

Oriole sat up in her bunk and bumped her head. Myron and Marian did not
awake, however, so she slipped down to the floor, wrapped a blanket
about her, and ran to the door.

She saw Teddy rise by the fire, and heard George Belden shout as he ran
for his gun:

"Get down, kid! We don't know who these fellers may be. Stoop!"

Sadie Brown came swiftly to the shade and, finding Oriole at the door,
pushed in beside her.

"What is it, Brownie?" asked the girl.

"Got me. Maybe just a couple of punchers looking for strays. But then,
you can't always tell."

George Belden's voice rose sonorously on the still night air:

"Hold your horses! Back up! D'you hear me?"

"Ya-hoo!" yelled one of the riders. "Who's there?"

"That ain't you, is it, Shaffer?" demanded a second voice.

"That's Hank Ridley!" cried Teddy Ford. "I know his voice!"

"Is that you, Ridley?" demanded Belden. "What are you and Mudd riding
this way for? I come nigh to puncturing you. Come on in."

"I declare if it ain't George!" exclaimed the relieved voice of Hank
Ridley. "What you doing up here, George?"

"I'll hand that back to you," said the trail foreman grimly. "What are
_you_ doing up this way? I thought you three fellers was for lighting
out for the south when you got your time from Harvey Langdon."

"You're right as rain," agreed Ridley, riding into the circle of light
cast by the fire on which Teddy had thrown an armful of brush which
burned fiercely. "Hullo! The kids, eh? I didn't know you folks had
come up this way on your picnic."

"Tell us about it," advised the foreman, still with suspicion.

"It's that darned Shaffer," explained Ridley.

"Ain't seen him, have you, George?"

"Not for a couple of days."

"That's what I told you, Mudd," said Ridley, turning to his companion.
"There is something dead wrong with poor Shaffer. Nobody ain't seen him
for a couple of days."

"What's the matter with him?" Belden asked.

"He's queer. Always has been. You know that, George. You know how he's
acted, off an' on."

"I know he's as lazy a hound as ever rode after the cows on this ranch,
if that's what you mean," said the foreman, with disgust.

"Oh, it's more than laziness made him act so funny," Ridley urged. "He
has spells."

"Uh-huh!" grunted Belden.

"And now he's rid away alone somewhere, and we're afraid something's
happened to him. You ain't seen him up this way, have you?"

"Not a bit of it."

"No sign of any trail--fresh trail--in this canyon?"

"Not any."

"Then it must have been your trail we follered into Squaw Canyon," said
Ridley thoughtfully. "He couldn't have come this way, Mudd. No, he
couldn't."

"Well," said George Belden, "going to 'light and make a night of it?"

"No. We'll be goin' back. Poor Shaffer! He must have taken another
trail."

Hank Ridley pulled his horse around, and Mudd at once did the same.
They bade the puzzled party a gay good-night and rode swiftly back down
the canyon.

"Now, what do you know about that?" grumbled George Belden.

"Crazy critters," sniffed Miss Brown.

"Don't know about that," rejoined the foreman. "Maybe not so crazy. I
just don't get what they are at. That's what!"

Discussing the matter evolved no solution, however, and Nurse Brown
tartly suggested they had all better go to bed. But Oriole felt sure
the next morning when she came out of the shack that the foreman had
not slept at all. The visit of the two doubtful characters had troubled
him so much that he had kept watch--she was confident--by the look of
his eyes and by his mighty yawns as he set about getting breakfast.

Teddy was already making a cast--and he did it very prettily--into a
deep pool near the foaming falls where the stream poured out of the
side canyon. When Oriole ran over there to wash her face in the stream
he shooed her away.

"Want to frighten every trout in this old stream?" he demanded. "I just
saw the biggest one jump that I ever laid eyes on."

"How much would it weigh--a ton?" asked Oriole roguishly.

"Never you mind. Wait till I catch him," rejoined the boy, grinning.
"He's a big fellow all right."

But after Oriole had made her toilet in a more distant spot and came
herself with pole and reel to try her luck, Teddy had caught only three
finger-length trout. The big fellow seemed to be shy.

Oriole grew interested herself directly, for one of the trout in the
pool jumped at least eighteen inches above the surface in chase of a
wandering fly dancing in the morning sunshine.

"Oh, I must get it!" she cried, and tried to make a cast as she had
been taught the evening before.

The line spun out and the reel whirred smartly. But the wind carried
the feather-trimmed lure around a big bowlder that hid a pool on the
other side of the stream.

"What was that?" cried the girl, in a low voice.

"Didn't hear anything," Teddy replied. "What was it?"

"A kind of a grunt," the girl replied.

Then the fly came floating lightly around the bowlder and danced away
on the rather swift water. There was a rush, a flash of fire and silver
(so it seemed) and the lure disappeared, while there came a mighty tug
on Oriole's line.

"Let it go! Let him have it! You'll break your line!" shouted Teddy, in
sharp staccato.

But Oriole, knowing a big trout had struck on, forgot all the cautions
and advice she had received the night before, and endeavored to jerk
the fish out of the water as though it were no more game than a codfish.

She did get it out of the water, too. It looked to be more than a foot
in length--a big fellow indeed!

"See it! My mercy!" yelled Teddy. "You'll lose it, you foolish girl."

Naturally the fish, struggling in the air, swung far across the stream
and for a moment was hidden by the out-thrust bowlder before mentioned.
This time there was a positive grunt from over there--then a splashing
in the stream.

"Oh, dear me! what is it?" shrieked Oriole, but hanging on manfully to
the rod.

The hook and fish did not swing back into view. But around the bowlder,
along the narrow beach of the stream, marched a great brown bear,
walking erect and pawing at his head in a most ridiculous way. As
Oriole drew back from the stream, frightened by bruin's appearance, she
seemed to drag the bear from his covert!

"Look there! Look there!" yelled Teddy. "That old bear has swallowed
that trout--hook, line and sinker! It takes a girl to catch a bear with
a trout fly, after all!"




                              CHAPTER XXI

                            NEWS OF MOMENT


Oriole was so excited that she did not even scream. Not that she did
not feel like screaming. But her tongue seemed fairly to stick to the
roof of her mouth.

She had never seen a bear at close range before. And to her mind
this was a very savage looking one indeed. She could not, in truth,
understand how a bear could look anything but savage. She had no idea
that, among all the beasts of the fields and woods, the brown bear is
the clown, _par excellence_.

Just as though he had been trained to stand upon his hind legs and
perform certain tricks, bruin continued to march along the edge of
the stream, pawing the air clumsily and uttering as he walked a sort
of whining grunt which Oriole at another time might have thought very
funny indeed.

Naturally a big brown bear could not be played for long on a silk line
and catgut leader. The big beast followed the tug of the line as
Oriole moved backward only for a little way. Then he uttered a loud
"Wuff!" dropped to all four paws, and the line snapped.

He turned to depart in haste, having evidently swallowed the trout,
hook, fly and all. But the cries of Teddy and Oriole had brought the
others to the scene. Sadie Brown appeared, a twin dragging from each
hand. George Belden caught up his rifle as he ran from behind the shack.

The bear galloped up the opposite bank. The shot the foreman made was
a perfect one--for it broke the bear's neck and he came tumbling back
again into the shallow water.

"Well, of all things!" gasped Nurse Brown. "What kind of actions is
this? Are you children fishing or bear hunting? I'd really like to
know."

The trout were forgotten. The capture of the bear was a much more
interesting incident than mere trout fishing. The twins were delighted
by the event, and even Oriole took some pride in the thought that she
had been the means of the bear's capture.

Teddy roped the dead animal quite skillfully, and then dragged it
across the stream and out on the near bank with the aid of his own
horse. The horses did not like the scent of the animal, and they had
to be finally picketed to keep them from running away.

Breakfast was postponed until the foreman and Teddy had skinned the big
and fat carcass. Some of the tenderer parts of the animal were cut out
and broiled for breakfast. They all made a hearty meal, and the lack of
trout did not so much matter.

"'Tisn't everybody that can go fishing and bring home a bear," declared
Sadie Brown. "You see that you cut it up nice, George. Don't make a
mess of it if you can help it."

"Yes, ma'am," murmured the foreman.

"What's that?"

"I mean 'No, ma'am,'" he hastened to reply.

There was no moonlight to affect the brusque Miss Brown on this
morning, and she seemed to be quite as sharp with Belden as ever.

Oriole had something to say to Teddy in private--and she was very
serious about it after breakfast when they were alone again.

"Such an idea, Teddy! But I can't get it out of my head."

"All right, Miss Jaybird. Tell it to me if you think it will relieve
your mind."

"I wish you wouldn't call me all kinds of birds. I'm just one
kind--Oriole. Now listen," she said.

"I've got my ears as wide open as a mine-shaft," he chuckled.

"Now, don't! It's just about that mine-shaft--maybe."

"What do you mean?" he wanted to know, startled.

"Well, those two men didn't ride up here last night for just nothing."

"Wow! You mean Ridley and Mudd?"

"That is just who I mean," Oriole said seriously.

"Of course they didn't. They were looking for Shaffer all right. And I
wonder if he is crazy."

"Dear me, Teddy! don't you remember what I told you they said that time
I overheard them?"

"What are you getting at?" he asked curiously.

"Don't you remember that I told you that Shaffer man was unwilling
to wait around any longer--he said so? He wanted to go to that
prospect-hole right away and not wait for the other two. And they got
mad and threatened him. You know I told you!"

"Shucks! So I do remember. Well?"

"I guess that that is what has happened. Hank Ridley and that Mudd
person were hunting for Mr. Shaffer last night. They thought he had
come up this way. Don't you see?"

"I bet!" cried Teddy in sudden excitement. "They think Shaffer has
double-crossed them. Jiminy! I see."

"But there is something more I wanted to speak about," Oriole hastened
to say.

"Go on. Let's hear," Teddy returned.

"I saw something up that cross gulch last evening--don't you remember?
It was something moving--something big----"

"That old bear!" exclaimed Teddy, laughing.

"_Was_ it?" questioned Oriole. "It looked like a man. It was as tall as
a man. I don't know. Suppose Shaffer is up in these hills?"

"Shucks! you get me all stirred up, Oriole," the boy complained.
"If--if Shaffer is up there," he turned toward the Three Sisters, their
tops quite visible even from the bed of the canyon, "we ought to know
about it."

"Let's tell George Belden," she suggested slowly.

"And he'll tell Brownie," returned Teddy with disgust. "He's just that
soft."

"Oh, Teddy!"

"Well, isn't he?" the boy demanded warmly. "See how she wound him
around her finger last night, and now this morning she's as prickly
with him as a porcupine."

Oriole had to giggle at that. It was true. But she was just as much in
earnest about the affair of the three bad men as Teddy was.

"I tell you that they didn't ride up here last night just for fun."

"No," agreed Teddy, "of course not. But Shaffer must have been ahead
of us then, if you saw him flitting up that gulch. Our trail must have
erased his trail."

"He did not come this way--not on horseback," said Oriole positively.
"George Belden told Ridley he didn't see any trail--and he wouldn't
have told a story about it."

"I suppose not. And I didn't see any myself," admitted Teddy. "So it
must have been the bear you saw, after all, Oriole," and he laughed
again.

However that might be--bear or man--the two friends had no opportunity
of searching the branch canyon, down which the brook tumbled, on this
occasion. They did not take back to the ranch many trout, either; for
it took so long to cut up the bear's carcass and pack it on the excited
horses and the burro that little time could be spent in fishing.

They left the shack at noon and arrived at the ranch house just at
dark, being welcomed by Ching Foo with acclaim. The bear meat made a
change from "bull beef" which change the Chinese cook welcomed.

Mr. Langdon returned from town that evening. He had found several new
hands; but it was not the scarcity of help that made his face so grave
as he joined his little family at the supper table. It was the way he
looked at Oriole that warned Sadie Brown of the possible nature of his
trouble.

"Has something turned up about our Oriole?" the nurse asked the ranch
owner after the children had been excused from the table.

"That's just it. Something seems to have become known at last about the
fate of Mr. and Mrs. Putnam," said Mr. Langdon quietly. "I don't know
how to tell the girl. Nat Jardin warned me it would be mighty hard to
take from the child all hope of her ever seeing her parents again."

"Oh, Harvey Langdon! that isn't the way of it, I hope? _All_ hope gone?"

"Well, I told you what that old sailor in the East Boston Hospital told
me. He was pretty sure Mr. Putnam was lost. And my agent in Boston
writes me that, without doubt, that was true. Mr. Putnam was knocked
out of one of the boats and drowned at the time the _Helvetia_ sunk,
after the collision."

"Poor, poor Oriole!" murmured the good-hearted nurse.

"Well, there it is. How can I tell her? And with such uncertain news
of her mother----"

"There is something you have not told me!" cried the nurse.

"It is about Mrs. Putnam. My agent found another seaman of the
_Helvetia_ that is sure the woman was taken aboard the ship that
collided with the _Helvetia_--a three-masted sailing vessel named
_Edgerton_, or _Ellerton_."

"Mercy's sake! can't you get the name of it right?"

"Chapman writes me that he will search Lloyd's records and the maritime
registers for the record of any three-master of either name. It is a
chance----"

"But for goodness' sake!" interrupted Nurse Brown, "where was the ship
sailing to that she hasn't been heard of in all this time?"

"Strange things happen at sea, and about ships," said Mr. Langdon,
shaking his head. "You ought to realize that, Sadie Brown, after what
happened to you and the twins. Evidently the _Ellerton_, if that
was the name of the ship, had a small crew--less than fifty aboard.
Otherwise she would have been obliged to carry a wireless outfit. Not
having a wireless, her movements subsequent to the collision were not
recorded."

"It seems terrible," murmured the nurse. "How shall we tell Oriole?"

"Do you think we had better tell her at all until we know more?" asked
the ranchman hastily.

"Perhaps not. Wait, at least, till your friend in Boston can tell you
something definite about that sailing ship. Dear me! I hate to stir the
child all up again with worriment."




                             CHAPTER XXII

                          SOMETHING GOING ON


Oriole did not suspect that Mr. Langdon's anxiety of mind was caused by
her own affairs. She never forgot the uncertainty of her mother's and
father's fate; but the matter was of such long standing now that it was
in the background of her thought. The trouble was not, in fact, so keen
as it at first had been.

This does not reflect upon the girl's love for her parents. Life was
full of interest for her and she was surrounded by those who loved her.

She often climbed into Mr. Langdon's lap after the twins had been put
to bed and snuggled against him and hugged him tight about the neck.
The ranchman had promised to be a father to her, now that it was almost
sure that her own father had been drowned; and he seemed to like very
much to have Oriole show a daughterly affection for him.

"And why shouldn't I love him?" Oriole said to Nurse Brown. "He is so
kind to me, and so thoughtful. I guess if my own father had lived he
couldn't have done more for me than Myron and Marian's papa does.

"Of course, when my mother comes back to me I don't know that she will
want to stay here at the Three-bar Ranch. But Mr. Langdon is so kind
maybe he will let her stay. Then I can stay too, and he can still be my
father."

"Humph! I guess so," admitted the nurse, reflectively.

She refrained from hinting at the possibility of Mrs. Putnam having
been lost at sea with her husband. But like Mr. Langdon, the nurse
worried about Oriole and the effect upon her finally if the death of
her mother was proved beyond any doubt. The girl had loved her mother
very dearly.

With so much of interest in and about the ranch house, however, Oriole
could not actually be morose or despondent even about her dear, dear
mother. And the very day after the party had returned from the fishing
trip something happened that gave Oriole and Teddy, as well as others
on the Three-bar Ranch, much food for reflection.

Rather, the happening was that night--the very night on which Mr.
Langdon had seemed so despondent after his return from town and the
children from the fishing excursion. Early in the morning there was a
great noise and excitement about the ranch house when Oriole came out
of doors. Sol Perkins, the ranch manager, was excitedly questioning the
chief wrangler and one of the punchers who had been in charge of the
horse herd at a place called Freeman's Sink.

"What sort of doings do you-all call this?" demanded the manager, who
had originally come from Louisiana and had a Southern drawl to his
speech. "You ain't babies, as I know of. Mean to tell me you-all let
them horses drift away from here and you can't find 'em?"

"They didn't drift. They was stole," declared the horse wrangler with
emphasis.

"What was you doing?" demanded Sol Perkins, pointing a finger at the
abashed puncher.

"We herded 'em into a pocket in the hills there by the Sink, and run
a couple of ropes across the mouth of it to hold 'em. Didn't need no
watchin'----"

"Oh! they didn't? _This_ looks like it," scoffed the manager.

"Well, anyhow, we made camp right there at the mouth of the pocket. But
this morning there wasn't a head of 'em in the pocket."

"They flew out, I s'pose?"

"Now, listen. We didn't suppose they could climb out. And they wouldn't
of, if they'd been left to themselves. But they was drove out."

"Drove out? Who by?"

"We don't know. I left Charley and Big Ike to trail 'em if they could.
There was a trail up the steep end of the pocket and then it come to
a sure-'nough path through the hills we didn't know was there. She's
aimin' toward the Three Sisters."

"Take it from me," remarked the foreman with vast disdain, "you fellers
take the sugar-coated bun for being the most useless two-legged human
beings that ever wore boots and pants. My mercy! I wonder you've lived
to grow up as far as you have. I could run this ranch better with
two-year-old kids."

"_You_ run this ranch?" flashed back the wrangler in a rage. "You
couldn't run nothin'. I thank my stars that Harvey Langdon pays me my
money."

"He don't pay you none," sighed the foreman. "He gives it to you 'cause
he pities you. That's flat!"

The alarm over the lost herd of riding stock spread swiftly about the
ranch. And nobody was more interested in the matter than Teddy and
Oriole. For they felt that their guess as to the identity of the horse
thieves was as good as anybody's.

"Shaffer hasn't shown up," whispered the boy to Oriole eagerly, when
they met after breakfast. "Nobody knows where he went to. Didn't even
get his pay. But Hank Ridley and Mudd got their pay last night of Sol
Perkins and beat it away from the ranch--riding south. But did they
ride south far?"

"Oh, Teddy! what shall we do?" cried Oriole. "Tell Mr. Langdon?"

"What have we got to tell him? The men are going to follow the stolen
horses in any case. They didn't drift away, that is sure. I don't
believe Shaffer and his old friends are working together, either. Bet
Ridley and Mudd have got the horses, and are going up there to the
Three Sisters with 'em, looking for Shaffer on the way."

"And maybe they are going to recover the stolen silver plate and carry
it off with them," whispered Oriole.

"I don't know. I'm all mixed up about those fellers--fellows," admitted
Teddy. "Anyway, I'm for waiting until we've got more evidence before
we say anything to Harvey Langdon. There's been enough false accusing
already. Much as I hate Ridley and his crew, I wouldn't wish my worst
enemy to be up against what I've been unfairly accused of."

"Oh, Teddy!"

"That's right. So wait a while. The boys will chase those horse
thieves, whoever they are, to a fare-ye-well. I wish I could go with
the posse."

"Couldn't we ride up that canyon again and see if we could overtake
them?" urged Oriole.

"Shucks! they didn't go that way. And I couldn't go. I wouldn't be let.
I have to stay here at the corrals and 'tend to business. I never do
have any chance to do anything," complained the boy.

Oriole was not held in leash as Teddy seemed to be. She was of so
independent a character, and so courageous, that she did not fear
to ride alone anywhere. Her life on Harbor Light Island had been so
free and untrammeled that she did not realize that, under certain
circumstances, she might be in peril riding alone about the wild
country to the north of the ranch house.

Besides, had not Mr. Langdon insisted that the West was much safer than
the seacoast? She had accepted this statement at its face value. Even
the bear she had caught on a fishline had not much frightened her. And
surely it had been much more in fear of her than Oriole was of it!

So, while everybody about the ranch house was so excited over the
stealing of twenty-two of the choicest riding stock of the Three-bar
brand, little attention was paid to Oriole, who saddled Molly at the
gate of the home corral and rode calmly away on the trail which she
knew led to Squaw Canyon.

Of course she did not expect to meet and have trouble with Hank Ridley
and his gang. She was just curious about the person (she felt sure it
was a human being) whom she had seen at dusk in the branch canyon from
which the mountain torrent poured.

She rode to the canyon without seeing any one. As Teddy had prophesied,
the posse of searchers after the horse thieves had gone another way
into the hills. But what puzzled Oriole was the mystery lying up the
branch canyon. She rode Molly directly past the hut where she and the
others had spent the night and pursued the rough path Teddy had pointed
out along the edge of the brawling stream.

Had a horse been ridden this way before her, she could scarcely have
distinguished the marks of its hoofs, the path was so like adamant.
Molly's shoes rang on the stones so loudly that it annoyed Oriole. She
feared that if anybody--the man, Shaffer, for instance--were hidden
here he would be warned of her approach.

Bad as Ridley and his mates were supposed to be, the girl from the
East had no thought of danger. Even if the three "bad men" were
thieves, she did not presume they would hurt her. And of course, so she
considered, they would not know that she was looking for them--or for
the silver stolen from the Langdon house.

However, were it human being or wild animal that she had seen two
nights before in this locality, Molly made so much noise that the
unknown got out of the way. At the big bowlder, beside which she had
seen the shadowy figure, Oriole saw that a scant patch of grass had
been torn up--and that recently. But it might have been done by the
bear they had later killed or by some other creature rather than by man.

She pursued the rough path for some distance farther. The boisterous
voice of the cataract drowned Molly's hoof-beats at last--and drowned,
as well, all other sounds. Oriole was very alert. She had brought her
quirt on this occasion and believed that she would see nothing that
could not be beaten off with the whip.

In fact she saw nothing but birds in this branch canyon; but she
finally found the unmistakable trace of a human being. It consisted of
the ashes of a campfire between two stones.

"He was here!" cried Oriole confidently, speaking aloud because of the
noise of the falling waters. "It _was_ that Mr. Shaffer, I do believe."

She began to feel a little doubtful when she found that without any
question a man had recently been along this way--had even camped here.
If it were one of the three "bad men" he might not care to be spied
upon. And Oriole was doing just that.

Yet she wanted to know more. Where did the gulch lead to? Teddy said it
extended right to the basin between the Three Sisters. It might be that
a little search would reveal the prospect-hole the three men had once
talked about in Oriole's hearing.

"And if they did steal Mr. Langdon's silver plate," she thought, "I am
sure they have hidden it in that hole. And Shaffer wants to steal it
from the other two. That is just what I believe."

In her simplicity she did not realize that were this so Shaffer would
scarcely welcome the presence of anybody in the vicinity--even a young
girl.

She urged Molly on and cheerfully pursued a course that an older person
would certainly have considered very carefully before venturing upon.
Curiosity--and something else--urged the girl on. She wanted to free
her friend Teddy from the stigma that rested on his name. Because she
had gone through the bitter waters of suspicion herself when equally
innocent, Oriole was all the more eager to help her friend.

"I don't really believe Mr. Harvey Langdon believes now that Teddy
helped steal the plate chest. Just the same, it must be proved that he
didn't," thought Oriole. "He will never be satisfied otherwise--and
perhaps Mr. Langdon won't be sure, either, that Teddy is innocent.

"Oh, dear me, if I could only find that prospect-hole and whatever
those three men have got hidden in it!"




                             CHAPTER XXIII

                           SUSPICION IS RIFE


Teddy Ford and Oriole were not the only two persons about the ranch who
suspected that Hank Ridley and his mates were at the bottom of the loss
of the twenty-two horses driven away the night before.

There was another couple that began to question--themselves and each
other. At last there was something in common between the brusque Sadie
Brown and the generous-hearted George Belden.

"Tell you what it is, man," said the nurse, for once not trying to
drive the foreman out of her presence when he first appeared, "there
was something funny about those two fellows riding so hard up that
canyon the other night. I felt it then, and I know it now."

"I was thinking of that. Ridley has a bad reputation. So has Mudd. We
know about some doings of theirs up in Shoshone Gap a year ago. It
leaked through lately that they were suspected of rustling."

"I shouldn't wonder," said Nurse Brown. "And that Shaffer is no better.
He ain't crazy none, either. Bet he has been trying to double-cross his
friends in something."

"Sounds right sensible to me, Sadie."

"I hope so," she said scornfully. "It's lucky somebody has some horse
sense about this ranch."

Belden nodded cheerful agreement. His opinion of the woman was very
high indeed, and he was always ready to admit it.

"Now, see here," Miss Brown continued. "Harvey Langdon and Sol and the
other fellows have all gone pirooting off on the trail of those horses.
Good enough, that is. But the horse thieves have got more than twelve
hours' start like enough. How about heading them off?"

"I can take a bunch and do it," said Belden promptly. "You say which
way they are headin', that's all."

"The way Hank and Mudd were heading the other night. Through Squaw
Canyon. And I bet Shaffer had gone on ahead of them, even if we didn't
notice his trail."

"Sounds reasonable," agreed Belden. "I'll find some of the boys and get
a move on."

"And I'm going to go over that way myself and see what comes of it,"
said the energetic woman. "I'll take the twins along in the cart, and
that Teddy Ford to drive them. But I want to be astride a horse myself."

Sadie Brown rode anything on four legs (so she said herself), and the
horses she chose were not like Molly or old Blooey, the pony which drew
the twins in the cart. It rankled in Teddy Ford's mind that she should
be so well mounted when they set forth from the ranch house, while he
had to drive "a dead and alive pony" as he disrespectfully spoke of
Blooey.

Belden and the men he had picked up around the bunk houses and corrals
had already ridden out of sight when the pony phaeton started with
Nurse Brown riding beside it. Where Oriole had disappeared to neither
the twins nor their nurse thought to ask. Teddy refrained from saying
anything about her, for she had ridden away without explaining a word
to him of her intentions.

He had no expectation of his slow party getting anywhere near the goal.
George Belden and his men were out of sight long before the slow Blooey
and Miss Brown's fretting steed had come to the mouth of Squaw Canyon.
Indeed, by watching the trail, Teddy knew that Belden's party had not
come this way at all. The foreman evidently considered some other way
into the hills as more feasible if they were really to overtake the
horse thieves.

Not for a moment did anybody embarked upon this hunt for the outlaws
suspect that Oriole was calmly riding into the grave danger of meeting
at least one of the men suspected. The girl was so eager to help Teddy
and discover the criminals who had stolen the ranchman's plate that she
suspected no danger before her. She rode calmly on into the wilderness.

It was long after noon when she first halted up in the hills far above
the bed of Squaw Canyon where she had been with the fishing party two
days before. Because she was not retarded by the slow-moving phaeton,
she had come much faster than before.

Indeed, she had pushed Molly to the brim of the basin, about which the
wooded tops of the Three Sisters loomed quite majestically. Here Oriole
allowed her horse to graze. She had no lunch herself and really was not
hungry, her interest in what she saw was so intense.

She observed no sign of the man who she was sure had camped so recently
beside the stream she had followed. But while she sat searching the
great valley with her eyes, a number of moving objects wheeling out of
a ravine some miles away stirred the girl's imagination.

Were they cattle--a herd strayed from some greater band from the
distant range? Oriole narrowed her lids that her half-dazzled eyes
might the better mark the moving figures.

Then suddenly, by their tossing heads and their gait, she realized that
it was a band of horses trotting out into the open plain. Behind them
spurred two riders.

It needed no diagram to convince Oriole that she was looking at the
stolen twenty-two horses; and evidently the men who had stolen them
numbered two. Teddy and she had been right in their suspicions. She was
sure now that Ridley and Mudd were the two thieves. Shaffer could not
be with them. Indeed, that individual, whether he were out of his mind
or not, she was confident was on her side of this great valley.

She looked to see that Molly could not be observed where she was
grazing. Oriole knew that her own location must be hidden from the men
driving the horse herd. She felt no fear, for they were many miles away.

Suddenly, as she saw the two riders drive the herd rapidly across the
plain, there came several spurts of smoke from the mouth of that ravine
out of which the herd had come. The two men with the horses began to
fire their pistols as well. There came into view more than half a dozen
swift riders, and the pistol battle became general.

"Oh, they are Mr. Langdon and the boys!" gasped the frightened Oriole.
"It must be them! And somebody will be hurt!"

The antagonists were too far away at the time, however, for certain
pistol shooting. There was a good deal of powder burned during the next
few minutes, but nobody appeared to be hurt.

However, the Three-bar men rode more swiftly than the outlaws could
drive the stolen horses. They caught up to the terrified steeds.
Meanwhile the two evident thieves (whether they were Ridley and Mudd
or not) were driven off. They spurred their mounts, lying close along
their necks, and left the recovered horses and the posse behind.

"Oh, dear me! are they going to get away?" gasped Oriole, staring from
her hiding place behind a hedge of thorny scrub oak. "Why doesn't Mr.
Langdon stop them?"

She did not wish to see the escaping men shot down. That was too
terrible a thought. But she felt that they should be overtaken and
punished in some way.

The men from the Three-bar Ranch, however, were much too interested at
the moment in securing the scattered horses. They had to be ridden down
and roped in some cases, and then driven to a central place. The first
thought of the ranchman and his aids, of course, was the value of the
twenty-two mounts.

Before the horses were all secured the two thieves were far across the
basin. And they were riding in a direction that brought them toward
Oriole. The girl did not at first realize that. When she did, it was
too late for her to mount Molly and try to run away.

Instead, she crept on her hands and knees as swiftly as she could
travel in that posture along the hedge to the place where Molly grazed.
She secured the reins, put the bit again in the pony's mouth, and
almost dragged her into a thicket where they both might be hidden from
the approaching outlaws.

The two men came at a pounding gallop, evidently knowing well the
branch canyon up which Oriole had so recently climbed. Before they were
very near the girl realized that her suspicion as to their identity had
not been false.

Hank Ridley, the black-mustached and red-faced fellow, and his comrade
named Mudd were the identical men who had tried to run off Mr.
Langdon's horses. If they would steal horses, they surely would steal
silver plate! Oriole wished Mr. Langdon was at hand so that she might
point out this fact to him.

But she believed he was with the posse miles across the green basin.
The men there had gathered together the frightened herd. They were
conferring. Finally she saw that they intended to drive back the stolen
horses by the way they had come and would not follow the two rascals at
all.

This fact surprised Ridley and Mudd as much as it did the watching
girl. But they were more keenly apprehensive than was Oriole of what
probably was the fact.

"No, Mudd. No chance of them giving us freedom. They are just foolin'
about this."

"How do you mean, foolin'?" demanded the other man, likewise pulling in
his horse and staring back.

They were within earshot of Oriole. She eagerly listened.

"Mercy, what very bad men they are," murmured the girl to herself.
"Why, I never knew people could be so wicked!"

It really was Oriole's first contact with real wickedness in any form,
for the behavior of Shedder Crabbe, and even of his father, from which
she had suffered during her stay in and near Littleport, was brought
about by pettiness of character and lack of goodness rather than by
active wickedness.

"I--I would like to run away," Oriole's thoughts ran on. "Only, on
Teddy's account, I must stay to see if I cannot find out something."

"They ain't no idee of letting us go scot-free, I tell you," declared
Hank Ridley. "That idee of yours was all right--going off with them
horses. Only we couldn't hide our trail on that soft ground. But we
ain't going to be let to stay free and easy up here. No, sir."

"I want to get at that old hole, Hank. I'm sick o' this delay--mighty
sick. I don't know as I much blame Shaffer--if he did come up here
alone."

"Well, believe me," snarled Ridley, "if he did or if he didn't, it
ain't done him no good. He couldn't get into that shaft--no, sir."

"Why couldn't he?"

"'Cause after you fellers went that time, I pulled up the rope and
hid it. And no man of your heft or Shaffer's would risk his neck on a
lariat down that dog-awful hole," and Ridley chuckled.

"I declare!" exclaimed Mudd with admiration.

"When your Uncle Hank loses a point in the game, he's asleep or
smothered or something. Shaffer may be up here; but he ain't got down
that hole, you may be sure."

"Well, then----"

"And this ain't no place for us right now. Them fellers will be waiting
back in that ravine, ready to ride out and get us if we durst to come
back. We got to light out this way, make a big detour, and if things
shape up right we'll sneak back to the basin here from the other side.
That's all we can do. Come on, Mudd."

He jerked around his lathered horse and headed him right into the gulch
through which Oriole had come in reaching the brim of the great basin.
The outlaws were between her and the home trail!




                             CHAPTER XXIV

                         THE TWINS IN TROUBLE


What should Oriole do? The question fretted her not a little.

Across the basin between the three rounded hilltops were the party from
the Three-bar Ranch--Mr. Langdon of their number she was sure. They
waited for the two outlaws to return and hoped to catch them. At least,
that was what Hank Ridley and his partner believed.

Instead of remaining anywhere near the Three Sisters, however, the two
bad men were pushing their wearied horses down the side canyon toward
the lower plains--indeed they were heading back toward the Langdon
Ranch and by a much shorter route than that by which they had reached
this point in the foothills.

Of course it was not really their intention to return to the ranch.
Oriole was sure of that. Why, they had been recognized and fired at and
the Three-bar boys would apprehend them on sight as horse thieves! The
girl had heard enough since coming West to know that the stealing of
horses was a crime all but unforgiveable by the ranch people.

But she was very curious to know what the two would do--where they
intended to go. It was plain that they had given up looking for Shaffer
at this time. And she, herself, had almost forgotten him because of
this greater excitement.

She climbed into Molly's saddle after a few moments and started
after the two men. She had come up this path beside the boisterous
water-course and on the stones and hard ground she knew Molly had left
scarcely a mark. So she did not believe Ridley and Mudd would suspect
her presence.

As for the noise Molly made--the clatter of her little hoofs--as Oriole
could not hear the hoofs of the outlaws' horses, she knew the men could
not know that she was following them.

Fascinated by the adventure, the girl pushed on. She really followed
the two men by sight, every now and then catching a glimpse of them
below her. As they had no suspicion of her presence they did not look
back; so she got down into the bottom of Squaw Canyon behind them
without revealing her presence.

[Illustration: ORIOLE FOLLOWED THE TWO OUTLAWS.]

Once away from the noisy stream, however, the girl was wise enough to
follow much farther behind the two outlaws than before. Although their
mounts appeared to be pretty well winded from their hard gallop through
the upland basin, she did not wish to run a race with them on Molly.
Molly was spirited, but she was no racehorse.

As the canyon bed sloped to the south, Oriole was riding above the
outlaws all the way, and glimpsed them often, when even half a mile
ahead. Thus they came to the mouth of Squaw Canyon--at least, Hank
Ridley and Mudd came to the place where it debouched upon the plain.
Oriole saw them pull up their mounts sharply, and she stopped Molly.

She was hidden behind a clump of brush, if the men looked back. If they
were so frightened by what they saw out on the plain that they rode
back, _that_ was a different matter. She looked about quickly for some
more secure hiding place if need arose.

She discovered this easily. The chaparral could hide Molly and her
rider very nicely indeed. All the girl had to do was to back the pony
into the brush until the outer fringe of the herbage closed before them
both.

Oriole continued to sit in the saddle and peer through at the two men.
They did not make a move that the girl did not mark. She was on the
_qui vive_ every moment.

Hank Ridley and his companion, however, did not turn back. They had
halted it seemed for discussion only. Oriole saw them peering ahead and
gesticulating excitedly. Then they set spurs to their horses and, jaded
as they were, the animals sprang ahead and the two swept quickly out of
sight.

Oriole did not hesitate. There was something down there that she wanted
to see. Some strange happening was afoot in which she felt a keen
interest.

"Go on, Molly! Go on!" she urged her pony. "I want to know what those
bad men are doing. I feel sure they cannot be up to anything good."

Just what the two "bad man" had seen beyond the confines of the canyon
walls certainly would have astonished Oriole quite as much as it had at
first surprised Hank Ridley and his mate.

Urged by the fretting Teddy Ford, the lazy old pony, Blooey, was
drawing the phaeton toward the canyon at a more than ordinary brisk
pace, while Sadie Brown on a fiery little mustang was riding round and
around the phaeton to keep from getting too far ahead of the twins and
their driver. Teddy's repugnance at being commandeered for this job
was plainly visible in the expression of his freckled face.

George Belden and his party had disappeared in some direction--Teddy
and Nurse Brown did not know where. The twins were enjoying the ride
immensely, for Teddy got more speed out of old Blooey than ever Oriole
had. But sitting in the jouncing phaeton did not suit the fancy of the
older boy in the least.

At the sudden appearance of Hank Ridley and Mudd at the head of the
canyon trail, Teddy awoke. The very men they thought were the horse
thieves, and whom they had set out to head off! They certainly had
headed them off, all right. But what to do about it, now they were face
to face with the two rascals?

Perhaps Sadie Brown was equally disturbed by this question. But she did
not confer with Teddy. She spurred forward to meet the two men. She had
a pistol in her saddle holster, and although she did not draw it, its
presence perhaps gave her confidence.

"Hey! where are you two men going?" demanded the woman, drawing her
restive mustang suddenly across the path of Ridley and his mate.

"Howdy, Sis' Brown," grinned Ridley. "You anxious about our healths, I
don't doubt. Well, we're on our way----"

"To jail. I know that," snapped the vigorous young woman. "But I want
to know what you are headin' for directly?"

Hank had not stopped his horse. He rode close to the woman, still
grinning. Suddenly his free hand shot out and he snatched from her
saddle holster the pistol in which she had placed so much confidence.

"Give me that!"

She fought him for a moment, trying to tear the weapon out of his
hand. Ridley laughed, wrenched himself free, and spurred his horse
aside. Sadie Brown almost tumbled from her saddle. Both men roared with
laughter.

"You always was a reg'lar wildcat, Sis' Brown," declared Ridley. "But I
reckon I done pared your claws this time."

"I--I'll----"

"Save your breath to cool your soup," said Ridley rudely. "That'll be
about all from you."

"When Harvey Langdon and the boys hear about this----"

"He'll have something else to think of, Sis' Brown, when he does hear,"
snarled Ridley.

"What do you mean?" cried the woman.

Ridley said over his shoulder to Mudd: "Go get 'em! Knock that kid on
the head if he tries to interfere. Git!"

Mudd spurred his horse toward the pony phaeton. Sadie Brown suddenly
shrieked:

"Look out, Teddy Ford! They mean to hurt the twins! Run!"

Run with Blooey! Not a chance--and Teddy knew it. Mudd reached the
phaeton in half a minute. Sadie Brown tried to wheel her horse and
follow.

"No, you don't! You'll take a word to Harvey Langdon from me. If he
knows what's best for him he'll call all hands off Mudd and me. We
won't hurt the kids if he takes his men out of the hills back yonder
and gives us four days free. Then he'll find the twins all right. I'll
leave word at that old shack where you was fishing. The twins will be
safe, but he'll never find 'em if he don't do as he's told. Get me?"

"He'll put you both in jail, Hank Ridley!" cried Miss Brown wildly.

"You do like I say!" commanded the man in a most ugly fashion.

He had caught the bridle of her horse in one hand. Now he gave the
fiery animal a cut with his quirt. The creature began to buck and
sunfish in a fashion to unseat the most nimble rider.

"Now look out for yourself!" cried Ridley, and let the bridle free.
Sadie Brown was pitched over the mustang's head and came down on all
fours. The pony ran snorting from the scene.

Laughing cruelly, the outlaw rode after his mate. Mudd had reached the
phaeton. Teddy had no warning of his intention. Mudd rode close to the
carriage and, suddenly seizing the boy, toppled him off the seat.

Myron and Marian screamed. Teddy was too angry to say anything. He had
no means of defense but his fists, and he picked himself up hastily,
determined to use them.

He was given no chance. Having seen to Sadie Brown's disaster, Hank
Ridley rode after his partner in crime.

"Grab one of the kids, Mudd!" he shouted. "I'll take the other."

Almost as he spoke each outlaw swept a child from the phaeton and
spurred their mounts off to the east, each holding a twin before him on
the saddle. Myron and Marian shrieked their alarm. But they were out of
earshot before either Sadie Brown or Teddy Ford were fairly upon their
feet again.

The nurse and the boy ran together in panic and clung to each other,
watching the outlaws ride away with the twins.

"Oh! what will become of them?" gasped the woman, quite losing her
usual confidence.

"That Ridley won't dare really to hurt 'em," declared Teddy, but his
voice was very shaky.

"I don't know. See what he did to me. He is a dangerous man."

"He will get into awful trouble if he hurts Myron or Marian. He knows
that. Harvey Langdon is a bad one to have get after you."

"I guess _you_ know that, poor fellow," said the nurse, with some
sympathy. "And I wish Harvey was right here."

"Ain't nobody here--nor back at the house," said Teddy, shakingly.

"Not even that George Belden," added Sadie Brown vigorously. "That
fellow never _is_ around when he's wanted."

"Well, it isn't the foreman's fault this time," said the boy. "I wonder
where those scoundrels intend to carry the twins?"

"I don't know," returned Miss Brown, limping. "And I can't catch my
pony. I've twisted my ankle somehow falling off. Just think of that
fellow making me pull leather that way!"

She seemed as angry about her unseating as about anything else. She
stared after the disappearing outlaws, and shook her gloved fist at
them.

It was just at this point that Oriole rode out of the mouth of the
Squaw Canyon and spurred Molly down upon the stationary phaeton and
the bereft nurse and Teddy. At first she did not miss the twins at all.

"What is the matter with you?" cried the girl, excitedly. "Did you see
that horrid Ridley and Mudd? Did they ride this way?"




                              CHAPTER XXV

                           NATURE'S WONDERS


Teddy Ford did not stop to answer Oriole. He was running to head off
the mustang that had thrown Miss Brown. It was left to the latter to
explain to the excited girl what had happened.

"The twins?" gasped Oriole. "They've stolen Myron and Marian?"

"Those fellows will wish they had been hung before they did it,"
groaned Nurse Brown, limping to the phaeton to sit down. "And now I
can't ride--nor anything!" she added with much emphasis.

Oriole was horrified. She saw the two men in the distance, and
the thought that they were carrying off the Langdon twins almost
overpowered her. What had already happened to the twins in the East
when Sadie Brown was taking them to visit their grandparents had made
Mr. Langdon very fearful for their safety. With these two scoundrels
deliberately running off with Myron and Marian, the girl knew that
their father would be alarmed to the point of desperation.

There was no use in saying Hank Ridley and his mate would not dare
injure the children. No knowing what two such thorough-going villains
would do. They were using the twins as a means to keep Langdon and his
punchers out of the hills for a certain time. And Oriole instantly
realized what that was for.

In four days Ridley hoped to get to the old prospect-hole, so often
mentioned, bring up from its depths whatever was hidden there, and then
make his escape, with Mudd, out of the country. Just what had become
of Shaffer was a matter for supposition. But Oriole had heard Ridley's
speech about the third "bad man," and she believed that Shaffer would
be unable to get possession of the chest of silver alone--if that
really was what the men had hidden up there near the Three Sisters.

"My dear!" cried Oriole at last, "we can't let them run away with the
children. Poor Marian and Myron! They----"

"How you going to stop them, you foolish girl?" snapped Sadie Brown,
nursing her ankle that now pained her exceedingly. "_I_ can't go after
them."

"But I can," Oriole cried.

"I think not! They'd shoot you or something."

"Oh, no! I'm sure they would only try to frighten me. And maybe they
will only frighten Marian and Myron."

"That boy's caught that little rascal of a horse. But I can't ride him
now," groaned Miss Brown.

Oriole turned to see Teddy scrambling into the saddle, and at once
he urged the pony toward the phaeton. Oriole shouted to him as he
approached:

"What are you going to do, Teddy?"

"I'm going after Hank Ridley. The scoundrel! Maybe he will hurt those
poor little kids."

"Never, Teddy! You don't believe that?" cried Oriole, and started Molly
at a canter to keep up with the horse Teddy rode.

"Don't know what they'll do. We want to know where they go, anyway, so
as to tell Harvey Langdon."

"I'm--I'm afraid of what they may do to us if they know we are chasing
them," gasped Oriole.

"Huh! So'm I," rejoined Teddy with his usual grin. "Don't think you've
got all the fright in the world inside you. I'm just as scared of those
fellows as I can be. But I've got to know what they do with the twins."

"You are braver than I am," confessed Oriole.

"Not much I ain't. But Harvey Langdon will want to know--and the twins
were with me in that cart when Hank and Mudd grabbed them."

"That doesn't make you to blame," declared the girl. "Brownie, of
course, was in charge."

"She is only a woman," said Teddy, with some scorn. "Grown-up women
often have hysterics or something when anything like this happens. I'm
glad you're not grown up, Oriole."

"What would you do if I were?" she asked curiously.

"I'd send you back, quick enough," replied Teddy with conviction.
"Girls aren't as bad as women--at least, you are not, Oriole. But don't
you squeal and take on if anything happens."

"I'll try not," she returned meekly. "But you are not going to come to
close quarters with those bad men, are you?"

"How can I tell what we'll have to do? Anyway, you keep back. If they
grab me, you turn around and beat it back to the ranch and tell all
about it--and where we followed them to. You understand?"

"Oh, yes, Teddy. But I hope you won't get into any danger--not right up
close to those men."

"You needn't fret. I'm not looking for trouble," he declared. "And as
you ride keep your eyes peeled for them."

Oriole was too excited to take him to task for his slang on this
occasion. The situation was fraught with too much peril for the girl
to think of anything but the twins' abduction and their own attempt
to follow the kidnapers. All the time Molly was carrying her over the
plain she was imagining the most awful accidents happening to little
Myron and Marian.

They might easily be dropped by the kidnapers--maybe fall under the
hoofs of the men's horses! That Ridley and Mudd would actually beat the
children or maltreat them, did not seem so probable. It would do the
outlaws no good to be cruel to the children. But an accident to one or
both of the twins would be quite possible while the men were riding
away so recklessly.

Ridley and his mate were long since out of sight. But Teddy had taken
careful note of the direction the abductors had followed. Nor could the
trail of their mounts be easily missed. He and Oriole did not swerve
from the direct course to that gap in the foothills beyond which the
two men had urged their wearied steeds.

The mounts ridden by Teddy and Oriole were much fresher than those of
Ridley and Mudd. Undoubtedly the latter had been in the saddle most of
the night, and it was now past noon. The pony Sadie Brown had ridden
was quite as spirited as Molly. The friends were surely making better
time on the trail, and with less effort, than the outlaws.

In half an hour, or even less, they had lost sight of Sadie Brown and
the pony phaeton. They knew the nurse was urging old Blooey toward the
ranch house.

"And I'd lots rather have her driving the old beast than me," declared
Teddy. "He'd out-try the patience of Job, that horse would."

They reached the gap in the hills. Neither Teddy nor Oriole had
ever been so far in this direction before. It was all of five miles
beyond the mouth of Squaw Canyon, and while that place was a familiar
picnicking ground to the people of the Langdon Ranch, this valley into
which Teddy and Oriole now ventured was quite out of their familiar ken.

"But it goes right up into the hills toward the Three Sisters, just
like the Squaw," the boy declared. "I bet, as I said, Ridley and Mudd
are going back to the basin. You don't know much about the territory up
there----"

"Oh, yes, I do," Oriole interrupted. "I have been up to that place this
very morning."

"You don't mean it?"

She told him in detail of her trip up the side-canyon and what she had
seen in the upland plain. Teddy was deeply interested.

"Then we know just what to expect of Ridley and Mudd. They _are_ horse
thieves."

"I guess they are worse than that. Stealing children is worse," said
Oriole with vigor.

"I suppose so. And they are desperate. We want to look out," said
Teddy, with caution. "I don't see what they are really after, stealing
the twins. Why, the whole country will be aroused. They won't have a
chance to get away."

"They will use little Myron and Marian to buy Mr. Langdon and the other
ranchmen off."

"I suppose that's so. And Ridley hinted as much when he threw Brownie
out of her saddle. I heard him tell her to tell Mr. Langdon that he
would communicate with him about the twins at that cabin we were in the
other night."

"It is plain enough that the man means to win a chance to get at that
prospect-hole, where I am sure he has hidden the silver stolen from the
ranch. Oh, Teddy, if we could only catch them at it!"

"Getting back those twins is the more important job," sighed Teddy.
"Now take great care, Oriole. This is a covert we are riding through
and maybe they are lying in wait for us. You keep back. Don't follow
me too close. And if they grab me, _you_ run!"

Oriole promised with meekness. She felt that Teddy knew more about such
ventures as this than she did, although she did not like the idea of
running away to leave him to the mercy of the kidnapers. Still, he had
not been caught as yet--which was a comfort.

She noticed at once that a deep stream flowed out of this valley into
which they ventured. It did not flow in the direction of the ranch
house, so she had never chanced to see it before. But Teddy said it was
Byson's Creek and that it joined other streams to make the river they
had crossed in coming from Timmins Station.

This creek was deep and strong, and as they advanced along its bank by
a well cleared trail they began to hear the thunder of a heavy fall. By
and by, looking up and ahead as the horses climbed, Oriole beheld the
sun shining through a cloud of spray. Indeed, she exclaimed aloud that
she saw a rainbow.

"Never mind. It won't bite you," growled Teddy. "You look out. Those
fellows will hear you yet."

The way was rough and great trees bordered the stream. In half an hour
they came in full sight of the falls. It was quite fifty feet high--a
wide, foam-fretted stream of water flowing over the edge of a cliff and
dropping sheer, and with a thunderous sound, into the pool beside which
Oriole and Teddy stood.

"Gee!" ejaculated the boy suddenly, "where do we go from here?"

They had actually come to what appeared to be a wall, too steep and too
rugged to be climbed either by man or beast. They must have passed the
two men and the twins. Or, had they?

Above the sound of the falling water Oriole suddenly heard a faint
scream. She looked across the creek, and upward. She knew it to be
Myron Langdon who had called to her:

"Oriole! Oriole! Come!"

"Do you hear that?" demanded Teddy, greatly excited.

"Oh, see!" gasped the girl, pointing.

He understood her gesture although her voice was drowned by the waters.
On the other side of the river, and far up toward the head of the
falls, the two horsemen were climbing by a rocky and steep trail. Myron
was reaching over Hank Ridley's shoulder and screaming at the top of
his voice to his friends below--to Oriole in particular.

In another minute both of the kidnapers were out of sight and the boy
and girl could no longer hear Myron's voice. They stared at each other
in amazement and alarm.

"How did they get there?" demanded Oriole.

"I give it up. I never saw any chance to cross the creek--not even on
horseback," Teddy declared. "And I've been watching for just such a
place all the way up."

"My!" gasped Oriole in wonder, looking again across the deep and angry
flood, "do you suppose they could have flown over?"




                             CHAPTER XXVI

                           AT CLOSE QUARTERS


"I do wish you wouldn't talk like a silly," Teddy said with much
disgust. "Who ever heard the like? How could they fly over that
creek--horses and all?"

Oriole was quite embarrassed. Of course the men could not have flown
over the stream, horses, and twins, and all. But it was a puzzling
thing, to say the least.

"How did they do it, Teddy?" she asked.

"There must be some way across that we missed. You wait here. I will go
back and look," he declared.

He wheeled his mount and quickly disappeared beyond the first screen of
brush. Oriole climbed down to ease Molly's cinches and to let the pony
graze. She looked all about carefully. Right here at the deep pool, at
least, there was no possible ford across the stream. It was a perfect
mystery how the men with the stolen twins had escaped to the other side
of the river.

On this side it was plain that only a very small animal or an insect
could mount the rocky wall down which the stream tumbled. There must be
a way of crossing the stream, or else the kidnapers would not have come
this way. The ravine and its wonderful waterfall was familiar to them
at least.

Teddy was out of sight. Indeed, he was a long time gone it seemed to
Oriole. At any moment she expected to see him appear riding up the
other bank of the creek.

She began to wonder where he was. Had something happened to him? He
could not be lost, of course--not on such a plain trail as that they
had followed through this ravine. Only, so much had happened during the
last few hours that she thought she might expect almost anything to
occur!

While Molly gnawed the short grass in mild contentment, the girl went
closer to the waterfall. Here was a broad flat stone--oh, many yards
across!--which bordered the falls and was some twelve feet above the
surface of the pool into which the great volume of water poured. A fine
spray sprinkled this stone platform all of the time and--yes!--what was
this? These marks made by tiny muddy rivulets on the stone?

"Goodness me!" gasped Oriole. "They look just like horses' hoofs. They
are! What can they mean? Molly hasn't been here. Or that creature Teddy
is riding. Surely----"

She raised her eyes and stared up into the dancing rainbow in the mist.
Beyond it they had seen the two men and the twins riding out of sight
on the opposite side of the falls.

"Goodness me!" gasped Oriole again. "It can't be!"

Yet she was positive it was. She had made a most wonderful discovery.
There could be no doubt of it.

In this wonderful country she knew there must be many marvels like this
she had come upon and which the outlaws evidently knew and had often
taken advantage of in traveling through the hills. But to the casual
observer there was no sign--absolutely none--to reveal the secret.

Quickly scrambling across the wet surface of the stone platform until
she was close to the roaring stream of falling water, she pushed
through a green brush-clump--bushes that were continually wet by the
spray of the falls--and so got behind the curtain of water.

There was the path!

Oriole had read of the wonderful Falls Of Niagara, and she knew that
there was such a path as this behind one of those great curtains
of mist and water. This was a smaller wonder; but it was quite as
effective. Without any doubt the two outlaws, carrying the twins with
them and riding their horses, had passed behind the waterfall and so
crossed to the other side of the creek.

Oriole went far enough afoot to see that the passage was perfectly
feasible. The sun shone through the curtain of falling water and
illuminated the shallow cavern sufficiently. She was delighted with her
discovery.

Running back to the mildly startled Molly, she pulled up her cinches
and bitted the pony once more. Then leaping into her saddle she headed
Molly directly into the cloud of spray.

The pony shook her head and snorted; but Oriole touched her with the
whip and made the animal proceed. They came safely into the shallow
cavern behind the falling water. Oriole urged Molly on. The path was
smooth enough and certainly there was no mistaking the right direction!

The stream was only ten yards across. Oriole and her pony came out upon
a mossy rock that was marked deeply by the hoofs of the horses that had
gone before. She urged Molly a little to make her climb the heights.
She stood at last just where the two outlaws had stood--at the point
from which little Myron had screamed to her to come and get him.

She looked back in great glee now, when she heard Teddy's sharp voice
shouting:

"Oriole! Oriole Putnam! Where have you gone now?"

She "hoo-hooed" to him, and finally the boy, who had come riding back
in discouragement, saw her. He halted his mount in amazement and for a
minute could not utter a word.

"Oh, Teddy! can't you fly across the creek--like me?" she called to him.

"Oriole Putnam, you're a story-teller--that's what you are," he
declared confidently. "You know you didn't fly over there."

"Do you think Molly waded over?" she demanded, pleased at the idea of
teasing Teddy, who so often teased her.

"You'd better tell me the truth," he cried. "Hank Ridley might come
back 'most any time. Then you wouldn't want to be over there alone."

"You can come right over behind the waterfall," she told him hastily,
moved somewhat, perhaps, by his threat. "Just try it. It don't wet you
much."

"For a nickel I'd kick myself for not guessing it," shouted Teddy, and
pushed his agitated mount right in behind the bushes and so under the
falling water. In five minutes he was at Oriole's side. They pushed on
up the steep path which they had seen the kidnapers follow.

"That does beat all!" Teddy declared. "Ridley and his gang must know
this country pretty well. Better than Harvey Langdon's punchers do,
maybe. I wonder where George Belden and his bunch went. They must be up
here somewhere, but not just around here I guess. Otherwise we would
have heard something of them."

There was no indication of the presence of anybody at this time. Even
the two outlaws and the stolen children had got so far in advance that
after an hour, and after Teddy and Oriole were quite to the rim of the
interior basin guarded by the Three Sisters, they came neither in sight
nor sound of Ridley and his party.

"We must have lost 'em," complained the boy, stopping his horse where
they would be well screened by bushes. "What do you think, Oriole?"

It was quite nice of him to confer with her, the girl felt. "Teddy
considers that I have some judgment at least," she told herself.

"We may get into trouble if they see us," the girl declared. "But, oh!
I do want to find Myron and Marian. What will Mr. Langdon say if we
cannot tell him just where that horrid Hank Ridley has taken the twins?"

"I'd like better to come across George Belden and his men," the boy
returned. "He must be somewhere in this neighborhood. That is sure. And
perhaps Hank and Mudd don't know a thing about Belden's bunch. Hey!
who's that?"

He pointed off to the west of their standing-place. Something--or
somebody--was moving in a patch of brush. It was not a horseman, or the
rider's torso would have shown plainly above the low bushes.

"Bet it's another bear," suggested Teddy Ford.

"Oh, don't!" gasped Oriole. "I don't want to see another one--so close
as this."

"Ssh! Let's wait. There he is!"

But it was not a bear that appeared at the edge of the bushes. It was
a man, and he pushed aside the fringe of brush carefully and leaned
forward to look down into a hollow that the boy and girl farther up the
rim of the basin could not observe.

"Look at that!" ejaculated Teddy, in great excitement. "It's Shaffer!
Don't you see it is?"

"Oh, surely not!" murmured Oriole.

"Can't be mistaken," said the boy, with great confidence. "I'd know his
mouse-colored hair and that brown coat he wears. Sure, it's Shaffer.
Wonder where his horse is."

"_I_ wonder what he is looking at," said Oriole. "It must be----"

"Come on! Leave your horse here and let's slip down behind that
bowlder," said Teddy quickly. "Then we can see too."

"Oh, Teddy!"

"Pooh! What you afraid of?" demanded the boy. "They will never see us
in the world."

"Who else do you suppose is there?" whispered Oriole, obeying her
friend's suggestion, but in no little trepidation.

"We'll find out. Shaffer knows who it is, I bet. Wonder what's happened
to the horse he rode away from the ranch on."

There was nobody to answer this question. Teddy and Oriole left their
steeds to graze behind the summit of the ridge and crept down the slope
to the back of the big bowlder previously pointed out by the boy.

Shaffer was now out of sight. Suddenly they heard harsh voices, the pop
of a pistol, and next were electrified by the screaming of Myron and
Marian. There was no mistake to be made in the voices of the twins.

"Something is happening!" cried Oriole and started to run around the
bowlder.

But Teddy grabbed her and held her tight.

"Say! have a bit of sense, will you?" he demanded. "Do you want to run
right into trouble? Go easy. They are not hurting the kids. Myron and
Marian are only frightened."

"How do you know?" demanded Oriole fiercely. "Oh! Hear that!"

They could scarcely help but hear it, for it was the clash of men's
voices raised in anger. Although Teddy clung to her, Oriole insisted
upon going around the big rock and into sight of the "rumpus."

Ridley and Mudd had stopped here with the stolen children, evidently
to rest their steeds. At the first appearance of Shaffer, trouble had
commenced. The third outlaw had evidently tried to hold his former
friends up, but the weapon had been knocked out of his hand by Mudd,
who was now struggling with Shaffer most desperately.

Hank Ridley was circling around and around the two fighting men, pistol
in hand, evidently trying to help Mudd but afraid of shooting him if he
attempted to shoot Shaffer. It was a desperate and wicked struggle, and
at another time--when she was under less excitement--Oriole would have
been so horror-stricken that she could not have moved.

But there by a small campfire, over which a pan of bacon was burning,
were little Myron and Marian, and their danger almost wiped other
thoughts from the bigger girl's mind. With a scream she ran out of
cover and dashed toward the twins, who were clinging together near the
outlaws' saddles.

[Illustration: WITH A SCREAM ORIOLE DASHED TOWARD THE TWINS.]

"Oh, Oriole! Oriole!" shrieked Myron, seeing her coming. "Take us away!
Take us home to Brownie and papa!"




                             CHAPTER XXVII

                            THE WRIST WATCH


Teddy Ford had no idea of letting Oriole get into danger alone. When
she ran out of the covert to seize the Langdon twins, he followed her,
brandishing the quirt he had brought along and which was his only
weapon of defense. He was really prepared to attack Ridley with this
whip if it was necessary; but at first the outlaw did not even seem to
see the boy and girl who had followed him from the lowlands.

Mudd and Shaffer were locked in a desperate embrace, staggering and
falling, getting up again still with their arms wrapped about each
other--altogether displaying a hatred for each other that boded nothing
but tragedy. Fortunately neither of the antagonists was now armed.

Oriole ran down to the twins and they clung to her. Teddy placed
himself bravely between that group and the outlaws, gripping the handle
of the quirt so hard that his knuckles were white, and ready to spring
at Ridley if the latter turned on Oriole and the children.

"Beat it!" the boy shrilled to his friend. "Get 'em back of the rock.
Hurry!"

But Oriole did not need this advice. She realized that she must get
Myron and Marian out of sight as quickly as possible. She seized the
twins by their hands and ran with them to the huge bowlder.

It was just before they reached its protection that Ridley turned and
saw them. He shouted a threat and raised the weapon in his hand as
though he intended to fire after the children.

Teddy Ford "saw red." That was too much for him to see done without
effort to defend Oriole and the twins.

"You old scoundrel!" he shouted, "don't you dare shoot them. If you do
Harvey Langdon will get you, sure as you live! Put it down!"

Perhaps the reminder of the ranchman's wrath stayed the rascal's hand.
But he swung on the boy and started toward Teddy as though he intended
attacking him.

The latter was not cowardly in his own behalf. He faced Ridley and
raised the quirt.

"You hit me and I'll give you a taste of this," Teddy declared. He knew
that the longer he stayed the man, the safer Oriole and the twins
would be. They might even reach the horses beyond the hill. "I'll give
you a taste of this old quirt--sure as you live, Hank Ridley!"

"Hear the bantam crow!" sneered the man. "I ought to slam you a few
just to teach you your place--Hey! Look out for him, Mudd!"

He turned to see what the other men were doing. Shaffer had forced Mudd
back against a rock. They fell over it together and their hold was
broken. Both men scrambled to their feet, and Ridley darted forward,
his pistol extended.

Teddy thought the man, Shaffer, was about to be shot. It was an awful
thought, and although he had no more use for Shaffer than he had for
the other outlaws, to see such a tragedy was a terrible thing. He
shrieked as loud as he could:

"Don't shoot him! Don't you do it!"

Teddy's influence would have been slight indeed; but just as he shouted
his warning there appeared from the brush across the glade several
charging horsemen, George Belden at their head.

Shaffer and Mudd came together again, and Ridley lost his chance of
firing at the former. The struggling men did not see the foreman and
his party approaching. But Hank Ridley saw them and acted instantly.

Deserting his two mates, Ridley shot away across the open space and
grabbed up his saddle as he passed the fire. The posse from the
Langdon Ranch was some distance away. The outlaw had time to throw his
saddle on his mount, cinch up, and climb on the horse before Belden or
his men could get him.

Had they been of Ridley's own wicked mind, they might easily have shot
him. Had they known, even, that he had tried to kidnap the Langdon
twins they might have used their weapons in bringing the leader of the
three outlaws to earth. But they contented themselves in capturing
Shaffer and Mudd, while Ridley disappeared into the forest farther down
the basin, evidently aiming for the more easterly of the Three Sisters.

Belden threw himself from his saddle and tore Mudd and Shaffer apart.
He flung them both to the ground, and the desperadoes were so weary
from their battle that, realizing that they were captured and helpless,
they lay there panting.

"Well, here's two of the rascals," said the foreman with satisfaction.
"Never mind Hank. We'll get him later. What was you-all fightin' about?"

Neither Shaffer nor Mudd seemed ready to answer. Belden turned to look
at Teddy, his face breaking into a quizzical smile.

"And here's the kid. I would like to know what under the canopy of the
wide blue sky brought you up here?"

"There's a good deal to tell, Mr. Belden," said the boy seriously. "But
let me go after Oriole and the twins first----"

"Huh? Oriole Putnam and Harvey Langdon's children?"

"Yes. We are all up here. Mudd and Ridley ran away with the twins and
Oriole and I followed them."

"Peep o' day!" ejaculated Belden. "What you talkin' about?"

Teddy did not stop then to explain. He ran around the bowlder, found
the terrified twins and Oriole, and brought them back to prove his
statement. The punchers gathered around, amazed and interested to say
the least. They paid little attention for the time being to Shaffer and
Mudd; but those two rascals knew better than to try to escape.

When the story was told there was a chorus of praise for Oriole and
Teddy from the punchers, as well as an expression of their amazement. A
hunt for horse thieves had turned out to be the capture of at least one
kidnaper. Shaffer was evidently at outs with the other two desperadoes.
And even Mudd was not the principal in the abduction plot.

"Just the same," decided George Belden, "we'll let Hank go for now. I
bet he won't get far on that tired-out horse of his--no, sir! But it is
our duty to take these children--all of 'em--back to the ranch. Sadie
Brown will be near about worried to death over these here twins--no
doubt of that. And if Harvey Langdon gets back to headquarters and
finds his twins stole, he'll near about have a fit."

"What'll we do with these two fellers, George?" demanded one of the
punchers, looking scornfully down upon Shaffer and Mudd.

"Bring 'em along. We can't judge 'em. Let Harvey Langdon do that."

"They ought to stretch hemp," growled another.

"Never mind that now!" commanded the foreman. "We are law-abidin'
citizens, I hope. These fellers will be punished by the courts, no
doubt. Get busy now. Where's your horses, boy?"

Teddy ran and secured both Oriole's pony and the one he had been
riding. One thing he had refrained from speaking of before Belden and
the others. That was the strange path, including the one under the
waterfall, by which they had reached the uplands. And now he warned
Oriole to say nothing about it.

"No use everybody knowing that trick. George and these fellows came by
another way. Only those outlaws and we know the waterfall path, Oriole."

"Oh, Teddy! It shall be a secret--yes? I don't believe the children
will ever remember it."

"If they do they won't make anybody understand unless we chip in and
explain," said the boy cheerfully.

A secret of any kind delighted Oriole. Why not? With often only her own
thoughts for company, the girl had become more imaginative and fanciful
than many children of her age. She had few playthings, too--that is,
playthings like dolls and baby-houses and such toys, which other girls
of her age enjoyed. A veritable secret between Teddy and her was
delightful.

And especially because it was Teddy with whom she shared it. To her
mind Teddy Ford was quite a wonderful creature. Of course, Oriole
Putnam would not for the world have admitted it to Teddy; but she
believed him to be the most remarkable boy alive!

So it was agreed between them. The path behind the curtain of falling
water was to remain a secret--as far as Oriole and Teddy were
concerned. And surely the captured Shaffer and Mudd would be unlikely
to speak of it. Myron and Marian did not mention the wonder. When the
party regained the ranch-house, where Sadie Brown and Mr. Langdon were
just talking over the twins' abduction, it was dusk, the children were
tired and sleepy, and they were put to bed without recounting to their
nurse and father many particulars of the adventure.

It was Oriole who, before she went to bed that night, made a discovery
that was quite startling, to her at least, if not to the ranch family.
When she came to undress and make ready for bed she discovered that her
wrist-watch was gone.

"Oh, my dear!" she cried, running to Sadie Brown, "I've lost it--that
dear watch that Myron gave me last New Year's eve."

"Why, Oriole, don't you think you may have mislaid it?" asked Nurse
Brown.

"No, no! I lost it up there in the hills--I know I did. I know just
where I looked at it last. I am sure. It was while we stood behind that
big bowlder and George Belden and the other men rode up and captured
those two bad men. Yes! I remember looking at it then."

"But you don't really know you left it there," said the nurse.

"Well, I'm sure it was gone when I reached home. Yes! right up there it
was lost, for Teddy and I washed our hands in a pool of water before
we rode away from that spot. My watch was gone then, or I would have
noticed it on my wrist and taken it off before washing my hands. I
always do."

"Well, it is too bad. But it is too far away for you to go back and
look for it."

"Oh! I don't want to lose that pretty watch," complained the girl.

"Nothing can be done about it to-night, child," said the woman. "We'll
see to-morrow."




                            CHAPTER XXVIII

                         SHALL ORIOLE BE TOLD?


The pretty gold wrist watch that Oriole had lost was of course a
more important subject of thought to her than to anybody else around
the Three-bar Ranch. Naturally Nurse Brown and the father of the
twins considered the loss and recovery of Myron and Marian much more
important than the matter of Oriole's watch.

Mr. Langdon did not overlook the part Oriole and Teddy had played in
the recovery of the twins. Although they might not have been able
alone to have captured Myron and Marian from the desperadoes, the fact
remained that the young folks had bravely followed the abductors of the
children, thereby showing good sense and great bravery.

"Such a plucky girl I never did see," Nurse Brown remarked, of Oriole.

"We could look for something like that from her," declared the
ranchman, with enthusiasm. He knew Oriole of old. "And I want to state
as my opinion that that boy Ted Ford deserves commendation."

"I've been telling you that, Harvey Langdon," said the plain-spoken
nurse. "He ain't anything like what you used to say he was. Maybe he
came here like an outcast; but just because he hadn't any friends
didn't make him a thief.'

"Well, I have admitted I might have been mistaken in the first place,"
rejoined the man. "You needn't keep rubbing it in, Sadie Brown."

"I don't believe he had anything to do with the stealing of your
silverware," she declared.

"Neither does Oriole. And from something Ching Foo let drop, I think he
thinks Teddy never did it. But whoever it was----"

"Why don't you put these two rascals you have in the pen to the
question?" demanded Sadie Brown.

"Who do you mean--Mudd and Shaffer?"

"Yes. Oriole said to me once that she believed Hank Ridley and his
chums knew about the silverware. Hank would never tell; but these other
two are weaklings."

"Good idea," agreed Harvey Langdon.

That was in the evening of this exciting day. By morning other things
occurred that for the time put the matter of the stolen silver plate
out of Mr. Langdon's mind. And naturally the loss of Oriole's wrist
watch seemed to the ranchman's mind a very small thing indeed.

One of the boys rode in from town and brought the mail bag. Ching Foo
brought it into the breakfast room after Oriole and the twins had been
excused from the table and had run out to the corral to discuss the
adventures of the day previous with Teddy.

The first letter that the ranchman drew from the mail-bag occasioned
him more excitement than Sadie Brown had seen him express over a
missive for some time. She neglected her egg to watch him open the
letter. He scanned it in a moment, then looked at her across the table.

"It was the _Ellerton_!" he exclaimed.

"Yes? So glad to know it. But I don't get you, Harvey Langdon. _What_
was the _Ellerton_--and what _is_ the _Ellerton_?" demanded the brusque
nurse.

"That was the name of the ship that collided with the _Helvetia_. The
name of the sailing ship they think picked up Oriole's mother."

"Oh! My good land!" ejaculated Nurse Brown.

"Yes. Chapman says here it is positively the three-masted ship
_Ellerton_. She is a trading ship and was bound for the South Seas
by the way of the Cape of Good Hope. He has traced her as far as
Papiette. She was reported from there. And listen! She may now be
somewhere between Honolulu and San Francisco."

"Gracious!" murmured the nurse again.

"Of course," said the ranchman, much perturbed, "we don't know that
Mrs. Putnam is even aboard that ship. But we have reason to believe
that at one time she was on board of the _Ellerton_. Chapman says
here----" and he looked at the letter again and read aloud:

    "'Owner and commander, Captain Nathan Grimsby. Mrs. Grimsby sailed
    with him. They are New Jersey people--hail from Barnegat. If Mrs.
    Putnam was picked up by the _Ellerton_, and none of the other
    passengers of the _Helvetia_ was saved by the sailing vessel, the
    Grimsbys might have kept her with them.'"

"That is what Chapman says. It sounds reasonable."

"But shall we tell Oriole?" gasped Nurse Brown, going right at the root
of the matter in her usual confident way.

The ranchman looked almost frightened. He shook his head hastily.

"I do not dare," he said in a low tone. "Not I! Would _you_ want to
take the chance of raising her hopes about her mother, then, perhaps,
have them prove to be unfounded?"

"Now, Harvey Langdon!" cried Sadie Brown, "you are not going to drag me
into any such mess. No, sir. I won't decide for you. And I won't say a
word to Oriole."

"I guess you've answered your own question," sighed Mr. Langdon. "Just
as you shrink from speaking to Oriole about it, so do I. And I go
beyond that."

"What's that?" queried the nurse in curiosity.

"I don't know that I want to tell her at all. She is happy here. And
the twins love her. I don't know what I should do without her myself
now. Don't you see, Sadie, if her mother does appear we are likely to
lose our Oriole?"

"The land's sake! I suppose so," agreed the nurse, nodding.

"Well!"

"Well?" returned the woman.

"It isn't well at all!" burst out Mr. Langdon. "At any rate, I won't
tell Oriole until we are sure about her mother. The poor woman may not
be alive after all. But I will get somebody in 'Frisco to keep in touch
with the water-front news, and learn all about the _Ellerton_ and her
company the moment she arrives."

"I don't see what else you can do, Harvey," rejoined the woman. "It'll
be a wrench, I will say, to have Oriole taken from us. She is the
smartest girl I ever saw--and as brave as she can be. See how she went
after Ridley yesterday when he carried off Myron and Marian."

"That was foolhardiness," declared the man. "But it shows the sort of
heart the child has. No. We'll not tell her now. Not until we are sure.
And then----"

He shook his head and returned to the letter from Boston. That he was
deeply troubled he plainly showed. But Oriole did not notice this, or
Nurse Brown's sharp glances at her, when she returned from the corral.
She was eager to know what was going to be done about Hank Ridley, the
remaining kidnaper who had not been caught.

"I tell you what, child," said Nurse Brown, "Harvey Langdon can't send
half his help--'specially when the ranch is short-handed--after that
miserable cur. No, sir. But he will send word across the hills for the
sheriff of Pontette to be on the watch for Hank. And of course we will
all look out for him down here. He won't dare go back Shoshone Gap way,
for they know him there, and Mr. Belden's heard tell that he's wanted
there for a hold-up."

"He is the one who stole Mr. Langdon's silver plate--and those other
two men helped him," declared the girl positively.

"Mebbe so. But Shaffer and Mudd won't admit it. They are sore on each
other a pile--no doubt of that. I suppose Shaffer tried to double-cross
Mudd and Ridley in some way."

"He went up there alone trying to get at the silver chest they hid. And
he couldn't do it because Ridley had taken and hid the rope they used
to lower themselves into the prospect-hole where the silver is."

"For the land's sake!"

"Yes," Oriole said positively. "Teddy Ford and I have figured it all
out. I am going to tell Mr. Langdon. I am sure his silver is up there
somewhere near the Three Sisters."

But although she and her boy friend were so very sure of this, Oriole
could not entirely convince the grown folks of the Langdon ranch that
the Ridley gang had been the thieves who, the fall before, had removed
the chest of silver from the house. Even Ching Foo, if he suspected the
guilt of Hank and his mates, was not willing to state this as a fact
and with confidence.

"Guess the truth never will be brought to light, Oriole," sighed Teddy,
when they were talking it over. "And Hank Ridley will get clean
away--sure. I don't care what Brownie says."

"Well, it is a fact, I suppose," agreed Oriole, "that Mr. Langdon can't
give the time necessary to it now, nor let Mr. Belden or Sol Perkins
go after that bad man. But you'd think, seeing the silver was worth so
much money, he'd show more interest."

"Shucks!" grumbled Teddy, "that's easy to see. If he really believed
what you told him about the silver he'd find time to chase Hank Ridley
all right. He isn't convinced--that's what is the matter," and the boy
seamed quite gloomy about it.

"I really don't think you do Mr. Langdon justice, Teddy," murmured
Oriole, shaking her curls.

"Oh, yes, I do!"

"I am quite sure you don't," repeated the girl.

"Huh! I'd like to know why not?"

"You don't consider that he is much more interested in the safety of
the twins than in anything else."

"Gee! Er--I mean--well, whatever it _is_ I mean," stammered Teddy
finally, grinning. "Anyhow, I see your point, Oriole."

"Well, then?"

"But just the same, if he believed the silver was there somewhere and
that I hadn't anything to do with his losing it, he'd stir up things a
little faster. Oh, yes, he would!"

Of course, as Oriole very well knew, Teddy was particularly sensitive
on this point. But she really wished with all her heart that Mr.
Langdon would head a searching party, the object of which was to find
the stolen silver plate.




                             CHAPTER XXIX

                              OF COURSE!


It was true that these were very busy times around the Langdon Ranch.
The two horse thieves who had been captured, partly by the aid of
Oriole and Teddy, had been sent to town to be held for the sitting
of the court. Whether Hank Ridley, the chief outlaw, would ever be
captured or not was a question. At this time of year all the ranchmen
were engaged in much more necessary work even than the running down of
desperadoes.

Oriole was vastly disappointed that circumstances had not proved her
own and Teddy's contention correct--that Ridley and his companions
were the ones who had robbed the ranch house of the chest of silver.
But she had other important matters to think of too; and one of these
topics of thought was the loss of her wrist watch. She considered that
watch, which Myron had given her at the New Year's Eve party, her
most valuable possession. The gold heart-shaped locket and chain that
had been Marian's present at the same time, Oriole only wore on very
especial occasions, but the watch had been her constant companion while
riding over the ranch.

As nobody seemed to consider its loss of much importance save Oriole
herself, she soon stopped talking about it. But the determination grew
in her mind to make an effort to recover the watch. Why not? She knew
the way to the spot where it had been dropped--knew the way perfectly.
Ridley had dashed away from that place at top speed. Indeed, if he was
still in the basin he would not likely be anywhere near the place where
his friends had been captured.

The girl was viewing the problem quite calmly. Should she risk
continuing what she had begun? or should she retreat without
accomplishing anything? It needed some courage to decide as Oriole did
decide, after all.

"There's nothing to be afraid of in the daytime," thought Oriole.

She repeated this to herself a score of times. There might be other
bears in the foothills besides the one George Belden had killed; but
Oriole knew now that bruin was a timid beast--more timid, indeed, than
the trout she and Teddy had caught.

It was true, however, that the girl did not say anything to her
friends about her intention. She still rode about the ranges without
molestation; and if she could push Molly to the confines of the
Langdon's pastures, why could she not climb to the heights by one of
the wild paths she knew of?

Therefore, only two days after the twins were brought home in triumph,
Oriole saddled Molly soon after their early breakfast and cantered
away across the range without saying a word even to Teddy about her
destination.

"Of course he'd try to stop me," she told herself, in some glee,
feeling that she was being quite independent for once. "They all think
that a girl is sort of _tame_."

However that might be, Oriole was confident that she could take care
of herself. She knew the way to the heights where Shaffer and Mudd had
been captured. And, indeed, she was eager to follow that secret trail
again--the path that led behind the curtain of falling water in the
little known ravine.

Molly was two hours in bringing her to this spot. The girl was assured
of the way, and found no obstruction to her course when she ventured
behind the falling water. Molly snorted and shied a little; but Oriole
forced the pony on and was soon climbing the wet rocks on the far side
of the falling stream.

"I'm sure _that_ was no trouble," she told the pony. "You needn't snort
so and shake your head. Maybe I won't make you go back the same way. It
is shorter, but the path Mr. Belden showed us is safer, I s'pose."

In half an hour Oriole arrived at the rim of the huge basin in which
thousands of cattle might have grazed (and it was free grass) had the
paths to the height not been so treacherous. Horses might be driven
here in the summer, but never steers in any number. Horses are more
surefooted than heavy cattle.

There was the big rock beside which Oriole remembered standing with the
Langdon twins and looking at her watch. Off to the left was the spot
where Shaffer and Mudd had wrestled until the Langdon ranch cowboys
made their appearance and captured them. She urged Molly to descend the
slope to the bowlder.

There she jumped off and began to search in the grass for the lost
watch. It had not rained since her former visit, and surely nobody
would have found the watch. Who, indeed, would have been in this
vicinity since the hour Oriole had last seen the place?

She had been convinced that the escaping Hank Ridley would not
linger near this side of the basin. Oriole did not dream that the
prospect-hole she had heard mentioned on two occasions by the
desperadoes was near this spot where she now stood.

She knelt down and searched to the very roots of the grass for the
pretty wrist-watch which she had so much prized. It _must_ have been
dropped here--or near here. Over yonder was the pool of water where she
had washed her hands before mounting again for the journey back to the
ranch. She trailed across the meadow to that pool, searching for the
dropped trinket all the way.

When she had washed her hands the watch was gone. Of course it was, or
she would have carefully removed it. And she knew that she did not take
it off her wrist and carelessly lay the watch down.

While she stood marveling beside the pool Molly suddenly snorted, and
Oriole turned to see the pony jump aside.

"What _is_ the matter with her?" thought the girl. "Can it be a snake?"

Oriole shivered at the thought. Once she had heard the whir of a
rattle-snake's warning, and she knew that the sting of the creature
was usually deadly. Horses, cattle and sheep, as well as mankind, were
fearful of the rattler.

Nevertheless the girl ran toward her mount. She carried her quirt in
readiness. If there was a snake coiled there she meant to strike at it
with the whip. Teddy had often told her what to do when she saw one of
the reptiles.

But she saw nothing on the ground to frighten the pony. Indeed, Molly
was looking up, not down, and backing away from the huge bowlder that
was fringed all about its top like an Indian's head-dress with bushes
that were rooted in crevices in the rock.

"Goodness!" gasped Oriole suddenly, and she backed away too.

No wonder Molly was frightened! If that was a snake, it was a monster.
Down the gray rock was creeping a gyrating body possibly a couple of
inches in diameter, and goodness knew how many feet long!

"For the land's sake!" ejaculated Oriole, repeating one of Sadie
Brown's favorite expressions. "It isn't a snake. _It's a rope._"

And that is exactly what it was. Down from the summit of the bowlder,
through the fringe of bushes which surrounded its bald top, was being
lowered a strong rope. Of course, there was little mysterious about
it--even to Oriole's mind.

There was somebody up there letting down the rope. That the hidden
summit of the huge rock made an excellent hiding place there could be
no doubt. The girl jumped to the most natural conclusion without any
hesitation.

"It's that Ridley!" she whispered. "That is where he hid the rope from
Mudd and Shaffer! And he's dared come back to this side of the basin to
get it. Oh, dear! if somebody was only here--even Teddy! What shall I
do?"

There was still time for the girl to get away without Ridley being
aware of her presence. But she could never ride to the ranch house for
help, and bring a party here before the outlaw got away with the rope.
No, indeed!

"He is going right to that prospect-hole to get the chest of silver,
that is what he is going to do!" she decided. "And I can't stop him.
Oh! I don't dare let him know I have spied on him."

She seized Molly's reins and hurried the pony to the nearest thicket
that offered shelter for both her and the pony. From this spot she
peered out at the descending rope. It coiled itself roughly at the foot
of the rock--almost on the spot where Oriole had hoped to find her
wrist watch.

"And maybe that mean old Ridley will find my watch," she thought
anxiously. "Then I'll never see it again."

But now her interest in the watch was less than that she felt in the
rope and its manipulator. For in a very few moments she saw that her
suspicions were correct. It was Hank Ridley who had lowered the rope
from the crown of the bowlder.

He appeared between the low brush hedge up there, and allowed the end
of the rope to fall. Then, backing around, he came down the bowlder
with great care. It was no easy descent.

Oriole wished she had some means of holding him prisoner up there. But
there was no possibility of her doing that. She had no weapon with
which to frighten Ridley. And, even if she had had a pistol, what would
the outlaw be doing with his own firearm which she could very plainly
see was in its holster at the back of his belt?

She wondered, too, where the rascal had left his horse. And where was
the prospect-hole to which she believed the outlaw would take the long
rope he had now secured?

"But I mean to find that out," thought Oriole with confidence. "I don't
care how far it is away."

Ridley scrambled finally to the ground. From a clump of bushes he
picked up his hat and coat. Then he coiled the heavy rope into a neat
skein, tying it about the middle. When he shouldered it the rope
dragged on the ground, and it seemed about all that he could carry.

"How will he ever make his horse carry such a weight?" murmured the
girl, who knew something of the nature of cow ponies by this time. They
do not like to be made beasts of burden. "I just wonder if that old
mine _is_ so very far away. That's where he is going, for sure."

Ridley started away toward the north. He did not seem, after all, to
be looking for his horse. Oriole tied Molly in the scrub patch and
followed Ridley. She could do this safely, for the outlaw would not be
likely to look over his shoulder while he was dragging that heavy rope.

He entered a piece of wood that covered the easterly slope of the
basin. When he was out of sight Oriole ran forward and entered the
covert at the same place.

The dragged coil of rope made a plain trail for the girl to follow. In
five minutes she came to a tiny clearing where the sod had been scraped
off down to the subsoil of coarse sand and gravel. There were great
mounds, too, of soil and splintered rocks that, she saw at once, had
been brought out of a shaft that gaped in the middle of the patch of
open.

The old prospect-hole!

Of course, she now understood, the shaft would be near by. That was
why Shaffer was lurking in the vicinity when Ridley and Mudd had
appeared with the Langdon twins. Ridley would not have hidden the rope
far away from the old mine, for it was too heavy to carry.

And now what was the man about to do? The troubled Oriole watched
anxiously, wondering all the time if she might not do something to make
it impossible for him to recover the treasure which she believed was
hidden in the bottom of the deep well.




                              CHAPTER XXX

                       THE PROMISE OF THE FUTURE


Oriole was actually in a situation of extreme danger, as well as in
uncertainty of mind. If Hank Ridley found that she was spying on him
the girl knew quite well that the desperado would punish her. He was a
bad man, and he had shown by his attempt to abduct the Langdon twins
that he feared neither the law nor the ranchmen of the vicinity.

Oriole was quite sure that she knew why the fellow was such a menace to
society and why he was taking such chances with the law. She believed,
as did Teddy Ford, that Ridley and his gang had robbed Harvey Langdon
of the chest of silver and that Ridley was willing to take almost any
chance to get the silver out of the country. It was very valuable, and,
now that his companions had been captured, what was to prevent Ridley
from getting all the benefit of the robbery of the ranch house for
himself?

This was enough. Oriole had not to go beyond these facts to be sure
that the man was desperate and that she was in peril.

She might have crept back through the wood, got her pony, and ridden
away at once. She could reach the ranch before nightfall if she had any
kind of luck at all. But, so doing, she knew she would be unable to get
anybody to come up from the ranch until the next morning.

"Meanwhile," the girl told herself with good sense, "this fellow will
drag out the treasure chest and hide it somewhere else, or else get
clear away with it. Maybe he has got pack mules, or something, waiting
for him. No! I just can't leave here till I know what he does with Mr.
Langdon's silver plate."

Being quite unsuspicious of her watchfulness, or of being spied upon
at all, Ridley proceeded to let the rope down into the shaft. Near by
were the rotted timbers of an arrangement by which the original miners
here had raised the dirt and rocks excavated in the prospect-hole. But
across the mouth of the hole was now a comparatively green timber--one
quite probably set here by Ridley and his mates the fall before. Ridley
tied the end of the rope securely to this timber.

Although the rope was not knotted for hand- and foot-holds, Ridley
seemed quite assured of his job when he let himself over the edge of
the shaft. He did not even remove his boots, but braced his feet
against the sides of the well as he went down.

The timber creaked more and more as he descended. Oriole waited and
watched--desiring to go and peer down into the depths, and yet not
daring to. At least, she did not dare until the timber stopped creaking
and the rope gyrating.

"He's down there!" murmured the girl. "Oh! what shall I do now?"

Carefully she crept from the brush and across the opening to the edge
of the deep well. She was wise enough not to thrust her head over the
edge in a way to allow Ridley to observe her from below. Indeed, she
was so much afraid of the man that at first she did not realize that he
was quite in her power.

She was sure Ridley would attach the chest of silver (if it was down
there) to the end of the rope. Then he would climb up and draw the
chest up after him.

"And not a thing can I do then to stop him!" murmured Oriole Putnam.
"If I could only keep him here till I hurried home and told Mr. Langdon
and Teddy----

"Why! that's exactly what I _can_ do," and she uttered this last
statement of fact aloud.

Indeed, she was so suddenly positive of her security that she almost
laughed. She had seen Ridley tie the rope to the strong timber; and
while it was a knot that would not slip, it was one that she could
easily untie!

When she saw this to be the fact she made no delay, but went at the
knot with nimble fingers. Almost instantly a hollow-sounding voice came
from the bottom of the hole:

"Hey! What's doing up there? Get away from that rope!"

A pistol shot followed, and the bullet buried itself in the timber.
Oriole screamed and jumped back. She was dreadfully frightened; but the
knot was only half untied. Should she let the rope alone--let Ridley
climb up by it and escape?

The rope began to shake again. The frightened girl knew that the outlaw
was about to climb up.

But, if he was coming up the rope, he could not use his pistol! The
thought inspired her with sudden courage. She sprang forward again and
fumbled at the knot.

Again the man shouted from the bottom of the hole. His threats did not
achieve their purpose this time, for Oriole succeeded in loosening the
rope. She let it slip through her fingers, and the yell that came up
from Ridley assured her that the coils had fallen upon him with all
their weight.

"There!" gasped Oriole, feeling a confidence and delight that she had
not known before, "I have got that bad man just where he ought to be.
He can't get out, and he can't get the stolen silver out--if it _is_
down there. Now I guess I'll ride home and tell them all what I've
done."

Oriole may have other and quite as thrilling adventures as this here
narrated; for we expect to meet her again in a third volume of this
series entitled, "When Oriole Went to Boarding School." Nevertheless,
she is not likely to feel any greater satisfaction over any
accomplishment than she did when she rode the tired Molly to the corral
gate that evening.

"Where you been all day, Oriole Putnam?" demanded Teddy, running up to
unsaddle the pony. "I bet you'll get it from Harvey Langdon. He and
Brownie don't think you ought to be chasing all over the turnip-patch
alone."

"They aren't going to scold me this time," declared Oriole gleefully.
"Wait till you hear what I've done."

And she was right in this premise. Instead of being scolded she was
highly praised by the ranchman and the nurse--not to say everybody else
about the ranch house. The men were as enthusiastic over Oriole's feat
in capturing Hank Ridley as Teddy was himself.

"And as for that silly George Belden," Nurse Brown said, with apparent
disapproval, "he'd be willing to adopt Oriole right now--if I'd let
him."

It was thus that the brusque Miss Brown let it be known that the
foreman had finally been accepted. Later the twins and Teddy and Oriole
were all guests at the wedding of the nurse and Belden.

Before this happened, however, a posse rode to the basin up by the
Three Sisters and rescued Hank Ridley from the prospect-hole. In
addition, Teddy Ford was lowered into the hole and found there, wrapped
in an old horse-blanket, the chest of table-silver that had been stolen
the autumn before from the Langdon ranch. This recovery not only proved
the case against Ridley and his mates, but it disproved the accusation
that had hung over Teddy for so long.

"That boy has proved his worth around here anyway," Mr. Langdon said.
"I shall be glad to do something for him, and for more reasons than
one. It is not alone my duty, but it will be a pleasure to make it
possible for Teddy to have a fair chance in the world."

Oriole knew that he would not forget this promise, and even Teddy
agreed that Harvey Langdon was "lots better than I thought he was."

There was another thing--a most wonderful thing--that came into Oriole
Putnam's life about this time. Mr. Langdon had not forgotten his
decision to put the case of the _Ellerton_ trading vessel into the
hands of a competent person at San Francisco.

A lawyer's letter came from that city one summer day stating that
the ship from the South Seas had arrived, and that she brought a
passenger--a lady whom the long sea voyage and the care of the
captain's wife had brought back to health almost from the verge of the
grave.

Mrs. Putnam, having seen her husband drowned and believing her little
daughter had shared a similar fate, had been quite a helpless invalid
in the cabin of the _Ellerton_ for months. Mrs. Grimsby, the captain's
wife, had nursed her as though the unfortunate woman were her own
sister. It was so long after the sinking of the _Helvetia_ before the
_Ellerton_ had touched at even a semi-civilized port that her master
did not consider it of any moment to send word to Europe or America of
the salvation of a single passenger from the sunken vessel.

Joy never kills, it is said; and perhaps that is so. At least the
message sent to Mrs. Putnam from the Montana ranch was not likely to
injure the health of Oriole's mother. Two days after the receipt of
the lawyer's letter of explanation a telegram came for Oriole, saying:

    "Leave by overland special to-day for the ranch. Meet me at Timmins
    Station.--Mother."

Oriole laughed and cried alternately at the news. It was dreadful
to know that she would never see her father again. But the thought
that her mother was coming--that dear mother who had always been her
constant companion in years past--filled her heart with a joy that
nothing could dim.

"Poor, poor papa!" she murmured. "I'll surely miss him. But if one of
them had to--to go I'm glad it wasn't mamma."

Oriole could scarcely wait for the hour to arrive when she should start
on Molly for the train. The twins could not go on such a long drive;
but Teddy was to accompany her. And when the girl rode out of the home
acres and took the trail to the railroad everybody about the place
waved or shouted their good wishes--even Ching Foo from the door of his
kitchen.

"Gee! but you are a popular girl, Oriole," said Teddy, "folks like you
around here just about as they did back East, don't they?"

"Folks are awfully good to me," returned the girl, her eyes shining.
"And everything always turns out good for me, too. Just think! I'm
going to see my mother again. I'm going to see _my mother_!"

"Ye-es," chuckled Teddy suddenly. "But you never did find your
wrist-watch."

"That's so. But I don't care. Mr. Langdon has promised me another one
just like it," answered Oriole with a bright smile.


                                THE END

       *       *       *       *       *

    [Transcriber's Note: Inconsistent hyphenation left as printed.]

       *       *       *       *       *

                            BOOKS FOR GIRLS

                         _By_ AMY BELL MARLOWE

                      12mo.  Goth.  Illustrated.


                          THE OLDEST OF FOUR
                         Or Natalie's Way Out

                      THE GIRLS OF HILLCREST FARM
                      Or The Secret of the Rocks

                         A LITTLE MISS NOBODY
                  Or With the Girls of Pinewood Hall

                      THE GIRL FROM SUNSET RANCH
                       Or Alone in a Great City

                          WYN'S CAMPING DAYS
                  Or The Outing of the Go-Ahead Club

                         FRANCES OF THE RANGES
                    Or The Old Ranchman's Treasure

                    THE GIRLS OF RIVERCLIFF SCHOOL
                       Or Beth Baldwin's Resolve


                           THE ORIOLE BOOKS

                   WHEN ORIOLE CAME TO HARBOR LIGHT
                     WHEN ORIOLE TRAVELED WESTWARD


                    (Other volumes in preparation)

                           GROSSET & DUNLAP
                       PUBLISHERS      NEW YORK





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHEN ORIOLE TRAVELED WESTWARD ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


