The Project Gutenberg eBook of A literal translation of the Saxon chronicle
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: A literal translation of the Saxon chronicle

Translator: Anna Gurney

Release date: January 23, 2025 [eBook #75186]

Language: English

Original publication: London: John and Arthur Arch, 1819

Credits: Carla Foust, Charlene Taylor and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LITERAL TRANSLATION OF THE SAXON CHRONICLE ***


  A

  LITERAL TRANSLATION

  OF THE

  SAXON CHRONICLE.

  [Illustration]

  NORWICH:

  PRINTED BY STEVENSON, MATCHETT, AND STEVENSON;

  FOR JOHN AND ARTHUR ARCH, CORNHILL, LONDON.

  1819.




The following version of the Saxon Chronicle was undertaken by a Lady
in the Country, who had only access to the printed Texts. It was far
advanced towards its completion before she was informed, that the
Public was speedily to be indebted to the Rev. Mr. Ingram, for a
Collated Edition of these singularly valuable Annals, accompanied by a
Translation and Notes.

Under the expectation of the appearance of a work so much more complete
in all its circumstances, the present very limited impression is
intended for private circulation, and executed in a form, which, it is
conceived, may render it convenient for reference.




THE

SAXON CHRONICLE.


The island Britain is 800 miles long, and 200 broad, and there are in
this island five nations, English, Britons or Welch, Scots, Picts, and
Romans. The Britons were the first inhabitants of the land; they came
from Armenia, and first settled in the south of Britain; afterwards
it fell out that the Picts came from the south of Scythia, with long
ships, but not many, and they first landed in the north of Ireland,
and they entreated the Scots that they might abide there, and they
would not permit them; but the Scots said to them, We may nevertheless
give you counsel; we know another island eastward of this, there you
may live if you will, and if any withstand you, we will aid you that
you may conquer it. Then the Picts departed, and came to the northern
part of this land, for southward the Britons possessed it, as we said
before. And the Picts took wives of the Scots, on condition that they
should always choose their Royal lineage on the woman’s side, and they
observed this custom long after. And it happened, in the course of
years, that a division of the Scots passed from Ireland into Britain,
and conquered some part of this land, and their leader was called
Reoda; from him they are named the Dælreodi. Sixty years before Christ
was born, Caius Julius, the Roman Emperor, came to Britain with 80
ships. He was at first overcome in a terrible battle, and lost great
part of his army, and he left the remainder of his forces to abide
with the Scots, and went into Gaul, and there he collected 600 ships,
with which he returned to Britain, and at the first onset Cæsar’s
lieutenant, named Labienus, was slain. Then the Britons took large and
sharp stakes, and drove them into the fording place of a certain river,
under the water; this river was called the Thames. When the Romans
discovered this, they would not go over the ford: then the Britons fled
to the wood fastnesses, and the Emperor conquered very many of their
chief towns by great battles, and he passed again into Gaul.


1.

Octavianus reigned 56 years, and in the 42d year of his reign Christ
was born: then astrologers came from the Eastern parts that they might
worship Christ, and the children of Bethlehem were slain in Herod’s
search after him.


3.

This year Herod died, having stabbed himself, and his son Archelaus
succeeded to the kingdom. And the child Christ was brought again out of
Egypt.


6.

From the beginning of the world until this year, five thousand two
hundred years were gone by.


11.

This year Herod, the son of Antipater, received the government of Judea.


12.

Philip and Herod divided Judea into Tetrarchies.


16.

This year Tiberius succeeded to the empire.


26.

This year Pilate received the procuratorship over the Jews.


30.

This year Christ was baptized, and Peter and Andrew were converted, and
James, and John, and Philip, and the twelve Apostles.


33.

This year Christ was crucified, being about 5226 years from the
beginning of the world.


34.

This year St. Paul was converted, and St. Stephen was stoned.


35.

This year the blessed Apostle Peter established a bishop’s see in the
city of Antioch.


37.

This year Pilate slew himself with his own hands.


39.

This year Caius[A] succeeded to the empire.


44.

This year the blessed Apostle Peter established a bishop’s see at Rome.
This year James, the brother of John, was slain by Herod.


45.

This year died Herod, he who slew James one year before his own death.


46.

This year Claudius, second of the Roman Emperors, came to the land of
Britain, and brought under his power the greater part of this island,
he also subjected the Orkney islands to the Roman Empire. This was
in the 4th year of his reign, and the same year was the great famine
in Syria, which is spoken of by Luke, in the book of the Acts of the
Apostles. Then Nero succeeded to the Empire after Claudius: he was near
losing Britain by his inactivity.


47.

The Evangelist Mark began to write his gospel in Egypt.


50.

This year Paul was sent bound to Rome.


62.

This year James, the brother of Christ, suffered martyrdom.


63.

This year the Evangelist Mark died.


69.

This year Peter and Paul suffered martyrdom.


70.

This year Vespasian received the Empire.


71.

This year Titus, the son of Vespasian, slew eleven hundred thousand
Jews in Jerusalem.


81.

This year Titus succeeded to the Empire after Vespasian: he it was who
said that he lost the day in which he did no good.


83.

This year Domitian, the brother of Titus, succeeded to the Empire.


84.

This year John the Evangelist wrote the book called the Apocalypse in
the island of Patmos.


90.

This year Simon Peter the kinsman of Christ was crucified, and John the
Evangelist rested in death at Ephesus.


92.

This year Pope Clemens died.


110.

This year the Bishop Ignatius suffered martyrdom.


114

“Alexander commanded that water should be consecrated.”


116.

This year the Emperor Adrian began to reign.


124.

“Pope Sixtus ordered that the hymn, _Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus_, should
be sung in the Mass service.”


134.

“Pope Telesphorus ordered that the angelic hymn, _Gloria in excelsis
Deo_, should be sung on holy days.”


145.

This year Marcus Antoninus, and Aurelius his brother, took to
themselves the Empire.


189.

This year Severus possessed himself of the Empire, and came into
Britain with an army, and conquered great part of the island by battle;
and then he built a rampart of turf, and a thick wall thereon, from sea
to sea, for a defence to the Britons. He reigned 17 years, and then
finished his days at York, and Bassianus[B] his son succeeded to the
Empire. His other son died. He was called Geza. This year Eleutherus
received the bishoprick of Rome, and held it with glory 15 years: to
him Lucius, King of the Britons, sent letters, and entreated that he
might be made a Christian, and he obtained that which he desired, and
the Britons afterwards remained in the true faith till the reign of
Diocletian.


199.

This year the holy cross was found.


202.

“This year Pope Victor decreed that the feast of Easter should be held
on the Sunday, even as his predecessor Eleutherus had determined.”


254.

“Pope Cornelius removed the bodies of the Apostles by night from the
catacombs, and buried that of Paul in the Via Ostensis where he had
been beheaded, and that of Peter near the place where he had been
crucified.”


283.

This year St. Alban suffered martyrdom.


311.

“St. Silvester, the 23d Pope: in his time, the Council of Nice was
held; also the first Council of Arles, at which Avitianus, Archbishop
of Rouen, was present.”


343.

This year St. Nicholas died.


379.

This year Gratian succeeded to the Empire.

“At this time a Council of 150 Fathers was held at Constantinople under
Damasus, against Macedonius and Eunomius.”


381.

This year the Emperor Maximus assumed the government: he was born in
Britain, and thence he went into Gaul, and there he slew the Emperor
Gratian, and he drove his brother named Valentinian out of the country,
and this Valentinian afterwards gathered together an army, and slew
Maximus, and possessed himself of the Empire. At this time the heresy
of Pelagius spread itself throughout the world.


403.

“This year Pope Innocent sent an epistle to Victricius, Archbishop of
Rouen, and decreed that men should fast on the seventh day, because on
that day the Lord lay in the sepulchre.”


418.

This year the Romans collected all the gold that was in Britain, and
hid some of it in the earth, so that none could afterwards find it, and
some they carried with them into Gaul.


423.

This year Theodosius the younger succeeded to the Empire.


425.

“At this time the series of French Kings began to reign: Pharamond was
the first.”


429.

This year the Bishop Palladius was sent by Pope Celestine to the
Scotch, that he might confirm their faith.


430.

This year Patrick was sent by Pope Celestine to preach baptism to the
Scotch.


431.

“At this time the devil appearing in the form of Moses to the Jews in
Crete, engaged to lead them dry-shod through the sea to the promised
land, and thus, when many had perished, the rest were converted to
Christianity.”


433.

“Pope Celestine--In his time was held the Ephesian Synod of 200
Bishops, against Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople, at which Synod
Cyril Bishop of Alexandria, presided.”


435.

This year the Goths took Rome, and never after did the Romans reign in
Britain. This was about 1110 years from the building of the city. The
Romans reigned in Britain 470 years in all from the first invasion of
Caius Julius.


439.

“Pope Leo sanctioned the proceedings of the synod of Calchedon.”


443.

This year the Britons sent over sea to Rome, and begged for aid against
the Picts, but they obtained none, because the Romans were going
against Ætla, King of the Huns; and then they sent to the Angles, and
asked the same of the Princes of the Angle race.


444.

This year St. Martin died.


448.

This year, at the place where Herod formerly resided, John the Baptist
discovered his head to two monks, who came from the east to pray at
Jerusalem.


449.

This year Martian and Valentinian[C] succeeded to the Empire, and
reigned seven years. In their days Hengest and Horsa, called by
Vortigern King of the Britons to his aid, landed in Britain at the
place which is called Ypwinesfleot (Ebsfleet): they at first assisted,
but afterwards made war upon the Britons. The King commanded them
to fight against the Picts, and they did so, and gained the victory
wherever they came; then they sent to the Angles, and desired them to
send more aid, and told them of the imbecility of the inhabitants,
and of the excellence of this land. Thereupon they sent more forces;
these came from three tribes in Germany; from the Old Saxons, from
the Angles, and from the Jutes. From the Jutes came the men of Kent
and of Wight; this is the people that now dwelleth in Wight, and the
tribe among the West Saxons which is yet called the race of Jutes.
From the Old Saxons came the East, the South, and the West Saxons.
From the Angles (whose country lying between the Jutes and the Saxons,
remained deserted from that time) came the East Angles, the Mid Angles,
the Mercians, and all the Northumbrians: their leaders were the two
brothers Hengest and Horsa, and they were the sons of Wihtgils;
Wihtgils was the son of Witta, Witta of Wecta, Wecta of Woden: from
this Woden the line of our Kings is descended, and that of the
Southumbrian Kings also.

“At this time a synod of 630 Bishops was held at Calchedon against the
Abbot Eutyches and Dioscorus.”


455.

This year Hengest and Horsa fought with King Vortigern, at the place
which is called Ægeles-ford (Aylesford) and Horsa, the brother of
Hengest was slain, and, after this, Hengest and his son Æsc assumed the
government.


457.

This year Hengest and Æsc fought with the Britons at the place called
Creccanford (Crayford) and there they slew four chieftains, and then
the Britons forsook Kent, and fled in great fear to London.


465.

This year Hengest and Æsc fought with the Welsh near Wyppedes-fleote
(Wippedfleet) and they slew twelve Aldermen, all Welsh; and one of
their own Thanes, whose name was Wipped, was killed there.


473.

This year Hengest & Æsc fought with the Welsh, and gained spoils
innumerable, and then the Welsh fled from the English, as they would
from fire.


477.

This year Ælla, with his three sons, Cymen, and Wlencing, and Cissa,
arrived in Britain with three ships, at the place which is called
Cymenesora (Cimen Shore, Sussex) and there they slew many of the Welsh,
and chased some into the wood which is named Andredes-leage.[D]


482.

This year the blessed Abbot Benedict shone in this world through the
glory of his miracles, even as the blessed Gregory relateth in the book
of dialogues.


485.

This year Ælla fought with the Welch near Mearcredes-burnan-stede.


488.

This year Æsc succeeded to the kingdom, and reigned over the Kentish
men 24 years.


490.

This year Ælla and Cissa besieged Andredes-cester,[E] and they slew all
the inhabitants, so that not one Briton was left there.

“At this time the blessed Mamercus, Bishop of Vienne, appointed the
solemn Rogation Litany.”


495.

This year two Aldermen, Cerdic and his son Cynric, arrived in Britain
with five ships at the place which is called Cerdices-ora (near
Yarmouth), and the same day they fought with the Welch. And Cerdic
was the son of Elesa, Elesa of Esla, Esla of Giwis, Giwis of Wig, Wig
of Freawine, Freawine of Freothogar, Freothogar of Brand, Brand of
Baldæg, Baldæg of Woden; and in about six years from the time Cerdic
and Cynric landed, they conquered the country of the West Saxons,
and they were the first Kings who took the West Saxon land from the
Welsh. And Cerdic possessed that kingdom 16 years, then he died and
his son Cynric succeeded him, and held it 26 years. When he died his
son Ceawlin succeeded to the kingdom, and reigned 17 years; when he
died Ceol succeeded and reigned five years; when he died his brother
Ceolwulf succeeded and reigned 17 years, and their line goeth back to
Cerdic; then Cynegils, the brother’s son of Ceolwulf, succeeded and
reigned 20 years, and he was the first of the West Saxon Kings who
received baptism; and then Cenwalh succeeded to the kingdom, and held
it 31 years; this Cenwalh was the son of Cynegils; and then his Queen
Sexburh reigned one year after him; then Æscwine, whose genealogy
goeth back to Cerdic, reigned two years; then Centwine, the son of
Cynegils, succeeded to the kingdom of Wessex, and reigned nine years;
then Ceadwalla, whose genealogy goeth back to Cerdic, succeeded to the
kingdom, and reigned three years; then Ina, whose line goeth back to
Cerdic, succeeded to the kingdom of Wessex, and reigned 37 years; then
Æthelheard, whose genealogy goeth back to Cerdic, succeeded and reigned
16 years; then Cuthred, whose genealogy goeth back to Cerdic, succeeded
and reigned 17 years; then Sigebright, whose line goeth back to Cerdic,
succeeded and reigned one year; then Cynewulf, whose line goeth back
to Cerdic, succeeded and reigned 31 years; then Brihtric, whose line
goeth back to Cerdic, succeeded to the kingdom, and reigned 16 years;
then Ecgbriht succeeded and reigned 37 years and 7 months; then his
son Athelwulf succeeded and reigned 18 years and a half. Athelwulf was
the son of Ecgbriht, Ecgbriht of Ealhmund, Ealhmund of Eafa, Eafa of
Eoppa, Eoppa of Ingild, Ingild of Cenred; Ina and Cuthburh and Cwenburh
were also the children of Cenred; and Cenred was the son of Ceolwald,
Ceolwald of Cuthwulf, Cuthwulf of Cuthwine, Cuthwine of Celm, Celm of
Cynric, Cynric of Creoda, Creoda of Cerdic. Then Æthelbald, the son of
Athelwulf succeeded to the kingdom, and held it five years; his brother
Æthelbriht succeeded him and reigned five years; then their brother
Ælfred succeeded to the kingdom and reigned 28 years and a half; then
Edward, the son of Ælfred, succeeded him, and reigned 24 years; when he
died his son Athelstan succeeded him, and reigned 14 years, 7 weeks,
and 3 days; then his brother Edmund succeeded, and reigned six years
and a half all but two days; then his brother Edred succeeded him, and
reigned nine years and six weeks; then Edwy, the son of King Edmund,
succeeded to the kingdom, and reigned 3 years and 36 weeks all but two
days; when he died his brother Edgar succeeded him, and reigned 16
years, 8 weeks, and 2 days; when he died his son Edward succeeded to
the kingdom, and reigned----


501.

This year Port and his two sons, Bieda and Mægla, arrived in Britain
with two ships, at the place called Portes-muthe (Portsmouth) and they
landed forthwith, and there they slew a young Briton, a very noble man.


508.

This year Cerdic and Cynric slew a British King, whose name was
Natanleod, and 5000 men with him; from him the country, as for as
Cerdices-ford (Charford) was called Natanleag.


509.

This year the Abbot St. Benedict, the father of all monks, went to
heaven.


514.

This year the West Saxons, Stuf and Whitgar, arrived in Britain with
three ships at the place called Cerdices-ora, and they fought with the
Britons and put them to flight.


519.

This year Cerdic and Cynric possessed themselves of the kingdom of
Wessex, and the same year they fought with the Britons at the place
which is now called Cerdices-ford (Charford), and from that day forth
reigned the royal West Saxon line.


527.

This year Cerdic and Cynric fought with the Britons at the place called
Cerdices-leah.[F]


528.

“At this time Dionysius computed the cycle of Easter at Rome. Then
Priscian explored the depths of grammar.”


530.

This year Cerdic and Cynric conquered the Isle of Wight, and slew many
men at Wihtgarabyrig (Carisbrook).


534.

This year Cerdic, the first King of Wessex, died, and his son Cynric
succeeded to the kingdom, and reigned 26 years, and they had given all
the Isle of Wight to Cerdic’s two nephews, Stuf and Wihtgar.


538.

This year, 14 days before the March calends, the sun was eclipsed from
early in the morning till nine in the forenoon.


540.

This year the sun was eclipsed on the 12th of the calends of July, and
the stars were seen at nearly half-past nine in the forenoon.


544.

This year Wihtgar died, and was buried at Wihtgarabyrig (Carisbrook).


547.

This year Ida assumed the government; from him descended the
Northumbrian royal line.--Ida was the son of Eoppa, Eoppa of Esa, Esa
of Ingin, Ingin of Angenwit, Angenwit of Aloc, Aloe of Beonoc, Beonoc
of Brand, Brand of Bældæg, Bældæg of Woden, Woden of Freotholaf,
Freotholaf of Frithowulf, Frithowulf of Finn, Finn of Godwulf, Godwulf
of Geat: and Ida reigned 12 years, and built Bebbanburh (Bamborough),
which was at first surrounded by a hedge and afterwards by a wall.


552.

This year Cynric fought with the Britons at the place called Searobyrig
(Salisbury), and put them to flight. Cerdic was the father of Cynric,
and the son of Elesa, Elesa of Esla, Esla of Gewis, Gewis of Wig,
Wig of Freawine, Freawine of Frithogar, Frithogar of Brand, Brand of
Bældæg, Bældæg of Woden. Egelberht (Ethelberht), the son of Eormenric
was born, and in the -- year of his reign, he, first of the (Saxon)
Kings of Britain, received baptism.


556.

This year Cynric and Ceawlin fought with the Britons at Beranbyrig
(Banbury).


560.

This year Ceawlin succeeded to the kingdom of Wessex; and (Ida being
dead), Ælla to that of Northumberland,[G] and he held it 30 years.
Ælla was the son of Yffe, Yffe of Uscfrea, Uscfrea of Wilgis, Wilgis
of Westerfalcna, Westerfalcna of Sæfugl, Sæfugl of Sæbald, Sæbald of
Sigegeat, Sigegeat of Swæfdæg, Swæfdæg of Sigegear, Sigegear of Wægdæg,
Wægdæg of Woden, Woden of Frithowulf. This year Æthelbriht succeeded
to the kingdom of Kent, and reigned 53 years. In his days the holy
Pope Gregory sent us baptism, this was in the 32d year of his reign.
And the Priest Columba came to the Picts, and converted those who live
by the northern moors to the faith of Christ: and their King gave him
the island that is called Ii (Iona); it contains five hides of land,
and there, as men say, Columba built a monastery, and he lived there
as Abbot 32 years, and he died there when he was 77 years old. The
place is still in the possession of his heirs. The southern Picts were
baptized long before by Bishop Ninna, who was educated at Rome.--His
church and monastery consecrated in the name of St. Martin, are at
Hwiterne (Whitehorn), and there he resteth with many holy men. Now
there shall ever be an Abbot and not a Bishop in Iona, and all the
Scotch Bishops shall be subject to him, because Columba was an Abbot
and no Bishop.


568.

This year Ceawlin and his brother Cutha fought with Æthelbyrht and
drove him into Kent, and they slew two Aldermen, Oslac and Cnebba, at
Wibbandun (Wimbledon).


571.

This year Cuthwulf fought with the Britons at Bedican-ford (Bedford),
and took four towns, Lygean-burh (Leighton, Bedfordshire?) and
Ægeles-burh (Ailesbury), and Bennington (Benshington, Oxfordshire), and
Egones-ham (Ensham, Oxfordshire); and he died the same year.


577.

This year Cuthwin and Ceawlin fought with the Britons, and slew
three Kings, Conmail and Condidan and Farinmail, at the place called
Deorham (Durham or Dyrham, Gloucestershire) and they took three towns,
Gloucester and Cirencester and Bath.


583.

This year Mauricius succeeded to the Roman Empire.


584.

This year Ceawlin and Cutha fought with the Britons at the place called
Fethanleag (Frethorn, Gloucestershire?) and Cutha was slain there, and
Ceawlin took many towns, and spoils, and treasures innumerable, and he
returned thence to his own abode.


588.

This year King Ælla died, and Æthelric reigned after him five years.


591.

This year there was a great slaughter in Britain at Wodnes-beorg (in
Wiltshire?) and Ceawlin was driven out, and Ceolric reigned six years.


592.

This year Gregory succeeded to the Popedom of Rome.

“This Pope Gregory added to the mass service the words, _Diesque
nostros in tuâ pace disponas, &c._”


593.

This year Ceawlin and Cwichelm and Cryda, (King of Mercia) died, and
Æthelfrith succeeded to the kingdom of Northumberland; he was the son
of Æthelric, and Æthelric of Ida.


596.

This year Pope Gregory sent Augustine, with many monks, into Britain,
to preach the word of God to the English people.

“At this time St. Benedict’s Monastery was destroyed by the Lombards.”


597.

This year Ceolwulf began to reign over the West Saxons, and he was
always at war, and fighting either with the English, the Welsh, the
Picts, or the Scots: he was the son of Cutha, Cutha of Cynric, Cynric
of Cerdic, Cerdic of Elesa, Elesa of Esla, Esla of Gewis, Gewis of Wig,
Wig of Freawine, Freawine of Frithugar, Frithugar of Brand, Brand of
Bældæg, Bældæg of Woden. This year Augustine and his companions came to
England.


601.

This year Pope Gregory sent a pall into Britain for Archbishop
Augustine; he also sent many divines to his assistance, and the Bishop
Paulinus brought Edwin King of Northumberland to be baptized.


603.

This year Ægthan, King of the Scots, fought with the Dælreodi, and with
Æthelferth, King of Northumberland, at Dægstane,[H] and almost the
whole of his army was destroyed. Theodbald, the brother of Æthelferth,
was slain there with all his troop. Never after durst any Scotch King
lead an army against this people.


604.

This year Augustin consecrated two bishops, Mellitus and Justus: he
sent Mellitus to preach baptism to the East Saxons, where there was a
King named Sæbyrht, the son of Ricola the sister of Æthelbyrht, whom
Æthelbyrht had established there as King; and Æthelbyrht gave Mellitus
a Bishop’s see at London, and to Justus he gave one at Rochester which
is 24 miles from Dorwitceaster (Canterbury).


606.

This year Gregory died, about ten years from the time that he sent us
baptism; his father was named Gordian, and his mother Silvia.


607.

This year Ceolwulf fought with the South Saxons. And this year
Æthelfrith led his army to Leger-ciestre (Leicester) and there he
slew Welshmen without number, and thus was fulfilled the prophecy of
Augustin which he spoke, saying, If the Welsh will not be at peace with
us, they shall perish at the hands of the Saxons. Two hundred priests
were slain, who came thither that they might pray for the Welch army;
their Alderman was named Brocmail, and he escaped thence with some
fifty men.


611.

This year Cynegils succeeded to the kingdom of Wessex, and held it 31
years. Cynegils was the son of Ceol, Ceol of Cutha, Cutha of Cynric.


614.

This year Cynegils and Cwichelm fought at Beamdune (Bampton, Devon?)
and slew two thousand and forty-six Welshmen.


616.

This year died Æthelbyrht, King of Kent, the first English King who
received baptism, and he was the son of Eormenric; he had reigned 56
years, and his son Eadbald succeeded him. And the same year 5,818
winters had passed away since the beginning of this world. Eadbald
renounced his faith, and lived after the heathen manner, insomuch that
he had to wife his father’s widow. Whereupon Laurentius, who was then
Archbishop of Kent, resolved to go southward over sea, and to abandon
all here. And the Apostle Peter came to him by night, and beat him
sorely, because he would thus have forsaken the flock of God; and he
commanded him to go to the King, and to preach the true faith to him;
and he did so, and the King was converted unto the true faith again. In
this King’s days the same Laurentius, who was Archbishop of Kent after
Augustin, died on the 4th of the Nones of February, and he was buried
near Augustin. The holy Augustin, when in perfect health, consecrated
him Bishop, to the end that the Church of Christ, which was yet new in
England, might have no interval without an Archbishop after his death.
After Laurentius, Mellitus, who was before Bishop of London, succeeded
to the Archbishoprick; then the inhabitants of London, where Mellitus
had been, became heathens, and within five years, Eadbald still
reigning, Mellitus died. Justus succeeded to the Archbishoprick; he had
been Bishop of Rochester, and he consecrated Romanus to that bishoprick.


617.

This year Æthelfrith King of the Northumbrians, was slain by Redwald
King of the East Angles, and Edwin the son of Ælla obtained possession
of the kingdom, and conquered all Britain, excepting Kent alone, and
he drove out the Princes the sons of Æthelfrith; these were, first
Eanfrid, then Oswald and Oswin, Oslac, Oswudu, Oslaf and Offa.


624.

This year Archbishop Mellitus died.


625.

This year Paulinus was consecrated Bishop of Northumberland by
Archbishop Justus, on the 12th of the calends of August.

“This is the Cycle of Dionysius. It consists of five series of nineteen
years, that is of 95 years, and it takes its beginning from the 30th
year of our Lord’s incarnation, and finishes in the 626th year. This
series of nineteen years, which the Greeks call Enneakaidekaeteris, and
Pope John calls Kaideris, was established by the holy Fathers in the
Council of Nice, and agreeably to such mode of calculating the 14th day
of the (March) moon marked Easter every year without any uncertainty.”


626.

This year came Eomer from Cwichelm, King of Wessex, and thought to
murder King Edwin, but he stabbed his thane Lilla, and Forthher, and
wounded the King. And the same night a daughter was born to Edwin;
she was named Eanfled: then the King promised Paulinus that he would
dedicate his daughter to God, if he would obtain of God that he might
destroy his enemy who had sent the assassin. And he then marched with
an army against the West Saxons, and there he overcame five Kings
and slew much people. This year Eanfled, King Edwin’s daughter, was
baptized on the holy eve of Pentecost, and within twelve months the
King was baptized at Easter with all his nobility. Easter then fell
on the 2d of the Ides of April. This took place at York, where he had
before ordered a church of wood to be built, which was consecrated in
the name of St. Peter. There the King gave Paulinus a Bishop’s See,
and there he afterwards ordered a larger church to be built of stone.
This year Penda succeeded to the kingdom (of Mercia) and reigned 30
years, and he was 50 years old when he began to reign. Penda was the
son of Wybba, Wybba of Cryda, Cryda of Cynewold, Cynewold of Cnebba,
Cnebba of Icel, Icel of Eomær, Eomær of Angeltheow, Angeltheow of Offa,
Offa of Wærmund, Wærmund of Wihtlæg, Wihtlæg of Woden.


627.

This year King Edwin was baptized with his people by Paulinus, at
Easter. This Paulinus also preached Christianity in Lindisse (Lindsey),
where a certain rich man named Blecca believed first, with all his
adherents. And at this time Honorius succeeded to the Popedom after
Boniface; he sent a pall hither to Paulinus. And Archbishop Justus
died, and Honorius was consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury by Paulinus
at Lincoln, and the Pope also sent a pall to him, and he sent letters
to the Scotch that they should turn to the observance of the true
Easter.


628.

This year Cynegils and Cwichelm fought with Penda at Cirencester, and
they made a treaty there.


632.

This year Eorpwald was baptized.


633.

This year King Edwin was slain by Cadwalla and Penda at Heth-felda
(Hatfield, near Doncaster?) on the 2d of the Ides of October, and he
had reigned 17 years, and his son Osfrith also was slain with him. And
after this Ceadwalla and Penda went and laid waste all Northumberland.
When Paulinus saw this, he took Æthelburga, the widow of Edwin, and
went in a ship to Kent, and Eadbald and Honorius received him very
honorably, and gave him the Bishoprick of Rochester, and he abode there
till his death.


634.

This year Osric, whom Paulinus had baptized, succeeded to the kingdom
of Deira; he was the son of Ælfric, the uncle of Edwin; and Eanfrith,
the son of Æthelfrith, succeeded to the kingdom of Bernicia. And
this year Bishop Byrinus first preached baptism to the West Saxons
under King Cynegils: this Byrinus came thither by the command of Pope
Honorius, and was Bishop there till the end of his life. And this
year also Oswald succeeded to the kingdom of Northumberland, and he
reigned nine years, the ninth year being numbered to him because of the
heathenism of those who reigned the one year between him and Edwin.


635.

This year King Cynegils was baptized by Bishop Byrinus at Dorchester
(Oxfordshire) and Oswald, King of Northumberland, was his godfather.


636.

This year King Cwichelm was baptized at Dorchester (Oxfordshire), and
he died the same year; and Bishop Felix preached the Christian faith to
the East Angles.


639.

This year Byrinus baptized King Cuthred at Dorchester, and took him for
his godson.


640.

This year Eadbald, King of Kent, died; he reigned 25 years. He had two
sons, Ermenred and Ercenberht, and Ercenberht reigned after his father.
He threw down all the idols in his kingdom, and he was the first of
English Kings who appointed the fast before Easter. His daughter was
named Ercongota, an holy woman, as he was a glorious man, and her
mother was Sexburh, the daughter of Anna, King of the East Angles: and
Ermenred had two sons, who were martyred by Thunor.


642.

This year Oswald King of Northumberland was slain by Penda the
Southumbrian, at Maserfeld (Oswestry) on the Nones of August, and his
body was buried at Bearthan-ege (Bardney, on the Witham, Lincolnshire).
His sanctity and his miracles were afterwards greatly renowned
throughout the island, and his hands are preserved incorrupted at
Bamborough. And the same year that Oswald was slain, his brother Oswiu
succeeded to the kingdom of Northumberland, and reigned 28 years.


643.

This year Cenwalh succeeded to the kingdom of Wessex, and reigned
31 years. He caused the old church of Winchester to be built, and
consecrated in the name of St. Peter. This Cenwalh was the son of
Cynegils.


644.

This year Paulinus, who had been Archbishop of York, (and afterwards
Bishop of Rochester) died at Rochester on the 6th of the ides of
October; he was a Bishop 19 years, two months, and twenty-one days; and
this year Oswin the son of Osric, the cousin of Edwin, succeeded to the
kingdom of Deira, and reigned seven years.


645.

This year King Cenwalh was driven from his kingdom by King Penda.


646.

This year King Cenwalh was baptized.


648.

This year Cenwalh gave his kinsman Cuthred 3000 hides of land, near
Æsces-dun (Aston, Berkshire?). This Cuthred was the son of Cwichelm,
Cwichelm of Cynegils.


650.

This year Ægelbyrht of Gaul received the Bishoprick of Wessex, after
the Roman Bishop Byrinus.


651.

This year King Oswin was slain on the 13th of the calends of September;
and about twelve days afterwards Bishop Aidan died on the 2d of the
calends of September.


652.

This year Cenwalh fought at Bradford on the Avon.


653.

This year the Mid Angles, under the Alderman Peada, received the true
faith.


654.

This year King Anna was slain. And Botulf began to build the monastery
at Icanhoe (Boston?) And Archbishop Honorius died this year on the 2d
of the calends of October.


655.

This year Penda was killed at Winwid-feld, (on the river Winwed, now
the Aire, near Leeds) and with him 30 others of Royal lineage, some of
whom were Kings; amongst these was Æthelhere, the brother of Anna King
of the East Angles: and the Mercians became Christians. Then had 5,850
years passed away since the beginning of the world. And Peada, the son
of Penda, succeeded to the kingdom of Mercia: he and Oswin (Oswy?) the
brother of King Oswald, came together, and agreed that they would build
a monastery for the love of Christ, and to the honour of St. Peter. And
they did so, and they gave it the name of Medeshamstede,[I] because
there is at this place a whirlpool (in the river Nen) called Medeswæl.
And they began the foundations, and wrought thereon, and they committed
the care of the work to a monk named Saxulf; he was the friend of
God, and all the people loved him, and he was very nobly born in the
world, and rich, but he is now much richer with Christ. And king
Peada reigned not long, for he was betrayed by his own wife at Easter.
This year Ithamar Bishop of Rochester, consecrated Deusdedit to the
Archbishoprick of Canterbury, on the 7th of the calends of April.


656.

This year Peada was slain, and (after three years) Wulfhere, the
son of Penda, took possession of the kingdom of Mercia. In his time
Medeshamstede, which his brother had founded, became very rich: the
King favoured it much for love of his brother Peada, and for love of
Oswy his brother in baptism, and for love of the Abbot Saxulf. Then
he said he would make it renowned and glorious, and this with the
advice of his brothers Æthelred and Merwala, of his sisters Kyneburg
and Kyneswith, with the advice also of the Archbishop who was named
Deusdedit, and with that of all his wise men (gewitan) both clergy
and laity in the kingdom; and he did so. Then the King sent to the
Abbot that he should come to him with all diligence, and he came: then
said the King to the Abbot, “I have sent for thee, beloved Saxulf,
for the good of my soul, and I will clearly tell thee wherefore. My
brother Peada and my beloved friend Oswy began a monastery for the
love of Christ and of St. Peter, and my brother is departed from
this life even as Christ willed, and I would pray thee, O beloved
friend, that they labour diligently at this work, and I will find
thee gold and silver and land, and all and every thing that behooveth
thereto.” Then the Abbot went home and began to work, and he sped as
Christ enabled him, so that in a few years the monastery was finished.
When the King heard that, he was very glad, and he gave commandment
to send throughout the land to all his Thanes, to the Archbishops
and Bishops, and to his Earls, and to all who loved God, that they
should come to him, and he appointed the day on which the monastery
should be consecrated. King Wulfere was present when the monastery
was consecrated, together with his brother Æthelred and his sisters
Kyneburg and Kyneswith: and Deusdedit Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Ithamar Bishop of Rochester, and the Bishop of London named Wina, and
Jeruman Bishop of Mercia, and Bishop Tuda consecrated the monastery,
and the priest Wilfred who was afterwards a Bishop was there, and all
the Thanes who were in the kingdom. Then the monastery was consecrated
in the names of St. Peter, St. Paul, and St. Andrew. Then the King
stood up before all his Thanes, and said with a loud voice, “Thanked
be the high and Almighty God, for the good deed that is here done, and
I will this day render honour to Christ, and to St. Peter, and I will,
that you all confirm my words. I, Wulfere, do this day freely give to
St. Peter, and to the Abbot Saxulf, and to the monks of this monastery,
these lands and waters, and meres, and fens, and wears, all that lie
around and are of my domain, so that none but the abbot and the monks
shall have any claim upon them. This is the grant--from Medeshamstede
unto North-burh (Narborough) and thence to the place which is called
Folies, and all the fen straight to Esendic,[J] and from Esendic to
the place which is called Fethermuth, and thence 10 miles in a right
line to Cuggedic, and so to Raggewilh, from Raggewilh five miles to
the river which leadeth to Ælm (Elme) and Wisbeach, and so about
three miles to Throkonholt (Trokenhole), and from Throkonholt direct
through all the fen which is 20 miles long to Derevord (Denver?) and
so to Grætecross, and from Grætecross through the clear water called
Bradan-æ, and thence six miles to Paccelade, and so on through all
the meres and fens that lie towards the town of Huntingdon, and the
meres and the lakes Scælfremere and Witlesmere, and all the others
thereabout, with the lands and houses that are on the eastern side
of Scælfremere, and all the fens thence to Medeshamstede and to
Welmes-ford (Welmsford) and from Welmes-ford to Clive (Cliff) and
thence to Æstun (Easton) and from Æstun to Stan-ford (Stamford) and
from Stan-ford even as the water runneth to the abovesaid North-burh
(Narborough). These are the lands and the fens which the King gave
to St. Peter’s monastery. Then said the King, for this gift, it is
little, but I will that they hold it so royally and so freely, that
neither tribute nor tax be taken therefrom, excepting for the monks
only. Thus will I make this monastery free, that it be subject to
Rome alone: and I will that all amongst us who may not be able to
journey to Rome should repair hither to St. Peter.” Whilst he was thus
speaking, the Abbot entreated that he would grant that which he should
ask of him, and the King promised that he would: “I have some monks
here who fear God, and would spend their lives as Anchorites if they
knew where; but there is an island here called Ancarig (Thorney),
and this would I ask, that we might there build a monastery for the
love of St. Mary, and that those who would lead their lives in peace
and rest may dwell there.” Then the King answered and spoke thus,
“Not this only, beloved Saxulf, but all things which I know that thou
desirest on our Lord’s behalf, even thus I approve and grant. And I
entreat thee, brother Æthelred, and my sisters Cyneburh and Cyneswith,
for our soul’s redemption, that ye be witnesses, and that ye write
this with your fingers. And I desire of all who succeed me, be they
my sons or my brethren, or whosoever shall reign after me, that our
gift may stand, even as they would be partakers of eternal life,
and as they would escape everlasting torment. Whosoever diminisheth
our gift, or the gift of other good men, let the heavenly porter
diminish his part in the kingdom of heaven, and whosoever increaseth
it, let the heavenly porter increase his portion in the kingdom of
heaven.” These were the witnesses who were there, and who subscribed
with their fingers the cross of Christ, and who confirmed the grant
with their tongues. King Wulfere was the first who confirmed it by
word, and afterwards subscribed to it with his fingers the cross
of Christ, and he spoke thus, “I King Wulfere having these Kings,
Earls, Generals, and Thanes as witnesses of my gift, and before the
Archbishop Deusdedit, do confirm it with the cross of Christ.” ♰ “And
I Oswy King of Northumberland, the friend of this monastery and of the
Abbot Saxulf, do sanction it with the cross of Christ.” ♰ “And I King
Sighere do confirm the same with the cross of Christ.” ♰ “And I King
Sibbi do subscribe to it with the cross of Christ.” ♰ “And I Æthelred
the King’s brother do confirm it with the cross of Christ.” ♰ “And
we the King’s sisters Cyneburh and Cyneswith do sanction the same.”
“And I Deusdedit, Archbishop of Canterbury, do confirm the same.” Then
all the others who were there confirmed this grant with the cross of
Christ; these were by name Ithamar Bishop of Rochester, and Wine Bishop
of London, and Jeruman Bishop of the Mercians, and Bishop Tuda, and
the Priest Wilfrid, who was afterwards a Bishop, and the Priest Eoppa
whom King Wulfere sent to preach Christianity in Wight, and the Abbot
Saxulf, and the Aldermen Immine, Eadberht, Herefield, Wilberht, and
Abon, and Æthelbold, Brordan, Wilberht, Ælhmund, and Frethegis. These
and many others, the King’s chief men, all confirmed the grant. This
writing was made in the year 664 after the birth of our Lord, in the
7th year of King Wulfere, and the 9th of the Archbishop Deusdedit.
Then they laid the curse of God, and that of all the Saints, and of
all Christian people upon him who should undo any thing that was now
done: “So be it,” said all, “Amen.” When this transaction was finished
the King sent to Rome, to Vitalianus the Pope that then was, and
entreated that he would confirm all the aforesaid proceeding with his
rescript and with his blessing. And the Pope sent his rescript, saying
thus, “I Vitalianus the Pope do grant unto thee King Wulfere, and unto
the Archbishop Deusdedit, and unto the Abbot Saxulf, all things that
ye desire; and I forbid the King or any man whatsoever to have any
claim thereon, excepting the Abbot only, neither let him be subject
to any excepting the Pope of Rome, and the Archbishop of Canterbury.
If any man break this ordinance in any thing, let St. Peter with his
sword destroy him: whosoever observeth it, let St. Peter with his key
open unto him the kingdom of heaven.” Thus was founded the monastery
of Medeshamstede, which was afterwards called Burh (Peterborough).
Afterwards, another Archbishop came to Canterbury; he was named
Theodore, a very wise and a good man, and he held his synod with his
Bishops and the Clergy. Then Winfrid Bishop of Mercia was deprived of
his See, and the Abbot Saxulf was chosen thereto, and Cuthbald, a monk
of the same monastery, was made Abbot. This synod was held 673 years
after the birth of Christ.


658.

This year Cenwalh fought with the Welsh at Pen, and drove them to the
Parret. This battle was fought after he came from East Anglia: He was
there three years, for Penda had driven him into exile because he had
divorced his sister.


660.

This year Bishop Æthelbryht departed from Cenwalh, and Wine held the
Bishoprick three years. And Æthelbryht received the see of Paris on the
Seine in Gaul.


661.

This year at Easter Cenwalh fought at Possenbyrig (Pontesbury,
Shropshire), and Wulfere the son of Penda laid waste the country as
far as Æsces-dune (Aston, Berkshire?). And Cuthred the son of Cwichelm
and King Cenbyrht died in the same year. And Wulfere the son of Penda
ravaged Wight and gave the island to Æthelwald King of the South
Saxons, because he (Wulfere) was his godfather: and the priest Eoppa by
the desire of Wilverd and of King Wulfere first brought baptism to the
inhabitants of Wight.


664.

This year the Sun was eclipsed. And Arcenbryht King of Kent died, and
his son Ecbyrht succeeded him. And Colman[K] with his companions went
to his own country. And this year there was a great pestilence in
Britain, whereof Bishop Tuda died and he was buried at Wagele.[L] And
Ceadda and Wilverth were consecrated. And the same year the Archbishop
Deusdedit died.


667.

This year Oswiu and Ecbriht sent the priest Wigheard to Rome that he
might be consecrated as Archbishop of Canterbury, but he died as soon
as he arrived there.


668.

This year Theodore was consecrated Archbishop and sent to England.


669.

This year King Ecbyrht gave Raculf (Reculver) to the priest Basse that
he might there build a monastery.


670.

This year Osweo King of the Northumbrians died on the 15th of the
calends of March, and his son Ecverth reigned after him. And Hlothere
the nephew of Bishop Æthelbyrht received the Bishoprick of Wessex, and
held it 7 years; Bishop Theodore consecrated him. And Osweo was the son
of Æthelverth, Æthelverth of Æthelric, Æthelric of Ida, Ida of Eoppa.


671.

This year there was a great slaughter of birds.[M]


672.

This year King Cenwalh died, and his Queen Seaxburh held the kingdom
one year after him.


673.

This year Ecbryht King of Kent died, and the same year there was a
synod at Hertford.--And St. Ætheldryth began the monastery at Ely.


674.

This year Æscwine succeeded to the kingdom of Wessex, he was the son of
Cenfus, Cenfus of Cenferth, Cenferth of Cuthgils, Cuthgils of Ceolwulf,
Ceolwulf of Cynric, Cynric of Cerdic.


675.

This year Wulfere the son of Penda, and Æscwine the son of Cenfus,
fought at Bedanheafd (Bedwin, Wiltshire?) And the same year Wulfere
died, and Æthelred succeeded to the kingdom. He sent Bishop Wilfrid
to Rome, to the Pope that then was, named Agatho, and informed him
by letter and by a message, how his brethren Peada and Wulfere had
builded a monastery, which was called Medeshamstede, and that they
had freed the same from all subjection to King or Bishop, and he
desired that the Pope would confirm this with his rescript and with
his blessing. Then the Pope sent a letter to England, saying thus,
“I Agatho, Pope of Rome, greet well the worshipful Æthelred King of
Mercia, and Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury, and Saxulf Bishop of
Mercia, who before was Abbot, and all the Abbots in England, with the
salutation of God, and my blessing. I have heard the desire of King
Æthelred, and of the Archbishop Theodore, and of the bishop Saxulf,
and of the Abbot Cuthbald, and I will that it be in all wise, even
as ye have spoken. And I command, on behalf of God and of St. Peter,
and of all the Saints, and of all consecrated persons, that neither
King, Bishop, Earl, nor any man, receive any duty, tax, tribute, or
farthing, and that none claim any service of any kind from the abbacy
of Medeshamstede. I command also that the Bishop of the Shire presume
not to perform either ordination or consecration within this abbacy,
unless the Abbot desire it of him; neither may he claim any bishop’s
or synod’s fine, nor receive therefrom any returns of any kind. I will
also that the Abbot be held as the Legate of Rome over all the island,
and that whosoever may be chosen by the monks be consecrated by the
Archbishop of Canterbury. I will and enact, if any man have made a
vow to go to Rome, which he may not be able to perform, either from
sickness, from his Lord’s need of him, from poverty, or from any other
cause, that he, be he of England or of any other island, repair to the
monastery of Medeshamstede, and he shall receive the same absolution
from Christ and St. Peter, from the Abbot and from the Monks, that he
would have if he went to Rome. Now I desire thee, brother Theodore,
that thou cause it to be proclaimed throughout England, that a synod
be assembled, and that this letter be read and observed. I say also to
thee, Bishop Saxulf, that as thou desirest that this monastery should
be free, so I forbid thee, and all Bishops sent of Christ and of his
Saints, who come after thee, to receive any gain from the monastery,
excepting that which pleaseth the Abbot. Now will I say this in
words, that whosoever observeth this rescript and this commandment,
he shall dwell for ever with Almighty God in the kingdom of heaven,
and whosoever breaketh it, he shall be excommunicated and condemned to
punishment with Judas and with all the devils in hell, unless he come
to repentance. Amen.” Pope Agatho and 120 Bishops sent this letter to
England by Wilfrid Archbishop of York. This was done 680 years after
the birth of our Lord, in the 6th year of King Æthelred. Then the King
commanded Archbishop Theodore that he should appoint a meeting of all
the Witan at the place which is called Heatfeld (Hatfield). When they
were there assembled, then he caused the letter, which the Pope had
sent thither, to be read, and they all confirmed the same, and fully
ratified it. Then said the King, “All things that my brother Peada,
and my brother Wulfere, and my sisters Cyneburh and Cyneswith, gave
and secured to St. Peter and to the Abbot, I will that these stand;
and I will in my day increase the gift for the sake of their souls and
of mine own. Now give I this day to St. Peter and to his monastery
of Medeshamstede these lands, and all thereunto belonging: to wit,
Bredune, Hrepingas, Cedenac, Swines-hæfed (Swineshead), Heanbyrig,
Lodeshac, Scuffanhalch, Costesford,[N] Stretford, Wætelle-burne,
Lufgeard, Æthelhuniglond, Barthan-ig (Bardney), These lands I give to
St. Peter all as freely as I myself possessed them, and so that none of
my successors may take any thing therefrom. If any do this let him have
the curse of the Pope of Rome, and the curse of all Bishops, and of all
who are here as witnesses; and I confirm this with the sign of Christ.”
♰ “And I Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury am witness to this charter
of Medeshamstede, and I confirm it with my own hand-writing, and I
excommunicate all those who may break any part thereof, and I bless all
who shall observe it.” ♰ “I Wilfrid Archbishop of York am witness to
this writing, and I confirm the said curse.” ♰ “I Saxulf, who was first
Abbot and am now Bishop, do lay my curse and that of all my successors
upon those who may break it.” “I Ostrithe Queen of Æthelred do sanction
the grant.” “I Adrian the Legate assent to the same.” “I Putta Bishop
of Rochester subscribe to it.” “I Waldhere Bishop of London confirm
it.” “I the Abbot Cuthbald do establish the same, so that whosoever
breaketh it let him take the curse of all Bishops, and of all Christian
people.” Amen.


676.

This year Æscwine died and Hedda succeeded to the bishoprick (of
Winchester) and Centwine to the kingdom of Wessex. Centwine was the son
of Cynegils, Cynegils of Ceolwulf. And Æthelred King of Mercia overran
Kent.


678.

This year a comet appeared in August, and shone like a sun-beam every
morning for three months. And Bishop Wilfrith was driven from his see
by King Ecgverth, and two Bishops were consecrated for his bishoprick,
Bosa for the Deiri, and Eata for the Bernicians. And Eadhed was
appointed to the see of Lindsey, of which he was the first Bishop.


679.

This year Ælfwine was slain near the Trent, where Ecgferth and
Æthelred fought. And this year St. Ætheldrith died. And Coludes-burh
(Coldingham, Berwickshire) was burned with fire from God.


680.

This year Theodore convoked an Archiepiscopal Synod at Hatfield, that
he might set forth aright the Christian faith. And the same year died
Hilda Abbess of Streones-heale (Whitby).


681.

This year Trumbriht was consecrated Bishop of Hagulstades-ea (Hexham),
and Trumwine as Bishop of the Picts, who were then subject to this
country. This year also Centwine drove the Britons to the sea.


684.

This year Ecgferth sent an army against the Scots, and Briht his
Alderman therewith, and they lamentably plundered and burned the
Churches of God.


685.

This year King Ecgferth commanded that Cuthberht should be made a
Bishop, and Archbishop Theodore consecrated him at York, on the first
day of Easter, as Bishop of Hexham, for Trumbriht had been deprived of
that see. And the same year on the 13th of the calends of June King
Ecgferth was slain by the north sea, and a great army with him. He
reigned 15 years, and his brother Aldfrith succeeded him: this Ecgferth
was the son of Osweo, Osweo of Æthelverth, Æthelverth of Æthelric,
Æthelric of Ida, Ida of Eoppa. This year Ceadwalla began to contend
for the kingdom, he was the son of Cenbyrht, Cenbyrht of Cada, Cada of
Cutha, Cutha of Ceawlin, Ceawlin of Cynric, Cynric of Cerdic, and Mul
was the brother of Ceadwalla, and he was afterwards burned in Kent. And
Hlothere King of Kent died the same year. And John was consecrated to
the bishoprick of Hexham, and he kept possession of it till Wilfrith
returned, and afterwards, on the death of Bishop Bosa, John received
the bishoprick of York, and his priest Wilferth was afterwards
consecrated to the bishoprick of York, and he retired to his monastery
in Derawuda (Beverley). This year it rained blood in Britain, and milk
and butter were turned into blood.


686.

This year Ceadwalla and his brother Mul laid waste Kent and Wight;
this Ceadwalla gave to St. Peter’s monastery of Medeshamstede a valley
in a certain island called Heabureahg, the name of the Abbot of the
monastery at this time was Egbalth, he was the third after Saxulf,
Theodore being then Archbishop of Kent.


687.

This year Mul was burned in Kent, and 12 others with him; and this
year Ceadwalla again ravaged Kent.


688.

This year King Ceadwalla went to Rome and received baptism from Pope
Sergius, who gave him the name of Peter, and he died while he was yet
in his baptismal garments, about seven days afterwards, on the 12th of
the calends of May, and he was buried in St. Peter’s Church. And Ina
succeeded him in the kingdom of Wessex, and reigned 37 years, and he
built the monastery of Glastonbury, and he afterwards went to Rome, and
abode there unto the end of his days. Ina was the son of Cenred, Cenred
of Ceolwald, Ceolwald was the brother of Cynigils, and they were both
the sons of Cuthred the son of Ceawlin, Ceawlin was the son of Cynric,
Cynric of Cerdic.


690.

This year Archbishop Theodore died, he was a Bishop 12 years,
and he was buried at Canterbury, and Beorhtwald succeeded to the
Archbishoprick on the calends of July; he was before Abbot of Reculver.
Before this time the Bishops had been Romans, and afterwards they were
English. There were then two Kings in Kent, Wihtred and Wæbheard.


693.

This year Brihtwald was consecrated Archbishop by the Gallican Bishop
Godwin, on the 5th of the nones of July. At this time died Gifemund
Bishop of Rochester, and Archbishop Brihtwald consecrated Tobias to his
bishoprick. About this time Brihtelm also died.


694.

This year the men of Kent made a treaty with Ina, and gave thirty
thousand pounds for his friendship, because they had burned his brother
Mul. And Wihtred succeeded to the kingdom of Kent and held it 33
years; this Wihtred was the son of Ecgbyrht, Ecgbyrht of Arcenbyrht,
Arcenbyrht of Eadbald, Eadbald of Æthelbyrht. And as soon as he was
King he caused a great council to be convened at the place called
Baccancelde (Beckenham, Kent?); and there Wihtred King of Kent, and
Brihtwald Archbishop of Canterbury and Tobias Bishop of Rochester, with
Abbots and Abbesses, and many wise men were gathered together, all to
consult upon the restoration of the churches of God in Kent. Now the
King began to speak, and he said, “I will that all the monasteries and
churches that were given and bequeathed to the glory of God in the
days of faithful Kings my predecessors, and in the days of my kinsman
King Æthelberht and of those who followed after him, do so remain
dedicated to the glory of God, and that they continue thus evermore to
eternity. Forasmuch as I Wihtred an earthly King, incited by the King
of Heaven, and burning with zeal for righteousness, have learned this
of our forefathers, that no layman has the right to obtrude himself
into any church or into any thing that belongeth to the church, this
therefore we strictly and unreservedly establish and ordain, and in
the name of Almighty God, and of all the Saints, we forbid all Kings
our successors, and Aldermen, and all laymen, to hold any lordship
whatever over the churches, or over any of the possessions which I
or my predecessors in former days have given them, as an everlasting
inheritance to the glory of Christ, and of our Lady St. Mary, and of
the holy Apostles. And observe that when it shall happen that a Bishop
or an Abbot or an Abbess departeth this life, it shall be told to the
Archbishop, and with his counsel and advice let him that is worthy be
elected, and let the Archbishop inquire into the life and virtues of
him who is chosen to so high an office, and in no wise let any one
be chosen or consecrated thereto without the Archbishop’s sanction.
Kings shall create Earls and Aldermen, Sheriffs and Judges, and the
Archbishop shall govern and direct the church of God, and shall choose
and appoint Bishops, Abbots, Abbesses, Priests, and Deacons, and shall
consecrate them and confirm them by good precepts and example, lest any
of God’s flock stray and be lost.”


695.

This year the Southumbrians slew Æthelred’s Queen Ostrythe, the sister
of Ecgfrith.


699.

This year the Picts slew the Alderman Berht.


702.

This year Kenred succeeded to the kingdom of Southumbria.


703.

This year Bishop Hedda died; he held the Bishoprick of Winchester 27
years.


704.

This year Æthelred King of the Mercians, the son of Penda, became a
Monk, having reigned 29 years, and Cenred succeeded him.


705.

This year Ealdferth King of Northumberland died, at Driffield,
(Yorkshire) on the 19th of the calends of January. And Bishop Saxulf
died also. Then Ealdferth’s son Osred succeeded to the kingdom.


709.

This year died Bishop Aldhelm, whose diocese lay around Westan-wuda
(Westwood, Wiltshire). In the early days of Bishop Daniel the land of
the West Saxons was divided into two bishopricks, for before it had
formed only one. Daniel held the one, and Bishop Aldhelm the other.
Forthhere succeeded Aldhelm. And Ceolred received the kingdom of
Mercia, and Cenred went to Rome, and Offa with him, and Cenred remained
there to the end of his life. And the same year Bishop Wilferth died
at Oundle, and they carried his body to Rippon; he was the Bishop whom
King Ecgferth had banished to Rome.


710.

This year Acca Wilferth’s Priest received the Bishopric that Wilferth
had held before, and this year the Alderman Beorhtfrith fought with the
Picts between Hæfe and Cære (Heefield and Carehouse, Northumberland);
and Ina and his kinsman Nun fought with Gerent King of the Welsh; and
the same year Hygbald was slain.


714.

This year died St. Guthlac and King Pepin.[O]


715.

This year Ina and Ceolred fought at Wodnesbeorh (Wodensborough,
Wiltshire). King Dagobert (2nd) died this year.


716.

This year Osred King of Northumberland was slain on the southern
border, he had reigned 11 years after Ealdferth. Then Cenred succeeded
to the kingdom and reigned two years, and after him Osric 11 years.
The same year also died Ceolred King of Mercia, his body lieth at
Litchfield, and that of Æthelred the son of Penda at Bardney. And then
Æthelbald succeeded to the kingdom of Mercia and reigned 41 years.
This Æthelbald was the son of Alweo, Alweo of Eapa, Eapa of Wyb, whose
lineage hath been written before. And Ecbyrht, that venerable man,
converted the Monks of Iona to the true faith, so that they held Easter
aright, and received the clerical tonsure.


718.

This year died Ingild the brother of Ina: their sisters were Cwenburh
and Cuthburh, and this Cuthburh built the monastery at Winborn, and she
was married to Ealdferth King of Northumberland, but they separated
before his death.


721.

This year Bishop Daniel went to Rome. And the same year Ina slew the
Prince Cynewulf. And this year the holy Bishop John died, he was Bishop
33 years, 8 months and 13 days, and his body resteth at Beverley.


722.

This year Queen Æthelburh destroyed Taunton which Ina had built. And
Ealdbryht went as an exile into Surrey, and among the South Saxons: and
Ina fought with the South Saxons.


725.

This year Wihtred King of Kent died on the 9th of the calends of May;
he reigned 32 years, and his lineage is written above; and Eadberht
succeeded him. And Ina fought with the South Saxons, and there he slew
the Prince Ealbyrht, whom he had driven into exile.


727.

This year Tobias Bishop of Rochester died, and Archbishop Brihtwold
consecrated Aldulf to that bishoprick.


728.

This year Ina went to Rome, and there he ended his life, and his
kinsman Æthelheard succeeded to the kingdom of Wessex, and held it 14
years; and Æthelheard and the Prince Oswald fought the same year.
Oswald was the son of Æthelbald, Æthelbald of Cynebald, Cynebald of
Cuthwine, Cuthwine of Ceawlin.


729.

A comet appeared this year; and St. Ecgberht died in Iona.


730.

This year Prince Oswald died.


731.

This year Osric was slain; he was King of Northumberland 11 years,
and Ceolwulf succeeded him in the kingdom, and reigned eight years.
This Ceolwulf was the son of Cutha, Cutha of Cuthwine, Cuthwine of
Leodwald, Leodwald of Ecgwald, Ecgwald of Ealdhelm, Ealdhelm of Ocga,
Ocga of Ida, Ida of Eoppa. And Archbishop Beorhtwald died on the ides
of January; he was Bishop 37 years, 6 months, and 14 days; and Tatwine
was consecrated the same year; he before was a Priest of Breodune in
Mercia (Bredon, Worcestershire): Daniel Bishop of Winchester, Ingwald
Bishop of London, Aldwine Bishop of Litchfield, and Aldulf Bishop of
Rochester, consecrated him on the 10th of the month of June; he held
the Archbishoprick three years.


733.

This year Æthelbald took Somerton; and the sun was eclipsed, and Acca
was driven from his bishoprick.


734.

This year the moon appeared as if it were tinged with blood. And
Archbishop Tatwine died, and Bede also. And Ecgbriht was consecrated
Bishop (of York).


735.

This year Ecgbriht received a pall from Rome.


736.

This year Archbishop Nothelm received a pall from the Bishop of Rome.


737.

This year Bishop Forthere and Queen Frythogith went to Rome. And King
Ceolwulf received St. Peter’s tonsure, and gave up his kingdom to his
uncle’s son Edberht, who reigned 31 years. And Bishop Æthelwold, and
Acca, died, and Cynewulf was consecrated Bishop: and the same year
Æthelwold plundered Northumberland.


738.

This year Eadbryht the son of Eata, the son of Leodwald, succeeded
to the kingdom of Northumberland, and held it 21 years. Archbishop
Ecgbyrht the son of Eata was his brother, and they are both buried in
the same aisle at York.


741.

This year King Æthelheard died, and his kinsman Cuthred succeeded to
the kingdom of Wessex, and he fought with Æthelbald King of Mercia.
And Nothelm died, and Cuthbryth was consecrated Archbishop, and Dun as
Bishop of Rochester. York was burned this year.


742.

This year a great Synod was held at Cloveshou (Cliff, in Kent, or
Abingdon), and Æthelbald King of Mercia was there, and Archbishop
Cuthberht, and many other wise men.


743.

This year Æthelbald King of Mercia and Cuthred King of Wessex fought
with the Welch.


744.

This year Daniel gave up the bishoprick of Winchester, and Hunferth
received it. And there were many shooting stars. And Wilferth the
younger, who was Bishop of York, died on the 3d of the calends of May.
He was Bishop 30 years.


745.

This year Daniel died, 43 years being gone by from the time that he
received his bishoprick.


746.

This year King Selred was slain.


748.

This year Cynric Prince of the West Saxons was slain; and Eadbryht King
of Kent died, and Æthelbyrht son of King Wihtred succeeded him.


750.

This year Cuthred King of Wessex fought with Æthelhun, the high-minded
Alderman.


752.

This year Cuthred King of Wessex, in the 12th year of his reign, fought
with Æthelbald King of Mercia at Beorg-ford (Burford), and put him to
flight.


753.

This year Cuthred King of Wessex fought with the Welch.


754.

This year Cuthred King of Wessex died.--And Cyneheard received the
bishoprick of Winchester after Hunferth. And Canterbury was burned
this year. And Cuthred’s kinsman Sigebriht succeeded to the kingdom of
Wessex, and reigned one year.


755.

This year Cynewulf and the witan of Wessex deprived his kinsman
Sigebryht for his unrighteous deeds of all his kingdom, excepting
Hampshire, and Sigebryht kept that, till he had slain the Alderman
who had adhered to him the longest, and then Cynewulf drove him into
Andred, and he remained there until a certain peasant stabbed him at
Pruutes-flod (Privet, Hampshire) and avenged the Alderman Cumbran. And
Cynewulf often fought great battles with the Britons. And about 31
years from his accession to the kingdom he sought to banish a Prince
called Cyneheard: this Cyneheard was the brother of Sigebryht, and he
found that the King was gone with a small train to visit a lady at
Meran-tun (Merton, Surrey), and there he beset him, and blocked up the
house before the men who were with the King discovered him; and when
the king perceived this, he went to the door, and defended himself
manfully until he beheld the Prince, and then he rushed out upon him,
and wounded him severely, upon which they all fought against the King
until they slew him. When the King’s Thanes who were in the house
heard the tumult, they ran thither, every one armed as he was. And
immediately the Prince offered money and their lives to each of them,
but none would compound with him, and they fought against him until
they all fell, save one, a British hostage, and he was sorely wounded.
In the morning when the King’s Thanes, who had remained behind, heard
that the King was slain, they rode thither, both his Alderman Osric
and his Thane Wiverth, and all those whom he had left; and they found
the Prince in the town wherein the King lay slain, and the gates shut
against them. And when they came up he promised them their liberty, and
riches, and lands, if they would give up the kingdom to him; and he
told them that their kinsmen were with him, and would not desert him.
Then they answered, that no kinsman was dearer to them than their Lord,
and that they would never follow his murderer, and they bade their
kinsmen abandon the Prince, and depart in safety. These replied, that
the same offer had been made to their adversaries the former companions
of the King, and that they were no more inclined to do this thing than
their own fellow soldiers who with the King had been slain. And then
they fought around the gates until the Prince’s party fled into the
town, and the Prince was killed, and all who were with him except one;
he was godson of the Alderman who saved his life, though he had many
wounds. Cynewulf reigned 31 years, and his body lieth at Winchester,
and that of the Prince at Acsanmynster (Axminster), and their father’s
race goeth in a right line to Cerdic. And the same year Æthelbald King
of Mercia was slain at Seccan-dune (Seckington, Warwickshire) and his
body lieth at Hreopan-dune (Repton, Derbyshire); he reigned 41 years.
Then Beornred assumed the government, and held it for a short time and
unhappily. And the same year King Offa put Beornred to flight, and took
possession of the kingdom, and held it 39 years, and his son Egverth
reigned 140 days. He was the son of Offa, the son of Thincferth,
Thincferth of Eanwulf, Eanwulf of Osmod, Osmod of Eawa, Eawa of Wybba,
Wybba of Creoda, Creoda of Cynewald, Cynewald of Cnebba, Cnebba of
Icel, Icel of Eomær, Eomær of Angeltheow, Angeltheow of Offa, Offa of
Wærmund, Wærmund of Wihtlæg, Wihtlæg of Woden.


757.

This year Eadberht King of Northumberland received the tonsure, and
his son Osulf succeeded to the kingdom, and reigned one year, and his
servants slew him on the 9th of the calends of August.


758.

This year Archbishop Cuthbryht died; he held the archbishoprick 18
years.


759.

This year at Michaelmas Bregowine was consecrated to the
archbishoprick, and held it four years. And Moll Æthelwold succeeded to
the kingdom of Northumberland, and reigned six years and then resigned
the throne.


760.

This year Æthelbryht King of Kent died, he was the son of King Wihtred.
Ceolwulf died also.


761.

This year, a hard winter. And Moll King of Northumberland slew Oswin at
Ædwines-clife[P] on the 8th of the ides of August.


762.

This year Archbishop Bregwine died.


763.

This year Anbryht was consecrated Archbishop on the 14th day after
Christmas. And Frithewald Bishop of Whitehorn died on the nones of May:
he was consecrated at York on the 18th of the calends of September,
in the 6th year of Ceolwulf’s reign, and he was Bishop 29 years. Then
Pyhtwine was consecrated Bishop of Whitehorn at Ælfet-ee,[Q] on the
16th of the calends of August.


764.

This year Archbishop Jeanbryht received a pall.


765.

This year Alhred succeeded to the kingdom of Northumberland, and
reigned eight years.


766.

This year Archbishop Ecgbert died at York, on the 13th of the calends
of September: he was Bishop 36 years. And Fritheberht died at Hexham;
he was Bishop 34 years. And Æthelberht was consecrated to York, and
Ealhmund to Hexham.


768.

This year King Eadberht the son of Eata died, on the 14th of the
calends of September.


769.

“The beginning of the reign of King Charles.”


772.

This year Bishop Mildred died.


774.

This year, at Easter, the Northumbrians drove their King Alhred from
York, and took for their Lord Æthelred, the son of Moll, and he reigned
four years. And this year a red cross appeared in heaven after sun-set.
And this year the Mercians and Kentish men fought at Oxford. And
wonderful serpents were seen in the lands of the South Saxons.


775.

This year Cynewulf and Offa fought near Bynsintun (Benshington or
Benson, Oxfordshire), and Offa took the town. In the days of King Offa
there was an Abbot of Medeshamstede named Beonne, and this Beonne, by
the advice of all the monks of that monastery, let the lands of ten
bondsmen at Swineshead to the Alderman Cuthbriht, with the pastures and
meads, and all that lieth adjoining, on condition that Cuthbriht should
give the Abbot 50 pounds for the same, and every year one night’s
lodging or 30 shillings in pence, and also that the land should return
to the monastery after his death. King Offa, and King Egferth, and
Archbishop Hygeberht, and Bishop Ceolwulf, and Bishop Inwona, and the
Abbot Beonne, and many other Bishops, Abbots, and other great men were
witnesses to this transaction. In the days of King Offa there was an
Alderman named Brordan; he besought the King that for love of him he
would enfranchise his monastery of Wocingas (Wickins, Northamptonshire)
because he desired to give it to Medeshamstede, and to St. Peter, and
to the Abbot that then was; this was Pusa, the successor of Beonne, and
the King loved him much. And the King freed the monastery of Wickins
from service due to King, Bishop, Earl, or any other man, so that none
but St. Peter and the Abbot should have any claims thereon. This was
done in the King’s town called Freoric-burn.


776.

This year Bishop Pehtwine died, on the 13th of the calends of October;
he was Bishop 14 years. And Æthelberht was consecrated at York to the
bishoprick of Whitehorn, on the 17th of the calends of July.


778.

This year Æthebald and Hearberht slew three High Sheriffs, to wit,
Ealdulf the son of Bosa at Cininges-clife, and Cynewulf and Ecga at
Hela-thyrn,[R] on the 11th of the calends of April. Then Alfwold took
possession of the throne and drove Æthelred from the land, and he
reigned ten years. “Charles entered Spain. Charles came into Saxony.
Charles destroyed the cities of Pampeluna and Saragossa; he gathered
together his forces, and after receiving hostages, and subduing the
Saracens, he returned into France by Narbonne and Gascony.”


780.

This year the Old Saxons and the French fought. And the High
Sheriffs of Northumberland burnt the Alderman Beorn in Siltun
(Silton, Yorkshire), on the 9th of the calends of January. And
Archbishop Æthelberht died at York, and Eanbald was consecrated to
his archbishoprick, and Bishop Cynebald (Cynewulf) gave up the see of
Lindisfarne. This year Bishop Alchmund died at Hexham, on the 7th of
the ides of September, and Tilberht was consecrated in his place on the
6th of the nones of October. And Higbald was consecrated at Socca-byrig
(Sockburn, Durham), as Bishop of Lindisfarne.--And King Alwold sent to
Rome for a pall for Archbishop Eanbold.


782.

This year Ceolred’s Queen Wærburh died; Bishop Cynewulf also died at
Lindisfarne.--And there was a Synod at Aclea (Acley, Durham?)


784.

This year Cyneheard slew King Cynewulf, and was himself killed with
eighty-four men. Then Byrhtric succeeded to the kingdom of Wessex, and
reigned 16 years, and his body lieth at Wareham; his father’s line
goeth straight to Cerdic. At this time King Ealhmund reigned in Kent,
this King Ealhmund was the father of Egberht, and Egberht was the
father of Athulf.


785.

This year died Botwine Abbot of Rippon, and there was a discordant
Synod at Cealc-hythe.[S] And Archbishop Janbryht lost part of his
diocese. And Higebryht was chosen by King Offa. And Ecgverth was
consecrated King. And at this time Legates were sent from Rome to
England by Pope Adrian, to renew the faith and peace which St. Gregory
sent us by the Bishop Augustin: and they were received with honour.


787.

This year King Beorhtric took to wife Eadburhge the daughter of Offa.
And in his days the ships of the Northmen first came from Herethaland
(Denmark), they were three in number. And the Sheriff rode up to them
and would have driven their crews to the king’s town, for that he knew
not who they were, and there he was slain. These were the first Danish
ships that sought the land of the English people.


788.

This year a Synod was assembled at Pincanheale, in Northumberland
(Finkley, Durham), on the 4th of the nones of September. And the Abbot
Aldberht died.

“Charles came through Germany to the borders of Bavaria.”


789.

This year Alfwold King of Northumberland was killed by Siga, on the
9th of the calends of October, and a heavenly light was often seen in
the place where he was slain. And he was buried at Hexham, within the
church; and his nephew Osred the son of Alchred succeeded him. And a
Synod was assembled at Aclea (Acley).


790.

This year Janbryht died, and the same year the Abbot Æthelheard was
chosen Archbishop. And Osred King of Northumberland was betrayed and
driven from the kingdom, and Æthelred the son of Æthelwold regained it.


791.

This year Baldwulf was consecrated Bishop of Whitehorn, on the 16th of
the calends of August, by Archbishop Eanbald and Bishop Æthelberht.


792.

This year Offa King of Mercia commanded that King Æthelbyrht should be
beheaded: and Osred, who had been King of Northumberland, coming home
after his exile, was taken and slain on the 18th of the calends of
October, and his body lieth at Tinmouth. And King Æthelred took a new
wife named Ælfled on the 3d of the calends of October.


793.

This year terrible prodigies took place in Northumberland, and sorely
alarmed the people, these were dreadful lightnings and fiery dragons
which were seen flying in the air; a great famine soon followed these
portents, and shortly afterwards in the same year and on the 6th of the
ides of January a heathen invasion sorrowfully laid waste the church of
God at Lindisfarne by rapine and murder. And Sicga died on the 8th of
the calends of March.


794.

This year Pope Adrian died; also Offa King of Mercia on the 4th
of the ides of August, he reigned 40 years. And Æthelred King of
Northumberland was slain by his own people, on the 13th of the calends
of May, and the Bishops Ceolwulf and Eadbald departed from the land.
And Ecgferth succeeded to the kingdom of Mercia, and died the same
year. And Eadbryht whose other name was Præn obtained the kingdom of
Kent. And the Alderman Æthelheard died on the calends of August. And
the heathens plundered in Northumberland, and pillaged Ecgferth’s
monastery at the mouth of the river (Were); And one of their chiefs was
slain there; some of their ships also were wrecked by stormy weather,
and many of the men were drowned, and some came alive to the port, and
these were slain at the river’s mouth.


795.

This year the moon was eclipsed on the 5th of the calends of April,
between cock-crowing and day-break. And Eardwulf assumed the government
of Northumberland on the 2d of the ides of May, and he was consecrated
and placed on his throne by Archbishop Eanbald, and by the Bishops
Æthelberht, and Higbald, and Badwulf, at York, on the 7th of the
calends of June.


796.

This year Archbishop Eanbald died on the 4th of the ides of August,
and his body lieth at York, and Bishop Ceolwulf died the same year.
Another Eanbald was consecrated to the bishoprick of the former, on
the 19th of the calends of September. This year Cenwulf King of Mercia
ravaged Kent as far as the marshes (near Romney), and took prisoner the
King Eadberht Præn, and led him bound into Mercia, and caused his eyes
to be put out, and his hands to be cut off. And Æthelard Archbishop
of Canterbury assembled a synod, and at the command of Pope Leo he
confirmed and ratified all things that were appointed concerning God’s
monasteries, in the days of King Wihtgar, and of other Kings; and he
spoke thus, “I Æthelard, the humble Archbishop of Canterbury, with
the unanimous consent of the whole synod, and of the monasteries to
which freedom was granted by faithful men in former days, and by the
command of Pope Leo, do require in the name of God, and under pain of
his fearful judgment, that henceforth no man daringly choose Lords over
the heritage of God from amongst laymen. And even as it is commanded in
the rescripts which the Pope had given, and as the holy men our fathers
and teachers have appointed touching the sacred monasteries, so let
it remain inviolate without gainsaying. If there be any man who will
not observe this decree of God, and of our Pope, and of ourselves, but
despiseth it and setteth it at nought, let such know that they shall
be called to account before the judgment seat of God. And I Archbishop
Athelard, with 12 Bishops and 23 Abbots, do confirm and ratify the same
with the sign of the cross of Christ.”


797.

This year the Romans cut off Pope Leo’s tongue and put out his eyes,
and drove him from his throne, but soon after, by the help of God, he
could see and speak, and was Pope again as before. And Eanbald received
a pall on the 6th of the ides of September. And Bishop Æthelberht died
on the 3d of the calends of November.


798.

This year during Lent there was a great battle at Hweallæge in
Northumberland (Whaley, Lancashire) on the 4th of the nones of April,
and Alric the son of Heardberht was slain there, and many others with
him.


799.

This year Archbishop Æthelard and Cynebryht Bishop of Wessex went to
Rome. Bishop Alfun died at Sudbury, and was buried at Domuc (Dunwich),
and Tidfrith was chosen after him. And Siric King of the East Saxons
went to Rome. The same year the body of Wihtburh was found at Dereham,
entire and unchanged, fifty-five years after she had departed this
life.


800.

This year, on the 17th of the calends of February, the moon was
eclipsed at the second hour of the night. And this year King Beorhtric
and the Alderman Worr died. And Egbryht succeeded to the kingdom of
Wessex. And the same day Æthelmund Alderman of the Hwiccas,[T] rode
through the river at Cynemæres-ford (Kempsford?); then the Alderman
Weoxtan, with the men of Wiltshire, met him, and there was a great
battle, and both the Aldermen were slain, and the Wiltshire men gained
the victory.

“Charles was made Emperor, and received the title of Augustus from the
Romans: he condemned to death those who had maltreated Pope Leo, but at
the request of the Pope, he afterwards granted them their lives, and
sent them into banishment. Pope Leo consecrated him Emperor.”


802.

This year the moon was eclipsed at day-break on the 13th of the calends
of January. And this year Beornmod was consecrated Bishop of Rochester.



803.

This year Higbald Bishop of Lindisfarne died on the 8th of the calends
of July; and Egberht was consecrated in his place on the 3d of the ides
of June. And this year Archbishop Æthelheard died in Kent, and Wulfred
was consecrated Archbishop in his place. And the Abbot Forthred died.


804.

This year Archbishop Wulfred received a pall.


805.

This year died Cuthred King of Kent. The Abbess Ceolburh and the
Alderman Heabyrhte died also.


806.

This year the moon was eclipsed on the calends of September; and
Eardwulf King of Northumberland was driven from his kingdom; and
Eanberht Bishop of Hexham died. The same year the sign of the cross
appeared in the moon on a Wednesday, the 2d of the nones of June,
before day-break. This year also a wonderful circle was seen around the
sun on the 3d of the calends of September.


807.

This year the sun was eclipsed on the 17th of the calends of August,
at the beginning of the 5th hour of the day.


810.

“Charles made peace with Nicephorus Emperor of Constantinople.”


812.

This year King Charles died, and he had reigned 45 years. And
Archbishop Wulfred, and Wigbryht Bishop of Wessex, both went to Rome.

“Cireneius sends Ambassadors to Charles with peace. The Emperor Charles
dies.”


813.

This year Archbishop Wulfred returned to his own bishoprick with the
blessing of Pope Leo. And this year King Egbryht ravaged West Wales
(Cornwall) from east to west.


814.

This year the noble and holy Pope Leo died, and Stephen succeeded him.


816.

This year Stephen died, and Paschal was consecrated Pope: and the same
year the school of the English nation was burned.


819.

This year Cenwulf King of Mercia died, and Ceolwulf assumed the
government. And the Alderman Eadbyrht died.


821.

This year Ceolwulf was deprived of his kingdom.


822.

This year two Aldermen, Burhelm and Muca, were slain. And there was a
synod at Clofeshoo (either Cliff or Abingdon).


823.

This year there was a battle between the Welch and the men of Devon,
at Gaful-ford (Camelford?). And the same year Egbryht King of Wessex
and Beornwulf King of Mercia fought at Ellendune (Wilton), and Egbryht
gained the victory, and there was great slaughter. From this expedition
Egbryht sent his son Æthelwulf, and his Bishop Ealhstan, and his
Alderman Wulfheard, with a large detachment into Kent, and they drove
the King Balred northward across the Thames. And the men of Kent and of
Surrey, and the South and East Saxons, came over to Egbryht, because
they had been unjustly wrested from the rule of his kinsmen. And
the same year the King of the East Angles and his people sought the
alliance and protection of King Egbryht, for dread of the Mercians; and
the same year the East Angles slew Beornwulf King of Mercia.


825.

This year Ludecan King of Mercia was slain, and his five Aldermen with
him, and Wiglaf succeeded him.


827.

This year the moon was eclipsed on Christmas night: and the same year
King Egbryht conquered the kingdom of Mercia, and all south of the
Humber: he was the eighth king who was sovereign of Britain; Ella King
of the South Saxons was the first who possessed this great dominion,
Ceawlin King of Wessex was the next, the third was Æthelbryht King
of Kent, the fourth Rædwald King of the East Angles, Edwin King of
Northumberland was the fifth, Oswald who reigned after him the sixth,
Oswio the brother of Oswald was the seventh, and the eighth was
Egbryht King of Wessex. And this Egbryht led an army to Dore against
the Northumbrians, and there they tendered him their submission and
allegiance, whereupon they separated.


828.

This year Wiglaf[U] again obtained the kingdom of Mercia: and Bishop
Æthelwald died: and the same year King Egbryht led an army against the
men of North Wales, and reduced them to subjection.


829.

This year Archbishop Wulfred died, and the Abbot Feologild was chosen
to the Archbishoprick on the 7th of the calends of May, and he was
consecrated on a Sunday, the 5th of the ides of June, and he died on
the 3d of the calends of September.


830.

This year Ceolnoth was chosen and consecrated Archbishop: and the Abbot
Feologild died.


831.

This year Archbishop Ceolnoth received a pall.


832.

This year heathen men plundered Sheppey.


833.

This year King Egbryht fought with 35 pirate ships at Carrum
(Charmouth), and the slaughter was great, and the Danes kept possession
of the place of battle. And two Bishops, Hereferth and Wigen were
killed, also two Aldermen, Dudda and Osmod.


835.

This year a large fleet of armed men came to the West Welch
(inhabitants of Cornwall) and they united and made war upon Egbryht
King of Wessex. When he heard this he marched against them with an
army, and fought with them at Hengest-dune (Hengston-hill) and there he
put to flight both the Welsh and the Danes.


836.

This year King Egbryht died. Before he was King, Offa King of Mercia
and Borhtric King of Wessex had driven him out of England into France
for three years, Beorhtric aiding Offa because he had his daughter for
his Queen; and Egbryht afterwards returned again, and reigned 37 years
and 7 months. And Æthelwulf the son of Egbryht succeeded to the kingdom
of Wessex, and he (Egbryht?[V]) gave his son Æthelstan the kingdoms of
Kent and Essex, and that of Surrey and Sussex.


837.

This year the Alderman Wulfheard fought with 33 pirate ships at
Southampton, and there he made great slaughter, and gained the victory.
And Wulfheard died this year. And the same year Duke Æthelhelm and the
Dorset men fought with the Danish army in Port (Portland), and had the
advantage for some time, but the Danes kept possession of the field of
battle, and slew the Alderman.


838.

This year the Alderman Herebryht and many others with him were slain by
the heathens, in the marshes (near Romne). And again, the same year,
many were slain by this army in Lindsey, East Anglia, and Kent.


839.

This year there was great slaughter at London, Canterbury, and
Rochester.


840.

This year King Æthelwulf fought at Carrum, (Charmouth) with the forces
of 35 pirate ships, and the Danes kept possession of the field of
battle. The Emperor Louis died.


845.

This year the Alderman Eanwulf with the men of Somerset, and Bishop
Ealchstan, and the Alderman Osric with the Dorset men gave battle to
the Danish army at the mouth of the Parret, and made great slaughter,
and gained the victory.


851.

This year the Alderman Ceorl and the men of Devon fought with a
heathen army at Wicganbeorch (Wembury, near Plymouth), and there they
made great slaughter and won the victory. And the same year King
Æthelstan and Duke Ealchere fought in ships, and slew a great number
(of Danes), near Sandwich, in Kent, and they took nine ships, and
put the rest to flight. Then the heathens first remained through the
winter in Thanet. And the same year 350 ships came to the mouth of the
Thames, and the men landed and stormed Canterbury and London, and put
to flight Beorhtulf King of the Mercians and his army. And then they
went southward over the Thames into Surrey, and King Æthelwulf and his
son Æthelbald, with the West Saxon forces, fought with them at Aclea
(Okeley), and there they made the greatest slaughter of these heathens
that we have ever heard of unto this present day, and there they gained
the victory.


852.

This year Ceolred Abbot of Medeshamstede and the monks let the land of
Sempigaham (Sempringham) to Wulfred, on condition that it should return
to the monastery after his death, and that Wulfred should give the land
of Sliowaford (Sleaford) unto Medeshamstede, and that he should give
every year to the monastery 60 fother of wood, and 12 fother of coals,
and 6 fother of turf, and 2 tuns full of clear ale, and two slain oxen,
and 600 loaves, and 10 measures of Welch ale, also a horse every year,
and 30 shillings, and one night’s lodging. King Burhred, Archbishop
Ceolred, the Bishops Tunberht, Ceured, Alhhim, and Berhtred, the Abbots
Wihtred and Werhtherd, and the Aldermen Æthelheard and Hunberht, and
many others were witnesses thereof.


853.

This year Burhred King of Mercia and his Witan entreated King Æthelwulf
that he would assist them in bringing the North Welshmen into
subjection, and he did so, for he marched with an army through Mercia
into North Wales, and they all submitted to him. And the same year
King Æthelwulf sent his son Alfred to Rome. Leo was then Pope, and he
consecrated him as King, and took him for his Godson. The same year
Ealhere with the men of Kent, and Huda with those of Surrey, fought
with a heathen army in Thanet, and at first they were victorious,
and many were there slain and drowned on either side, and both the
Aldermen were killed. And Burhred King of Mercia married the daughter
of Æthelwulf King of Wessex.


854.

This year the heathens first remained through the winter in Sheppey.
And the same year King Æthelwulf made a grant of the tithe of his lands
throughout all his kingdom, for the love of God and for his own soul’s
eternal welfare. And this year he went to Rome with much pomp, and he
abode there 12 months; then he journeyed homeward, and Charles King of
France gave him his daughter named Leothete for his Queen; and after
this he came to his people, and they rejoiced thereat. And in about 2
years from the time he came into France, he died, and his body lieth
at Winchester; he reigned 18 years and a half. This Æthelwulf was the
son of Egbyrht, Egbyrht of Ealhmund, Ealhmund of Eafa, Eafa of Eoppa,
Eoppa of Ingild, Ingild was the brother of Ina King of Wessex, who
held his kingdom 37 years, and afterwards went to St. Peter and ended
his life at Rome: they were the sons of Cenred, Genred of Ceolwald,
Ceolwald of Cutha, Cutha of Cuthwine, Cuthwine of Ceawlin, Ceawlin
of Cynric, Cynric of Creoda, Creoda of Cerdic, Cerdic was the son of
Elesa, Elesa of Esla, Esla of Gewis, Gewis of Wig, Wig of Freawine,
Freawine of Frithugar, Frithugar of Brand, Brand of Bældæg, Bældæg
of Woden, Woden of Frithuwald, Frithuwald of Freawine, Freawine of
Frithuwulf, Frithuwulf of Finn, Finn of Godwulf, Godwulf of Geat, Geat
of Tætwa, Tætwa of Beaw, Beaw of Sceldwea, Sceldwea of Heremod, Heremod
of Itermon, Itermon of Hathra, Hathra of Hwala, Hwala of Bedwig, Bedwig
of Sceaf, the son of Noah, who was born in the ark; Lamech, Methusalem,
Enoch, Jared, Malalahed, Cainion, Enos, Seth, Adam _primus homo et
Pater noster, id est, Christus_, Amen.--Then the two sons of Æthelwulf
succeeded him, Æthelbald in the kingdom of Wessex, and Æthelbryht in
the kingdoms of Kent, of Essex, and of Surrey and Sussex. Æthelbald
reigned 5 years. Æthelwulf had sent his third son Alfred to Rome, and
when the Pope heard that he was dead, he consecrated Alfred as King,
and was godfather at his confirmation, even as his father Æthelwulf had
desired when he sent him thither.


860.

This year King Æthelbald died, and his body lieth at Sherborn, and his
brother Æthelbryht succeeded to all his kingdom, and he held it in
goodly concord and great peacefulness. And in his days a large army
landed and stormed Winchester, and the Alderman Osric with the men of
Hampshire, and the Alderman Æthelwulf with the Berkshire men, fought
with them and put them to flight, and kept possession of the field of
battle. And this Æthelbryht reigned 5 years, and his body lieth at
Sherborn.


861.

This year the Bishop St. Swithin died.


865.

This year the heathen army remained in Thanet, and made a treaty with
the Kentishmen, who promised them money for peace. And under this
treaty and promise of money, they stole out by night and plundered all
the eastern parts of Kent.


866.

This year Æthered the brother of Æthelbyrht succeeded to the kingdom
of Wessex. And the same year a great army of heathens came to England,
and took up their winter quarters among the East Angles, and there they
were supplied with horses, and the people made peace with them.


867.

This year the invading army went from East Anglia across the mouth
of the Humber to York in Northumberland; and there was much discord
amongst the people themselves there, for they had cast off their King
Osbryht, and had taken Ælla, an alien, for their King. But late in the
year the two parties joined, and both fought against the army; and they
gathered together a great force, and came upon the invaders at York,
and some of them broke into the town, and then there was a very great
slaughter of the Northumbrians, some being slain within the town and
some without, and both the Kings were killed, and those who survived
made peace with the army. The same year died Bishop Ealchstan, he held
the bishoprick of Sherborn 50 years, and his body lieth in that town.


868.

This year the same army came into Mercia as far as Nottingham, and took
up their winter quarters there, and Burhred King of Mercia and his
Witan begged Æthered King of Wessex and his brother Alfred to assist
them, that they might fight against this army. And then they came with
the West Saxon troops into Mercia and to Nottingham, and they found
them within the fortress, and besieged them, and there was no battle of
moment, and the Mercians made peace with the army.


869.

This year the army went again to York, and remained there one year.


870.

This year the heathen army rode over Mercia into East Anglia, and
took up their winter quarters at Thetford. And in the winter the King
St. Edmund fought with them, and the Danes gained the victory, and
slew the King, and they subjected all that land, and destroyed all
the monasteries to which they came. The names of their chiefs who
slew the King were Higwais and Ubba. At the same time they came to
Medeshamstede, which they burned and pulled down. They slew the Abbot
and the monks and all whom they found there; and that place which
before was very rich, they brought to possess nothing. And the same
year Archbishop Ceolnoth died, and Æthered Bishop of Wiltshire was
translated to the see of Canterbury.


871.

This year the army came to Reading, in Wessex, and in about three days,
two of their Earls rode forth, and the Alderman Æthelwulf met them at
Englefield, and fought with them and won the victory, and one of them
whose name was Sidrac was slain. Then in about four days King Æthered
and his brother Alfred led a great force to Reading, and fought with
the army, and there was much slaughter on both sides, and the Alderman
Æthelwulf was killed, and the Danes remained masters of the field. And
about four days from that time King Æthered and his brother Alfred
fought with all the army at Æcesdun,[W] and the Danes were overcome;
they had two heathen Kings Bagsæc and Healfden, and many Earls, and
they were in two divisions, the Kings Bagsæc and Healfden commanded
the one, and the Earls headed the other. King Æthered fought with the
division under the Kings and Bagsæc was slain, and his brother Alfred
with that of the Earls, and Earl Sidroc[X] the elder, and Earl Sidroc
the younger, and Earl Osbearn, and Earl Fræna, and Earl Hareld were
killed; and then both divisions fled, and many thousands were slain,
and they continued fighting until night. And in about a fortnight King
Æthered and his brother Alfred fought with the army at Basing, and
there the Danes gained the victory. And about two months afterwards
King Æthered and his brother Alfred fought at Mere-tun,[Y] with this
army which was in two divisions, and they had the advantage over both
during great part of the day, but there was much slaughter on either
side, and the Danes remained masters of the field, and Bishop Heahmund
and many good men were slain there. And after this fight a great
summer[Z] pestilence came upon Reading. And King Æthered died after
Easter; he reigned five years, and his body lieth at Winborn Minster.
His brother Alfred the son of Æthelwulf succeeded to the kingdom of
Wessex, and in about a month, he and a small number of men fought with
all the army at Wilton, and had the advantage great part of the day,
but the Danes kept possession of the field of battle. And this year
nine battles were fought in that kingdom, south of the Thames; and,
besides these, the King’s brother Alfred, and the Aldermen and the
King’s Thanes rode forth separately against the Danes, times out of
number. And this year nine Earls and a King were slain: and the same
year the men of Wessex made peace with the army.


872.

This year the army went from Reading to London, and there took up their
winter quarters, and the Mercians made peace with them.


873.

This year the army went into Northumberland, and they took up their
winter quarters at Torksey, in Lindsey: then the Mercians again made
peace with them.


874.

This year the army proceeded from Lindsey to Repton, and there they
took up their winter quarters. And they drove King Burhred over sea,
about twenty-two years from the time that he had begun to reign. And
they conquered all that country. And King Burhred went to Rome and
abode there unto the end of his life, and his body lieth in St. Mary’s
Church, in the school of the English nation. The same year they gave
the kingdom of Mercia to Ceolwulf, an unwise Thane of the King, that he
should hold it; and he swore oaths to them and gave hostages that the
kingdom should be at their command, on whatsoever day they might wish
to have it again, and that he himself and all his subjects should be
ready to aid the army.


875.

This year the army departed from Repton; and Healfden went with part
of the troops into Northumberland, and wintered by the river Tyne; and
this division conquered that land, and made many inroads upon the Picts
and the Strathclyde Britons. And the three Kings, Godrun, Oscytel, and
Anwind, went from Repton to Cambridge with a large army, and abode
there one year. And this summer King Alfred went out to sea with a
fleet, and fought with seven pirate ships, and took one of them, and
put the rest to flight.


876.

This year Rodla (Rollo), with his forces, overran Normandy; he reigned
50 years. And this year the Danes marched secretly into Wareham in
Wessex, and afterwards the King made peace with that army, and they
gave the noblest amongst them as hostages, and swore oaths to him
on the holy bracelet[AA] (which they would never do for any nation
before), that they would forthwith depart from his kingdom. Yet under
these engagements their horse stole off by night to Exeter. And the
same year Healfden parcelled out Northumberland, and they ploughed and
tilled it.


877.

This year the army came from Wareham into Exeter, and the fleet sailed
round to the west, and a great storm met them at sea, and 120 ships
were wrecked at Swanwich. And King Alfred with his troops rode after
the Danish horse as far as Exeter, but they could not come up with them
before they were in the fortress where none might assail them. And
they gave him hostages, as many as he would, and swore solemn oaths,
and they kept this peace well. Then in the autumn the army went into
Mercia, and they parcelled out part of the land (amongst themselves),
and they gave part to Ceolwulf.


878.

This year at mid-winter the army marched secretly to Chippenham after
Twelfth night, and they overran Wessex, and they fixed themselves
there, and drove many of the inhabitants over sea, and they rode
forth against most of those who remained, until all had submitted to
them excepting King Alfred, and he with a small party hardly escaped
into the woods and the hill fastnesses. The same winter the brother of
Inwær and Healfden came with 23 ships to Devonshire in Wessex, and he
was slain there, and 840 men with him; and the sacred standard, which
they called the raven, was taken. And at Easter King Alfred, with his
small band, raised a fortress at Æthelinga-igge (Athelney) and thence
he made sallies upon the army, together with the men of Somerset who
were nearest to him.--Then in the seventh week after Easter he rode
to Ecgbyrhtes-stan (Brixton) east of Selwood, and there all the men
of Somerset and Wiltshire and Hampshire, all who were on this side
the sea, met him, and were rejoiced to see him. And after one night
he went from that village to Iglea (Leigh), and thence again after
another night to Æthan-dun (Edindon), and there he fought with the
whole army, and he put the Danes to flight, and pursued them as far as
their fortress, and he remained there a fortnight. And then the army
gave him hostages, with solemn oaths that they would depart from his
kingdom, and they promised that their King should receive baptism,
which also was performed. And in about three weeks King Godrun, with
some thirty men, the noblest in the army, came to him at Aire which is
near Athelney, and the King stood godfather at his baptism, and he put
off the Chrisom-cloth at Wetmor (Wedmor), and he was twelve days with
the King, who honoured him and his companions with great presents.


879.

This year the army went from Chippenham to Cirencester, and remained
there one year: and this year a body of pirates was gathered together
and settled at Fulham on the Thames. And the same year the sun was
eclipsed for one hour in the day. And the army went from Cirencester
into East Anglia, and fixed themselves in that land, and divided it.
And the same year the army which was before at Fulham went over sea to
Ghent in France, and abode there one year.


881.

This year the army went over to France, and the French fought with
these invaders, and the army horsed itself after that battle.


882.

This year the army went up along the Maese far into France, and
remained there one year. And the same year King Alfred went out to
sea, and fought with four Danish pirate ships, and he took two of them,
the men therein being slain, and two yielded to him, but many of the
men were cut down and wounded before they would surrender themselves.


883.

This year the army proceeded up the Scheldt to Condé, and abode there
one year. And the great Pope Marinus sent a piece of our Lord’s cross
to King Alfred. And this year Sighelm and Athelstan carried to Rome the
alms which King Alfred had vowed to send thither, and also into India,
to St. Thomas and to St. Bartholomew. Then troops were posted at London
to oppose the army, and, thanks to God, they were very successful after
these vows.


884.

This year the army went up the Somme to Amiens, and remained there one
year. This year died the good Bishop Athelwold.


885.

This year the aforesaid army divided itself into two parts, one
division went eastward,[AB] the other proceeded to Rochester, and
besieged that town: and they built another fortress over against it,
yet the inhabitants defended the place until King Alfred came out
with his troops. Then the army went to the ships and deserted the
fortress, and the king’s men were supplied with horses; and soon after,
in the course of the same summer, the Danes departed again over sea.
And the same year King Alfred sent a fleet from Kent to East Anglia.
As soon as they came to the mouth of the Stour, they met 16 pirate
ships, and they gave them battle immediately, and they took all the
ships and slew the men, but as they were returning homeward with the
booty, they met a large fleet of pirates, and they fought with them
also the same day, and the Danes gained the victory. Charles King of
France died this year, he was killed by a wild boar. And his brother
also who reigned over the Western Empire had died one year before;
and they were both sons of Louis who held the Western Empire, and who
died the year in which the sun was eclipsed; he was the son of that
Charles whose daughter Æthelwulf King of Wessex had to wife. And the
same year a large fleet was gathered together among the Old Saxons,[AC]
and there were two great fights, and the Saxons gained the victory,
and the Frisians were with them. This year Charles succeeded to the
Western Empire, comprehending all the lands, exclusive of Britanny,
from the Wendel sea (the Mediterranean) unto this sea, even as his
great grandfather had possessed them: this Charles was the son of
Louis, the brother of Charles the father of Judith whom Æthelwulf King
of Wessex had to wife; these were the sons of Louis, and he was the son
of Charles the elder, and Charles was the son of Pepin. And the same
year died the good Pope Marinus, who freed the school of the English
nation from tribute at the desire of King Alfred, and who sent him
great gifts, and holy relics, and a piece of the cross on which Christ
suffered. And this year the army in East Anglia broke the peace with
King Alfred.


886.

This year the army, which before had bent its course eastward, turned
again to the west; and they went up the Seine, and fixed their winter
quarters at the city of Paris. The same year King Alfred repaired
London, and all the English people who were free from the bondage of
the Danes came over to him, and he committed the city to the care of
the Alderman Æthered.


887.

This year the army went over the bridge at Paris, and thence along the
Seine unto the Marne, and then up the Marne to Caziei (Choisy?) and
they fixed themselves there, and in Yonne, spending two winters in
these two stations.--And the same year died Charles King of France; his
brother’s son Earnulf had deprived him of the kingdom six weeks before
his death. Then was that kingdom divided into five parts, and five
Kings were consecrated thereto; yet this was done with the consent of
Earnulf, and they said that they would hold their kingdoms at his hand,
because none of them were claimants on the father’s side, excepting
him alone. Then Earnulf dwelt in the country east of the Rhine; and
Hrothulf took the middle kingdom; and Oda the western parts; and
Beorngar and Witha took Lombardy, and the lands on that side of the
mountains, and they reigned there in much enmity, and they frequently
laid waste that land, and they fought two pitched battles, and many
times did each drive out the other. And the same year that the army
went forth over the bridge at Paris, the Alderman Æthelhelm carried to
Rome the alms of the West Saxons and of King Alfred.


888.

This year the Alderman Beocca carried the alms of the West Saxons and
of King Alfred to Rome. And Queen Æthelswith, who was the sister of
King Alfred, died on her way to Rome, and her body lieth at Pavia.
And the same year Æthered Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Alderman
Æthelwold died in one month.


889.

This year no one journeyed to Rome, excepting two couriers whom King
Alfred sent with letters.


890.

This year the Abbot Beornhelm carried the alms of King Alfred and
the West Saxons to Rome. And Godrun King of the Northmen died; his
baptismal name was Æthelstan, and he was King Alfred’s godson: he
dwelt in East Anglia, and first colonized that land.[AD] And the same
year the army from the Seine went to St. Lo, which is between Britanny
and France, and the Bretons fought with them, and gained the victory,
and drove them into a river and drowned many. This year Plegemund
was chosen of God and of all his saints to the Archbishoprick of
Canterbury.


891.

This year the army went eastward, and King Earnulf with the East
French, and the Saxons, and the Bavarians, fought with their horse
before the ships arrived, and put them to flight. And three Scots came
to King Alfred from Ireland, in a boat without any rowers, and they had
stolen away from that country because they would go on a pilgrimage
for the love of God, they cared not whither. The boat was made of
three hides and a half, and they took with them food for a week, and
in about seven days they came to land in Cornwall, and proceeded
forthwith to King Alfred: they were thus named, Dubslane, and Macbeth,
and Maelinmun. And Swifneh the most learned teacher of the Scots died.
And after Easter the same year, about Rogation week or before, a star
appeared which is called Cometa in Latin, and some men say that this in
English signifies a hairy star, for long rays stream from it, sometimes
on one side, sometimes on the other.


893.

This year the great army, of which we have before spoken, returned
from the Eastern kingdom westward to Boulogne, and there they took
shipping; so that they came over at one passage, horses and all. And
they arrived at Limene mutha (New Romney?) with 250 ships. This harbour
is on the eastern side of Kent, and at the eastern end of the great
wood called Andred; this wood is from east to west 112 miles long or
more, and 30 miles broad, and the river of which we have spoken floweth
out of the weald. They towed their ships up this river as far as the
wood, four miles from the outward mouth. They stormed a fortress in
the fens; a few countrymen were in it, and it was half finished. Soon
afterwards, Hastings came into the mouth of the Thames with 80 ships,
and there he built a fortress at Middel-tun (Milton), and the other
army one at Appledore.

“This year died Wulfhere Archbishop of the Northumbrians.”


894.

This year, it being about 12 months, after they had built the fortress
in the eastern kingdom, the Northumbrians and the East Angles, who
had taken oaths to King Alfred, the East Angles having also given him
six hostages, yet broke their faith, and whenever the other armies
went out to plunder, these went forth also, either with them or in
a separate division. Then King Alfred gathered together his troops,
and came and encamped between the two armies in the nearest place
defended by wood and by water, so that he could fall upon either, if
they sought any field for forage; whilst they still going about the
weald in parties of foot and troops of horse, to plunder the country
wherever it was unprotected, continually encountered other parties
from the King’s army or from the towns day and night. The King had
also divided his forces into two parts, so that half his troops were
always at home, and half out, exclusive of those who were employed in
guarding the towns. Neither were all the heathen forces out of their
quarters at the same time oftener than twice, once when they first came
to land before the King’s army was assembled, and again when they would
depart from this station. Then when they had collected much plunder,
and would have carried it northward across the Thames into Essex, and
towards the ships, the King’s army hastened before them, and fought
with them at Farnham, and put them to flight, and got possession of
the spoil; and they fled across the Thames, where there was no ford,
and thence down the Colne to a certain island (Mersey or Bricklesey).
The King’s troops[AE] remained encamped round about them as long as
they had provisions, for their time of service was limited, and their
meat proportioned thereto. And the King being on his march thither
with the shire that served under him, the other troops departed home,
and the Danes remained in the same place, because their King had been
wounded in the battle, and they could not remove him. Then the Danes
who were settled in Northumberland and East Anglia gathered together
about an hundred ships, with which they sailed round by the south;
and some forty ships besides which sailed round by the north, and
besieged a fortress on the northern coast of Devonshire. And those
who had sailed by the south besieged Exeter. When the King heard
this, he turned westward with all his forces, excepting a detachment
of troops who were to watch the enemy in the east. These troops went
forward until they came to London, and then, with the citizens and
the aids which joined them from the west, they marched eastward to
Benfleet: Hastings had come thither with his army, which was before
at Milton, and the great army was come thither also which was before
at Appledore, near Limine Mutha. Hastings had built the fortress at
Benfleet, and he was then gone out to plunder, and the great army was
at home. Then they came, and put that army to flight, and stormed the
fortress, and they took all that was therein, treasure, women, and
children, and they carried all to London, and they broke up or burned
all the ships, or brought them to London or Rochester. And the wife
of Hastings and his two sons were brought to the King, and the King
gave them to him again, because the one was his own Godson, the other
the Alderman Æthered’s. They had been before taken, ere Hastings came
to Benfleet, and he had given hostages and oaths, and the King had
also given him much money, and then also he had restored his wife and
children. But as soon as he came to Benfleet, and the fortress was
finished, he ravaged the very district of Alfred’s kingdom which was
under his son’s Godfather Æthered, and again a second time he was gone
out to plunder the same province, when his fortress was destroyed. The
King, as was said before, had marched with his army towards Exeter, and
when he came thither, the army which had besieged the town made for
the ships. Whilst he was engaged with his enemies in the west, both
the other ravaging armies joined at Shobury, in Essex, and they raised
a fortress there: then they went up together along the Thames, and a
reinforcement came to them from East Anglia and Northumberland, and
they proceeded by the side of the Thames, until they crossed over to
the Severn; and then they marched along the Severn. Then the Aldermen
Æthered, and Æthelm, and Æthelnoth, and the King’s Thanes who were at
home in their fortresses, gathered together an army from every town
east of the Parret, and west of Selwood, also east and north of the
Thames, and west of the Severn, and they raised moreover some part of
the Welsh nation. When they were all assembled they came up with the
army at Butdiging-tun (Bultington?) on the banks of the Severn, and
there they besieged them on every side in a fortress. When they had
been encamped on the two sides of the river for many weeks, the King
being still detained by the fleet in the west, in Devonshire, the Danes
were pressed by hunger, and they had eaten great part of their horses,
and some perished through famine. Then they rushed out upon the men who
were posted on the eastern side of the river, and fought with them,
and the Christians gained the victory, but the King’s Thane Ordhelm was
slain there, and many others of the King’s Thanes; and those (of the
heathens) who escaped were saved by flight. When they came to their
fortress and ships in Essex, the remnant again collected a large army
from amongst the East Angles and Northumbrians before winter, and they
secured their wives, and their ships, and their treasures, in East
Anglia, and marched straight forward day and night until they came to a
western town in Wirehall which is called Lega-ceaster (Chester).--And
the King’s troops could not overtake them until they were within the
fortifications; nevertheless they encamped around the place for about
two days, and they took all the cattle that were in the neighbourhood,
and they slew the men whom they met without the fortress, and they
burned the corn, or, together with their horses, consumed it. And this
was about twelve months from the time that they came hither from beyond
sea.


895.

This year, soon afterwards, the army went from Wirehall into North
Wales, for they could not remain without corn or cattle to subsist
on.--Then they departed again from North Wales with their plunder,
and they passed through Northumberland and East Anglia, and the King’s
army could not overtake them before they had reached the eastern
part of Essex, and had come to an island in the sea which is called
Mersey.--And the division which had besieged Exeter, on their return
homewards invaded the South Saxons near Chichester, but the townsmen
put them to flight, and slew many hundreds of them, and took some of
their ships. The same year, before winter, the Danes who were quartered
in Mersey towed their ships up the Thames, and thence up the Lea. This
was about two years from the time that they came hither from beyond the
sea.


896.

This year the aforesaid army built a fortress on the Lea, 20 miles
above London. Then in the summer, many of the citizens with others went
forth and attacked this fortress of the Danes, but they were driven
back, and some four of the King’s Thanes were slain there. During the
following harvest, the King encamped in the neighbourhood of the city
while the people reaped their corn, that the Danes might not annoy
them. One day the King was riding by the river’s side, and he observed
a place where it might be blocked up so that the Danes could not bring
out their ships: and this was done, and two forts were built, one
on each side of the river; but while the King was employed on these
works, and was encamped by them, the Danes perceiving that they could
not remove their ships, deserted them, and marched across the country
until they came to Cwat-bridge (Bridgenorth?), on the Severn, and they
built a fortress there. Then the King’s troops rode westward after
them, and the citizens of London went for the ships and broke up all
that they could not remove, and all that were serviceable they brought
into London. The Danes had placed their wives in safety in East Anglia
before they left their fortress. They remained at Cwat-bridge that
winter. This was about three years from the time when they came over
the sea into Limine-Mutha.


897.

It was in the summer of this year that the army went away, part to East
Anglia and part to Northumberland: and there, those who were without
money, got themselves ships, and sailed southward to the Seine. Thanks
to God, this army had not entirely ruined the English nation, but in
these three years it was much afflicted by a mortality amongst the
cattle, and more than all by that amongst men, and many of the most
noble of the King’s Thanes died during these three years. Among these
were Swithulf Bishop of Rochester, Ceolmund Alderman of Kent, Beorhtulf
Alderman of Essex, Wulfred Alderman of Hampshire, Ealheard Bishop of
Dorchester, Eadulf the King’s Thane in Sussex, Beornwulf the Town
Sheriff of Winchester, Ecgulf the King’s Horse Thane and many others,
though I have named these as being the most eminent. The same year
the ravagers from East Anglia and Northumberland harassed the country
of the West Saxons, particularly on the southern coast, by sudden
descents, using the vessels which they had built many years before.
Then Alfred caused long ships to be built as a defence against these
vessels, and his were twice as long as the others; some had sixty oars
and some more; they were both swifter and more steady, and also higher
than those of the Danes, and were shaped neither after the Frisian
nor the Danish manner, but even as he himself thought they would best
befit the service. At one time this year six ships came to Wight, and
did much damage there, and in Devon, and all along the coast. The King
ordered his people to take nine of the new ships and to blockade them
in a certain harbour.[AF]--Then the pirates sailed out against them
with three ships, for three lay aground at the head of the bay, and
their crews were gone ashore.--The King’s men took two of the three
ships at the entrance of the bay, and slew the men in them, and the
third escaped, and in this also all but five of the men were killed.
But in making towards the other ships, which were set fast, the English
also were left aground to their great discomfort, three on that part
of the shore where the Danish ships lay, and all the rest on the other
side, so that they could not get near each other, and the water had
now ebbed many furlongs from the ships. Then the Danes belonging to
the three ships came and attacked the three which were left by the
tide on their side of the bay, and they fought there, and Lucumon the
King’s Sheriff, and Wulfheard and Æbba and Æthelere, Frisians, and
Æthelferth the King’s herdsman, were slain, and sixty two men in all,
Frisians and English, and 120 Danes. Now the tide came to the Danish
ships before the Christians could get theirs off, and they therefore
rowed them away; but they were so much damaged, that they were unable
to get beyond Sussex before two of them had been driven on shore, and
the men were brought to the King at Winchester and he ordered them to
be hanged. The rest much wounded, with the remaining ship, reached East
Anglia. This year, not less than twenty ships with their whole crews,
perished on the southern coast. The same year died the King’s Horse
Thane Wulfric, who was also Sheriff of Wales.


898.

This year Æthhelm Alderman of Wiltshire died nine nights before
Midsummer. And Heahstan Bishop of London died this year.


901.

This year Alfred the son of Athulf died six nights before the feast of
All Saints: He was King over all England, excepting that part of it
which was under the dominion of the Danes.--He reigned 28 years and
a half, and his son Edward succeeded to the kingdom. Then Edward’s
uncle’s son Prince Æthelwald rode to the towns of Winborn and Tweonea
(Christ Church) without leave of the King and his Witan, upon which
the King went forth with his troops and encamped at Badbury, near
Winborn, and Æthelwald with his party was within the town. He had
blocked up the gates on the inside, and said that there he would live
or die, but yet he stole away by night, and hastened towards the army
in Northumberland; the King ordered his troops to pursue him, but they
could not outride him, and the others received him as their king, and
submitted to him: his wife was seized; he had married her without
the King’s leave, and against the Bishop’s command, for she had been
professed a nun. Æthered Alderman of Devonshire died the same year,
four weeks before King Alfred.


902.

In this year the battle of Holme (near Pevensey) was fought between the
men of Kent and the Danes.


903.

This year died the Alderman Athulf the brother of Ealhswitha the mother
of King Edward. Virgilius Abbot of the Scots died also; and on the
8th of the ides of July the Priest Grimbald. The same year the new
monastery of Winchester was consecrated on the Advent of St. Judoc.


904.

This year Æthelwald came hither from beyond the sea with all the ships
he could muster, and the East Saxons submitted to him. This year the
moon was eclipsed.


905.

This year Æthelwald induced the army in East Anglia to break the peace,
and they ravaged Mercia as far as Crecca-gelade (Cricklade), and they
crossed the Thames there, and took all they could meet with in Brædune
(Breden forest, Wiltshire), and in the neighbourhood, and then they
returned homeward. Then King Edward pursued after them as soon as he
could assemble his army, and he laid waste their land between the
Dyke (the Devil’s Ditch) and the Ouse, as far northward as the fens.
And when he was about to depart thence, he caused it to be proclaimed
throughout his army, that all the troops should keep together, but the
Kentish men remained behind against his command, though he had sent
them seven messages. Then the Danes surrounded them, and they fought,
and the Aldermen Siwulf and Sigelm, and the King’s Thane Eadwold, and
the Abbot Cenwulf, and Sigebryht the son of Siwulf, and Eadwald the son
of Acca, were slain there, and many others; though I have named the
most noted. And there fell on the side of the Danes, their King Eohric,
and Prince Æthelwald who had persuaded them to the war, and Byrhtsige
the son of Prince Beornoth, and the Holds[AG] Ysopa and Oscytel, and a
great many others whom we cannot now name. There was much slaughter on
either side, but most on that of the Danes, though they kept possession
of the field of battle. Ealhswyth died the same year, and a comet
appeared.


907.

This year Alfred who was Sheriff of Bath died: and the same year peace
was ratified at Yttingaford[AH] with the East Angles and Northumbrians,
on the terms which King Edward dictated. This year Lig-ceaster
(Chester) was repaired.


909.

This year Denulf Bishop of Winchester died, and the body of St. Oswald
was brought from Bardney into Mercia.


910.

This year Frithestan received the Bishoprick of Winchester, and after
this Asser Bishop of Sherborn died. And the same year King Edward sent
forth an army of West Saxons and Mercians, who greatly harassed the
army in the north, and seized many prisoners, and took much plunder of
all kinds, and slew many Danes, and they remained five weeks in those
parts.


911.

This year the army in Northumberland broke the peace, and set at nought
all the conditions which King Edward and his son had prescribed; and
they ravaged Mercia. And the King had assembled about an hundred ships,
and he was in Kent, and the ships sailed to the south-east along the
coast to join him. The heathens believed that the greater part of his
forces was in these ships, and that they might therefore go where
they would unmolested. When the King heard that they were gone out to
plunder, he sent his West Saxon and Mercian troops, and they followed
the Danes, and came up with them as they returned homeward, and they
attacked them and put them to flight, and killed many thousands. And
King Eowils and King Healfden were slain, and the Earl Ohter, and the
Earl Scurfa, and the Hold Othulf, and the Hold Benesing, and Anlaf the
black, and the Hold Thurferth, and Osferth the collector of tribute,
and the Hold Guthferth, and the Hold Agmund, and Guthferth.


912.

This year Æthered Alderman of Mercia died, and King Edward took into
his own government the towns of London and Oxford, and all the lands
belonging thereto; and this year on the holy eve of the discovery of
the sacred cross, Æthelflæd the Lady of Mercia came to Scergeate and
built a fortified town there, and in the same year that of Bricge
(Bridgenorth).


913.

This year, about Martinmas, King Edward caused the northern town of
Hertford to be built, between the Mermera, the Benefica (the Bean),
and the Lea. And afterwards, between Rogation week and Midsummer,
King Edward went with some of his forces to Malden, and remained
there while they built and fortified the town of Witham. And a great
part of this country, which had been under the Danish Government,
submitted to him. During this time some of his forces built that part
of the town of Hertford which is on the south side of the Lea. This
year, God permitting, Æthelflæd the Lady of Mercia, went with all the
Mercians to Tamworth, and built a fenced town there in the early
part of the summer, and before Lammas she built the town of Stafford.
And the next year she built Eadesbyrig[AI] in the beginning of the
summer, and Warwick towards the end of autumn, and after Christmas the
year following she built the fortified town of Cyric-byrig,[AJ] and
afterwards that of Weard-byrig,[AK] and again before Christmas that
year, that of Rumcofan, (Runkhorn, Cheshire).


916.

This year the guiltless Abbot Ecgbriht was slain before Midsummer,
on the 16th of the calends of July, the anniversary of the martyrdom
of St. Cyricius and his companions. And about three days afterwards
Æthelflæd sent an army into Wales, and took Brecenanmere (Brecknock)
and the King’s wife, with some four and thirty others, were made
prisoners.


917.

This year, after Easter, the army rode forth from Northampton and
Leicester, and they broke the peace and slew many men at Hocneratun
(Hognorton) and in the neighbourhood. And as soon as these returned
home, another troop was immediately assembled, which rode forth towards
Ligtun (Leighton, Bedfordshire), but the inhabitants of that country
knew of their coming, and fought with them, and completely routed them,
and seized all the plunder which they had amassed, and a great part of
their horses and arms.


918.

This year a pirate fleet came over from the south from the land of the
Lidwiccas (Britanny), with two Earls Ohtor and Hroald, and they sailed
westward and entered the Severn’s mouth, and they plundered the coasts
of North Wales wherever they could; and they took Bishop Cameleac, at
Ircinga-feld (Archenfield), and led him away to their ships, and King
Edward afterwards ransomed him for forty pounds. Then afterwards all
the army landed, and would have marched yet again towards Archenfield
to plunder, but then the men of Hereford and of Gloucester, and of the
nearest towns met them, and fought with them, and put them to flight;
and they slew the Earl Hroald, and a brother of the other Earl Ohtor,
and they drove the rest into a wood and besieged them there until they
gave hostages that they would depart from the dominions of King Edward.
The King had taken care to post troops so as to guard the southern
coast of the channel from Wales in the west (Cornwall), to the mouth
of the Avon eastward, that they might not dare to invade the country
on that side. Nevertheless they landed by night at two several times,
once east of Weced (Watchet), and again at Portloca (Porlock). And the
King’s men repulsed them each time, and few escaped but those alone,
who swam to the ships; and these remained in the isle of Bradanrelic
(Steepholm?) until they were in great want of of provisions, and many
died of hunger because they could not procure any food; then they went
to Deomod (South Wales), and thence away to Ireland. And afterwards,
the same year, King Edward went to Buckingham with his army, and he
remained there four weeks, and built fortifications on each side of
the river before he departed thence. And Earl Thurcytel acknowledged
him as his Lord, as did all the Holds and chief men of Bedford, and
most of those of Northampton. Before Lammas, this year, Æthelflæd the
Lady of Mercia, by the help of God won the town of Derby, with all its
appurtenances, but four of her most valued Thanes were slain within
the gates.


919.

This year, before Martinmas, King Edward went with an army to Bedford,
and he gained possession of that town, and almost all the inhabitants
who had before been subject to him returned to their obedience; and
he remained there four weeks, and he caused the fortifications on the
south side of the river to be built before he departed thence.


920.

This year King Edward went to Malden, and repaired and fortified the
town before he departed thence. And this year Earl Thurcytel and
his adherents went over sea into France, with the permission and
aid of King Edward. Early in this year Æthelflæd got possession of
Leicester without fighting, and the greater part of the troops of
that town became subject to her. Those at York had also engaged to
be under her command, some having given pledges to her, and others
having taken oaths. And immediately after she had effected this, she
died at Tamworth, twelve days before Midsummer, in the eighth year of
her governing Mercia with rightful dominion; and her body lieth at
Gloucester, in the eastern aisle of St. Peter’s Church. This year
also the daughter of Æthered Lord of Mercia was wholly deprived of
the government of Mercia, and carried into Wessex, three weeks before
Christmas; her name was Hælfwin.


921.

This year, before Easter, King Edward ordered his people to go to
Tofeceaster (Towcester), and to build a fortress there. And again this
year, in Rogation week, he caused a fortress to be built at Wigingamere
(Wigmore). And between Lammas and Midsummer, the troops of Northampton,
and of Leicester, and of the country north of these places, broke the
peace, and marched to Towcester, and fought all day against the town,
and they thought that they should have taken it by storm, but the men
who were within defended it until more aid arrived; and then these gave
up the attack and departed. Again, very soon afterwards, they went
forth by night on a secret expedition, and came unawares, and seized
many prisoners and much cattle between Burnewuda (Bernwood forest) and
Ægles-byrig (Ailesbury). And at the same time the army of Huntingdon
and of East Anglia came, and built the fortress at Temesford
(Tempsford), where they fixed themselves, and strengthened the place,
deserting their other post of Huntingdon; and they intended to make
their excursions from this station, and thought that thus they should
again get the greater part of this land into their power. And they
went forth until they came to Bedford, but the garrison marched out
against them, and fought with them, and put them to flight, and slew a
great part of them. Yet after this a great army again assembled from
East Anglia and Mercia and proceeded to Wigmore, and they surrounded
the place, and fought against it till late in the day, and they seized
the cattle in the neighbourhood; nevertheless the garrison defended
the town and they gave up the assault and departed. After this, the
same summer, a large body of King Edward’s subjects was collected
from the towns[AL] nearest Tempsford, and they marched thither and
besieged that town, and they fought against it until they took it. And
they slew the King and Earl Toglos, and his son Earl Manna, and his
brother and all those who would have resisted, and they took captive
the remainder, and the town they plundered. And immediately after this,
in harvest, a great force was collected out of Kent, out of Surrey,
and out of Essex, and out of the towns around on all sides, and they
marched to Colchester, and they besieged the town and fought against it
until they subdued it, and they seized all that was therein, and they
slew all the inhabitants excepting those who escaped over the wall.
And during the same autumn a great army was gathered together out of
East Anglia, consisting of the land forces, and also of such Vikingar
as the others had persuaded to join them; and they thought to satisfy
their desire of vengeance. They went to Malden and besieged that town,
and they fought there until aid came to the Burghers from without,
and then the army left the town and departed. And the townsmen, and
those who had arrived to succour them, sallied forth after them, and
put them to flight, and slew many hundreds both pirates and others.
Immediately after this, during the same autumn, King Edward went to
Passenham with the troops of Wessex, and he abode there while his men
inclosed Towcester with a stone wall. And Earl Thurferth and the Holds,
and all the army at Northampton, and those, of the country northward as
far as Weolud (the Welland), came over to him, and acknowledged him as
their Lord and protector. And when at the regular time the troops he
had with him returned to their homes, others took the field, and these
proceeded to Huntingdon, and they repaired the town by King Edward’s
orders, and rebuilt that part of it which had been pulled down. And
all who remained of the inhabitants of that country gave themselves
up to King Edward, and sought his favour and protection. And again
the same year, before Martinmas, King Edward went to Colchester with
the Wessex troops, and he repaired the town and restored that which
had been demolished. And a large body of people in East Anglia and in
Essex, who had before been under the Danish dominion, came over to him.
And all the army of East Anglia swore to be as one with him; that they
would will all that he should will, and that they would keep peace
both by sea and land with all whom he should befriend. And the army at
Grantanbrycge (Cambridge) separately acknowledged him for their Lord
and patron, and confirmed this with oaths even as he had desired. This
year King Sihtric slew his brother Niel.


922.

This year, between Rogation week and Midsummer, King Edward went
with an army to Stamford, and caused fortifications to be made on
the southern side of the river, and the inhabitants of the town on
the northern bank submitted to him, and acknowledged him as their
Lord.--And whilst he remained at this place, his sister Æthelflæd died
at Tamworth, twelve days before Midsummer. And then he rode to the town
of Tamworth, and all the people, who had been under the government of
Æthelflæd became his subjects: and the Kings of North Wales, Howel and
Cledauc and Jeothwel, and all that nation, acknowledged him as their
Lord. Thence he went to Nottingham, and he took that town, and caused
it to be repaired, and he peopled it with English and Danes. And all
the inhabitants of Mercia, both Danes and English, came over to him.


923.

This year, after harvest, King Edward went with an army to Thælwæl
(Thelwall), and caused that town to be built and fortified and
garrisoned. And whilst he abode there, he commanded another army,
raised in Mercia, to go to Manchester, in Northumberland, to repair
and garrison that town. This year Archbishop Plegemund died; and King
Regnold conquered York.


924.

This year, before Midsummer, King Edward went with an army to
Nottingham, and caused a town to be built on the south side of the
river, over against the other, with a bridge across the Trent between
the two. And thence he went to Badecanwylla (Bakewell), in Peakland,
and caused a town to be built and garrisoned in the neighbourhood. And
the King of the Scots and all the Scottish nation chose him for their
Father and Lord, and thus did Regwnald and the sons of Eadulf, and all
the inhabitants of Northumberland, both English and Danes, Northmen and
others; also the King of the Strathclyde Britons and all that people.


925.

This year King Edward died at Fearndun (Ferringdon), in Mercia, and
very soon afterwards his son Ælfweard died at Oxford, and their bodies
rest in Winchester. And Æthestan was chosen King by the Mercians,
and he was consecrated at Cingestun (Kingston upon Thames). And
St. Duntstan was born, and Wulfhelm received the Archbishoprick of
Canterbury.


927.

This year King Æthelstan expelled King Guthfrith, and this year
Archbishop Wulfhelm went to Rome.


928.

William succeeded in Normandy, and held the government 15 years.


932.

This year Byrnstan was consecrated Bishop of Winchester, on the 4th of
the calends of June, and he held the Bishoprick two years and a half.


933.

This year Bishop Frithestan died; and Prince Ædwine was drowned in the
sea.


934.

This year King Athelstan invaded Scotland with an army and a fleet, and
he ravaged a great part of the country. And Bishop Byrnstan died at
Winchester on All Saint’s day.


935.

This year Bishop Ælfheah received the Bishoprick of Winchester.


938.[AM]

This year King Athelstan the Lord of Earls, the Giver of Bracelets
to the Nobles, and his brother Edmund the Atheling, the elder, the
survivors of their race, the children of Edward, won lasting glory
with the edge of the sword in battle at Brunanburh.[AN] They clave
the wooden walls, they hewed down the tall banners, for it was the
portion of their lineage, that oft in the field they should defend
their lands, their treasures, their homes, against the enemy. The Scot
and the Ship-man fell on every side--the din of arms resounded sith
the sun in the morning tide rose glad over the earth, greatest of the
stars, bright candle of God the Lord Eternal, till the noblest of
things created sank in the west. There, struck down with darts, lay
many a warrior, Northmen pierced over their shields--Scots the savages
of war--The West Saxons, a chosen band, pressed the live-long day upon
the hated people. Sternly they smote down the flying multitudes, with
swords well sharpened at the stone. The Mercians shrank not from the
hard play of hands. Safety there was none for the companions of Anlaf,
for those who sought the land for deadly fight over the billowy sea,
bosomed in ships.--Five young Kings lay on the battle field, put to
sleep by the swords. So also seven Earls of Anlaf, and of the host from
the fleet, and of the Scots, more than can be numbered. The King of the
Northmen with his little troop fled in his terror to the voice of the
ship; the King of the Fleet, with one ship’s crew, living escaped over
the yellow deep.

So also the routed Constantine returned a fugitive to his northern
hills. The hoary warrior needed not to exult in the conflict of
swords.--He was the remnant of his race. His kinsmen were heaped on
the field--slain in the battle. He left his son on the place of blood,
covered with wounds. Young in war though old in wisdom, the fair-haired
youth was staid in his glorying by the bill of slaughter.

Neither could Anlaf and his broken army boast that they were better in
works of battle; at the fall of banners, at the meeting of darts, in
the conflict of men, in the exchange of weapons, when they had played
with the children of Edward in the field of death.

The Northmen, the sorrowful few spared by the darts, departed in their
nailed ships over the roaring sea--over the deep waters. They sailed
for Dublin, and disgraced their land.

Then the brothers, the King and the Atheling, returned to their
country, the West Saxon land. They left behind them the screamers of
war, the birds of prey. The sallow kite, and the black raven with the
horny beak, and the hoarse-voiced eagle devouring the white flesh, with
the battle-hawk, and the grey beast the wolf of the wood. Never in this
island had a greater destruction of men been worked by the edge of
the sword, say the books of the Wise Elders, since the Saxons and the
Angles came hither from the east--to Britain over the broad sea. Since
those glorious Earls, who smote the Welch on the anvil of battle, and
obtained their lands.


941.

This year King Athelstan died on the 6th of the calends of November,
forty-one years all but one day after the death of King Alfred; and the
Prince Edmund succeeded to the kingdom. He was then 18 years old; and
King Athelstan had reigned 14 years and 10 weeks.


942.

This year King Edmund, the Lord of the English, the protector of his
kinsmen, the worker of mighty deeds, conquered all Mercia unto the way
of the white spring, and the broad and sea-like stream of the river
Humber. Five towns, Leicester, and Lincoln, and Nottingham, Stamford
also, and Derby, lay in Danish thraldom, bowed under the power of the
Northmen, held in long durance, until the warlike heir of Edward, to
his own glory, delivered them from heathen bondage.

King Edmund stood as godfather at the baptism of King Anlaf; and late
in the same year he was godfather to King Regenold at his confirmation.
This year King Anlaf died. And Richard the Elder succeeded (in
Normandy), and reigned 52 years.


944.

This year King Edmund reduced all Northumberland, and drove out two
Kings, Anlaf the son of Syhtric and Regenald the son of Guthferth.


945.

This year King Edmund ravaged all Cumberland, and gave it to Malcolm
King of the Scots, on condition that he should join forces with him by
sea and by land.


946.

This year King Edmund died[AO] on St. Augustine’s day; he had reigned
six years and an half, and his brother Prince Edred succeeded to the
kingdom. He soon brought all Northumberland into his power, and the
Scots took oaths that they would will all that he should will.

949.

This year Anlaf came back to Northumberland.


951.

This year Ælfheah Bishop of Winchester died on St. Gregory’s day.


952.

This year the Northumbrians drove out King Anlaf, and took for their
king Yric the son of Harold.


954.

This year the Northumbrians expelled Yric, and King Ædred took to
himself the kingdom of Northumberland.


955.

This year King Ædred died in the prime of life on St. Clement’s day; he
had reigned nine years and a half: then Edwy the son of King Edmund and
of St. Ælgiva, succeeded to the kingdom, and he banished St. Dunstan
from the country.


956.

This year Wulstan Archbishop of York died; and this year Prince Edgar
received the kingdom of Mercia.


957.

This year King Edwy died on the calends of October, and his brother
Edgar took to himself the kingdom of Wessex, as well as Mercia and
Northumberland; he was then 16 years old.--There was prosperity in
his days, and God gave him to abide in peace so long as he lived, and
he, as it beseemed him, strove to merit this favour. He every where
exalted the glory of God, and he loved the laws of God, and attended
to the peace of the people, more than any King before in the memory of
man. And God also shewed him favour, so that Kings and Earls willingly
obeyed him, and submitted to that which he desired, and without
opposition he ruled all things according to his own pleasure. He was
greatly honoured throughout the nation because he willingly gave honour
to the name of God, and he often meditated in the law of God, and
exalted the glory of God far and wide, and he always took wise counsel
for his people before God and before the world. Yet was he guilty of
one great sin, in that he loved the vicious habits of foreign nations,
and established heathenish customs in this land, and invited hither
outlandish and mischievous people: but God grant that his good actions
may have outweighed his misdeeds, to the salvation of his soul in the
last day. This year he sent for St. Dunstan and gave him the bishoprick
of Worcester, and afterwards that of London.


961.

This year the good Archbishop Odo died, and St. Dunstan[AP] received
the Archbishoprick of Canterbury. This year the King’s kinsman Ælfgar
died in Devon, and his body lieth at Wilton. And King Sigeferth killed
himself, and his body resteth at Winborn. And this year there was a
great pestilence among men, and a great fever in London, and Paul’s
monastery was burned and was rebuilt the same year. This year the
priest Athelmod went to Rome, and he died there on the 18th of the
calends of September.


963.

This year the Deacon Wulfstan died, on Childermas-day, and after this
died Cyric the Priest. The same year the Abbot Athelwold received the
Bishoprick of Winchester, and was consecrated on a Sunday, the vigil
of St. Andrew. The second year after his consecration be founded many
monasteries, and he drove the clergy out of his bishoprick because they
would observe no rule, and he placed monks in their room. He founded
two abbeys, one for monks, the other for nuns, both in Winchester.
Afterwards he went to King Edgar, and desired of him that he would give
him all the monasteries which the heathens had destroyed, for that
he would restore them; and the King willingly granted his request.
And the Bishop came first to Ely, where. St. Ætheldrith lieth, and
he caused the monastery to be rebuilt, and he gave it to one of his
monks named Brihtnoth. He consecrated him abbot, and he established
monks there to serve God, whereas the place was formerly inhabited by
nuns, and he bought many small estates of the King, and made it very
rich. Afterwards Bishop Athelwold came to the monastery that is called
Medeshamstede, which had been destroyed by the heathens, and he found
nothing there but old walls and wild woods. He found also hidden in
the old wall the records which the abbot Headda had formerly written,
how King Wulfhere and his brother Æthelred had built the monastery,
and had made it free of the King, of the Bishop, and of all earthly
service; and how the Pope Agatho had confirmed this with his rescript,
and the Archbishop Deusdedit also. He then caused the monastery to
be rebuilt, and he appointed an abbot whose name was Aldulf, and he
peopled that place with monks, which was before a wilderness. Then he
came to the King, and caused him to look at the writings which had
been found, and the King then answered and said, “I King Edgar, before
God and in presence of the Archbishop Dunstan, do this day grant to
St. Peter’s monastery of Medeshamstede, freedom from subjection to
the King and to the Bishop, and do endow it with all these adjoining
villages, to wit, Æst-feld (Eastfield), and Dodes-thorp (Dasthorp), and
Ege (Eye), and Pastun (Paston). And I so make it free, that no Bishop
shall have any authority over it, but the abbot of the monastery alone.
And I give the town called Undela (Oundle) with all the land belonging
to it, which is called the Eahte hundred, with the markets and tolls,
so freely, that neither the King, nor the Bishop, nor the Earl,
nor the Sheriff of the county, shall have any power there, neither
any man, excepting the abbot alone, and those whom he may appoint
thereto. And at the request of Bishop Athelwold, I give these lands
to Christ and to St. Peter, to wit, Barwe (Barrow or Berk, Rutland),
Wermington (Warmington, Northamptonshire), Æsctun (Ashton, near
Oundle?), Kettering, Castra (Castor, Northamptonshire), Egleswurthe
(Ailesworth), Walton, Withringtun (Werrington), Ege (Eye), Thorp (near
Kettering); and I empower them to have a moneyer at Stamford. And I
herewith assign to Christ and to St. Peter the sac and soc, toll and
team, and infangentheof, and all other rights attached to the lands,
and to others belonging to the monastery. And I give two parts of
Witlesmere (Whittleseymere) with the waters, the wears, and the fens,
and so on through Merelade unto the river which is called the Nen, and
so eastward to Cyngesdælf. And it is my will that a market be held in
that town, and that there be no other betwixt Stamford and Huntingdon;
and I will, that the toll should be given thus: first, from Witlesmere
as far as the King’s toll of Northmannes-cross (Normancross) hundred
and again on the other side, from Witlesmere through Merelade unto the
Nen, and thence as the water runneth to Croyland, and from Croyland to
Must, and from Must to Cyngesdælf and to Witlesmere. And I will that
all the exemptions and all the privileges granted by my predecessors
stand good and I subscribe to this, and do confirm it with the cross of
Christ.” Then Dunstan the Archbishop of Canterbury answered and said,
“I confirm all that has been said, and I will that all things which
thy predecessors and mine have, granted should stand; and whosoever
breaketh this grant, to him give I the curse of God, and of all the
saints, and that of every consecrated head, and my curse also, unless
he come to repentance I also give to St. Peter my surplice, stole, and
vestment for the service of Christ.” “I Oswald Archbishop of York do
ratify all these words with the sign of the holy cross on which Christ
suffered.” “I Bishop Athelwold bless all who; do observe this, and I
excommunicate whomsoever breaketh it, unless he come to repentance.”
There were present also the Bishops Ælfstan and Athulf, and the Abbots
Escwi and Osgar and Æthelgar, and the Aldermen Ælfere, Æthelwine,
Brihtnoth, and Oslac, with many other great men, and they all confirmed
this grant, and subscribed thereto the cross of Christ. This was done
972 years after the birth of our Lord, and in the 16th year of the
King’s reign. Then the Abbot Aldulf bought many lands, with which he
endowed the monastery; and he remained there till the death of Oswald
Archbishop of York, on which he was chosen to succeed him. And another
Abbot was immediately chosen out of the same monastery; his name was
Kenulf, and he was afterwards Bishop of Winchester. He first built the
walls round about the monastery, and he gave it the name of Burch,
whereas it had before been called Medeshamstede. He remained there
until he was nominated Bishop of Winchester, and then another Abbot,
whose name was Ælfsi, was chosen out of the same monastery. This Ælfsi
was Abbot there fifty years; he took up St. Kyneburh and St. Kynesvith
who lay at Castra (Castor), and St. Tibba, who was buried at Rihala
(Ryal or Ryehall, Rutland), and he presented all these relics to St.
Peter in one day, and he kept them whilst he remained there.


964.

This year King Edgar drove the priests of Winchester out of the old
monastery, and out of the new also, and out of Ceortesige (Chertsey),
and out of Middel-tun (Milton Abbey, Dorsetshire), and placed monks
in their room. And he made Æthelgar Abbot of the new monastery, and
Ordbryht Abbot of Chertsey, and Cyneweard of Milton.


966.

This year Thored the son of Gunner ravaged Westmoreland: and the same
year Oslac received the office of Alderman.


969.

This year King Edgar caused all Thanet to be laid waste.


970.

This year died Archbishop Oskytel. He was first consecrated to the
Bishoprick of Dorchester, and was afterwards translated to the see of
York, with the sanction of King Edred and all his Witan. He was Bishop
22 years, and he died at Tame on All Saints’ night, ten nights before
Martinmas; and his kinsman the Abbot Thurkytel carried the Bishop’s
body to Bedford, for he was Abbot there at that time.


971.

This year Prince Edmund died, and he was buried at Rumsige (Rumsey).


973.

This year Edgar the ruler of the English was consecrated as King
with great pomp in the ancient town of Acemannes-ceaster, which the
inhabitants also call Bath. There was much joy among all the sons of
men on that blessed day, called the day of Pentecost. There was a
multitude of priests, and a great throng of monks, wise men in my mind,
gathered together. At that time ten hundred years were reckoned to have
passed away since the birth of the King of glory, the Keeper of Light,
excepting only, that, as writers say, twenty-seven winters were wanting
thereto. So nearly was the thousandth year of our conquering Lord
completed when this event took place. And the son of Edmund, the man of
mighty deeds, had then been nine and twenty years in the world, and in
his thirtieth year he was a King, and consecrated.

And soon afterwards the King led all his fleet to Chester; and six
Kings met him there, and promised faithfully that they would aid him by
sea and by land.


975.

This year Edgar, King of the English, ended his earthly joys; he chose
for himself another light, beautiful and pleasant, and gave up this
worthless life, which the children of the people, the men of dust,
confess to be so vain. It was in that month which every where in this
country is called July by those who have been rightly instructed in
the art of numbers, and on the 18th day of the month, that the young
Edgar, the giver of bracelets to the valiant, departed this life. And
then his son, a child not full-grown, succeeded to the kingdom: he was
the ruler of Earls, and his name was Edward--a prince most excellent.
Ten days before this Britain lost Cyneweard, that good and kindly
Bishop. At that time, to my mind, the glory of the Supreme governor was
trampled on throughout Mercia, many of God’s wise servants were driven
away, and this was a great sorrow to those who bore in their hearts
and minds an ardent love of their Creator. Then indeed was the author
of miracles set at nought, he who is the disposer of victory, and the
law-giver of heaven, when men violated his right. And then also that
beloved chieftain Oslac was driven from the land, and that long-haired
warrior, wise and discreet in words, was borne, bereaved of an home, on
the rolling waves, on the sea bird’s bath, on the roaring waters, over
the country of the whales. And then a star appeared in the sky, above
in the firmament, which strong-minded men, of deep learning, skilful
men, and wise soothsayers, universally call a comet. The vengeance of
the Almighty was upon the nation, and a dire famine in the country.
But this again, the ruler of Heaven, the Lord of the angels, removed,
and gave bliss to every inhabitant through the fruitfulness of the
earth.

This year the Alderman Ælfere caused the monks to be turned out of very
many monasteries which the holy Bishop Athelwold had established by the
command of King Edgar. This year the great Earl Oslac was driven from
England.


976.

This year there was a great famine in England.


977.

This year a great meeting was held after Easter at Kyntlingtun
(Kirtlington?), and there Bishop Sideman died suddenly on the 2d of the
calends of May. He was Bishop of Devonshire, and he willed that his
body’s resting place should be at his metropolitan see of Cridiantun
(Crediton). Then King Edward and Archbishop Dunstan commanded that he
should be carried to St. Mary’s monastery of Abbandun (Abingdon); this
was done, and he was honourably buried in the north side of St. Peter’s
aisle.


978.

This year all the chief of the Witan of the English nation fell from
an upper floor at Calne, excepting the holy Archbishop Dunstan alone,
who stood upon a beam, and some had their bones broken, and others
escaped not with their lives. This year King Edward was slain at
Corfes-geat (Corfe Castle), in the evening of the 15th of the calends
of April, and he was buried at Wareham without any royal honours. No
worse deed than this had been committed amongst the people of the
Angles since they first came to the land of Britain. Men murdered
him, but God gave him glory. In his life he was an earthly King, but
now after his death he is a Saint in heaven. His mortal kinsmen would
not avenge him, but his heavenly Father hath avenged him greatly. His
earthly murderers would have blotted out his memory from the world, but
the avenger who is above hath widely extended his fame in heaven and
earth: and whereas they formerly would not bow down before his living
body, now they piteously bend their knees to his dead bones. We may
gather hence, that the wisdom of men, their devices and counsels, avail
nothing against the purposes of God. And the same year his brother
Prince Æthelred took to himself the kingdom, and was consecrated very
soon afterwards at Cyninges-tun (Kingston), with great rejoicing of
the Witan of the English nation.


980.

This year St. Dunstan and the Alderman Ælfhere fetched the body of the
holy King St. Edward from Wareham, and brought it with great pomp to
Shaftesbury.


981.

This year seven ships first came and plundered Southampton.


983.

This year the Alderman Ælfhere died and Ælfric succeeded to his office.


984.

This year died the good Bishop Athelwold, the father of monks: and the
consecration of his successor Ælfheah, who was also called Godwin, took
place on the 14th of the calends of November, and he was installed at
Winchester on the feast of the two Apostles Simon and Jude. And this
year Eadwine was consecrated Abbot of Abingdon.


985.

This year the Alderman Ælfric was banished.


986.

This year the King laid waste the Bishoprick of Rochester, and this
year the great distemper among the cattle first afflicted the English
nation.


987.

This year Weced-port (Watchet) was plundered.


988.

This year the Danish Thane Goda was killed, and many with him. And
this year the holy Archbishop Dunstan gave up this life, and entered
upon that of heaven; and Bishop Æthelgar succeeded him in the
Archbishoprick, and he lived but a short time afterwards, only one year
and three months.


989.

This year the Abbot Ædwine died, and Wulfgar succeeded him. And Siric
was consecrated Archbishop, and he afterwards went to Rome for his pall.


991.

This year Ipswich was plundered, and very soon afterwards the Alderman
Brihtnoth was slain at Maiden. And the same year it was first proposed
that a tribute should be paid to the Danes, because of the great terror
in which they kept the coasts. This tribute was at first ten thousand
pounds: it was Archbishop Siric who gave this as his counsel.


992.

This year the blessed Archbishop Oswald departed this life, and entered
upon that of heaven; and the Alderman Æthelwine died the same year.
Then the King and his Witan determined that all the ships which were
fit for service should be assembled at London; and the King put this
fleet under the command of the Alderman Ealfric, and of the Earl
Thorode, and of the Bishops Ælfstane and Æscwig, and they were ordered
to endeavour to surprise and block up the Danes. Then the Alderman
Ælfric sent and warned them; and in the night preceding the day on
which an engagement would have taken place, he himself left his fleet,
to his exceeding dishonour, and the enemy escaped, excepting one ship,
which was destroyed. And then they met the ships of East Anglia and of
London, and there they made a great slaughter, and they took the ship
in which the Alderman sailed, and which was well manned and fitted out.

Upon the death of Archbishop Oswald, Ealdulf Abbot of Peterborough
was raised to the Bishoprick of York and Worcester, and Kenulf to the
Abbacy of Peterborough.


993.

This, year Anlaf came to Staines with 93 ships, and plundered that
part of the country; and he went thence to Sandwich, and so on to
Ipswich, and laid all waste, and thus he proceeded to Malden. And then
the Alderman Byrhtnoth came against him, and their armies fought,
but the Alderman was slain, and Anlaf’s army kept possession of the
field of battle, and peace was made with him, and the King afterwards
stood godfather at his confirmation, by the advice of Siric Bishop
of Canterbury and of Ælfeag of Winchester. This year Bamborough was
destroyed, and much plunder was seized there. And after this the Army
came to the mouth of the Humber, and did great damage in Lindsey
and in Northumberland. Then a great number of troops were gathered
together, but when they were about to engage in battle, their leaders
first betook themselves to flight. These were Fræna, and Godwin, and
Frithegist. The same year the King put out the eyes of Ælfgar the son
of the Alderman Ælfric.


994.

This year Archbishop Sigeric died, and Ælfric Bishop of Wiltshire was
chosen as his successor by King Æthelred and his Witan, at Ambresbyri
(Amesbury), on Easter-day. This year Anlaf and Swegen came to London on
the nativity of St. Mary, with 94 ships, and they attacked the city
vigorously, and they also attempted to burn it with fire, but they
suffered more loss and injury than they could ever have looked for
from any townsmen, for the holy Mother of God in her mercy manifested
herself to the inhabitants, and delivered them from their enemies. And
then these departed, and did as much damage as any army might, burning,
plundering, and slaying, along the coasts of Essex, of Kent, of Sussex,
and of Hampshire. And at length they took horses and rode far and
wide wherever they would, and they did unspeakable mischief. Then the
King and his Witan determined to send to them and offer them tribute
and a supply of provisions, on condition that they would abstain from
plundering. This they accepted, and all the army came to Southampton,
and there they took up their winter quarters, and all the kingdom of
Wessex provided food for them, and sixteen thousand pounds were paid to
them. Then the King sent the Bishop Ælfeach and the Alderman Æthelward
for King Anlaf, and hostages were left in the ships, while they brought
him with much pomp to the King at Andover; and King Æthelred stood
godfather at his confirmation, and gave him royal presents. And Anlaf
made him then a promise, which he also fulfilled, that he would never
again come with hostile designs against the English nation.

“This year Richard the elder died, and his son Richard succeeded him,
and reigned 31 years” (in Normandy).


995.

This year a comet appeared.


997.

This year the Army sailed round Devonshire into the mouth of the
Severn, and plundered in Cornwall, Wales, and Devon; and they landed at
Watchet, and did much damage there, burning and slaying. And after this
they sailed southward, and round Penwiht-steort (the Land’s end), and
they entered the mouth of the Thamar, and proceeded up that river until
they came to Lydeford, and they burned and slew all before them; and
they burned Ordulf’s monastery at Ætefingstoce (Tavistock), and carried
innumerable spoils to their ships. This year Archbishop Ælfric went to
Rome for his pall.


998.

This year the Army again turned eastward into the mouth of the Frome,
and they made inroads upon Dorsetshire as far as they would on either
side. And troops were often gathered together against them, but
whenever they were about to engage, from some cause or other, a flight
constantly took place, and the enemy always obtained the victory in
the end. At another time they lay off the Isle of Wight, and supplied
themselves with provisions from Hampshire and Sussex.


999.

This year the Army again sailed round into the Thames, and came up the
Medway as far as Rochester. And the Kentish troops marched against
them, and fought with them bravely: but too soon, alas! they gave way
and fled, because they had not the support which they ought to have
had. Then the Danes kept possession of the field of battle, and having
seized horses they rode far and wide wherever they chose, and they
plundered and laid waste nearly all the western part of Kent. Then the
King with his Witan resolved that both a fleet and an army should be
sent against them; but when the ships were ready, they delayed them
from day to day, and oppressed the miserable people who served in them.
And whenever the ships were going to sail, they were always stopped
from time to time, and they allowed the enemy’s forces to increase
continually, and whenever these retired from the coast, they then went
forth after them. In the end this fleet served no purpose, but to weary
the men, to waste money, and to encourage the enemy.


1000.

This year the King went into Cumberland and laid waste nearly the whole
of it; and his ships attempted to get round Chester, and were to have
met him, but they were not able; then they plundered Mænige (Anglesey).
And the enemy’s fleet sailed this summer to the dominions of Richard.


1001.

This year the peace of England was much disturbed by the pirates, who
plundered and burned in all parts; and thus they proceeded in one
course until they came to Æthelinga-dene (Alton), and there the men of
Hampshire met them, and fought with them. And the King’s High Sheriff
Ethelweard was killed there, and Leofric of Whitechurch, and Leofwine
the King’s High Sheriff, and Wulfhere the Bishop’s Thane, and Godwin of
Weorthig (Worthing?) the son of Bishop Ælfsig, and there fell 81 men
in all. And many more were slain on the part of the Danes, although
they kept possession of the field of battle. And thence they proceeded
northward until they came into Devon, and there Pallig joined them
with all the ships that he could collect, for he had deserted from
King Ethelred after all the assurances of fidelity which he had given
him, and although the King had been very bountiful to him, in gifts
of houses, of gold, and of silver. And they burned Tegnton (Teynton),
and many other good villages which we cannot name, and afterwards the
people of that country made a treaty with them; and they departed
thence to Exmouth, and so they went on in one course until they came
to Peonnho (Pen), and there Cola the King’s High Sheriff, and Eadsige
the King’s Sheriff, came against them with the troops which they had
gathered together, but they were put to flight and many were slain, and
the Danes kept possession of the field of battle. And the next morning
they burned the villages of Pen and of Clifton, and many good villages
besides which we cannot name. And then they proceeded eastward until
they arrived at Wight, and in the morning they there burned the village
of Wealtham and many other hamlets, and the inhabitants soon treated
with them and obtained peace.


1002.

This year the King and his Witan again resolved to give tribute to the
fleet, and to negociate a peace with them, on condition that they would
cease from doing mischief. Then the King sent the Alderman Leofsig
to the fleet, and there he set forth the King’s words, and the peace
proposed by the Witan, that they should receive provisions and tribute;
and they accepted these terms, on which twenty-four thousand pounds
were paid to them. At this time the Alderman Leofsig slew the King’s
High Sheriff Æfic, and the King banished him from the country. And
during the same Lent, the Lady the daughter of Richard, came to this
land. In the summer of the same year Archbishop Eadulf (Ealdulf) died:
and this year also the King gave command that all the Danes in England
should be slain on St. Brice’s day, because it had been reported to him
that they had a design to murder him first, and then all his Witan, and
thereupon to possess his kingdom without opposition.


1003.

This year Exeter was taken through the ill conduct of the French churl
Hugo, whom the Lady had placed there as her Sheriff; and the Army
entirely destroyed the town, and seized much plunder. Then a large
number of troops was gathered together from Wiltshire and Hampshire,
and they marched against the Army with great readiness; and the
Alderman Ælfric should have led these troops, but he practised his
former wiles, for as soon as they were so near that either array might
behold the other, he gave out that he was ill, and feigned sickness,
and thus deceived the troops whom he ought to have headed, even as it
is said--“When the General sickeneth, then the whole army is sorely
hindered.” When Swegn saw that they were not unanimous and that they
all began to return, he led his army to Wilton, and plundered and
burned that town, and thence they proceeded to Salisbury, and thence to
the coast again, and thither he carried their provender to his horses
of the sea.[AQ]


1004.

This year Swegn came with his fleet to Norwich, and plundered and
burned the whole town. Then Ulfkytel with the Witan of East Anglia
concluded that it was better to buy a peace of that army before they
did much harm in the country; for the enemy had come upon him unawares,
neither had he time to collect his troops; but in the time of truce the
Danes stole up from the ships and directed their course to Thetford.
When Ulfkytel heard this, he sent desiring that the ships might be hewn
in pieces, but this order was neglected. He himself assembled troops
secretly, as speedily as he might. And the invaders came to Thetford
within three weeks from the time that they first plundered Norwich, and
they remained one night in that town, and then plundered and burned
it. Then in the morning when they would have returned to their ships,
Ulfkytel came up with his troops, and they engaged in battle with fury,
and the slaughter was great on either side. The prime of East Anglia
fell there, but if all their forces had been collected, the Danes, as
they acknowledged, would never have returned to their ships.


1005.

This year died Archbishop Ælfric, and Bishop Ælfeah succeeded him in
the Archbishoprick. This year there was a great famine in England, such
as men never before remembered, it was so dreadful. And this year the
fleet sailed from this country to Denmark, but returned again in a very
short time.


1006.

This year Ælfehg was consecrated Archbishop; and Bishop Brihtwold
received the bishoprick of Wiltshire (Sherborn). And Wulfgeate was
deprived of all his honours, and Wulfeah and Ufegeat were blinded,
and the Alderman Ælfelm was slain, and Bishop Kenulf died. Then after
Midsummer the Danish fleet came to Sandwich and did all as they were
wont, plundering, burning, and slaying wherever they went. Then the
King caused all the West Saxons and Mercians to be called out, and they
kept the field against the Army all the autumn, yet this was of no more
avail than many times before, but for all this the Army went where it
would, and this campaign did the inhabitants more injury than they had
ever before suffered from any force, native or foreign. And in the
beginning of winter the troops returned home, and the enemy came after
Martinmas to their safe quarters in Wight, and thence they procured
for themselves whatever they wanted from all parts. At mid-winter
they went forth to get supplies, and marched through Hampshire into
Berkshire, and they proceeded as far as Reading, and they did as they
were wont and lighted their beacons wherever they came. And thence they
marched to Wallingford and entirely destroyed that town, and passing by
Æsces-dune (Aston) they made for Cwichelmes-hlæwe (Cuckamsley-hill), so
that they never approached the sea, but returned homeward the other
way. Then the troops of the country were assembled at Cynetan (Kennet),
and there they engaged in battle, and forthwith the enemy put these
troops to flight, and afterwards carried their spoils to the sea.
Then might the inhabitants of Winchester see that proud and fearless
Army marching past their very gates carrying with them to the sea
provisions and treasures from a distance of above fifty miles. The King
had crossed the Thames into Shropshire, and there he kept the feast
of Christmas. Then the dread of the Army became so great, that none
could think or imagine how they might be expelled from the country, or
how this land might be defended against them, for they had grievously
defaced every shire of Wessex with burning and devastation. The King
began anxiously to enquire of his Witan what measures they all thought
advisable to be taken for the preservation of this land before it was
entirely ruined. Then the King and his Witan agreed, that, for the good
of the people, they must pay tribute, though they were all unwilling so
to do. Then the King sent to the Army, and caused it to be told them
that he desired that there should be peace between them and him, and
that tribute and provisions should be delivered to them; and they all
accepted these conditions, and they were supported by the whole English
nation.


1007.

This year the tribute was paid to the Army; it was thirty thousand
pounds; and this year also Ædric was appointed Alderman over all the
kingdom of Mercia.


1008.

This year the King commanded that ships should be built and fitted
out with diligence throughout England, at this assessment, one vessel
from every 310 hides of land, and from eight hides a helmet and a
breast-plate.


1009.

This year the ships were ready of which we have before spoken, and
inasmuch as we learn from books, so many were never constructed by
the English nation in any King’s days; and they were all collected at
Sandwich, that they might lie off that port, and defend this land from
every foreigner. But yet the country had neither the fortune nor honour
to profit more by this fleet than by former armaments.

It was at this time, or a little earlier, that Brihtric the brother of
the Alderman Edric accused Childe Wulfnoth the South Saxon the father
of Earl Godwin before the King; on which Wulfnoth departed, and got
together twenty ships, and plundered the whole southern coast, and
did all manner of evil. Then it was said in the fleet that Wulfnoth
might easily be taken if the attempt were made, on which Brihtric
went forth with eighty ships, and he thought that he should gain
great fame, and that he should bring back Wulfnoth alive or dead. But
as they were proceeding in search of him, such a wind arose against
them as had never been remembered, and the ships were beaten about
and dispersed and driven ashore; and Wulfnoth immediately came and
burned them. When it was known in the remainder of the fleet where the
King was, how the other ships had fared, it seemed as if all plan and
conduct were lost, and the King, with the Aldermen and High-Witan,
returned home; thus lightly did they leave their ships, and the people
who were in them rowed them back to London. And in this manner they
caused the effort of the whole nation to fail, and the dread of the
enemy was in no wise lessened, as all the English people had hoped.
When the fleet was thus broken up, there came an immense army of the
enemy to Sandwich soon after Lammas, and forthwith they went their
way to Canterbury, and would speedily have stormed the town, had not
the inhabitants with greater speed begged for peace, and all the men
of East Kent made a peace with that army, for which they gave three
thousand pounds. And soon after this the army sailed round as far as
Wight, and they plundered and burned there as was their wont, and also
in Sussex, in Hampshire, and in Berkshire. Then the King ordered all
the nation to arms, that every quarter might be defended against them;
nevertheless they went wherever they would. At one time the King with
all the troops which he had collected, had intercepted them as they
were returning to their ships, but when all his people were ready to
fall upon them, the attack was prevented as usual by the Alderman
Ædric. Then after Martinmas the army returned into Kent, and took up
their winter quarters on the Thames, and lived upon Essex and upon the
neighbouring counties on each side of that river; and they frequently
attacked London, but, God be praised, the town yet stands in safety:
for they ever failed in their attempts against it. And after Christmas
they set out on an expedition through Chiltern, and so to Oxford, and
they burned that town, and they plundered on each side of the Thames
in returning towards the ships. But when they were warned that troops
were assembled at London to oppose them, they passed over at Staines:
thus they went on all the winter, and they were in Kent during Lent and
repaired their ships.


1010.

This year, after Easter, the aforesaid Army invaded the Angles; they
landed at Ipswich and marched straight forward to the place where, as
they had heard, Ulfcytel was with his troops. This was on the morning
of Ascension-day, and the East Anglians soon took to flight, but the
men of Cambridgeshire stood their ground firmly. The King’s son in
law Æthelstan was slain there, and Oswi and his sons, and Wulfric the
son of Leofwin, and Eadwig the brother of Æfic, and many other good
Thanes, and more than can be numbered of the common people. Thurcytel
Myranheafod began the flight, and the Danes kept possession of the
field of battle, and there they obtained horses; and after this they
were masters of East Anglia, and they continued to burn and plunder
that country for the space of three months, and they even penetrated
into the wild fens, and slew both men and cattle, and they set all on
fire, and they burned the towns of Thetford and Cambridge; and then
they returned southward to the Thames, the cavalry keeping up with the
ships; and very soon they set forth again, and proceeded westward into
Oxfordshire, and thence into Buckinghamshire, and so along the Ouse
until they came to Bedford, and thus on to Tempsford, burning wherever
they went; and then they returned to their fleet with their plunder,
and divided it amongst the ships. And when the English troops ought to
have taken the field to repel the invaders they departed home, and when
the enemy was in the east these were kept in the west, and when they
were in the south our troops were in the north. Then all the Witan were
summoned to the King, to consult how this land might be defended, but
yet they persevered not for one month in any of the plans determined
on; and at length there was no leader who would gather the troops
together, but every man fled as best he might, nor indeed would any
county unite with another. Then before St. Andrew’s day the Army came
to Northampton, and forthwith burned that city, and they seized all
that they would in those parts, and thence they crossed the Thames into
Wessex, and so along the Caningan marshes (Cannington, Somersetshire?)
and they set all on fire, and having gone as far as they would for that
time, they returned to their ships at Christmas.


1011.

This year the King and his Witan sent to the Army, and desired peace,
promising tribute and supplies of provision, on condition that they
should cease from plundering. At this time they had overrun the
following districts: 1st, East Anglia; 2dly, Essex; 3dly, Middlesex;
4thly, Oxfordshire; 5thly, Cambridgeshire; 6thly, Hertfordshire; 7thly,
Buckinghamshire; 8thly, Bedfordshire; 9thly, half of Huntingdonshire;
and 10thly, south of the Thames, all Kent, and Sussex, and Hastings,
and Surrey, Berkshire, Hampshire, and great part of Wiltshire. All
these calamities befel us through ill-advisedness, because tribute was
not offered them sufficiently soon; but when they had done all possible
mischief, we then compounded with them for peace and quietness. Yet
notwithstanding this treaty and tribute, they went not forth the
less frequently in every direction, marching in separate divisions,
and carrying off or slaying our miserable countrymen. And this year,
between the nativity of St. Mary and Michaelmas, they besieged
Canterbury, and gained an entrance through treachery, for Ælmær, whose
life had been saved by Archbishop Ælfeah, betrayed the town to them.
And they seized the Archbishop Ælfeah; and Ælfword the King’s sheriff,
and the Abbot Leofwine, and Bishop Godwin, but they let the Abbot
Ælmær depart; and they took captive all the consecrated persons men and
women, none could say how great was the number of prisoners, and they
remained in the town as long as they would, and when they had ransacked
it thoroughly, they returned to their ships carrying the Archbishop
with them. He who erewhile was the chiefest of the English nation, and
of its religion, was now a prisoner; and now might men behold that
wretched city the abode of misery, wherein had been fullness of joy;
and from whence Christianity and blessedness had been first sent forth
to us, before God, and before the world. And they kept the Archbishop
with them until the time that they martyred him.


1012.

This year the Alderman Eadric and all the chief of the Witan of
the English nation, clergy and laity, came to London before Easter
day, which fell on the 13th of April, and they remained there after
Easter, until all the tribute was paid, it was 8000 pounds. Then on
the Saturday the Army was greatly exasperated against the Archbishop,
because he would not promise them money, but forbade others to give
them any thing on his behalf; they were also very drunken, for wine
was brought to them from the south; then they took the Archbishop and
led him to their hustings on the eve of Sunday the octave of Easter
day, and there they pelted him with the bones and skulls of cattle, and
at length one of them struck him upon the head with an iron axe, so
that he dropped down from the blow. And his sacred blood was spilled
upon the earth but his holy soul departed to the kingdom of God. And in
the morning the Bishops Eadnoth and Ælfhun and the townsmen took his
holy body and carried it to London with all reverence and buried it
in St. Paul’s Minster where God yet maketh manifest the power of the
blessed martyr. When the tribute had been paid, and the oaths of peace
were sworn, the Army again dispersed itself widely, as it had been
gathered together from various parts. And 45 of their ships entered
into the King’s service, and promised him that they would defend this
country, on condition that he should feed and clothe them.


1013.

The year after that in which Archbishop Ælfeg was martyred, the King
appointed Bishop Lifing to the see of Canterbury. And the same year
before the month of August King Swegn arrived with his fleet at
Sandwich, and he coasted very rapidly round East Anglia and entered
the mouth of the Humber, and so proceeded up the Trent until he came to
Gainsborough. And in a short time Earl Uhtred and all Northumberland
and the people of Lindsey submitted to him, and afterwards the
inhabitants of the five towns[AR] did likewise, and very soon after
this all the forces north of Watling-street submitted also, and
hostages were given him from each county. When he found that all the
people were subject to him he commanded that they should supply his
army with horses and provisions, and he then proceeded southward with
a large force, leaving the charge of his ships and hostages to his
son Cnut. And when they had passed Watling-street, they did as much
evil as any army might; he marched to Oxford, and the town immediately
surrendered and gave hostages; thence he went to Winchester, and the
inhabitants of that place did the same; thence he turned eastward
towards London, and many of his soldiers were drowned in the Thames,
not looking out for a bridge. And when he came to the city the
inhabitants would not surrender, but they held out against him and
fought bravely, for King Æthelred was there, and Thurkil with him.
Then King Swegn departed thence to Wallingford, and so over the Thames
westward to Bath, and he rested there with his army. And the Alderman
Æthelmer came thither, and all the western Thanes with him, and they
submitted themselves to King Swegn, and gave hostages. And having thus
conquered the country, he returned to his ships in the north, and all
the people fully received and acknowledged him as their true King. And
after this the men of London submitted to him and gave hostages, for
they feared lest he should utterly ruin them. Then Swegn exacted an
immense tribute, and provision for his army during that winter; and
Thurcyl demanded the same for the army at Greenwich; and besides this
they plundered as often as they would, to the great injury of this
people both in the south and in the north. The King remained a little
while with the fleet in the Thames, and the Lady went over sea to her
brother Richard, and Ælsige Abbot of Peterborough with her. And the
King sent Bishop Ælfun over sea with the Æthelings Edward and Alfred,
that he might take care of them. And the King went from the fleet to
Wight at Christmas, and he remained there during that festival; and
then he departed over sea to Richard, and he abode with him till Swegn
was dead. Whilst the Lady was beyond sea with her brother, Ælfsige
Abbot of Peterborough who was with her, went to a monastery called
Bonneval, where the body of Saint Florentinus lay. He found the place,
and the Abbot, and the monks in a condition of great misery, for they
had been plundered; and he bought of the Abbot and the monks the whole
of the remains of Saint Florentinus, excepting his head, for five
hundred pounds; and when he returned home he presented them to Christ
and to Saint Peter.


1014.

This year King Swegn ended his days at Candlemas, on the 3d of the
nones of February, and the fleet chose Cnut as King. Then all the Witan
of the English nation, clergy and laity, determined that they would
send to King Æthelred, and they assured him that no one was dearer to
them than their natural Lord, if he would govern them more righteously
than he did before. So the King sent his son Edward hither with his
deputies, and commanded him to greet all his people, and said that he
would be their faithful Lord, and that he would amend all that had
been complained of, and all that had been done or said against himself
should be forgiven, if they would return to him with one consent and
without guile. And confidence was fully established by words, deeds,
and pledges, on either side, and they outlawed for ever any Danish King
of England. In Lent King Æthelred came home to his own people, and he
was gladly received by them all.

After the death of Swegn, Cnut and his army remained at Gainsborough
till Easter, and it was agreed between him and the men of Lindsey that
the latter should furnish him with horses, and that afterwards they
should all go forth together and plunder. Then King Æthelred with all
his troops marched into Lindsey before they were prepared to oppose
him, and he plundered and burned, and he slew all the people that he
found; but Cnut the son of Swegn sailed away with his fleet, and thus
were these miserable people betrayed by him, and he steered southward
till he came to Sandwich, and there he set on shore the hostages
that had been delivered to his father, and he cut off their hands
and noses. And besides all these evils, the King ordered twenty-one
thousand pounds to be paid to the army at Greenwich. And on the eve of
Michaelmas-day this year was that great inundation of the sea over a
wide extent of this land, which came up farther than was ever known
before, and overwhelmed many towns and an immense number of persons.


1015.

This year there was a great meeting (of the Witan) at Oxford, and the
Alderman Eadric betrayed Sigeferth and Morcær the chief Thanes of the
seven towns,[AS] for he enticed them to his lodging, and there they
were basely murdered. And the King seized all their possessions, and
commanded that the widow of Sigeferth should be taken and carried to
Malmesbury. And a short time afterwards Prince Edmund went thither
and took her for his wife without the King’s consent. Then before the
feast of the nativity of St. Mary the Prince went northward to the five
towns, and he forthwith attacked the Heritage of Sigeferth and Morcær,
and all the people submitted to him. And at the same time Cnut came
to Sandwich, and he immediately sailed round Kent and along the coast
of Wessex till he came to the mouth of the Frome, and he plundered in
Dorset, Wiltshire and Somersetshire. At that time King Æthelred lay
sick at Cosham. And the Alderman Edric assembled an army and Prince
Edmund also raised troops in the north, and when they joined forces
the Alderman would have betrayed the Prince, but he was not able to
do this, therefore they parted, and gave place to the enemy without
fighting. And then the Alderman Edric drew off 40 ships from the King’s
party and went over to Cnut. And the West Saxons also submitted to Cnut
and gave hostages, and furnished his army with horses, and he remained
there until Christmas.


1016.

This year Cnut crossed the Thames into Mercia at Cricklade with the
forces of 160 ships, and the Alderman Eadric was with him. And they
invaded Warwickshire at Christmas, and there they plundered and burned,
and they slew all that they found. Then the Ætheling Edmund began to
gather troops together, but when they were assembled they refused to
serve unless the King were present, and they had also a reinforcement
from the citizens of London: and thus they set aside the expedition,
and every man departed to his home. After Christmas troops were again
levied, under a heavy penalty, that even those who were at a distance
must come forth; and a message was sent to the King at London, and he
was desired to meet this Army with all the force that he could muster:
but this effort availed not more than the many former attempts, for
when they were all assembled it was told the King that some[AT] who
ought to support him would betray him, on which the Army was broken up
and he returned to London. Then Prince Edmund rode to Northumberland
to Earl Uhtred, and all men thought that they would raise an army
to oppose King Cnut; but they marched into Staffordshire, and to
Shrewsbury, and to Chester, and they plundered on their side of the
country, while Cnut did the same on his. For he proceeded through
Buckinghamshire into Bedfordshire, and thence into Huntingdonshire, and
along the fens to Stamford, and then into Lincolnshire, thence into
Nottinghamshire, and then into Northumberland and towards York. And
when Uhtred heard this he left off plundering and hastened northward,
and he yielded to necessity and all Northumberland with him, and
he gave hostages, but nevertheless he was slain and Thurcytel the
son of Nafana with him. And after this Cnut appointed Yric Earl of
Northumberland in like manner as Uhtred had been. And then he returned
southward another way by the west; and thus the whole army came to the
ships before Easter. And Prince Edmund went to his father at London.
And after Easter King Cnut sailed towards London with all his ships,
but King Æthelred was dead before they arrived there. He died on St.
George’s day, after a life of much trouble and sorrow. After his death
all of the Witan who were in London and the citizens chose Edmund, for
their King, and he valiantly defended his kingdom during his whole
life. Then the ships came to Greenwich in Rogation week, and in a
little while they proceeded to London; they dug a great ditch on the
south side of the town and drew up their ships west of the bridge, and
they beset the town so that none could go in or out. And they attacked
the city several times, but the inhabitants withstood them resolutely.

And before this, King Edmund had gone forth, and he marched into
Wessex, and all the people submitted to him, and soon after that, he
fought with the Army at Pen, near Gillingham. And he fought another
battle after Midsummer, at Sceorstan,[AU] and there many fell on either
side, and the armies separated of their own accord.--The Alderman
Eadric, and Ælmær the Beloved, were with the Danes against King
Edmund.--And then he raised an army for the third time, and marched
to London and rescued the inhabitants, and he drove their enemies to
the ships. And within two days he crossed the river at Brentford and
fought with the Army, and put it to flight, but many of the English
were drowned through their own heedlessness, because they had hastened
before the main body, being greedy of plunder. And after this the King
went into Wessex and assembled troops, and the Army marched to London
and encamped round about the town, and they attacked it vigorously by
water and by land, but Almighty God delivered it; and they navigated
their ships from London into the Arwan (the Arrow), and they landed
and went up into Mercia, slaying and plundering all before them as was
their wont, and they supplied themselves with provisions and conveyed
their ships and cattle to the Medway. Then King Edmund assembled
all the English people for the fourth time, and crossed the Thames
at Brentford and marched into Kent, and the Danes fled before him
with their horses into Sheppey, and the King slew all whom he could
overtake; and at Aylesford the Alderman Eadric turned the King from
the pursuit: more treacherous advice than this never was given. The
Army went up again into Essex, and thence into Mercia, destroying all
things wherever they came. And when the King knew that they were on
their march, he assembled all the English troops for the fifth time,
and followed after them, and he came up with them in Essex, at the
place called Assandun,[AV] and there they fought furiously.--But the
Alderman Eadric acted as he had often done before; he was the first to
take to flight with the Magesætas (men of Radnorshire), and thus he
betrayed his natural Lord and all the people. There Cnut gained the
victory, though all England fought against him. And Eadnoth[AW] and
the Abbot Wulsige were slain there, and the Alderman Ælfric, and the
Alderman Godwin, and Ulfcytel of East Anglia, and Æthelward the son
of the Alderman Æthelsig, and all the prime of the English nobility.
After this battle King Cnut marched his army into Gloucestershire,
having heard that King Edmund was in that quarter. Then the Alderman
Eadric and those of the Witan who were there, advised that the Kings
should make peace between themselves, and the Kings met at Olan-ige
(Alney), and there they confirmed their alliance by pledges and oaths;
and they agreed upon the tribute for the Army. And when this treaty was
concluded they separated; King Edmund going into Wessex, and Cnut into
Mercia. The Army returned to their ships with the spoil which they had
gained, and the men of London treated with them, and bought peace, and
the Danes brought their ships into London, and there they took up their
winter quarters. Then on St. Andrew’s day, King Edmund died, and he was
buried with his grandfather Edgar at Glastonbury. And the same year
Wulfgar Abbot of Abingdon died, and he was succeeded by Æthelsige.


1017.

This year[AX] King Cnut took to himself the whole kingdom of England,
and he divided it into four parts, reserving to himself the government
of Wessex, and committing East Anglia to Thurcyll, Mercia to Eadric,
and Northumberland to Yric. This year the Alderman Eadric was slain,
and Northman also the son of the Alderman Leofwin, and Æthelword
the son of Æthelmær the Great, and Brihtric the son of Ælfget of
Devonshire. And King Cnut banished Ædwig the Ætheling, and Eadwig the
King of the Peasants. Then before the calends of August he sent for the
widow of the late King Æthelred, the daughter of Richard, to be his
Queen.


1018.

This year a tribute was levied throughout England; it amounted in all
to seventy-two thousand pounds, besides that paid by the citizens of
London, which was eleven thousand pounds. Then a part of the Army
returned to Denmark; but forty ships remained with King Cnut; and the
Danes and English came to an agreement[AY] at Oxford. And this year
Æthelsige Abbot of Abingdon died, and Æthelwine succeeded him.


1019.

This year King Cnut went to Denmark, and remained there all the winter.


1020.

This year King Cnut returned to England; and during Easter a great
meeting was held at Cirencester, at which the Alderman Æthelword was
outlawed. And this year the King went to Assandun, and caused a
Minster[AZ] to be built of stone and lime, for the souls of those who
were slain there, and he gave it to one of his priests whose name was
Stigand. And Archbishop Living died, and Æthelnoth a monk and Deacon of
Christ Church was consecrated Bishop of that diocese the same year by
Archbishop Wulstan.


1021.

This year at Martinmas King Cnut outlawed Earl Thurkil.


1022.

This year King Cnut sailed with his ships to Wight. And Bishop
Ælhelnoth journeyed to Rome, and was very honourably received by Pope
Benedict, who put on his pall with his own hands, and consecrated him
Archbishop with much pomp. And he performed mass clad in the same pall,
even as the Pope desired; and after this he banqueted with the Pope:
and at length he returned home with a full blessing.--And the Abbot
Leofwin, who had been unjustly banished from Ely, was his companion,
and he cleared himself of all that had been alledged against him, in
the presence of the Archbishop and of all the company that was with
him, as the Pope instructed him.


1023.

This year Archbishop Wulfstan died. Ælfric succeeded him, and
Archbishop Ægelnoth consecrated him at Canterbury. And the same year
Archbishop Ægelnoth brought the relics of the Archbishop St. Ælfeg from
London to Canterbury.


1024.

“This year Richard 2d died: then his son Richard reigned nearly one
year, and after him his brother Robert eight years.”


1025.

This year King Cnut sailed to Denmark, and thence to an island near the
river Helga,[BA] and there Ulf and Eglaf came against him with a great
fleet and army from Sweden. And very many fell on the side of King
Cnut, both Danes and English, and the Swedes remained in possession of
the field of battle.


1028.

This year King Cnut sailed from England to Norway with fifty ships of
English Thanes, and he expelled King Olaf and took possession of that
land.


1029.

This year King Cnut returned home to England.


1030.

This year King Olaf returned to Norway, and the people rose against
him, and fought with him, and he was slain.


1031.

This year as soon as King Cnut came to England, he granted to Christ’s
Church, in Canterbury, the harbour of Sandwich with all the profits
therefrom arising, on either side of the haven, to this distance,
namely, that when the tide runs highest and is fully in, and a ship
can ride as near the shore as possible, a man should stand in the ship
holding a small axe in his hand, “and as far as he could throw this
axe on shore, so far should their rights extend.” This year King Cnut
journeyed to Rome, and the same year after his return he went into
Scotland, and the Scotch King Malcolm, with two other Kings, Mælbæthe
and Iehmarc, submitted to him. And Robert Earl of Normandy went to
Jerusalem and died there, and he was succeeded in Normandy by William
then a child, who was afterwards King of England.


1032.

This year there were terrible lightnings, such as men remembered not
before, and which caused much damage in various places throughout the
country. And the same year Ælfsige Bishop of Winchester died, and the
King’s priest Ælfwine received that bishoprick.


1033.

This year Merehwit Bishop of Somerset died, and he is buried at
Glastonbury.


1034.

This year died Bishop Ætheric.


1036.

This year King Cnut died at Shaftesbury, and he is buried in the
old monastery of Winchester. He was King over all England nearly 20
years; and soon after his death a meeting of all the Witan was held
at Oxford, and Earl Leofric, and almost all the Thanes north of the
Thames, and the seamen of London, chose Harold to govern all England,
both in his own right, and for his brother Hardacnut, who was then in
Denmark. And Earl Godwin and all the chief men of Wessex opposed them
as long as they could; but they could not prevail against them. Then
it was resolved that Ælfgiva the mother of Hardacnut should reside at
Winchester, with the King her son’s household, and should hold the
government of Wessex for him. Earl Godwin was the head man of that
party. Some men say of Harold that he was the son of King Cnut and of
Ælfgiva the daughter of the Alderman Ælfelm; but this is thought very
unlikely by many. Be this as it may, he was sole King of all England.


1037.

This year Ælfgiva the widow of King Cnut and mother of Edward and King
Hardacnut, was banished, and she sought an asylum with Baldwin oversea
in the south, and he gave her a residence in Bruges, and he protected
and maintained her as long as she was there.


1038.

This year Archbishop Æthelnoth died on the calends of November; and
within a short time Æthelric Bishop of Sussex died also; and then
before Christmas Brihteh Bishop of Worcestershire; and very soon after
that Ælfric Bishop of East Anglia. Then Bishop[BB] Eadsige succeeded to
the Archbishoprick; Grymcytel received the Bishoprick of Sussex; and
Living that of Worcestershire and Gloucestershire.


1039.

This year King Harold died at Oxford on the 16th of the calends of
April, and he was buried at Westminster: he governed England four
years and sixteen weeks, and in his reign a tax was raised for (keeping
up a fleet of) 16 ships, at the rate of eight marks to every sailor,
even as it had been in the days of King Cnut. And the same year King
Hardacnut arrived at Sandwich seven days before Midsummer, and he was
forthwith received as King by the English and by the Danes: but those
who promoted his accession paid dearly for it afterwards. Then they
determined upon raising a tax to keep up a fleet of 62 ships, at the
rate of eight marks for every sailor. And the same year the sæster of
wheat sold for 55 pennies and even more.


1040.

This year Archbishop Eadsige journeyed to Rome, and this year the
army-tribute was paid; it was twenty-one thousand and ninety-nine
pounds: and eleven thousand and forty-eight pounds were afterwards paid
for 32 ships. And the same year Edward the son of King Æthelred came
hither from abroad;[BC] he was a brother of King Hardacnut, for they
both were sons of Ælfgiva Emma the daughter of Earl Richard.


1041.

This year King Hardacnut died at Lambeth on the 6th of the ides
of June. He was King over all England two years all but ten days,
and he was buried with his father King Cnut in the old monastery at
Winchester; and his mother gave the head of the martyr Saint Valentine
for his soul’s sake to the new monastery. And before he was buried
all the people chose Edward King in London, and he held the kingdom
as long as God permitted him. And all this year was a very heavy time
in many different ways, from the inclemency of the weather, and from
the destruction of the fruits of the earth. So many of the cattle
also perished this year both from disease, and from the ill season,
as had never before been remembered. At this time Ælfsige Abbot of
Peterborough died, and the monk Arnwi was chosen in his place, because
he was a good man, and one of a singular simplicity.


1042.

On Easter-day, this year, Edward was consecrated King with great
worship at Winchester. Easter then fell on the 3d of the nones of
April. The Archbishop Eadsige consecrated him, and instructed him well
before all the people, and admonished him for his own good and that
of the nation. And the Priest Stigand was consecrated Bishop of East
Anglia. And soon afterwards the King gave command to over-ride the
lands which his mother held of him, and he took from her all that she
possessed in gold and silver, and treasures innumerable, because she
had not been liberal towards him.


1043.

This year Eadsige gave up his Archbishoprick, because of his
infirmities, and he consecrated thereto Siward Abbot of Abingdon, with
the consent and advice of the King and of Earl Godwin. This transaction
was disclosed to few before it was completed, because the Archbishop
thought that if it became known to many, some other man in whom he
trusted and confided less, would beg or buy the preferment. And this
year there was a very great famine over all England, and corn was so
dear as was never before remembered, so that a sæster of wheat sold
for 60 pennies, and even more. And the same year the King went out to
Sandwich with a fleet of 35 ships. And the Churchwarden Æthelstan was
made Abbot of Abingdon. And Stigand entered upon his Bishoprick.

It was in this year (1043) that Edward took for his Queen the
daughter of Earl Godwin.--The same year died Brihtwold; he had held
his Bishoprick, that of Sherbourne, 38 years, and the King’s Priest
Hereman succeeded him. And this year Wulfric was chosen Abbot of Saint
Augustine’s (Canterbury) at Christmas time, on St. Stephen’s day, with
the consent of the King and of the Abbot Ælfstan, because of the great
infirmities of the latter.


1044.

This year Living Bishop of Devonshire died, and the King’s Priest
Leofric succeeded him.--And this year Ælfstan Abbot of St. Augustine’s
died on the 3d of the nones of July. And the same year Osgot Clapa was
banished.


1045.

This year Grymkytel Bishop of Sussex died, and Heca the King’s Priest
succeeded him.--And this year Ælfwine Bishop of Winchester died on the
4th of the calends of September, and Bishop Stigand was translated from
the north to that see. And the same year Earl Swegn went out to Bruges
in the land of Baldwin, and he abode there all the winter, and departed
thence in the summer.


1046.

This year Æthelstan Abbot of Abingdon died, and Spearhafoc, a monk of
St. Edmund’s Bury, succeeded him. And this year Bishop Siward died, and
Archbishop Eadsige resumed the whole diocese. And the same year Lothen
and Yrling came to Sandwich with 25 ships, and they plundered, and
collected spoils innumerable, seizing men, gold and silver, so that no
man knew what the whole amount was. And they sailed round about Thanet,
and would have done the same there, but the inhabitants made a stout
resistance, and kept them from landing and from entering the river, and
wholly put them to flight; and then they came upon Essex, and there
they plundered, and carried off men and whatever they could find; and
thence they bent their course eastward to the land of Baldwin, and they
sold their booty there, and then they returned to the east whence they
came.

“Battle of Val des Dunes.”[BD]

In this year (1046) the great synod was held at St. Remy, at which the
Pope Leo was present, with the Archbishop of Burgundy, the Archbishop
of Besançon, the Archbishop of Treves, and the Archbishop of Rheims,
and many other wise men besides, both clergy and laity: and King Edward
sent Bishop Dudoc thither with Wulfric Abbot of St. Augustine’s, and
the Abbot Ælfwine, to the end that they might report to him what was
there determined upon with regard to the Christian religion.

The same year King Edward went out to Sandwich with a large fleet, and
Earl Swegn came with seven ships to Boseham, and treated with the King,
and it was promised him that he should be put in possession of all that
he had before; then his brother Earl Harold and Earl Beorn interfered,
and prevented his enjoying the King’s grant, and four days were allowed
for his return to the ships. In the mean while word was brought to the
King that an hostile fleet lay off the west, and was plundering. Then
Earl Godwin sailed westward with two of the King’s ships, one of which
was commanded by Earl Harold, and the other by his brother Tostig, and
with 42 of the ships furnished by the people.--Then Earl Harold was
removed from the king’s ship which he had commanded, and they sailed as
far as Pevensey, and lay there weather-bound. And within two days Earl
Swegn came thither and spake with his father and with Earl Beorn, who
was then with Godwin; and he entreated Beorn that he would go with him
to the King at Sandwich, and assist him in obtaining the King’s favour:
and Beorn consented to this, and they departed as if they would go
to the King. But, as they rode along, Swegn begged him to go with him
to his ships, for he feared that his sailors would desert unless he
returned speedily: and they both proceeded to the place where the ships
lay at anchor, and when they came thither Earl Swegn desired Beorn to
go on board with him; this he wholly refused, until the sailors seized
him, and threw him into a boat, and bound him, and rowed to the ships,
and put him in one of them. Then they hoisted sail, and proceeded
westward to Exmouth; and they kept him with them until they slew him,
and they took his body and buried it in a church. His friends and the
seamen of London afterwards came and took it up again, and carried it
to the old monastery at Winchester, and there he is buried beside his
uncle King Cnut. And Swegn went away eastward to the land of Baldwin,
with whose full leave he abode at Bruges during the whole winter.
And the same year died Eadnoth Bishop in the north,[BE] and Ulf was
appointed his successor.


1047.

This year a great council was held at London in the middle of Lent, and
nine of the ships belonging to the seamen were sent out, and five were
left there. And the same year Earl Swegn came to England. And a great
synod was assembled at Rome this year, and King Edward sent thither the
Bishops Hereman and Ealdred, and they arrived on Easter eve. And after
this the Pope held a synod at Vercelli; and Bishop Ulf came there, and
his staff would have been broken, if he had not given large sums of
money; for he did not know his office so well as he ought. This year
Archbishop Eadsige died on the 4th of the calends of November.


1048.

This year, during Lent, King Edward being in London, nominated Robert
Archbishop of Canterbury. And the same Lent he went to Rome for his
pall. And the King gave the Bishoprick of London to Sparhafoc Abbot of
Abingdon, and the Abbacy of Abingdon to his kinsman Bishop Rothulf.
The Archbishop returned from Rome one day before the eve of the feast
of St. Peter, and he was installed in Christ Church on St. Peter’s
day, and immediately afterwards he proceeded to the King. Then the
Abbot Sparhafoc came to him with the King’s letters and seal, to
the intent that he should consecrate him Bishop of London. But the
Archbishop refused, and said that the Pope had forbidden it: the Abbot
endeavoured to persuade the Archbishop, and he earnestly desired the
promotion, but the other constantly denied him, still saying that the
Pope had forbidden it. The Abbot notwithstanding returned to London,
and resided there in the diocese which the King had granted him all
the summer and autumn, and this with his full permission. And Eustace
arrived from beyond sea soon after the Archbishop, and he proceeded to
the King and spoke with him all that he would, and then he journeyed
homeward. When they had gone as far east as Canterbury he and his men
rested to eat, and thence they went on to Dover. And when he was a
mile or more from Dover he put on his breast-plate, and so did all
his followers; and they came to Dover. And when they were there, they
would fix on their quarters according to their own pleasure, and one
of his men came, and would have lodged in the house of a certain
person against his will, and he wounded the master of the house, but
the householder slew him. Then Eustace mounted his horse, and his
followers theirs, and they fell upon and slew the householder on his
own hearth. And thence they went towards the town, and they killed
within and without more than twenty men. And on the other hand the
townsmen slew nineteen of Eustace’s train, and wounded they knew not
how many. And Eustace got off with a few others, and returned again to
the King, and related partially what had occurred. And the King was
very angry with the townsmen, and he sent Earl Godwin, commanding him
to march into Kent, and to take vengeance upon Dover; for Eustace had
told the King that the townsmen were more in fault than himself, but
it was not so, neither was the Earl consenting to this expedition, for
he was unwilling to ruin his own vassals.--Then the King sent for all
his Witan, and desired that they should come to him at Gloucester, soon
after St. Mary’s day. At this time the Welch had built a castle in
Herefordshire, in the territory of Earl Swegn, and they did all manner
of despite and injury to the King’s subjects in the neighbourhood.
Then Earl Godwin, and the Earls Swegn and Harold, and many with them,
met at Beverston, that they might proceed to their liege Lord and his
Witan then assembled, and that they might obtain their advice and aid
for avenging this insult offered to the King and all his people. But
the Welch were with the King beforehand, and accused the Earls, so
that they were not admitted into his presence, because the others had
said, that they were coming with treasonous designs against the King.
Earl Siward and Earl Leofric and a great number of men from the north
had joined the King, and it was told Earl Godwin and his sons that
the King and those who were with him, were about to attack them, on
which they fortified themselves strongly, albeit they were loth to act
against their natural Lord. Then the Witan on either side advised that
they should abstain from hostilities, and the King gave the peace of
God and his own full friendship to both parties.--Then the King and his
Counsellors determined that another meeting of all the Witan should be
held at London, at the autumnal equinox: and the King commanded that
an army, as powerful as might be, should be raised both from the south
and from the north of the Thames. Earl Swegn was declared an outlaw,
and Earl Godwin and Earl Harold were summoned to be at the meeting with
as much speed as they could make. When they were come thither, they
were called before the Council, and they desired hostages and security
that they might go in and out of the Council safe from treachery; and
the King demanded all the Thanes whom the Earls had with them, and
they delivered them all into his hands. Then the King sent to them
again, and desired that they should come into the Council with twelve
attendants, but the Earl again desired security and hostages, that so
he might clear himself from every charge which had been brought against
him; but these hostages were finally denied him, and five days were
allowed him, in which he was to depart from the country. Then Earl
Godwin and Earl Swegn went to Boseham, and they put to sea, and sought
shelter with Baldwin, and they abode in his land the whole winter. And
Earl Harold sailed westward to Ireland, and remained there through the
winter, under the protection of the king of that country. And as soon
as all this had happened, the King sent away the Lady, who had been
consecrated as his Queen; and he caused all that she possessed of gold,
and of silver, and of every other thing, to be taken from her; and he
put her under the charge of his sister at Wherwell (in Hampshire). And
the Abbot Sparhafoc was driven from the Bishoprick of London, and the
King’s Priest William was consecrated thereto. And Odda was appointed
Earl of Devon, Somerset, and Dorset, and of Wales; and the Earldom
which Harold had enjoyed was given to Ælfgar the son of Leofric.


1052.

This year died Ælfgiva Ymma the mother of King Edward and of King
Hardacnut. And the same year the King and his Witan resolved that a
fleet should be assembled at Sandwich, and they appointed the Earls
Raulf and Odda to command it. Then Earl Godwin went with his ships
from Bruges to Ysera (the Ysere?), and thence after one day’s voyage
he arrived at the Ness south of Romney on Midsummer’s eve.--The Earls
who were stationed at Sandwich were informed of his arrival, and they
sailed in pursuit of him, and a land army was also called out to oppose
him. But in the mean time Earl Godwin was warned of their intentions,
and he put into Pevensey, and the weather was very stormy, so that the
Earls could not find out whither he was gone; and Earl Godwin sailed
out again and went back to Bruges, and the other ships returned to
Sandwich. Then it was advised that the fleet should be brought back
to London, and that other Earls and officers should be appointed, but
they delayed so long that all the ships separated and returned home.
When Earl Godwin heard this, he set sail and hastened westward to
Wight, and there they landed and plundered until the inhabitants gave
them as much money as they chose to exact. And thence they proceeded
westward, till they came to Portland, and there they landed, and did
all the mischief that they could. At this time Harold had left Ireland
with nine ships, and he arrived at Porlock, and a large body of the
inhabitants were collected to oppose him; nevertheless he feared not
to go in quest of provisions, and he landed and slew a great number of
these people, and seized whatever fell in his way, cattle, men, and
money.--And thence he proceeded eastward to join his father, and they
sailed together to Wight, and there they seized whatever had been left
before. Thence they sailed to Pevensey, and they took away with them
as many ships as were in the harbour: thus they proceeded to the Ness,
and they took with them all the ships that were at Romney, Hythe, and
Folkestone; and thence they turned eastward to Dover, and there they
landed, and obtained as many ships and hostages as they would; and so
they proceeded to Sandwich, and they did the same there, and the people
every where gave them the hostages and provisions that they demanded.
And from this place they made for the North Mouth (Buoy of the Nore);
and so they proceeded towards London; but some of the ships stopped at
Sheppey, and did much damage there, and at King’s Milton also, and
they burned that town, and then they followed the Earls to London. When
they were come to London, the King and all his Earls had stationed
themselves with fifty ships to oppose them. Then the Earls sent to the
King, and desired that all their possessions of which they had been
unjustly deprived should be restored to them: this demand the King
resisted for some time, even so long, that all the people who were with
the Earls became furiously enraged against him and his party; so that
the Earls themselves scarcely quieted them. At length, by God’s help,
and the intervention of Bishop Stigand, and wise men from the city and
the country, an exchange of hostages was brought about. When Archbishop
Robert and the French heard this, they took their horses and rode away,
some westward to Pentecost’s Castle, and others northward to Robert’s.
And Archbishop Robert and Bishop Ulf and their train rode out at the
east gate, and slew or wounded many young men, and they proceeded to
Ealdulf’s-ness (the Nase, Essex), and the Archbishop embarked in a
mean little vessel and went away beyond sea, and he left his pall and
his Archbishoprick in this land, even as God willed, since he had at
first obtained the same in a manner that pleased not Him. Then a great
Council was convened out of London, and all the Earls and the chief men
of England were at this meeting: Earl Godwin there took up the word,
and he protested before his Lord King Edward and the people of this
land that he was guiltless of all that was charged against him, and
against his son Harold, and all his children. And the King restored to
the Earl and his children his full friendship, and his whole Earldom,
and all that had belonged to him: and he granted the same pardon to
the men who were with him: and the King gave the Lady all that she
possessed before. And Archbishop Robert and all the Frenchmen were
fully outlawed, because they had been the chief promoters of the
difference between Earl Godwin and the King. And Bishop Stigand was
translated to the Archbishoprick of Canterbury. And at this time Arnwi
Abbot of Peterborough, being in sound health, gave up the Abbacy to
the monk Leofric, with the consent of the King and of the monks, and
he lived eight years afterwards. And the Abbot Leofric gilded the
monastery, so that men called it Golden Borough; and it became very
rich in lands, in gold, and in silver.


1053.

This year Earl Godwin died on the 17th of the calends of May, and he
is buried in the old monastery of Winchester. And his son Earl Harold
succeeded to the Earldom, and to all that his father possessed, and
Earl Ælfgar received Harold’s Earldom.


1054.

This year Leo the Holy Pope of Rome died. And this year there was a
great murrain amongst the cattle, such as men remembered not for many
winters before. And Victor was chosen Pope.

“Battle of Mortemer.”[BF]


1055.

This year Earl Siward died. And a meeting of all the Witan was
appointed seven days before Mid-Lent. And there Earl Ælfgar was
outlawed, for he was accused as a traitor to his King and all the
nation, and he was convicted before the King and all who were there
assembled, though the sentence grieved him sorely.--And the King
gave the Earldom which Siward had held to Tostig the son of Earl
Godwin.--And Earl Ælfgar went to the castle of Griffin in North Wales;
and the same year Griffin and Ælfgar burned St. Æthelbryht’s monastery
and the whole town of Hereford.


1056.

“This year Henry Emperor of the Romans died, and was succeeded by his
son Henry.”


1057.

This year Prince Edward the son of King Edmund came to this land, and
he died soon afterwards, and his body is buried in St. Paul’s monastery
at London. And Pope Victor died, and Stephen Abbot of Monte-Cassino
was chosen as his successor. And Earl Leofric died, and his son Ælfgar
succeeded to his father’s Earldom.


1058.

This year Stephen died, and Benedict was consecrated Pope: the same
sent hither a pall to Archbishop Stigand. And this year Heaca Bishop
of the South Saxons died; and Archbishop Stigand consecrated Ægelric a
monk of Christ Church to that Bishoprick, and the Abbot Siward to that
of Rochester.


1059.

This year Nicholas Bishop of Florence was chosen Pope, and Benedict the
former Pope was driven out.


1060.

This year Kynsige Archbishop of York died on the 11th of the calends
of January, and Bishop Ealdred succeeded him: and Walter received the
Bishoprick of Hereford.

“This year Henry King of France died, and was succeeded by his son
Philip.”


1061.

This year Duduc Bishop of Somerset died, and was succeeded by Gisa.
And this year Bishop Godwin died at St. Martin’s (Canterbury), on
the 7th of the ides of March. And the same year Wulfric Abbot of St.
Augustine’s died in Easter week, on the 14th of the calends of May.
When word was brought to the King that the Abbot had departed this
life, he chose Æthelsig a monk of the old monastery (of Winchester) to
succeed him, and he repaired to Archbishop Stigand, and was consecrated
Abbot at Windsor on St. Augustine’s day.


1062.

“This year the province of Maine was brought into subjection to William
Earl of Normandy.”


1063.

This year Earl Harold and his brother Earl Tostig invaded Britain[BG]
with an army, and fleet, and they conquered the country; and the
inhabitants gave hostages and submitted to them, and afterwards they
went and slew their King Griffin, and brought his head to Harold, and
he set another King over them.


1064.

This year the Northumbrians assembled together, and outlawed Tostig
their Earl, and they slew all his retainers whom they could meet with,
both English and Danes: and they seized all his arms at York, and his
gold, and his silver, and all his treasures that they could find. And
they sent for Morker the son of Earl Ælfgar, and chose him for their
Earl; and he marched southward with the troops of that country, and
of Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire, and Lincolnshire, till he arrived at
Northampton; and his brother Edwin joined him with the men of his
Earldom, and many Britons also came with him. Then they were met by
Earl Harold, and they charged him with a message to King Edward, and
they also sent deputies with him, and they desired that they might
have Morker for their Earl.--And the King granted this, and sent
Harold again to them at Northampton on the eve of St. Simon and St.
Jude’s day, and he reported the same to them, and put into their hands
the King’s assent, and there he renewed the laws of Canute. And the
northern men did much damage about Northampton whilst he was gone on
their errand, for they slew men, and burned houses and corn, and took
all the cattle they could find, being many thousand head, and many
hundred men did they seize and carry off into the north; so that this
county, and the others adjoining, were the worse for them during many
years. And Earl Tostig and his wife, and all who were of his party,
went over sea southward to Earl Baldwin, and he received them all, and
they remained there the whole winter.


1066.

This year the Abbey Church of Westminster was consecrated on
Childermas-day. And this year King Edward died on the eve of
Twelfth-day, and he was buried on Twelfth-day, in the Church of
Westminster, newly consecrated.--And Earl Harold succeeded to the
kingdom, even as the King had granted it to him; men, also chose him
thereto, and he was consecrated King on Twelfth-day, and reigned forty
weeks and one day. And the same year that he was made King, he went
out with a fleet against William; and in the mean time Earl Tostig
entered the Humber with 60 ships, but Earl Edwin came up with his
troops and drove him away, and the crews of his vessels also deserted
him. Then he went to Scotland with twelve smacks; and Harold King of
Norway joined him with 300 ships, to whom Tostig gave up the command,
and they entered the Humber together, and proceeded to York: and the
Earls Morker and Edwin fought with them, and the Norwegian King gained
the victory. King Harold, being informed of what had passed, came
with a great army of Englishmen, and he met the King of Norway at
Stæng-fordes-brycge (Stanford bridge), and he slew him and the Earl
Tostig, and routed their whole army.

And in the mean time Earl William landed at Hastings on Michaelmas-day,
and Harold marched from the North, and fought with him before all
his own army had come up, and he fell there with his two brothers,
Gyrth and Leofwin. And William conquered this land, and he came to
Westminster, and the Archbishop Ealdred consecrated him King, and men
paid him tribute, and gave him hostages, and afterwards bought their
lands again.

Leofric Abbot of Peterborough was in this campaign, and whilst he was
with the army he became ill, and he returned home, and died soon after
on All Saints’ night. May God glorify his soul! In his days was all
bliss and all prosperity at Peterborough, and he was beloved of all
men, so that the King granted to St. Peter and to him the Abbey of
Burton, and that of Coventry which his uncle Earl Leofric had founded,
and also those of Croyland and Thorney. And he enriched the monastery
of Burh with gold, with silver, with vestments, and with lands, more
than any other before or after him. And the Golden Borough now became
the borough of wretchedness. Then the monks chose the Provost Brand for
their Abbot because he was a very good man, and very wise; and they
sent him to Edgar Ætheling, for the people of those parts supposed that
he should be the King; and the Ætheling willingly confirmed him in his
office. When King William heard this he was very wroth, and said that
the Abbot had treated him with contempt; but good men interfered and
reconciled them, because of the excellence of the Abbot. He gave the
King forty marks of gold for his favour, and he lived but a short time
after, only three years. After this all tribulation and evil came upon
the monastery. May God have pity on it. And this year Christ Church was
burned, and a comet appeared on the 14th of the calends of May.


1067.

This year the King went over sea, and took with him hostages and
treasures. And he came back the next year on St. Nicholas’ day; and on
his return he restored to every man his land.--And this summer Childe
Edgar and Mærleswegn, and many others with them, departed and went to
Scotland, and King Malcolm received them all, and took the Childe’s
sister Margaret for his wife.


1068.

This year King William gave the Earldom of Northumberland to Earl
Robert, and the men of that country came against him, and slew him
and 900 others with him. And then Edgar Ætheling marched with all the
Northumbrians to York, and the townsmen treated with him; on which King
William came from the south with all his troops, and sacked the town,
and slew many hundred persons: and the Ætheling went again to Scotland.


1069.

This year Bishop Ægelric, being at Peterborough, was accused and sent
to Westminster; and his brother Bishop Ægelwin was outlawed. Then
between the two feasts of St. Mary, the sons of King Swegn and his
brother Earl Osbearn came from Denmark with three hundred ships; on
which Earl Waltheof marched forth, and he and Edgar Ætheling, and many
hundreds with them, came and joined this fleet in the Humber, and they
proceeded to York, and they landed and stormed the castle, and slew
many hundred men, and carried much treasure to their ships: and they
kept the chief men in bonds; and they wintered between the Ouse and the
Trent. And King William went into those parts, and laid them all waste.
And the same year Brand Abbot of Peterborough died on the 5th of the
calends of December.


1070.

This year Landfranc Abbot of Caen came to England, and in a few days
he was made Archbishop of Canterbury. He was consecrated at his
metropolis on the 4th of the calends of September, by eight Bishops his
suffragans; the rest who were absent signifying through messengers,
and by writing, why they could not be there.--This year Thomas, who
had been chosen as Bishop of York, came to Canterbury, that he might
be consecrated there after the old form, but when Landfranc craved the
confirmation of his subjection by oath, he refused, and said that he
was not obliged to give it. Then was the Archbishop Landfranc wroth,
and he commanded the Bishops, who were there at his behest to assist
at the ceremony, and all the monks, to unrobe him; and they did as
he desired: so this time Thomas returned home without a blessing. It
happened soon after this, that the Archbishop Landfranc went to Rome,
and Thomas with him: and when they were come thither, and had said all
that they would on other subjects, Thomas began his speech, saying how
he had come to Canterbury, and how the Archbishop had desired of him
an oath of obedience, and that he had refused it. Then the Archbishop
Landfranc began to make manifest with clear reasoning, that he had a
right to demand that which he required; and he proved the same with
strong arguments before the Pope Alexander, and before all the council
then assembled: and thus they departed home. After this, Thomas came
to Canterbury, and humbly performed all that the Archbishop required,
and thereupon he received the blessing. This year Earl Waltheof made
peace with the King. And during this Lent the King caused all the
monasteries in England to be despoiled of their treasures. The same
year King Swegn came from Denmark into the Humber, and the people
of those parts came to meet him and made an alliance with him, for
they believed that he would conquer this land. Then the Danish Bishop
Christien, and Earl Osbearn, and their Danish retainers, came into Ely,
and all the people of the fens joined them, for they believed that they
would conquer the whole country.--Now the monks of Peterborough were
told that some of their own men, these were Hereward and his train,
would pillage the monastery, and this, because they had heard that the
King had given the Abbacy to a French Abbot named Turold, and that he
was a very stern man, and that he was come into Stamford with all his
French followers. There was, at that time, a church-warden named Ywar;
and he took all that he could by night, gospels, mass-robes, cassocks,
and other garments, even all and each of such small things as he could
carry away, and he came before day to the Abbot Turold, and told him
that he sought his protection, and told how the outlaws were coming to
Peterborough, and he said that he had done this at the desire of the
monks. Then early in the morning all the outlaws came with many ships,
and they endeavoured to enter the monastery, but the monks withstood
them, so that they were not able to get in. Then they set fire to it,
and burned all the monks’ houses, and all those in the town, save one:
and they broke in through the fire at Bolhithe-geate (the Bulldyke
gate), and the monks came before them and desired peace. But they gave
no heed to them, and they went into the monastery, and climbed up to
the holy crucifix, and took the crown from our Lord’s head, which was
all of the purest gold, and they took the footstool of red gold from
under his feet. And they climbed up to the steeple, and brought down
the cope which was hidden there; it was all of gold and silver. They
also seized two gilt shrines, and nine of silver, and they carried
off fifteen great crosses of gold and silver. And they took so much
gold and silver, and so much treasure in money, robes, and books, that
no man can compute the amount; saying they did this because of their
allegiance to the monastery: and afterwards they betook themselves to
their ships and went to Ely, and there they secured their treasures.
The Danes believed that they should overcome the Frenchmen, and they
drove away all the monks, leaving only one named Leofwin the Long, and
he lay sick in the hospital. Then came the Abbot Turold, and eight
score Frenchmen with him, all well armed; and when he arrived he found
all burnt both within and without, excepting the church itself; and
all the outlaws were then embarked, knowing that he would come thither.
This happened on the 4th of the nones of June. Then the two Kings,
William and Swegn, made peace with each other, on which the Danes
departed from Ely, carrying with them all the aforesaid treasure. When
they were come into the midst of the sea, there arose a great storm,
which dispersed all the ships in which the treasures were: some were
driven to Norway, some to Ireland, and others to Denmark, and all the
spoil that reached the latter country, being the cope and some of the
shrines and crosses, and many of the other treasures, they brought
to one of the King’s towns called ----, and laid it all up in the
church.--But one night, through their carelessness and drunkenness the
church was burned, with all that was in it. Thus was the monastery of
Peterborough burned and pillaged. May Almighty God have pity on it
in his great mercy: and thus the Abbot Turold came to Peterborough,
and the monks returned thither and performed christian worship in the
church, which had stood a full week without service of any kind. When
Bishop Ægelric heard this, he excommunicated all the men who had done
this evil. There was a great famine this year; and this summer the
fleet from the Humber sailed into the Thames, and lay there two nights,
and it afterwards held on its course to Denmark. And Earl Baldwin died,
and his son Arnulf succeeded him; and Earl William (Fitz Osbern) and
the French King should have been his support: but Earl Robert came and
slew his kinsman Arnulf, and the Earl; and put the King to flight, and
slew many thousands of his men.

       *       *       *       *       *

“In the second year after Lanfranc’s consecration he went to Rome.
Pope Alexander so greatly honoured him, that contrary to his custom he
rose to meet him, and gave him two palls in token of especial favour:
Lanfranc received one of them from the altar after the Roman manner,
and the Pope, with his own hands, gave him the other, in which he
himself had been accustomed to perform mass. In the presence of the
Pope, Thomas brought forwards a calumny touching the primacy of the see
of Canterbury, and the subjection of certain Bishops. Lanfranc briefly
and clearly states the conclusion to which this affair was afterwards
brought in England, in an epistle to the aforesaid Pope Alexander. This
year a general council was held at Winchester, in which he deposed
Wulfric Abbot of the new monastery, and made many regulations touching
Christian discipline. A few days afterwards, he consecrated Osbern at
London as Bishop of Exeter, and Scotland at Canterbury as Abbot of St.
Augustine’s.

“In his 3d year he consecrated Peter at Gloucester as Bishop of
Litchfield or Chester. This year also a great council was held at a
place called Pinenden (Pinnenden or Pinchenden Heath, near Maidstone),
in which Lanfranc proved that he and his church held their lands and
their rights by sea and by land, as freely as the King held his:
excepting in three cases: to wit, if the highway be dug up; if a tree
be cut so as to fall upon it; and if murder be committed and blood
spilt: when a man is taken in these misdeeds, the fine paid shall
belong to the King; otherwise their vassals shall be free from regal
exactions.

“In his 4th year he consecrated Patrick at London as Bishop of Dublin,
in Ireland, from whom he received a profession of obedience, and he
moreover gave him very memorable letters to the Kings of Ireland.

“In his 5th year a general council was held at London, the proceedings
of which Lanfranc committed to writing, at the request of many.

“In his 6th year he gave the bishoprick of Rochester to Hernost, a monk
of Christ Church, whom he also consecrated at London. A council was
held at Winchester: and the same year Hernost departed this life.

“In his 7th year, he gave the bishoprick of Rochester to Gundulf, whom
he consecrated at Canterbury. This year Thomas Archbishop of York sent
letters to Lanfranc, requesting that he would send two Bishops to
consecrate a certain priest, who had come to him with letters from the
Orkneys, to the intent that he might be made Bishop of those islands.
Lanfranc consenting to this, commanded Wolstan Bishop of Worcester,
and Peter Bishop of Chester, to go to York, and to assist Thomas in
completing the ceremony.

“In his 8th year, a council was held at London, in which Lanfranc
deposed Ailnod Abbot of Glastonbury.

“In his 11th year, a council was held at Gloucester, wherein, by the
King’s order, and with the consent of Lanfranc, Thomas Archbishop of
York consecrated William to the Bishoprick of Durham; and because
he could not be attended by the Scotch Bishops his suffragans, the
Bishops Wolstan, Osbern, Giso, and Robert assisted at this ceremony by
the command of Lanfranc.--At this time Lanfranc sent letters rich in
sacred lore to Bishop Donald in Ireland.

“In his 16th year Lanfranc consecrated Donatus, his monk at Canterbury,
to the bishoprick of Dublin, by the desire of the King, clergy, and
people of Ireland. This year a council was held at Gloucester, wherein
Lanfranc deposed Wulstcetel Abbot of Croyland. He consecrated Robert to
the bishoprick of Chester, and William to that of Elmham, in one day,
at Canterbury. At Winchester also he consecrated Maurice as Bishop of
London, who brought noble gifts to his mother church of Canterbury a
few days afterwards.

“In the 18th year of Lanfranc’s prelacy, on the death of King William
beyond sea, he acknowledged his son William, as he had done his father,
and consecrated and crowned him in St. Peter’s Church, which is in
the western part of London. The same year, and at his metropolitan
city of Canterbury, he examined and consecrated Godfrey as Bishop of
Chichester, Wido also as Abbot of St. Augustine’s and John as Bishop of
Wells. The next day Lanfranc, on his own authority, and taking with him
Odo Bishop of Baieux the King’s brother, who was then at Canterbury,
conducted the Abbot Wido to St. Augustine’s and commanded the Brothers
of the Order to receive him as their own Abbot and Pastor; but they,
with one accord, answered that they would neither submit to him nor
receive him. Thus Lanfranc came leading the Abbot, and when he found
that the Monks were obstinate in resistance, and that they would not
obey him, he commanded that all the refractory should come out one by
one. When therefore nearly all had left the monastery, Lanfranc and his
suite led in the Abbot with much pomp, placed him in the chair, and
delivered the church up to him. He also seized the Prior, Elfrin by
name, and as many others as he thought fit, and he put them forthwith
into claustral imprisonment at Canterbury; but he sent those who had
the greatest influence, and were the authors of this scandal, to the
castle to be confined there. After he had returned home having finished
all, he was informed that the monks who had left the monastery were
assembled, near St. Mildred’s church. Hereupon he sent to them, saying,
that if they would, they might return to the church before the 9th
hour, but that if they delayed longer, they would not be allowed free
entrance, but be treated as renegadoes. Having heard this message they
doubted whether to return or to remain, but at the hour of refection,
when they became anhungered, many repenting of their obstinacy sent to
Lanfranc and promised submission. These he treated with lenity, and
desired that they should return directly and confirm by oath their
profession of obedience to the aforesaid Abbot. Thus they returned and
swore faithfulness and obedience to the Abbot Wido, upon the relics of
St. Augustine. Lanfranc seized those who remained behind and placed
them in various monasteries of England, confining them till he brought
them to profess their submission. About the same time he seized one
of them named Ælfred, who had attempted to flee, and confined him
loaded with irons at Canterbury, together with some of his fellows: and
he exercised upon them the utmost severity of their order. But when
these monks were thought to be sufficiently humbled and had promised
amendment, Lanfranc taking pity on them, had them brought from the
several places whither he had banished them, and reconciled them to
their Abbot.

“The same year the dissentions were renewed, and the monks plotted the
death of their Abbot, but one of them, named Columban, being taken,
Lanfranc caused him to be brought to him. And as he stood there before
him, Lanfranc asked if he desired to murder his Abbot. And the monk
forthwith replied “Yes! if I could I would certainly kill him.” Then
Lanfranc commanded that he should be tied up naked by the gates of St.
Augustine’s and suffer flagellation before all the people, that his
cowl should then be torn off, and that he should be driven out of the
city. This order was executed, and thenceforth during Lanfranc’s life,
sedition was repressed by the dread of his severity.

“In the 19th year of his prelacy, died the venerable Archbishop
Lanfranc, and he was buried at his metropolitan see of Canterbury, of
which he had been possessed eighteen years, nine months, and two days.
His deeds, his buildings, alms, and labours, are only in part recounted
in the writing which is read on his anniversary, for they were very
numerous. After his death the monks of St. Augustine’s, openly
rebelling against their aforesaid Abbot Wido, stirred up the citizens
of Canterbury, who, with an armed force, attempted to slay him in his
house. But his family made resistance, and when many had been wounded,
and some killed on both sides, the Abbot with much difficulty escaped
unhurt from amongst them, and fled for refuge to the mother church of
Canterbury (Christ Church). On the report of this disturbance Walkelm
Bishop of Winchester, and Gundulf Bishop of Rochester, suffragans to
the see of Canterbury, with some noblemen sent by the King, hastened
to Canterbury, that they might take vengeance on the delinquents; and
when they had enquired into the causes of the sedition and had found
the monks unable to clear themselves, they condemned them to suffer
public punishment because they had transgressed openly. But the prior
and monks of Christ Church, moved with piety, pleaded against this
sentence, lest, if they were to receive their discipline before all
the people, they should henceforth be accounted infamous, and so their
profession and office come to be despised. Wherefore it was granted
on their intercession, that the punishment should take place in the
church, into which the populace should not be admitted, but those only
who were appointed to see it executed. And two monks of Christ Church,
Wido and Norman, were called in, and they inflicted the punishment at
the command of the Bishops. Then the rebellious monks were dispersed
into various monasteries of England; and 24 monks of Christ Church were
substituted in their place, together with the prior, named Anthony,
who had been sub-prior at Christ Church. The townsmen who entered the
Abbot’s hall in arms were seized, and those who were convicted of
having struck him lost their eyes.

“After the death of Lanfranc the see remained vacant four years, nine
months, and nine days, during which time it suffered much adversity. At
length, in the year of our Lord’s incarnation 1093 and on the 2d of the
nones of March, the Archbishoprick of Canterbury was given to Anselm
Abbot of Bec, a good and an upright man, of great learning, and amongst
the most noted of his time. He came to Canterbury on the 7th of the
calends of October, his earlier arrival having been prevented by many
sufficient causes, and he was consecrated on the 2d of the nones of
December.”


1071.

This year Earl Ædwin and Earl Morker withdrew themselves and wandered
through the woods and fields. Then Earl Morker took ship and went
to Ely; and Earl Ædwin was slain treacherously by his own men: and
Bishop Egelwin, and Siward Bearn, and many hundreds with them, came
into Ely. And when King William heard this, he called out a fleet and
army; and he surrounded that land, and he made a bridge and entered
in, his fleet lying off the coast. Then all the outlaws surrendered;
these were, Bishop Egelwin and Earl Morker, and all who were with them,
excepting only Hereward, and his followers whom he led off with great
valour. And the King seized their ships, and arms, and much treasure;
and he disposed of the men as he would; and he sent Bishop Egelwin to
Abingdon, where he died early in the winter.


1072.

This year King William led an army and a fleet against Scotland, and
he stationed the ships along the coast and crossed the Tweed with his
army; but he found nothing to reward his pains. And King Malcolm came
and treated with King William, and delivered hostages, and became his
liege-man; and King William returned home with his forces. And Bishop
Egelric died; he had been consecrated to the Archbishoprick of York, of
which he was unjustly deprived, and the see of Durham was given to him;
this he held as long as he would, and then resigned it and went to the
monastery of Peterborough, and there he spent 12 years. Then after King
William had conquered England, he removed Egelric from Peterborough,
and sent him to Westminster, and he died on the ides of October, and
he is buried in the Abbey, in the aisle of St. Nicholas.


1073.

This year King William carried an army of English and French over sea,
and conquered the province of Maine: and the English did great damage,
for they destroyed the vineyards and burned the towns, and they laid
waste that province, the whole of which submitted to William; and they
afterwards returned home again.


1074.

This year King William went over sea to Normandy; and Childe Edgar came
thither from Scotland, and the King received him and all his men into
the protection of the law, and he remained at Court, enjoying such
privileges as the King granted him.


1075.

This year King William gave the daughter of William Osbearn’s son in
marriage to Earl Ralph: the said Ralph was a Welchman on his mother’s
side, and his father was an Englishman named Ralph, who was born in
Norfolk. Then the King gave the Earldom of Norfolk and Suffolk to
his son, who brought his wife to Norwich, but there the bridal feast
was the bane of all: for Earl Roger and Earl Waltheof were there,
and Bishops and Abbots, and they took counsel to depose the King of
England. And this was soon reported to the King then in Normandy, and
it was told him withal that Earl Roger and Earl Ralph were the heads
of the conspiracy, and that they had brought over the Welch to their
side, and had sent eastward to Denmark for a fleet to assist them. And
Earl Roger departed to his earldom in the west, and gathered his people
together in rebellion against the King, but he was checked in his
attempt. And Earl Ralph also being in his earldom would have marched
forth with his people; but the garrisons of the castles of England,
and the inhabitants of the country came against him, and prevented his
effecting any thing, on which he took ship at Norwich: and his wife
remained in the castle, and held it till she had obtained terms, and
then she departed from England with all her adherents. And after this
the King came to England, and he took his kinsman Earl Roger and put
him in prison; he also seized Earl Waltheof. And soon afterwards 200
ships arrived from Denmark, commanded by two chieftains, Cnut the son
of Swegn, and Earl Hacon, but they durst not risk a battle with King
William, and they bore away for Flanders. And the lady Eadgith died at
Winchester seven nights before Christmas, and the King caused her to be
brought to Westminster with great pomp, and to be laid by her Lord King
Edward. And the King was at Westminster during Christmas, and there all
the Welchmen who had been at the bridal feast at Norwich were brought
to justice; some were blinded, and others banished. Thus were put down
the traitors to William.


1076.

This year Swægn King of Denmark died, and Harold his son succeeded to
the kingdom. And the King gave Westminster to Vithele, who had before
been Abbot of Bernay. Earl Waltheof was beheaded at Winchester, and his
body was carried to Croyland. And the King went over sea and led his
army into Britanny, and besieged the castle of Dol, and the Bretons
defended it till the King of France came up, and then William departed,
having lost both men and horses and much treasure.


1077.

This year a peace was made between the King of France and William King
of England, and it lasted but a little while. And this year, one night
before the Assumption of St. Mary, there was a more dreadful fire in
London than had ever happened since the town was built. And this year
Ægelwig Abbot of Evesham died on the 14th of the calends of March.
Bishop Hereman died also on the 10th of the calends of March.


1079.

This year, between the two feasts of St. Mary, King Malcolm invaded
England with a large army, and laid waste Northumberland as far as the
Tyne; and he slew many hundred men, and carried home much money and
treasure and many prisoners. And the same year King William fought
against his son Robert without the borders of Normandy near a castle
called Gerborneth (Gerberoy), and there King William was wounded, and
the horse on which he sat was killed, and his son William was also
wounded, and many men were slain.


1080.

This year Walcher Bishop of Durham was slain at a gemot, and a hundred
French and Flemings with him: Walcher himself was born in Lorrain. The
Northumbrians perpetrated this in the month of May.


1081.

This year the King led an army into Wales, and there he set free many
hundred persons.


1082.

This year the King arrested Bishop Odo. And there was a great famine
this year.


1083.

This year a quarrel arose in Glastonbury between the Abbot Thurstan
and his monks. It was first caused by the Abbot’s unwise conduct, in
that he treated his monks ill in many respects, but the monks were
lovingly-minded towards him, and begged him to govern them in right
and in kindness, and they would be faithful and obedient to him. But
the Abbot would none of this, and wrought them evil, and threatened
worse. One day the Abbot went into the Chapter-house, and harangued the
monks, and would have taught them amiss;[BH] and he sent for laymen,
and they came in all armed upon the monks in the Chapter-house. Then
the monks were greatly terrified and knew not what to do, and some ran
for refuge into the church and locked the doors from within; but the
others followed them, and would have dragged them forth when they durst
not come out. Rueful things happened there on that day, for the French
broke into the choir and threw darts towards the altar where the monks
were collected, and some of their servants went upon the upper floor
and shot down arrows towards the chancel, so that many arrows stuck in
the crucifix which stood above the altar, and the wretched monks lay
around the altar, and some crept under it, and they called earnestly
upon God and besought his mercy, since they could obtain no mercy at
the hands of men. What can we say, but that they shot without ceasing,
and others broke down the doors, and rushed in, and they slew some of
the monks and wounded many, so that the blood ran down from the altar
on the steps, and from the steps to the floor. Three were smitten to
death and eighteen wounded. And the same year Matilda the wife of King
William died on the day after the feast of All Saints. And the same
year after Christmas the King caused a great and heavy tax to be raised
throughout England, even 72 pence upon every hide of land.


1084.

This year Wulfwold Abbot of Chertsey died on the 13th of the calends of
May.


1085.

This year men said and reported as certain, that Cnut King of Denmark,
the son of King Swægn was bent hitherward, and that he designed to
conquer this land, with the assistance of Robert Earl of Flanders,
whose daughter he had married. When King William, who was then in
Normandy, heard this, for England and Normandy were both his, he
hastened hither with a larger army of horse and foot, from France and
Britanny, than had ever arrived in this land, so that men wondered how
the country might feed them all. But the King billetted the soldiers
upon his subjects throughout the nation, and they provided for them,
every man according to the land that he possessed. And the people
suffered much distress this year: and the King caused the country near
the sea to be laid waste, that if his enemies landed they might the
less readily find any plunder. Afterwards when he had received certain
information that they had been stopped, and that they would not be able
to proceed in this enterprise, he let part of his forces return to
their own homes, and he kept part in this land through the winter. At
Christmas the King was at Gloucester with his Witan; and he held his
court there five days; and afterwards the Archbishop and Clergy held a
synod during three days; and Maurice was there chosen to the bishoprick
of London, William to that of Norfolk, and Robert, to that of Cheshire;
they were all chaplains of the King. After this the King had a great
consultation, and spoke very deeply with his Witan concerning this
land, how it was held and what were its tenantry. He then sent his
men over all England, into every shire, and caused them to ascertain
how many hundred hides of land it contained, and what lands the King
possessed therein, what cattle there were in the several counties,
and how much revenue he ought to receive yearly from each. He also
caused them to write down how much land belonged to his Archbishops,
to his Bishops, his Abbots, and his Earls, and, that I may be brief,
what property every inhabitant of all England possessed in land or in
cattle, and how much money this was worth. So very narrowly did he
cause the survey to be made, that there was not a single hide nor a
rood of land, nor--it is shameful to relate that which he thought no
shame to do--was there an ox, or a cow, or a pig passed by, and that
was not set down in the accounts, and then all these writings were
brought to him.


1086.

This year the King wore his crown and held his court at Winchester at
Easter, and he so journeyed forward that he was at Westminster during
Pentecost, and there he dubbed his son Henry a knight. And afterwards
he travelled about, so that he came to Salisbury at Lammas; and his
Witan, and all the land-holders of substance in England, whose vassals
soever they were, repaired to him there, and they all submitted to him,
and became his men, and swore oaths of allegiance, that they would
be faithful to him against all others. Thence he proceeded to Wight
because he was to cross over to Normandy; and this he afterwards did,
but first, according to his custom, he extorted immense sums from his
subjects, upon every pretext he could find, whether just or otherwise.
Then he went over to Normandy, and King Edward’s kinsman Edgar Ætheling
left him, because he received no great honour from him: may Almighty
God give him glory hereafter. And the Ætheling’s sister Cristina went
into the monastery of Romsey, and took the holy veil. And the same was
a very heavy year, and very disastrous and sorrowful; for there was a
pestilence among the cattle, and the corn and fruits were checked; and
the weather was worse than may easily be conceived: so violent was the
thunder and lightning, that many persons were killed: and things ever
went worse and worse with the people: may Almighty God mend them, when
such is his will.


1087.

The year 1087 after the birth of Christ our Saviour, and the one
and twentieth of King William’s reign, during which he governed and
disposed of the realm of England even as God permitted him, was a very
grievous time of scarcity in this land. There was also so much illness,
that almost every other man was afflicted with the worst of evils, that
is, a fever; and this so severe, that many died of it. And afterwards,
from the badness of the weather which we have mentioned before, there
was so great a famine throughout England, that many hundreds died
of hunger. O how disastrous, how rueful were those times! when the
wretched people were brought to the point of death by the fever, then
the cruel famine came on and finished them.--Who would not deplore such
times, or who is so hard hearted that he will not weep for so much
misery? But such things are, on account of the sins of the people, and
because they will not love God and righteousness. Even so was it in
those days; there was little righteousness in this land amongst any,
excepting the monks alone who lived piously. The King and the chief men
loved much, and over much, to amass gold and silver, and cared not
how sinfully it was gotten, so that it came into their hands. The King
sold out his lands as dear as dearest he might, and then some other
man came and bid more than the first had given, and the King granted
them to him who offered the larger sum; then came a third and bid yet
more, and the King made over the lands to him who offered most of all;
and he cared not how iniquitously his Sheriffs extorted money from
the miserable people, nor how many unlawful things they did. And the
more men spake of rightful laws, the more lawlessly did they act. They
raised oppressive taxes, and so many were their unjust deeds, it were
hard to number them. And the same year, before harvest, St. Paul’s holy
minster, the residence of the Bishops of London, was burnt, together
with many other monasteries, and the greater and handsomer part of the
whole city. At the same time likewise almost all the principal towns of
England were burnt down. O how sad and deplorable was this year, which
brought forth so many calamities.

The same year also, before the Assumption of St. Mary, King William
marched with an army out of Normandy into France, and made war upon
his own Lord King Philip, and slew a great number of his people, and
burned the town of Mante, and all the holy monasteries in it, and two
holy men who served God as anchorites were burned there. This done King
William returned into Normandy. Rueful deeds he did, and ruefully he
suffered. Wherefore ruefully? He fell sick and became grievously ill.
What can I say? The sharpness of death, that spareth neither rich nor
poor, seized upon him. He died in Normandy the day after the Nativity
of St. Mary, and he was buried in Caen, at St. Stephen’s monastery,
which he had built and had richly endowed. O how false, how unstable is
the good of this world, He, who had been a powerful King and Lord of
many territories, He, then, of all his lands, possessed not more than
seven feet of ground; and He, who was erewhile adorned with gold and
with gems, lay then covered with mould. He left three sons: Robert the
eldest was Earl of Normandy after him; the second, named William wore
the crown of England after his father’s death; and his third son was
Henry, to whom he bequeathed immense treasures.

If any would know what manner of man King William was, the glory that
he obtained, and of how many lands he was Lord; then will we describe
him as we have known him, we, who have looked upon him, and who
once lived in his court. This King William, of whom we are speaking,
was a very wise and a great man, and more honoured and more powerful
than any of his predecessors. He was mild to those good men who loved
God, but severe beyond measure towards those who withstood his will.
He founded a noble monastery on the spot where God permitted him to
conquer England, and he established monks in it, and he made it very
rich. In his days the great monastery at Canterbury was built, and
many others also throughout England; moreover this land was filled
with monks who lived after the rule of St. Benedict; and such was the
state of religion in his days that all that would, might observe that
which was prescribed by their respective orders. King William was also
held in much reverence; he wore his crown three times every year when
he was in England: at Easter he wore it at Winchester, at Pentecost at
Westminster, and at Christmas at Gloucester. And at these times, all
the men of England were with him, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and
Earls, Thanes, and Knights. So also, was he a very stern and a wrathful
man, so that none durst do any thing against his will, and he kept in
prison those Earls who acted against his pleasure. He removed Bishops
from their sees, and Abbots from their offices, and he imprisoned
Thanes, and at length he spared not his own brother Odo. This Odo was
a very powerful Bishop in Normandy, his see was that of Baieux, and
he was foremost to serve the King. He had an Earldom in England, and
when William was in Normandy he was the first man in this country, and
him did he cast into prison. Amongst other things the good order that
William established is not to be forgotten; it was such that any man,
who was himself aught, might travel over the kingdom with a bosom-full
of gold unmolested; and no man durst kill another, however great the
injury he might have received from him. He reigned over England, and
being sharp-sighted to his own interest, he surveyed the kingdom so
thoroughly that there was not a single hide of land throughout the
whole, of which he knew not the possession, and how much it was worth,
and this he afterwards entered in his register. The land of the Britons
(Wales) was under his sway, and he built castles therein; moreover he
had full dominion over the Isle of Mann (Anglesey): Scotland also was
subject to him from his great strength; the land of Normandy was his
by inheritance, and he possessed the Earldom of Maine; and had he lived
two years longer he would have subdued Ireland by his prowess, and that
without a battle. Truly there was much trouble in these times, and very
great distress; he caused castles to be built, and oppressed the poor.
The King was also of great sternness, and he took from his subjects
many marks of gold, and many hundred pounds of silver, and this, either
with or without right, and with little need. He was given to avarice
and greedily loved gain. He made large forests for the deer, and
enacted laws therewith, so that whoever killed a hart or a hind should
be blinded. As he forbade killing the deer, so also the boars; and he
loved the tall stags as if he were their father. He also appointed
concerning the hares, that they should go free. The rich complained
and the poor murmured, but he was so sturdy that he recked nought of
them; they must will all that the King willed, if they would live; or
would keep their lands; or would hold their possessions; or would be
maintained in their rights. Alas! that any man should so exalt himself,
and carry himself in his pride over all! May Almighty God shew mercy
to his soul, and grant him the forgiveness of his sins! We have written
concerning him these things, both good and bad, that virtuous men might
follow after the good, and wholly avoid the evil, and might go in the
way that leadeth to the kingdom of heaven.

We may write of many events which happened during this year. In
Denmark, the Danes who were formerly accounted the most loyal of
people, turned to the greatest possible perfidy and treachery, for they
chose King Cnut, and submitted to him, and swore oaths of allegiance
and afterwards they shamefully murdered him in a church.[BI] It also
came to pass in Spain, that the heathen men went forth, and made
war upon the Christians, and brought great part of the country into
subjection to themselves. But the Christian King, whose name was Anphos
(Alfonso), sent to all countries and begged assistance. And allies
flocked to him from every Christian land, and they went forth, and
slew or drove away all the heathens, and they won their land again by
the help of God. The same year also many great men died in this land:
Stigand Bishop of Chichester, and the Abbot of Saint Augustine’s, and
the Abbots of Bath and of Pershore, and the Lord of them all William
King of England, concerning whom we have spoken above.

After his death, his son William, of the same name with his father,
took to himself the government, and was consecrated as King in
Westminster by Archbishop Lanfranc three days before Michaelmas: and
all the men of England acknowledged him, and swore oaths of allegiance
to him. This done, the King went to Winchester and examined the
treasury, and the hoards which his father had amassed; gold and silver,
vessels of plate, palls, gems, and many other valuables that are hard
to be numbered:--The King did as his father before he died commanded
him; he distributed treasures amongst all the monasteries of England,
for the sake of his father’s soul: to some he gave ten marks of gold,
and to others six, and sixty pennies to every country church, and a
hundred pounds of money was sent into every county to be divided among
the poor for his soul’s sake. And before he died he had also desired
that all who had been imprisoned during his reign should be released.
And the King was at London during Christmas.


1088.

This year the land was much disturbed, and filled with treason, for
the principal Frenchmen here would have betrayed their Lord the King,
and have had his brother Robert instead, who was Earl of Normandy.
Bishop Odo was the chief man in the conspiracy, together with Bishop
Gosfrith, and William Bishop of Durham.--The King esteemed the Bishop
so highly, that the affairs of all England were directed after his
counsel, and according to his pleasure, but the Bishop purposed to do
by him as Judas Iscariot did by our Lord. And Earl Roger was concerned
in this conspiracy, and many others with him, all Frenchmen. This plot
was concerted during Lent; and as soon as Easter came, they marched
forth, and plundered, and burned, and laid waste the lands of the
crown; and they ruined the estates of those who remained firm in their
allegiance. And each of the head conspirators went to his own castle,
and manned and victualled it, as best he might. Bishop Gosfrith and
Robert the Peace-breaker went to Bristol, and having plundered the
town, they brought the spoils into the castle; and afterwards they
sallied forth and plundered Bath, and all the surrounding country,
and they laid waste all the lordship of Berkeley. And the chief men of
Hereford and all that county, and the men of Shropshire, with many from
Wales, entered Worcestershire, and went on plundering and burning, till
they approached the county town, and they were resolved to burn this
also, and to plunder the cathedral, and to seize the King’s castle for
themselves. The worthy Bishop Wulfstan seeing this, was much distressed
in mind, because the castle was committed to his keeping. Nevertheless
his retainers, few as they were, marched out, and through the mercy of
God, and the good desert of the Bishop, they slew or took captive 500
men, and put all the rest to flight.--The Bishop of Durham did as much
harm as he could in all the northern parts: one of the conspirators
named Roger, threw himself into Norwich castle, and spread devastation
throughout that country: Hugo also was in no respect less formidable to
Leicestershire and Northampton. Bishop Odo, with whom these commotions
originated, departed to his Earldom of Kent, which he ravaged, and he
wholly laid waste the lands of the King and the Archbishop, and brought
all the plunder into his castle at Rochester. When the King had heard
all this, and with what treason they were acting towards him, he was
greatly disturbed in mind; and he sent for the English, and laid his
necessities before them, and entreated their assistance. He promised
them better laws than had ever been in this land, and forbade all
unjust taxes, and guaranteed to his subjects their woods and hunting.
But these concessions were soon done away. Howbeit the English came to
the aid of their Lord the King, and they then marched towards Rochester
desiring to seize Bishop Odo, for they thought that if they had him
who was the head of the conspiracy in their power, they might with
greater ease subdue the others.--Then they came to Tunbridge castle, in
which were the Knights of Bishop Odo and many others, resolved to hold
out against William. But the English came on, and stormed the castle,
and the garrison capitulated. They then proceeded towards Rochester
believing that the Bishop was there; but the King was told that he was
departed to his castle at Pevensey, and the King and his troops went
after him, and he besieged that castle full six weeks with a very large
army. In the mean time Robert Earl of Normandy, the King’s brother,
gathered together a great multitude, and thought that he should win
England with the aid of the disaffected of this country. And he sent
some of his troops to this land, intending to follow them himself.
But the English who guarded the sea attacked these men, and slew and
drowned more than any one can number. At length provisions became
scarce in the castle, on which the insurgents prayed for a truce and
surrendered the place to the King, and the Bishop took an oath that he
would depart from England, and never return unless the King sent for
him, and that he would also give up Rochester castle. After this the
Bishop proceeded thither that he might deliver up that fortress, and
the King sent his men with him, but then the soldiers who were in the
castle arose, and seized the Bishop, and the King’s men, whom they put
into confinement. There were very good knights in this castle: Eustace
the younger, the three sons of Earl Roger, and all the best born of
this land, and of Normandy. When the King knew this, he set forth
with all the troops then with him, and he sent over all England and
commanded that every man of mark, French or English, from town and from
country, should come and join him. Many were those who flocked to him
and he marched to Rochester and besieged the castle till the garrison
capitulated. Bishop Odo and those who were with him departed over sea,
and thus the Bishop lost the station he held in this land. The King
afterwards sent an army to Durham, and besieged the castle, and the
Bishop capitulated, and surrendered it, and he gave up his Bishoprick
and went to Normandy. Many Frenchmen also left their lands, and went
over sea, and the King gave their estates to those who had held fast to
him.


1089.

This year the venerable father and patron of monks Archbishop Lanfranc
departed this life, but we trust that he hath entered into the kingdom
of heaven. There was also a great earthquake throughout England on the
3d of the ides of August. And it was a very late year both as to the
corn, and fruits of all kind, so that many men reaped their corn about
Martinmas, and even later.


1090.

Things being in the state we have described, as regarding the King,
his brother, and his people, William considered how he might take the
surest vengeance on his wretched brother Robert, and win Normandy
from him. To this end, he gained the castle and port of St. Valeri
by stratagem or bribery, and also Albemarle Castle, and he placed
his knights in them, and they did much harm, ravaging and burning
the country. After this he got possession of more castles in that
land, and in these also he stationed his knights. When Robert Earl of
Normandy found that his sworn liege-men revolted and gave up their
castles to his great injury, he sent to his Lord Philip King of France,
who came into Normandy with a large army; and the King and the Earl
with an innumerable force besieged a castle defended by the King of
England’s soldiers: but King William of England sent to Philip King of
France, and he, for love of William or for his great bribes, deserted
his vassal Earl Robert and his land, and returned to France, leaving
things as they were. During all these transactions, England was greatly
oppressed by unlawful taxes, and many other grievances.


1091.

This year King William held his court at Westminster at Christmas, and
the following Candlemas he departed from England to Normandy, bent on
his brother’s ruin: but whilst he was in that country, peace was made
between them, on condition that the Earl should give up Fescamp, the
Earldom of Eu, and Cherbourg, to William, and withal that the King’s
men should be unmolested in those castles of which they had possessed
themselves in the Earl’s despite. And the King, on his side, promised
to reduce to their obedience the many castles conquered by their
father, which had since revolted from the Earl, and also to establish
him in the possession of all their father’s territories abroad,
excepting those places which the Earl had then given up to the King.
Moreover all who had lost their lands in England on account of the Earl
were to regain them by this treaty, and the Earl also was to receive
certain estates in England then specified. It was also agreed that if
the Earl died leaving no legitimate son, the King should be heir of all
Normandy, and in like manner if the King died, that the Earl should be
heir of all England. Twelve of the chief men on the part of the King
and twelve on that of the Earl guaranteed this treaty by oath; yet it
was observed but a short time. During this peace Edgar Ætheling was
dispossessed of those lands which the Earl had granted him, and he
departed and went from Normandy into Scotland, to the King his brother
in law, and his sister. Whilst King William was out of England, Malcolm
King of Scotland invaded this country, and ravaged great part of it,
till the good men to whom the keeping of the land was entrusted, sent
their troops against him and drove him back.--When King William heard
this in Normandy, he hastened to return, and he came to England and his
brother Earl Robert with him. And they called out a fleet and army, but
almost all the ships were lost, a few days before Michaelmas, ere they
reached Scotland. And the King and his brother proceeded with the army:
and when King Malcolm heard that they sought to attack him he marched
with his array out of Scotland into Lothian in England, and remained
there. And when King William approached, Earl Robert and Edgar Ætheling
mediated a peace between the Kings, on condition that King Malcolm
should repair to our King, and become his vassal, in all the like
subjection as to his father before him; and this he confirmed by oath.
And King William promised him all the lands and possessions that he
held under his father. By this peace Edgar Ætheling was reconciled to
the King. And the Kings separated in great friendship, but this lasted
during a short time only.--Earl Robert abode here with the King till
Christmas drew near, and in this time he found little good faith as
to the fulfilment of the treaty, and two days before the feast he took
ship from Wight and sailed to Normandy, and Edgar Ætheling with him.


1092.

This year King William went northward to Carlisle with a large army,
and he repaired the city, and built the castle. And he drove out Dolfin
who had before governed that country, and having placed a garrison in
the castle, he returned into the south, and sent a great number of
Englishmen thither with their wives and cattle, that they might settle
there and cultivate the land.


1093.

This year, in Lent, King William was very sick at Gloucester, insomuch
that he was universally reported to be dead: and he made many good
promises in his illness; that his future life he would lead in
righteousness--that the churches of God he would guard and free--and
never more sell them for money--and that he would have all just laws
in his kingdom. And he gave the Archbishoprick of Canterbury, which he
had hitherto kept in his own hands, to Anselm who was before this Abbot
of Bec, and the Bishoprick of Lincoln to his Chancellor Robert; and he
granted lands to many, monasteries, but afterwards, when recovered, he
took them back, and he neglected all the good laws that he had promised
us. After this the King of Scotland sent desiring that the stipulated
conditions might be performed; and King William summoned him to
Gloucester, and sent hostages to him in Scotland, and afterwards Edgar
Ætheling and others met him and brought him with much honour to the
Court. But when he came there he could neither obtain a conference with
our King, nor the performance of the conditions formerly promised him,
and therefore they departed in great enmity: and King Malcolm returned
home to Scotland, and as soon as he came thither, he assembled his
troops and invaded England, ravaging the country with more fury than
behoved him: and Robert Earl of Northumberland with his men lay in wait
for him, and slew him unawares. He was killed by Moræl of Bamborough,
the Earl’s steward, and King Malcolm’s own Godfather: his son Edward,
who had he lived would have been King after his father, was killed with
him. When the good Queen Margaret heard that her most beloved Lord, and
her son were thus cut off, she was grieved in spirit unto death, and
she went with her priest into the church, and having gone through all
befitting rites, she prayed of God that she might give up the ghost.
And then, the Scots chose Dufenal the brother of Malcolm for their
King, and drove out all the English who had been with King Malcolm.
When Duncan the son of King Malcolm heard all this, for he was in King
William’s Court, and had remained here from the time that his father
gave him as an hostage to our King’s father, he came to the King, and
did such homage as the King required; and thus with his consent he
departed for Scotland, with the aid that he could muster, both English
and French, and he deprived his kinsman Dufenal of the throne, and was
received as King. But then some of the Scotch again gathered themselves
together, and slew nearly all his men, and he himself escaped with few
others. They were afterwards reconciled on this condition, that Duncan
should never more bring English or Frenchmen into that country.


1094.

This year, at Christmas, King William held his Court at Gloucester: and
there came messengers to him out of Normandy from his brother Robert,
and they said that his brother renounced all peace and compact if the
King would not perform all that they had stipulated in the treaty;
moreover they called him perjured and faithless unless he would perform
the conditions, or would go to the place where the treaty had been
concluded and sworn to, and there clear himself. Then at Candlemas the
King went to Hastings, and whilst he waited there for a fair wind, he
caused the monastery on the field of battle to be consecrated; and he
took the staff from Herbert Losange, Bishop of Thetford.--After this,
in the middle of Lent, he went over sea to Normandy. When he came
thither he and his brother Earl Robert agreed that they would meet in
peace, and they did so, to the end that they might be reconciled. But
afterwards, when they met attended by the same men who had brought
about the treaty, and had sworn to see it executed, these charged all
the breach of faith upon the King; he would not allow this, neither
would he observe the treaty, on which they separated in great enmity.
And the King then seized the castle of Bures and took the Earl’s men
who were in it, and he sent some of them over to this country. And on
the other hand the Earl with the assistance of the King of France,
took the castle of Argentses (Argentan) in which he seized Roger the
Poitevin and 700 of the King’s soldiers; and he afterwards took the
castle of Hulme; and frequently did each burn the towns and take
captive the people of his rival. Then the King sent hither and ordered
out 20,000 Englishmen to aid him in Normandy, but when they reached the
sea, they were desired to return, and to give to the King’s Treasury
the money that they had received; this was half a pound for each man,
and they did so. And in Normandy, after this, the Earl with the King
of France and all the troops that they could collect, marched towards
Eu, where King William then was, purposing to besiege him therein, and
thus they proceeded until they came to Longueville, and there the King
of France turned off through treachery, and on this the whole army
dispersed. In the mean time King William sent for his brother Henry who
was in the castle of Domfront, and because he could not pass through
Normandy in security, he sent ships for him, with Hugo Earl of Chester.
And when they should have made for Eu, where the king was, they
directed their course instead to England, and landed at Southampton on
the eve of All Saints’ day; and they then remained in this country,
and were in London at Christmas. The same year also the Welsh gathered
themselves together, and made war upon the French in Wales, or in
the neighbouring parts, where they had been before deprived of their
lands, and they stormed many fortresses and castles, and slew the men,
and afterwards their numbers increased so much, that they divided
themselves into many bodies; Hugo, Earl of Shropshire fought with one
division, and put it to flight, but nevertheless the others abstained
not, during the whole year, from committing every outrage in their
power. This year also the Scots conspired against their King Duncan and
slew him, and they afterwards took his uncle Dufenal a second time for
their king; through whose instructions and instigation Duncan had been
betrayed to his death.


1095.

This year King William was at Hwitsand during the first four days of
Christmas, and after the fourth day he set sail and landed at Dover.
And the King’s brother Henry remained in this country till Lent, and
then he went over sea to Normandy, with much treasure to be employed
in the King’s service against their brother Earl Robert: and he gained
ground upon the Earl continually, and did much damage to his lands
and subjects. Then at Easter the King held his Court at Winchester,
and Robert Earl of Northumberland would not repair thither; therefore
the King’s anger was greatly stirred up against him, and he sent
to him, and sternly commanded that if he would remain in peace he
should come to his Court at Pentecost. This year Easter fell on the
8th of the calends of April, and after Easter, on the night of the
feast of St. Ambrose the 2d of the nones of April, there was seen
all over the country a great multitude of stars falling from heaven
during nearly the whole of the night, not one or two at a time, but
so thickly that no man might number them. After this at Pentecost the
King was at Windsor, and all his Witan with him, excepting the Earl of
Northumberland, for the King would neither give hostages nor pledge his
troth that he should come and go in security. On this the King called
out an army, and marched against the Earl into Northumberland, and
as soon as he came thither he seized almost all the chief men of the
Earl’s court in a certain fortress, and he put them in confinement.
And he besieged Tinmouth castle until he took it, and there he seized
the Earl’s brother, and all who were with him: thence he proceeded to
Bamborough, and there he besieged the Earl; and when the King found
that he could not reduce him, he caused a castle to be built over
against Bamborough, and called it in his speech Malveisin, which
is in English “the evil neighbour,” and he garrisoned it strongly,
and afterwards he departed southward. Then one night soon after the
King’s return into the south, the Earl went out of Bamborough towards
Tinmouth, but those in the new castle being aware of his design,
pursued and attacked him, and they wounded him, and afterwards took
him prisoner, and some of his followers were slain, and some taken
alive. In the mean time the King was told, that the Welch had stormed a
certain castle in Wales, called Montgomery, and had slain Earl Hugo’s
men who defended it; on this he commanded another army to be called
out in haste, and after Michaelmas he proceeded into Wales. He divided
his forces, and his troops made their way through all parts of the
country, and met at Snowdon, on All Saints’ day. But the Welch ever
fled before him to the mountains and moors, so that no man could get
near them, and the King at length returned homewards, because he found
that he could do no more there that winter. When the King came back, he
commanded his people to take Robert. Earl of Northumberland and lead
him to Bamborough, and to put out both his eyes, unless the besieged
would surrender the castle, which was defended by his wife, and his
steward Moreal, who was also his kinsman. On this, the castle was given
up, and Moreal was received at William’s Court; and through him many
were discovered, both clergy and laity, who had aided this rebellion
with their counsel. Then the King ordered some of them to be imprisoned
before Christmas, and he straightly commanded throughout the kingdom,
that all who held lands of him should be at his Court on that festival,
as they would retain his protection. And the King had Earl Robert
brought to Windsor, and confined there in the castle. This year also,
a little before Easter, the Pope’s Legate came to England; this was
Walter Bishop of Alba, a man of a very virtuous life, and at Pentecost
he presented Archbishop Anselm with his pall from Pope Urban, and he
received it at his metropolitan city of Canterbury. And Bishop Walter
remained here great part of this year, and on his return the Romescot,
which had not been paid for many years before, was sent with him. This
year also the weather was very unseasonable, so that the fruits of the
earth were much injured over all the country.


1096.

This year King William held his Christmas Court at Windsor; and William
Bishop of Durham died there on New Year’s day. And the King and all
his Witan were at Salisbury on the octaves of Epiphany. There Geoffrey
Bainard accused William of Eu the King’s relation, saying that he had
been concerned in the conspiracy against the King, and for this cause
he fought with him and overcame him in single combat, and after he was
vanquished the king commanded that his eyes should be put out; and
the king also caused his steward named William, who was his aunt’s
son, to be hanged on the gallows.--Then also Eoda Earl of Champaigne
the King’s uncle, and many others, were deprived of their lands, and
some were brought to London, and there executed. At Easter, this year,
there was a very great stir in this country and in many others also,
through Urban, who was called Pope, though he was not in possession
of the See of Rome: and an innumerable multitude of men, with their
wives and children, departed to go and conquer the heathen nations.
The King and his brother Earl Robert were reconciled in consequence
of this expedition, so that the King went over sea, and received from
the Earl all Normandy for a sum of money, according to contract. And
thereupon the Earl departed, and with him went the Earls of Flanders
and of Boulogne, and many other chieftains. And Earl Robert and those
who accompanied him abode in Apulia that winter. But of those who
went by Hungary, many thousands perished miserably there, or on the
road, and many, rueful and hunger-bitten, toiled homewards against
winter. These were very hard times to all the English, as well because
of the manifold taxes, as of the very grievous famine which sorely
afflicted the land. This year also the nobles who had charge of this
country frequently sent forth armies into Wales, and thus they greatly
oppressed many and for no purpose, but with much loss of men and of
money.


1097.

This year King William was in Normandy at Christmas, and before Easter
he sailed for this land, intending to hold his Court at Winchester, but
he was kept at sea by bad weather till Easter eve; and Arundel was the
first place to which he came, therefore he held his Court at Windsor.
After this, he marched into Wales with a large army, and his troops
penetrated far into the country by means of some Welchmen who had come
over to him, and were his guides. And William remained there from
Midsummer till near August, to his great loss of men and horses and
many other things.

When the Welch had revolted from the King they chose several leaders
from among themselves, one of these was named Cadugan, he was the
more powerful of them all, and was the son of King Griffin’s brother.
The King seeing that he could not effect his purpose returned into
England, and he forthwith caused castles to be built on the marches.
Then at Michaelmas, on the 4th of the nones of October, an uncommon
star appeared shining in the evening, and soon going down: it was
seen in the south-west, and the light which streamed from it seemed
very long, shining towards the south-east; and it appeared after this
manner nearly all the week.--Many allowed that it was a comet. Soon
after this, Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury obtained permission from
the King, though against his inclination, to leave this country and go
over sea, because it seemed to him that in this nation little was done
according to right, or after his desires. And at Martinmas the King
went over sea to Normandy; but whilst he waited for a fair wind, his
train did as much injury in the county in which they were detained,
as any Prince’s retinue, or even an army could have committed in a
peaceable land.

This year was in all respects a very heavy time, and the weather was
singularly bad at the seasons when men should till their lands and
gather in the harvest; and the people had nevertheless no respite
from unjust taxes. Many shires, moreover, which are bound to duty in
works at London, were greatly oppressed in making the wall around the
tower, in repairing the bridge which had been almost washed away, and
in building the King’s hall at Westminster; these hardships fell upon
many. This year also, at Michaelmas, Edgar Ætheling, with the King’s
aid, led an army into Scotland, and won that country by hard fighting,
and drove out the King Dufenal, and established his kinsman Edgar the
son of King Malcolm and Queen Margaret, as King holding of William, and
then he returned into England.


1098.

This year King William was in Normandy at Christmas; and Walcelin
Bishop of Winchester, and Baldwin Abbot of St. Edmund’s, both died
during this festival. This year also died Turold Abbot of Peterborough.
Moreover in the summer Of this year a spring of blood burst out at
Finchamsted, in Berkshire, according to the declaration of many men
of credit, who said that they had seen it. And Earl Hugo was slain in
Anglesey by foreign pirates; his brother Robert succeeded him, having
obtained this of the King. Before Michaelmas-day the heaven appeared
as it were on fire, almost all the night.--This was a year of much
distress, caused by the manifold oppressive taxes; nearly all the crops
in the marsh lands failed also from the great rains, which ceased not
the whole year.


1099.

This year King William was in Normandy at Christmas; and at Easter he
came hither; and at Pentecost he held his Court for the first time in
the new building at Westminster, and there he gave the Bishoprick of
Durham to his chaplain Rannulf, who had long been the chief manager
and director in all the king’s councils held in England. And soon
afterwards William went over sea, and drove Earl Elias from Maine, and
brought that province into subjection; and at Michaelmas he returned to
this land. This year also, on St. Martin’s day, there was so very high
a tide, and the damage was so great in consequence, that men remembered
not the like to have ever happened before, and the same day was the
first of the new moon. And Osmond Bishop of Salisbury died during
Advent.


1100.

This year, at Christmas, King William held his Court in Gloucester;
and at Easter in Winchester; and at Pentecost in Westminster. And at
Pentecost blood was observed gushing from the earth, at a certain town
of Berkshire, even as many asserted who declared that they had seen it.
And after this, on the morning after Lammas day, King William was shot
with an arrow by his own men, as he was hunting, and he was carried to
Winchester and buried there. This was in the thirteenth year from his
accession. He was very powerful, and stern over his lands and subjects,
and towards all his neighbours, and much to be dreaded, and through the
counsels of evil men which were always pleasing to him, and through
his own avarice, he was ever vexing the people with armies and with
cruel taxes; for in his days all justice sank, and all unrighteousness
arose, in the sight of God and the world. He trampled on the Church of
God, and as to the Bishopricks and Abbacies, the incumbents of which
died in his reign, he either sold them outright, or kept them in his
own hands and set them out to renters; for he desired to be the heir
of every one, churchman or layman, so that the day on which he was
killed he had in his own hands the Archbishoprick of Canterbury, the
Bishopricks of Winchester and Salisbury, and eleven Abbacies, all let
out to farm, and in fine, however long I may delay mention of it, all
that was abominable to God and oppressive to men was common in this
island in William’s time: and therefore he was hated by almost all his
people, and abhorred by God as his end sheweth, in that he died in the
midst of his unrighteousness, without repentance or any reparation made
for his evil deeds. He was slain on a Thursday, and buried the next
morning; and after he was buried, the Witan who were then near at hand,
chose his brother Henry as King, and he forthwith gave the Bishoprick
of Winchester to William Giffard, and then went to London; and on the
Sunday following he made a promise to God and all the people, before
the altar at Westminster, that he would abolish the injustice which
prevailed in his brother’s time, and that he would observe the most
equitable of the laws established in the days of any of the Kings
before him: and after this Maurice Bishop of London consecrated him
as King, and all the men of this land submitted to him, and swore
oaths and became his liege-men. And soon afterwards, the King, by the
advice of those about him, caused Rannulf Bishop of Durham to be taken
and brought into the Tower of London, and confined there. Then before
Michaelmas Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury came to this land; King
Henry having sent for him by the advice of his Witan, because he had
left the country on account of the injustice done him by King William.
And soon afterwards the King took for his wife Mahald the daughter of
Malcolm King of Scotland and of the good Queen Margaret King Edward’s
kinswoman, of the true Royal line of England; and on Martinmas day
she was given to him with great pomp at Westminster, and Archbishop
Anselm wedded her to Henry, and afterwards consecrated her as Queen.
And soon after this Thomas Archbishop of York died. This year also, in
the autumn, Earl Robert came home into Normandy, and Robert Earl of
Flanders and Eustace Earl of Boulogne also returned from Jerusalem, and
on Earl Robert’s arrival in Normandy he was joyfully received by all
the people, excepting those in the castles which were garrisoned with
King Henry’s men, and these he made many efforts to win.


1101.

This year, at Christmas, King Henry held his Court at Westminster, and
at Easter at Winchester. And soon afterwards the chief men of this
land entered into a league against the king, both from their own great
treachery, and through Robert Earl of Normandy who had hostile designs
upon this land. And then the King sent out ships to annoy and hinder
his brother, but some of them failed at time of need, and deserted
from the King and submitted to Earl Robert.--At Midsummer the King
posted himself with all his troops at Pevensey to oppose his brother,
and he waited for him there. And in the meantime Earl Robert landed at
Portsmouth twelve nights before Lammas, and the King marched against
him with all his forces; but the chief men interfered and made peace
between them, on condition that the King should give up all those
places in Normandy which he then detained from his brother by force of
arms; and that all who had lost their lands in England on the Earl’s
account should have them again, and that Earl Eustace should also
have his father’s estates in this country, and that Earl Robert should
receive yearly 3000 marks of silver from England; and it was stipulated
by this treaty that whichever of the brothers outlived the other, he
should inherit all England together with Normandy, unless the deceased
left legitimate issue. And twelve men of the highest rank on either
side confirmed this treaty by oath: and the Earl afterwards remained
here till after Michaelmas; and his men did much harm wherever they
went, whilst the Earl staid in this land. This year also, at Candlemas,
Bishop Rannulf escaped by night from the Tower of London, in which he
was confined, and went to Normandy. It was at his incitement chiefly,
that Earl Robert was spirited up to invade this land.


1102.

This year King Henry was at Westminster during the feast of the
Nativity, and at Easter he was at Winchester. And soon afterwards a
difference arose between the King and Robert of Belesme, who held the
Earldom of Shrewsbury in this country, which his father Earl Roger had
enjoyed before him, and who had other great possessions both here and
abroad; and the King went and besieged Arundel castle, and when he
found that he should not be able to take it speedily, he caused castles
to be built before it, and garrisoned with his men; and then he led all
his troops to Bridgenorth, and remained there till he had reduced the
castle, and deprived Earl Robert of his lands, and he took from him all
that he possessed in England, so the Earl departed over sea, and the
King’s soldiers were disbanded and returned home. On the Michaelmas
following the King was at Westminster, with all the head men of this
land, both clergy and laity; and Archbishop Anselm held a synod, at
which many decrees were made touching the Christian religion; and many
Abbots, both French and English, lost their staffs and their abbacies,
because they had obtained them unlawfully, or had lived unrighteously
therein. And the same year, in Pentecost week, there came robbers, some
from Auvergne, some from France, and some from Flanders, and they brake
into the monastery of Peterborough, and carried off much treasure of
gold and silver; crosses, chalices, and candlesticks.


1103.

This year King Henry was at Westminster at Christmas. And soon
afterwards the Bishop William Giffard departed from this land,
because he would not against right, receive consecration from
Gerard Archbishop of York. And at Easter the King held his Court at
Winchester; and afterwards, Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury journeyed
to Rome, as he and the King had agreed. This year also Earl Robert
of Normandy came to this land, to speak with the King, and before he
departed hence he gave up the 3000 marks which King Henry should have
paid him yearly according to the treaty. This year blood was seen
gushing out of the earth at Hampstead, in Berkshire. This was a year
of much distress from the manifold taxes, and also from a mortality
among the cattle, and from the failure of the crops, both of the corn
and all fruits of trees. In the morning also of St. Lawrence’s day,
the wind did so much damage to all the fruit of this land, that no man
remembered the like to have ever happened before. The same year died
Mathias Abbot of Peterborough, who had not lived more than one year
after he was made Abbot. After Michaelmas, on the 12th of the calends
of November, he was received in procession as Abbot, and the same day
the year following he died at Gloucester, and there he was buried.


1104.

This year, at Christmas, King Henry held his Court at Westminster, at
Easter at Winchester, and at Pentecost again at Westminster. This year
the first day of Pentecost was on the nones of June, and on the Tuesday
after, at mid-day, there appeared four circles of a white colour round
the sun, one under the other as if they had been painted. All who saw
it wondered, because they never remembered such before.--An alliance
was afterwards formed between Robert Earl of Normandy and Robert of
Belesme, whom King Henry had deprived of his estates, and driven
out of England, and from this, the King of England and the Earl of
Normandy became at variance. And the King sent his people over sea into
Normandy, and the head men of that country received them, and admitted
them into their castles in treachery to their Lord the Earl, and they
greatly annoyed the Earl by plundering and burning his territories.
This year also, William Earl of Moreton (Mortaigne) departed to
Normandy, and being there, he took arms against the King, on which the
King confiscated all his possessions and estates in this country. It is
not easy to describe the misery of this land, which it suffered at this
time through the various and manifold oppressions and taxes that never
ceased or slackened: moreover wherever the King went his train fell
to plundering his wretched people, and withal there was much burning
and manslaughter. By all this was the anger of God provoked, and this
unhappy nation harrassed.


1105.

This year, at Christmas, King Henry held his Court at Windsor, and
the following Lent he went over sea to Normandy against his brother
Earl Robert. And whilst he remained there he won Caen and Baieux from
his brother, and almost all the castles and chief men of that land
became subject to him; and in the autumn he came again to this country.
And all that he had conquered in Normandy remained to him afterwards
in peace and subjection, excepting those places which lay in the
neighbourhood of William Earl of Mortaigne, and which he harrassed
continually as much as harrass he might, in revenge for the loss of his
estates in England. Then before Christmas Robert de Belesme came hither
to the King. This was a year of great distress from the failure of the
fruits, and from the manifold taxes which never ceased, either before
the King went abroad, while he was there, or again after his return.


1106.

This year, at Christmas, King Henry was at Westminster, and there he
held his court, and during this festival Robert de Belesme departed
from the King in enmity, and left this country for Normandy. After
this, and before Lent, the King was at Northampton, and his brother
Earl Robert of Normandy came to him there; and because the King
would not give up that which he had won from the Earl in Normandy,
they separated in enmity, and the Earl soon went again over sea. In
the first week of Lent, on the evening of Friday, the 14th of the
calends of March, a strange star appeared, and it was seen a while
every evening for a long time afterwards. This star appeared in
the south-west, it seemed small and dim, but the light that stood
from it was very bright and like an exceedingly long beam shining
to the north-east; and one evening it seemed as if a beam from over
against the star darted directly into it. Some persons said that they
observed more unknown stars at this time, but we do not write this as
a certainty because we saw them not ourselves. One night, the morrow
being the day of our Lord’s Supper, that is, the Thursday before
Easter, two moons appeared before day in the heavens, the one in the
east and the other in the west, both full; and the same day was the
14th of the moon. At Easter the King was at Bath, and at Pentecost
at Salisbury, because he would not hold his Court over sea during
his absence from this country. After this, before August, the King
went into Normandy, and almost all the inhabitants bowed to his will,
excepting Robert de Belesme, and the Earl of Mortaigne, and a few other
chiefs who yet held with the Earl of Normandy: the King therefore came
with an army, and besieged a castle of the Earl of Mortaigne called
Tinchebray. Whilst the King was besieging this castle, Robert Earl
of Normandy and his army came upon him on Michaelmas eve, and with
him were Robert de Belesme and William Earl of Mortaigne, and all
who wished well to their cause, but strength and victory were with
the King. The Earl of Normandy was taken, together with the Earl of
Mortaigne and Robert de Stutteville; and they were afterwards sent to
England, and kept in confinement; Robert de Belesme was put to flight,
and William Crispin was taken, with many others; Edgar Ætheling who
had gone over from the King to the Earl a short time before, was also
taken; but the King afterwards let him depart unhurt. After this, the
King subdued the whole of Normandy, and brought it under his own will
and power. This year, also there was a very terrible and sinful war
between the Emperor of Saxony and his son, during which the father
died, and the son succeeded to the Empire.


1107.

This year King Henry was in Normandy at Christmas and reduced that
land, and having settled the government, he came to England the
following Lent; and he held his Court at Windsor at Easter, and at
Pentecost he held it at Westminster. And in the beginning of August
he was again at Westminster, and there he gave away Bishopricks and
Abbacies, disposing of such as were without elders and pastors, both
in England and Normandy; the number of these was so great that no man
remembered that so many were ever before given away at one time. And
amongst others who then received Abbacies, Ernulf Prior of Canterbury
obtained that Of Peterborough. This was about the seventh year of King
Henry’s reign, and the one and fortieth year that the French ruled in
this land. Many said that they saw various tokens in the moon this
year, and its light waxing and waning contrary to nature. This year
died Maurice Bishop of London, and Robert Abbot of St. Edmund’s Bury,
and Richard Abbot of Ely. This year also Edgar King of Scotland died
on the ides of January, and his brother Alexander succeeded to the
kingdom with King Henry’s consent.


1108.

This year, at Christmas, King Henry was at Westminster; and at Easter
at Winchester; and at Pentecost again at Westminster. After this,
before August, he went into Normandy. And Philip King of France dying
on the nones of August, his son Louis succeeded him, and there were
afterwards many battles between the Kings of France and of England,
whilst Henry remained in Normandy. This year also Gerard Archbishop of
York died before Pentecost, and Thomas was afterwards appointed as his
successor.


1109.

This year King Henry was in Normandy both at Christmas and at Easter;
and before Pentecost he came hither and held his Court at Westminster,
at which place the stipulations were ratified, and the oaths sworn,
relative to the marriage of his daughter with the Emperor. There was
much thunder this year and that very terrible. And Anselm Archbishop of
Canterbury died on the 11th of the calends of April, and the first day
of Easter was on the greater Litany.


1110.

This year, at Christmas, King Henry held his Court at Westminster; and
at Easter he was at Marlborough; and at Pentecost he held his Court for
the first time in the New Windsor. This year, before Lent, the King
sent his daughter with manifold treasures over sea, and gave her to
the Emperor. On the fifth night of the month of May the moon appeared
shining brightly in the evening, and afterwards its light waned by
little and little, and early in the night it was so wholly gone that
neither light, nor circle, nor any thing at all of it was to be seen,
and thus it continued till near day, and then it appeared shining full
and bright; it was a fortnight old the same day: the sky was very clear
all the night, and the stars shone very brightly all over the heavens,
and the fruit trees were greatly injured by that night’s frost. After
this, in the month of June, there appeared a star in the north-east,
and its light stood before it to the south-west, and it was seen thus
for many nights, and ever as the night advanced it mounted upwards and
was seen going off to the north-west. This year Philip de Brause, and
William Mallet, and William Baynard were deprived of their lands. This
year also died Earl Elias, who whilst living held Maine of King Henry,
but on his death the Earl of Anjou took possession of that province,
and kept it against the King’s will. This was a year of much distress
from the taxes which the King raised for his daughter’s dowry, and from
the bad weather by which the crops were greatly injured, and nearly all
the fruit on the trees destroyed throughout the country.--This year men
first began to work at the new monastery of Chertsey.


1111.

This year King Henry wore not his crown at Christmas, nor at Easter,
nor at Pentecost.--And in August he was called over sea to Normandy, by
the hostility of certain of his enemies on the marches of France, and
principally by that of the Earl of Anjou who held Maine against him:
and after his arrival many were the intrigues and great the burning and
plundering carried on by either party against the other.--This year
Robert Earl of Flanders died and his son Baldwin succeeded him. The
winter was very long this year, a heavy and a severe time, by which
the fruits of the earth were much injured; and there was the greatest
pestilence among the cattle ever remembered.


1112.

All this year King Henry remained in Normandy, on account of the war
in which he was engaged with France, and with the Earl of Anjou, who
held Maine against him. And whilst he was there he deprived the Earl
of Evreux and William Crispin of their lands, and drove them out of
Normandy: and he restored to Philip de Brause the estates which had
been taken from him, and he caused Robert de Belesme to be seized and
put into prison. This was a very good year as to the crops, the trees
and fields being very fruitful; but it was a very heavy and a sorrowful
time, by reason of a dreadful pestilence among men.


1113.

This year King Henry was in Normandy at Christmas, at Easter, and at
Pentecost. And in the summer he sent hither Robert de Belesme, to be
confined in Wareham castle, and he himself came to this land soon
afterwards.


1114.

This year, at Christmas, King Henry held his Court at Windsor, and he
held no Court again this year. And at Midsummer he entered Wales with
an army, and the Welch came and treated with the King, and he caused
castles to be built in that country. And in September he went over sea
to Normandy. In the end of May, this year, a strange star with a long
light was seen shining for many nights. This year also there was so
great an ebb of the tide every where in one day, as no man remembered
before, so that men went through the Thames both riding and walking,
east of London bridge. This year there were very high winds in the
month of October, and more especially on the night of the octaves of
St. Martin, as was apparent in all woods and towns. This year also
the King gave the Archbishoprick of Canterbury to Ralph Bishop of
Rochester; and Thomas Archbishop of York died, and the King’s Chaplain
Turstein succeeded him. At this time the King went towards the sea,
and he would have gone over but he was detained by the weather. In
the mean while he sent his writ to Ernulf Abbot of Peterborough,
desiring him to come to him with speed, for that he would speak with
him on something of importance. On Ernulf’s arrival, the King and the
Archbishops and Bishops, and the English Nobility who attended the
King, forced him to accept the Bishoprick of Rochester; he withstood
them long, but his resistance availed nothing. And the King commanded
the Archbishop to take him to Canterbury, and to consecrate him as
Bishop whether he would or not.--This was done in the town called Burne
(Sittingburn?) on the 17th of the calends of October. When the monks of
Peterborough heard this, they were so sorry as never before, because
Ernulf was a very good and a mild man, and did much good within the
monastery and out of it whilst he remained there. May Almighty God be
ever with him. Soon afterwards, at the request of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the King gave that Abbacy to a monk of Sees named John. And
soon after this the King and the Archbishop sent him to Rome for the
Archbishop’s pall, and with him a monk named Warner, and the Archdeacon
John the Archbishop’s nephew, and they sped well on their journey. This
was done on the 11th of the calends of October, at the town called
Rugenor (Rowner, near Gosport), and the same day the King took ship at
Portsmouth.


1115.

This year, during Christmas, King Henry was in Normandy, and whilst
he was there he caused all the chief men of Normandy to do homage and
swear oaths of allegiance to his son William, whom he had by his Queen;
and afterwards in the month of July he returned hither. This year the
winter was so severe with snow and with frost, that no man then living
remembered a harder: and it occasioned much disease among the cattle.
This year Pope Paschal sent hither a pall to Archbishop Ralph, and he
received it with much pomp at his see of Canterbury. Anselm an Abbot of
Rome, the nephew of Archbishop Anselm, and John Abbot of Peterborough,
brought the pall from Rome.


1116.

This year, at Christmas, King Henry was at St. Alban’s, and there he
caused the monastery to be consecrated; and at Easter he was at Wudiham
(Odiham). And this year also, the winter being severe and long, it was
a very heavy time for the cattle and all things. And soon after Easter
the King went over sea, and much treachery was practised, and there was
plundering and taking of castles between France and Normandy. The chief
cause of enmity was that King Henry aided his nephew Earl Theobald de
Blois, who was then at war with his Lord Louis King of France. This was
a very calamitous year, the crops being spoiled by the heavy rains,
which came on just before August and lasted till Candlemas. Mast also
was so scarce this year that none was to be heard of in all this land,
or in Wales: moreover this land and nation were many times sorely
oppressed by the taxes which the King raised both within the towns and
out of them. This year also the whole of the monastery of Peterborough
was burnt, with all the houses, excepting the chapter-house and the
dormitory: and the greater part of the town was burnt also. All this
happened on a Friday, being the 2d of the nones of August.


1117.

All this year King Henry abode in Normandy, because of the war with the
King of France and his other neighbours: then in the summer the King
of France, and the Earl of Flanders with him, entered Normandy with an
army, and remained in the country one night, and went away again in the
morning without fighting. And Normandy was greatly oppressed by taxes
and by the levies of troops that King Henry raised to oppose them.
This nation also was sorely aggrieved in like manner, to wit, by the
manifold taxes. This year also there was a violent storm of thunder and
lightning, rain and hail, on the night of the calends of December; and
on the 3d night of the ides of December the moon appeared for a long
time as it were bloody, and then it was darkened. Also, on the night of
the 17th of the calends of January the heaven appeared very red, as
if it were burning. And on the octave of St. John the Evangelist’s day
there was a great earthquake in Lombardy, by which many monasteries,
towers, and houses were thrown down, and the inhabitants suffered
greatly. This was a very bad year for the corn, through the rains which
ceased scarcely at all. And Gilebert Abbot of Westminster died on the
8th of the ides of December, and Farits Abbot of Abingdon died on the
7th of the calends of March. And the same year ----


1118.

All this year King Henry was in Normandy, being at war with the King
of France, and with the Earl of Anjou, and with the Earl of Flanders.
And the Earl of Flanders was wounded in Normandy, on which he returned
to Flanders. The King was greatly impoverished by this war, and lost
much money and land, and he was most harrassed by his own men, who
continually revolted and betrayed him, and went over to his enemies,
and treacherously gave up their castles in the King’s despite. England
paid dearly for all this by the manifold taxes which ceased not all
this year. This year, one evening in Epiphany week, there was dreadful
lightning which caused many deaths. And Queen Mahald (Matilda) died
at Westminster on the calends of May, and was buried there. And Robert
Earl of Mellent also died this year. This year also, on St. Thomas’
day, there was so exceedingly high a wind that none who then lived
remembered a greater, and this might be seen every where from the state
of the houses and of the trees. Pope Paschal also died this year, and
John of Gaieta, whose other name was Gelasius, succeeded to the Popedom.


1119.

All this year King Henry remained in Normandy, and was greatly
harrassed by the war with the King of France, and by the treachery of
his own men, who were continually revolting from him, till at length
the two Kings with their forces met in Normandy. The King of France
was there put to flight and all his best men taken, and many of King
Henry’s vassals who had kept their castles against him, now submitted,
and were reconciled to him, and some of the castles he took by force.
This year, William the son of King Henry and of Queen Mahald went to
Normandy to his father, and the daughter of the Earl of Anjou was there
given and wedded to him. On Michaelmas eve there was a great earthquake
in some parts of this land; and it was felt most in Gloucestershire
and Worcestershire. The same year Pope Gelasius died on this side of
the mountains, and he was buried at Cluny; and the Archbishop of Vienne
was chosen Pope, his name was Calixtus. He afterwards came to Rheims,
in France, on the feast of St. Luke the Evangelist, and held a council
there. And Turstein Archbishop of York journeyed thither, and because
he received consecration from the Pope, against right, and to the
prejudice of the see of Canterbury, and against the King’s will, Henry
wholly forbade his return to England; and being thus deprived of his
Archbishoprick, he proceeded with the Pope towards Rome. This year also
Baldwin Earl of Flanders died of the wound which he had received in
Normandy, and was succeeded by Charles the son of his aunt and of St.
Cnut, King of Denmark.


1120.

This year peace was made between the Kings of England and of France,
and after this all King Henry’s own men in Normandy made their peace
with him; also the Earls of Flanders and of Ponthieu. Then the King
ordered and disposed of his castles and land in Normandy after his own
will; and so, before Advent, he returned to England. And the King’s two
sons William and Richard were drowned in the passage, together with
Richard Earl of Chester, and Ottuel his brother; and very many of the
King’s Court; stewards, and chamberlains, and butlers, and other men
in office, and an innumerable multitude of all ranks, were also lost.
The manner of their death was a twofold grief to their friends, first
because they lost their lives so suddenly, and next that few of their
bodies were ever found. And this year that remarkable light twice came
upon our Lord’s sepulchre at Jerusalem, once at Easter, and again on
the Assumption of St. Mary, according to the report of men of credit,
who came from thence. And Turstein Archbishop of York was reconciled
to the King through the Pope, and he came to this land, and was put in
possession of his Archbishoprick, though much against the will of the
Archbishop of Canterbury.


1121.

This year, at Christmas, King Henry was at Bramtun (Brampton ?),
and before Candlemas Athelis was given him to wife at Windsor, and
afterwards consecrated Queen; she was the daughter of the Duke of
Louvain. And the moon was eclipsed on the night of the nones of
April, being the 14th day of the moon. And the King was at Berkeley
at Easter, and the Pentecost following he held a great Court at
Westminster, and in the summer he entered Wales with an army, and the
Welch came to meet him, and made a treaty with him on his own terms.
This year the Earl of Anjou returned from Jerusalem to his own land,
and after this he sent hither to fetch away his daughter who had been
married to the King’s son William. And on the night of Christmas eve
there was a very high wind throughout this land, as might be seen
plainly in its effects.


1122.

This year King Henry was at Norwich at Christmas, and at Easter he
was at Northampton. And the town of Gloucester was burned the Lent
before, for while the monks were singing mass, the deacon having begun
the gospel “_Præteriens Jesus_,” the fire fell on the top of the
steeple, and it burned the whole monastery, and all the treasures in
it, excepting a few books and three vestments: this happened on the 8th
of the ides of March. And there was a very high wind on the Tuesday
after Palm Sunday, the 11th of the Calends of April: and after this
many strange tokens were noticed throughout England, and many ghosts
were seen and heard. And on the night of the 8th of the calends of
August, there was a great earthquake throughout Somersetshire and
Gloucestershire. Again on the 6th of the ides of September, St. Mary’s
day, there was a very high wind, which continued from nine in the
morning till dark night. The same year Ralph Archbishop of Canterbury
died on the 13th of the calends of November. After this many shipmen
were at sea, and on the water, and said that they saw a fire in the
north-east, large and broad, near the earth, and that it grew in height
unto the welkin, and the welkin divided into four parts and fought
against it, as it would have quenched it; nevertheless the fire flamed
up to heaven. They observed this fire at day-break, and it lasted until
it was light every where: this was on the 7th of the ides of December.


1123.

This year King Henry was at Dunstaple at Christmas, and the messengers
from the Earl of Anjou came to him there, and he proceeded thence to
Woodstock, and his Bishops and all his Court with him. Now it fell out
on a Wednesday, being the 4th of the ides of January, that the King
rode in his deer-park, and Roger Bishop of Salisbury was on one side of
him, and Robert Bloet Bishop of Lincoln on the other; and they rode
there talking. Then the Bishop of Lincoln sank down, and said to the
King, “Lord King! I am dying,”--and the King alighted from his horse,
and took him between his arms, and bade them bear him to his inn,
and he soon lay there dead; and they took his body with much pomp to
Lincoln, and Robert Bishop of Chester, who was called Pecceth, buried
him before St. Mary’s altar. Soon after this the King sent his writs
over all England, and desired his Bishops, his Abbots, and his Thanes,
that they should all come to the meeting of his Witan at Gloucester,
on Candlemas day, and they obeyed; and when they were there assembled
the King bade them choose to themselves whomsoever they would as
Archbishop of Canterbury, and that he would confirm their choice. Then
the Bishops spake among themselves, and said that they would never more
have a man of any monastic order as Archbishop over them. And they
all with one accord went to the King, and entreated that they might
choose one of the clergy for their Archbishop, and to this the King
consented.--All this had been set on foot by the Bishop of Salisbury,
and by the Bishop of Lincoln before he died, for they never loved the
monks’ rules, but were ever against the monks and their rules also.
And the Prior and monks of Canterbury and all others of the monastic
order who were there, resisted this proceeding two full days, but in
vain, for the Bishop of Salisbury was very powerful, and swayed all
England, and he was against them with all his might. Then they chose a
clerk named William of Corboyl, he was a canon of a monastery called
Cice (St. Osith); and they brought him before the King, who gave him
the Archbishoprick, and he was received by all the Bishops; but the
Monks and Earls, and almost all the Thanes who were there, would not
acknowledge him. At this same time the messengers of the Earl departed
from the King dissatisfied, nothing regarding his gifts. At this time
also a Legate arrived from Rome; his name was Henry, and he was Abbot
of the monastery of St. Jean d’Angely. He came for the Romescot; and he
told the King that a clerk had no right to be set over monks, and that
therefore they had formerly chosen the Archbishop in the chapter, as
was befitting; but, for love of the Bishop of Salisbury, the King would
not undo his act. Soon afterwards, the Archbishop went to Canterbury,
and was received, though unwillingly, and he was forthwith consecrated
there by the Bishop of London, and Ernulf Bishop of Rochester, and
William Giffard Bishop of Winchester, and Bernard Bishop of Wales
(St. David’s), and Roger Bishop of Salisbury. Then early in Lent the
Archbishop journeyed to Rome for his pall, and Bernard Bishop of Wales,
and Sefred Abbot of Glastonbury, and Anselm Abbot of St. Edmund’s, and
John Archdeacon of Canterbury, and Gifard who was the King’s chaplain,
went with him. Thurstan Archbishop of York went to Rome at the same
time by order of the Pope, and he arrived three days before the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and was received with much honour. Then came
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and it was a full week before he could
obtain an audience of the Pope, because the Pope had been given to
understand that he had received the Archbishoprick in opposition to the
monks of the monastery, and against right; but that which overcometh
all the world, namely gold and silver, overcame Rome also, and the Pope
relented and gave him his pall, and the Archbishop swore obedience in
all things that he should impose, on the heads of St. Peter and St.
Paul, and the Pope then sent him home with his blessing. Whilst the
Archbishop was abroad, the King gave the Bishoprick of Bath to the
Queen’s Chancellor, named Godfrey; he was of Louvain: this was done
at Woodstock on the day of St. Mary’s Annunciation. Soon afterwards
the King went to Winchester, where he remained during the festival of
Easter; and while there he gave the Bishoprick of Lincoln to a clerk
named Alexander, who was a nephew of the Bishop of Salisbury, and
he did this all for love of that Bishop. Then the King proceeded to
Portsmouth, and staid there over Pentecost week; and as soon as he
had a fair wind he sailed for Normandy, having committed all England
to the care and administration of Roger Bishop of Salisbury. The King
was in Normandy all this year, and a great war broke out between him
and his Thanes, for Earl Waleram of Mellent, and Hamalri, and Hugh of
Montfort, and William of Roumare, and many others revolted from him
and held their castles against him; and the King on his part opposed
them with vigour, and the same year he won from Waleram his castle of
Pont-au-de-mer, and from Hugh that of Montfort, and after this his
affairs continued to prosper more and more. The same year, before the
Bishop of Lincoln came to his see, nearly the whole town of Lincoln was
burnt, with a great number of persons, both men and women, and so much
harm was done that no man could tell another how great the damage was.
This happened on the 14th of the calends of June.


1124.

All this year King Henry was in Normandy, being detained there by
his great wars with Louis King of France, and the Earl of Anjou, and
with his own subjects most of all. Then it befel on the day of St.
Mary’s Annunciation that Waleram Earl of Mellent was going from one of
his castles called Beaumont, to another, Watteville, and Amalri the
steward of the King of France, and Hugh the son of Gervais, and Hugh of
Montfort, and many other good Knights went with him. Then the King’s
Knights from all the neighbouring castles came against them, and fought
with them, and put them to flight, and they took the Earl Waleram, and
Hugh the son of Gervais, and Hugh of Montfort, and five and twenty
other Knights, and brought them to the King; and the King caused Earl
Waleram and Hugh the son of Gervais to be confined in the castle of
Rouen, and he sent Hugh of Montfort to England, and caused him to be
put in evil bonds in that of Gloucester, and as many of the others as
he thought fit he sent north and south to his castles for confinement.
Then the King went on, and won all Earl Waleram’s castles in Normandy,
and all the others which his enemies held against him. All this was
on account of the son of Robert Earl of Normandy named William. The
same William had married the younger daughter of Fulk Earl of Anjou,
and for this cause the King of France, and all the Earls and great men
held with him, and said that the King did wrongfully keep his brother
Robert in confinement, and that he had unjustly driven his son William
out of Normandy. This year there was much unseasonable weather which
injured the corn and all fruits in England, so that, between Christmas
and Candlemas, one acre’s seed of wheat, that is two seedlips, sold
for six shillings, and one of barley, that is three seedlips, for six
shillings, and one acre’s seed of oats, being four seedlips, for four
shillings. It was thus, because corn was scarce, and the penny was so
bad, that the man who had a pound at the market, could hardly, for any
thing, pass twelve of these pennies. The same year, the holy Bishop of
Rochester Ernulf, who had been Abbot of Peterborough, died on the ides
of March. Thereafter died Alexander King of Scotland, on the 9th of the
calends of May, and his brother David, then Earl of Northamptonshire,
succeeded him, and held at the same time both the kingdom of Scotland
and the English earldom. And the Pope of Rome called Calixtus died
on the 19th of the calends of January, and Honorius succeeded to the
Popedom. The same year, after St. Andrew’s day, and before Christmas,
Ralph Basset, and the King’s Thanes held a Witenagemot at Hundhoge
(Huncot), in Leicestershire, and there they hanged more thieves than
had ever before been executed within so short a time, being in all four
and forty men: and they put out the eyes of six.--Many men of truth
said that several there suffered with great injustice, but our Lord
God Almighty who seeth and knoweth all hidden things, seeth that the
miserable people is oppressed with all unrighteousness; first men are
bereaved of their own, and then they are slain. Full heavy a year was
this; he who had any property was bereaved of it by heavy taxes and
assessments, and he who had none, starved with hunger.


1125.

Before Christmas, this year, King Henry sent from Normandy to England,
and commanded that all the moneyers of England should be deprived of
their limbs, namely of their right hands.--And this, because a man
might have a pound, and yet not be able to spend one penny at a market.
And Roger Bishop of Salisbury sent over all England, and desired all
of them to come to Winchester at Christmas; and when they came thither
his men took them one by one, and cut off their right hands. All
this was done within the twelve days, and with much justice, because
they had ruined this land with the great quantity of bad metal which
they all bought. This year the Pope of Rome sent John of Crema, a
Cardinal, to this land. He first came to the King in Normandy, and
the King received him with much honour, and commended him to William
Archbishop of Canterbury, who conducted him to Canterbury; and he was
there received with much pomp, and a great procession, and he sang
the high mass at Christ’s altar on Easter day; and then he journeyed
over all England, to all the Bishopricks and Abbacies, and he was
honourably received every where, and all gave him great and handsome
gifts; and in September he held his council in London full three days
(beginning) on the Nativity of St. Mary, with the Archbishops, Bishops,
and Abbots, and the clergy and laity, and he sanctioned the laws which
Archbishop Anselm had made, and he enacted many others, though they
remained in force but a little while.--Thence he went over sea soon
after Michaelmas, and so to Rome. William Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Thurstan Archbishop of York, and Alexander Bishop of Lincoln, and
John Bishop of Lothene (Glasgow), and Geoffrey Abbot of St. Alban’s,
accompanied him, and were received with great honour by the Pope
Honorius, and they remained there the whole winter. The same year
there was so great a flood on St. Lawrence’s day, that many towns were
deluged, and men drowned, the bridges were broken up, and, the corn
fields and meadows spoiled; and there was famine and disease upon men
and cattle; and it was so bad a season for all fruits as had not been
for many years before. The same year John Abbot of Peterborough died on
the 2d of the ides of October.


1126.

This year King Henry was in Normandy till after harvest; and he came to
this land between the Nativity of St. Mary, and Michaelmas, accompanied
by the Queen, and by his daughter whom he had before given in marriage
to the Emperor Henry of Lorrain. He brought with him the Earl Waleram,
and Hugh the son of Gervais, and he imprisoned the Earl at Bridgenorth,
and he afterwards sent him to Wallingford, and he sent Hugh to
Windsor, and caused him to be put into hard bonds. And after Michaelmas
David King of Scotland came hither, and King Henry received him with
much honour, and he abode through the year in this land.--The same year
the King caused his brother Robert to be taken from Roger Bishop of
Salisbury, and delivered to his son Robert Earl of Gloucester, and he
caused him to be removed to Bristol, and put into the castle. All this
was done through the advice of his daughter, and of her uncle David
King of Scotland.


1127.

This year, at Christmas, King Henry held his Court at Windsor, and
David King of Scotland was there, and all the head men of England, both
clergy and laity. And the King caused the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Earls, and all the Thanes who were present, to swear to place England
and Normandy after his death in the hands of his daughter the Princess,
who had been the wife of the Emperor of Saxony. And then he sent her
to Normandy, accompanied by her brother Robert Earl of Gloucester, and
by Brian the son of the Earl Alein Fergan; and he caused her to be
wedded to the son of the Earl of Anjou, named Geoffrey Martel. Howbeit
this displeased all the French and the English, but the King did it to
obtain peace from the Earl of Anjou and aid against his nephew William.
The same year Charles Earl of Flanders was slain in Lent, by his own
men, as he lay before the altar in a church, and prayed to God during
mass. And the King of France brought William the son of the Earl of
Normandy, and gave him the earldom, and the men of Flanders received
him.--The same William had before taken to wife the daughter of the
Earl of Anjou, but they were afterwards divorced because of their
nearness of kin, and this through the interference of Henry King of
England; he afterwards married the sister of the King of France, and
on this account the King gave him the earldom of Flanders.--The same
year Henry gave the Abbacy of Peterborough to an Abbot named Henry of
Poitou, who was in possession of the Abbacy of St. Jean d’Angely; and
all the Archbishops and Bishops said that this grant was against right,
and that he could not have in hand two Abbacies. But the same Henry
made the King believe that he had given up his Abbey on account of the
great disquietude of the land, and that he had done so by the order
and with the leave of the Pope of Rome, and of the Abbot of Cluny,
and because he was Legate for collecting the Romescot. Nevertheless it
was not so, but he wished to keep both Abbeys in his own hands, and he
did hold them as long as it was the will of God. In his clerkship he
was Bishop of Scesscuns (Soissons), afterwards he was a monk at Cluny,
then Prior of the same monastery, and next he was Prior of Savenay;
after this, being related to the King of England and to the Earl of
Poitou, the Earl gave him the Abbey of St Jean d’Angely. Afterwards
by his great craft he obtained the Archbisboprick of Besançon, and
kept possession of it three days; and then lost he it right worthily,
in that he had gotten it with all injustice. He then obtained the
Bishoprick of Saintes, which was five miles from his own Abbey, and
he kept this for nearly a week, but here again the Abbot of Cluny
displaced him, as he had before removed him from Besançon. Now he
bethought himself that if he could be sheltered in England, he might
have all his will, on which he besought the King, and said to him that
he was an old man, and a broken-down, and that he could not endure the
wrongs and oppressions of that land, and he asked the King, himself,
and through all his friends, by name for the Abbacy of Peterborough.
And the King granted it to him, forasmuch as he was his kinsman, and in
that he had been one of the first to swear oaths, and to bear witness,
when the son of the Earl of Normandy and the daughter of the Earl of
Anjou were divorced on the plea of kindred.--Thus vexatiously was the
Abbacy of Peterborough given away at London, between Christmas and
Candlemas; and so Henry went with the King to Winchester, and thence he
came to Peterborough, and there he lived even as a drone in a hive; as
the drone eateth and draggeth forward to himself all that is brought
near, even so did he; and thus he sent over sea all that he could
take from religious or from secular, both within and without; no good
there he did, nor any did he leave there. Let no man think lightly of
the marvel that we are about to relate as a truth, for it was full
well known over all the country. It is this; that as soon as he came
to Peterborough; it was on the Sunday when men sing “_Exsurge quare O
Domine_;” several persons saw and heard many hunters hunting.--These
hunters were black and large and loathly, and their hounds were all
black, with wide eyes and loathly, and they rode on black horses and
on black bucks. This was seen in the very deer-park of the town of
Peterborough, and in all the woods from the same town to Stamford; and
the monks heard the blasts of the horns which they blew in the night.
Men of truth kept in the night their watch on them, and said that there
might well be about 20 or 30 horn-blowers.--This was seen and heard
from the time that the Abbot came thither, all that Lent, until Easter.
Such was his entrance, of his exit we can say nothing yet: God knoweth
it.


1128.

All this year King Henry was in Normandy, on account of the war between
him and his nephew the Earl of Flanders; but the Earl was wounded in
battle by a servant, and being so wounded he went to the monastery
of St. Bertin, and forthwith he was made a monk, and lived five days
after, and then died, and was buried there: God rest his soul! He was
buried on the 6th of the calends of August. The same year died Randulf
Passeflambard Bishop of Durham, and he was buried there on the nones of
September. And this year the aforesaid Abbot Henry went home to his own
monastery in Poitou, with the King’s leave. He had given the King to
understand that he would wholly quit that monastery, and that country,
and abide with him in England, and at his monastery of Peterborough.
But so it was not, for he spake thus guilefully, wishing to remain
there a twelvemonth or more, and then to return again. May Almighty God
have mercy upon this wretched place. The same year Hugh of the Temple
came from Jerusalem to the King in Normandy, and the King received him
with much honour, and gave him much treasure in gold and silver, and
afterwards he sent him to England, and there he was well received by
all good men, and all gave him treasures; and in Scotland also: and
they sent in all a great sum of gold and silver by him to Jerusalem.
And he invited the people out to Jerusalem, and there went with him and
after him so great a number, as never before since the first expedition
in the days of Pope Urban. Yet this availed little: he said that there
was a furious war between the christians and the heathens, and when
they came there it was nothing but leasing.--Thus were all these people
miserably betrayed.


1129.

This year the King sent to England after Earl Waleram, and after Hugh
the son of Gervais; and there they gave him hostages, and Hugh went
home to France his own country, and Waleram remained with the King,
and the King gave him all his lands, excepting his castle alone. Then
the King came to England in harvest, and the Earl came with him, and
they were as great friends as they had been enemies before. Then soon,
by the King’s counsel and consent, William Archbishop of Canterbury
sent over all England, and commanded the Bishops, and Abbots, and
Archdeacons, and all the Priors, Monks, and Canons of all the cells
of England, and all who had the charge and oversight of the Christian
religion, that they should come to London at Michaelmas, to hold
conference upon all God’s rights. When they came thither, the meeting
began on the Monday and lasted till the Friday, and it came out that
it was all concerning the wives of Archdeacons and Priests, that they
should part with them by St. Andrew’s day; and that he who would not do
this, should forego his church, his house, and his home, and never be
permitted again to claim them. This was ordered by William Archbishop
of Canterbury, and all the Bishops of England; and the King gave them
leave to depart, and so they went home, and these decrees were in no
respect observed, for all kept their wives, by the King’s permission,
even as before. The same year William Giffard Bishop of Winchester
died, and was buried there on the 8th of the calends of February;
and after Michaelmas the King gave the Bishoprick to his Nephew Henry
Abbot of Glastonbury, and he was consecrated by William Archbishop of
Canterbury on the 15th of the calends of December. The same year died
Pope Honorius, and before he was well dead, two Popes were chosen. The
one was named Peter, he was a monk of Cluny, and descended from the
greatest men of Rome, and the Romans and the Duke of Sicily held with
him; the other was named Gregory, he was a clerk, and he was driven
from Rome by the other Pope and his kinsmen, and he was acknowledged
by the Emperor of Saxony, by the King of France, by Henry King of
England, and by all on this side the mountains. There was now so great
a division in Christendom, that the like had never been before: May
Christ appoint good counsel for his miserable people! The same year
there was a great earthquake on St. Nicholas’ night, a little before
day.


1130.

This year the monastery of Canterbury was consecrated by Archbishop
William, on the 4th of the nones of May. The following Bishops were
there: John of Rochester, Gilbert Universalis of London, Henry
of Winchester, Alexander of Lincoln, Roger of Salisbury, Simon of
Worcester, Roger of Coventry, Godfrey of Bath, Everard of Norwich,
Sigefrid of Chichester, Bernard of St. David’s, Audoenus of Evreux, in
Normandy, and John of Seez. On the 4th day after this, King Henry was
at Rochester, and nearly the whole town was burnt down; and Archbishop
William and the aforesaid Bishops consecrated St. Andrew’s monastery.
And King Henry went over sea to Normandy during harvest. The same year
Henry Abbot of Angely came to Peterborough after Easter, and said that
he had wholly given up that monastery. After him, the Abbot of Cluny
named Peter came to England with the King’s leave, and he was received
with much honour wherever he went; he came to Peterborough, and there
the Abbot Henry promised that he would obtain for him the monastery of
Peterborough, and that it should be annexed to Cluny; but as it is said
in the proverb, “The Hedge still stands--That parts the Lands.” May
Almighty God frustrate evil counsels! And soon afterwards the Abbot of
Cluny went home to his own country.


1131.

This year, on a moonlight night after Christmas, during the first
sleep, the northern half of the heaven was, as it were, a burning
fire; so that all who saw it were more affrighted than ever they were
before; this happened on the 3d of the ides of January. The same year
there was so great a pestilence amongst animals over all England, as
had not been in the memory of man; it chiefly fell on cattle and on
swine, so that in the town where ten or twelve ploughs had been going,
not one remained, and the man, who had possessed two or three hundred
swine, had not one left him. After this the hens died; and flesh-meat
became scarce, and cheese, and butter. God mend the state of things
when such is his will! And King Henry came home to England before
harvest, after the latter feast of St. Peter. The same year before
Easter the Abbot Henry went from Peterborough over sea to Normandy,
and there he spoke with the King, and told him that the Abbot of Cluny
had commanded him to come over, and resign to him the Abbey of Angely;
and that then, with his leave, he would return home: and so he went
to his own monastery and abode there till Midsummer day. And, on the
day after the feast of St. John, the monks chose an Abbot from among
themselves, and brought him into the church in procession; they sang
_Te Deum laudamus_, they rang the bells, and they set him on the
Abbot’s seat, and they did all obedience to him, even as they would to
their Abbot; and the Earl and all the chief men and the monks drove the
other Abbot Henry out of the monastery, and well they might, for in
five and twenty years they had never known a good day. All his great
craftiness failed him here, and now it behoved him to creep into any
corner, and to consider if perchance there yet remained some slippery
device, by which he might once more betray Christ and all christian
people. Then went he to Cluny, and there they kept him, so that he
could go neither east nor west; the Abbot of Cluny saying that they had
lost St. Jean through him, and his great sottishness; wherefore seeing
he could give no better compensation, he promised and swore on the
holy relics, that if he might proceed to England he would obtain for
them the monastery of Peterborough, and would establish there a Prior
of Cluny, a church-warden, a treasurer, and a keeper of the robes, and
that he would make over to them all things both within and without the
monastery. Thus he went into France and abode there all the year. May
Christ provide for the wretched monks of Peterborough, and for that
miserable place, for now do they stand in need of the help of Christ
and of all christian people.


1132.

This year King Henry returned to this land: then the Abbot Henry came,
and accused the monks of Peterborough to the King, because he desired
to subject that monastery to Cluny; so that the King was well nigh
beguiled, and sent for the monks; but by God’s mercy, and through the
Bishops of Salisbury and Lincoln, and the other great men who were
there, he found out that the Abbot dealt treacherously. When he could
do no more, he wished that his nephew might be Abbot of Peterborough,
but this was not the will of Christ. It was not very long after
this that the King sent for him, and made him give up the Abbey of
Peterborough, and depart out of the country, and the King granted
the Abbacy to a Prior of St. Neot’s named Martin, and he came to the
monastery, right worshipfully attended, on St. Peter’s day.


1135.

This year, at Lammas, King Henry went over sea: and on the second
day, as he lay asleep in the ship, the day was darkened universally,
and the sun became as if it were a moon three nights old, with the
stars shining round it at mid-day. Men greatly marvelled, and great
fear fell on them, and they said that some great event should follow
thereafter--and so it was, for the same year the King died in Normandy,
on the day after the feast of St. Andrew. Soon did this land fall into
trouble, for every man quickly began to rob his neighbour as he might.
Then King Henry’s sons and his friends took his body, and brought it
to England, and buried it at Reading. He was a good man, and great
was the awe of him; no man durst ill treat another in his time: he
made peace for men and deer. Whoso bare his burden of gold and silver,
no man durst say to him aught but good. In the mean time his nephew
Stephen de Blois had arrived in England, and he came to London, and the
inhabitants received him, and sent for the Archbishop William Corboyl,
who consecrated him King on midwinter-day. In this King’s time was all
discord, and evil-doing, and robbery; for the powerful men who had kept
aloof, soon rose up against him; the first was Baldwin de Redvers,
and he held Exeter against the King, and Stephen besieged him, and
afterwards Baldwin made terms with him. Then the others took their
castles, and held them against the King, and David King of Scotland
betook him to Wessien,[BJ] but, notwithstanding his array, messengers
passed between them, and they came together, and made an agreement,
though it availed little.


1137.

This year King Stephen went over sea to Normandy, and he was received
there because it was expected that he would be altogether like his
uncle, and because he had gotten possession of his treasure, but
this he distributed and scattered foolishly. King Henry had gathered
together much gold and silver, yet did he no good for his soul’s sake
with the same. When King Stephen came to England he held an assembly at
Oxford; and there he seized Roger Bishop of Salisbury, and Alexander
Bishop of Lincoln, and Roger the Chancellor, his nephew, and he kept
them all in prison till they gave up their castles. When the traitors
perceived that he was a mild man, and a soft, and a good, and that he
did not enforce justice, they did all wonder. They had done homage to
him, and sworn oaths, but no faith kept they; all became forsworn,
and broke their allegiance, for every rich man built his castles, and
defended them against him, and they filled the land full of castles.
They greatly oppressed the wretched people by making them work at
these castles, and when the castles were finished they filled them
with devils and evil men. Then they took those whom they suspected to
have any goods, by night and by day, seizing both men and women, and
they put them in prison for their gold and silver, and tortured them
with pains unspeakable, for never were any martyrs tormented as these
were. They hung some up by their feet, and smoked them with foul smoke;
some by their thumbs, or by the head, and they hung burning things on
their feet. They put a knotted string about their heads, and writhed
it till it went into the brain. They put them into dungeons wherein
were adders and snakes and toads, and thus wore them out. Some they put
into a crucet-house, that is, into a chest that was short and narrow,
and not deep, and they put sharp stones in it, and crushed the man
therein so that they broke all his limbs. There were hateful and grim
things called Sachenteges in many of the castles, and which two or
three men had enough to do to carry. The Sachentege was made thus: it
was fastened to a beam, having a sharp iron to go round a man’s throat
and neck, so that he might no ways sit, nor lie, nor sleep, but that
he must bear all the iron. Many thousands they exhausted with hunger. I
cannot and I may not tell of all the wounds, and all the tortures that
they inflicted upon the wretched men of this land; and this state of
things lasted the 19 years that Stephen was King, and ever grew worse
and worse. They were continually levying an exaction from the towns,
which they called Tensery,[BK] and when the miserable inhabitants had
no more to give, then plundered they, and burnt all the towns, so that
well mightest thou walk a whole day’s journey nor ever shouldest thou
find a man seated in a town, or its lands tilled.

Then was corn dear, and flesh, and cheese, and butter, for there was
none in the land--wretched men starved with hunger--some lived on alms
who had been erewhile rich: some fled the country--never was there
more misery, and never acted heathens worse than these. At length
they spared neither church nor churchyard, but they took all that was
valuable therein, and then burned the church and all together. Neither
did they spare the lands of Bishops, nor of Abbots, nor of Priests;
but they robbed the monks and the clergy, and every man plundered
his neighbour inasmuch as he might. If two or three men came riding
to a town, all the township fled before them, and thought that they
were robbers. The Bishops and clergy were ever cursing them, but this
to them was nothing, for they were all accursed, and forsworn, and
reprobate. The earth bare no corn, you might as well have tilled the
sea, for the land was all ruined by such deeds, and it was said openly
that Christ and his Saints slept. These things, and more than we can
say, did we suffer during 19 years because of our sins. Through all
this evil time the Abbot Martin held his Abbacy for 20 years, and a
half, and eight days, with many difficulties: and he provided the
monks and guests with all necessaries, and kept up much alms in the
house; and withal he wrought upon the church, and annexed thereto lands
and rents, and enriched it greatly, and furnished it with robes: and
he brought the monks into the new monastery on St. Peter’s day with
much pomp. This was in the year 1140 of our Lord’s incarnation, the
23d year after the fire. And he went to Rome and was well received
there by Pope Eugenius, and he obtained sundry privileges, to wit, one
for all the abbey lands, and another for the lands that adjoin the
monastery, and had he lived longer he meant to have done as much for
the treasurer’s house. And he regained certain lands that powerful
men possessed by force; he won Cottingham and Easton from William
Malduit, who held Rockingham castle, and from Hugh of Waltville he won
Hyrtlingberi (Artleborough), and Stanwick, and sixty shillings yearly
out of Aldewingle (Oldwincle). And he increased the number of monks,
and planted a vineyard, and made many works, and improved the town; and
he was a good monk and a good man, and therefore God and good men loved
him.--Now will we relate some part of what befel in King Stephen’s
time. In his reign the Jews of Norwich bought a Christian child before
Easter, and tortured him with all the torments wherewith our Lord was
tortured, and they crucified him on Good Friday for the love of our
Lord, and afterwards buried him. They believed that this would be kept
secret, but our Lord made manifest that he was a holy martyr, and the
monks took him and buried him honourably in the monastery, and he
performed manifold and wonderful miracles through the power of our
Lord, and is called St. William.


1138.

This year David King of Scotland entered this land with an immense
army resolving to conquer it, and William Earl of Albemarle, to whose
charge the King had committed York, and other trusty men, came against
him with few troops, and fought with him, and they put the King to
flight at the Standard, and slew a great part of his followers.


1140.

This year Stephen attempted to take Robert Earl of Gloucester the son
of King Henry, but failed, for Robert was aware of his purpose.--After
this, in Lent, the sun and the day were darkened about noon, when men
eat, so that they lighted candles to eat by. This was on the 13th of
the calends of April, and the people were greatly astonished. After
this William Archbishop of Canterbury died, and the King made Theobald
Abbot of Bec Archbishop. Then there arose a very great war between the
King and Randolf Earl of Chester, not because the King did not give
him all that he could ask, even as he did to all others, but that the
more he gave them, the worse they always carried themselves to him.
The Earl held Lincoln against the King, and seized all that belonged
to the King there, and the King went thither, and besieged him and his
brother William de Romare in the castle: and the Earl stole out and
went for Robert Earl of Gloucester, and brought him thither with a
large army; and they fought furiously against their Lord on Candlemas
day, and they took him captive, for his men betrayed him and fled, and
they led him to Bristol, and there they put him into prison and close
confinement. Now was all England more disturbed than before, and all
evil was in the land. After this, King Henry’s daughter, who had been
Empress of Germany, and was now Countess of of Anjou, arrived, and
she came to London, and the citizens would have seized her, but she
fled with much loss. Then Henry Bishop of Winchester, King Stephen’s
brother, spake with Earl Robert and with the Empress, and swore them
oaths that he never more would hold with the King his brother, and he
cursed all those that did hold with him, and he said that he would
give up Winchester to them, and he made them come thither. But when
they were in that place Stephen’s Queen brought up her strength and
besieged them, till there was so great a famine in the town, they could
endure it no longer. Then stole they out and fled, and the besiegers
were aware of them, and followed them, and they took Robert Earl of
Gloucester and led him to Rochester, and imprisoned him there: and the
Empress fled into a monastery. Then wise men, friends of the King and
of the Earl, interfered between them, and they settled that the King
should be let out of prison for the Earl, and the Earl for the King;
and this was done. After this the King and Earl Randolf were reconciled
at Stamford, and they took oaths and pledged their troth, that neither
would betray the other: but this promise was set at nought, for the
King afterwards seized the Earl in Northampton through wicked counsel,
and put him in prison, but he set him free soon after, through worse,
on condition that he should swear on the cross and find hostages that
he would give up all his castles. Some he did deliver up, and others
not; and he did worse than he should have done in this country. Now
was England much divided, some held with the King and some with the
Empress, for when the King was in prison the Earls and the great men
thought that he would never more come out, and they treated with the
Empress, and brought her to Oxford, and gave her the town. When the
King was out of prison he heard this, and he took his army and besieged
her in the tower, and they let her down from the tower by night with
ropes, and she stole away, and she fled: and she went on foot to
Wallingford. After this she went over sea, and all the Normans turned
from the King to the Earl of Anjou, some willingly, and some against
their will; for he besieged them till they gave up their castles, and
they had no help from the King. Then the King’s son Eustace went to
France, and took to wife the sister of the King of France: he thought
to obtain Normandy through this marriage, but little he sped, and that
of right, for he was an evil man, and did more harm than good wherever
he went: he spoiled the lands, and laid thereon heavy taxes: he brought
his wife to England, and put her into the castle of ----; she was a
good woman but she had little bliss with him, and it was not the will
of Christ that he should bear rule long, and he died, and his mother
also. And the Earl of Anjou died, and his son Henry succeeded him; and
the Queen of France was divorced from the the King, and she went to the
young Earl Henry and he took her to wife, and received all Poitou with
her. Then he came into England with a great army and won castles; and
the King marched against him with a much larger army, howbeit they did
not fight, but the Archbishop and wise men went between them and made
a treaty on these terms; that the King should be Lord and King while
he lived, and that Henry should be King after his death, and that he
should consider him as his father, and the King him as his son, and
that peace and concord should be between them, and in all England.
The King, and the Earl, and the Bishop, and the Earls, and all the
great men swore to observe these and the other conditions that were
then made. The Earl was received with much honour at Winchester and at
London, and all did homage to him, and swore to keep the peace, and it
soon became a very good peace, such as never was in this land. Then the
King was more powerful here than ever he was; and the Earl went over
sea, and all the people loved him, because he did good justice, and
made peace.


1154.

This year King Stephen died, and he was buried with his wife and his
son at Favres-field (Feversham); they had built that monastery.--When
the King died the Earl was beyond sea, and no man durst do other than
good for very dread of him. When he came to England he was received
with much honour, and was consecrated King at London on the Sunday
before Christmas, and he held a great Court there: and on the same day
that Martin Abbot of Peterborough should have gone thither he sickened,
and he died on the 4th of the nones of January. And that day the monks
chose another Abbot from among themselves. He is named William de
Waltville, a good clerk, and a good man, and well beloved of the King
and of all good people: and they buried the Abbot honourably in the
Church, and soon afterwards the Abbot Elect and the monks went to the
King at Oxford, and the King gave him the Abbacy, and thus he departed,
having received * * * * * * *


Finis.




_Index to the Saxon Chronicle._


  A

  A. D.                                                     PAGE
   656   Abon Alderman (A. D. 664)                            40
   710   Acca Bishop of Hexham                                56
   733        expelled                                        60
   737        dies                                            60
   785   Adrian 1st, Pope, sends to England                   71
   794          dies                                          73
   675   Adrian, Legate, in England (A. D. 680)               48
   897   Æbba killed                                         114
  1007   Ædric Alderman of Mercia                            163
  1009         favours the Danes                             165
  1015         murders Sigeferth and Morcær                  175
  1015         deserts to Cnut                               176
  1016         his treachery towards Edmund                  179
  1017         receives the government of Mercia from
                 Cnut                                        181
  1017         killed                                        181
  1017   Ædwig, Ætheling, banished by Cnut                   182
   933   Ædwine, Prince, drowned                             131
  1002   Æfic, High Sheriff, murdered                        158
   650   Ægelbyrht, or Æthelbryht, Bp. of Wessex              33
   660              leaves England                            42
  1058   Ægelric Bishop of Chichester                        205
  1070           excommunicates Hereward                     216
  1069   Ægelric (abdicated) Bp. of Durham, arrested         211
  1072           dies                                        226
  1077   Ægelwig, Abbot of Evesham, dies                     230
  1069   Ægelwin, Bishop of Durham, outlawed                 211
  1071            joins Morker at Ely                        225
  1071            dies                                       226
   603   Ægthan, King of Scots, defeated                      24
  1006   Ælfelm, Alderman, killed                            161
   961   Ælfgar, Edgar’s kinsman, dies                       138
   993   Ælfgar, son of Ælfric, blinded                      152
  1048   Ælfgar, son of Leofric, receives Harold’s
          Earldom                                       199, 204
  1055           outlawed and joins Griffin                  204
  1057           succeeds to Leofric’s Earldom               205
  1002   Ælfgiva Emma, Ethelred’s Queen, the daughter
          of Richard Earl of Normandy, comes to
          England                                            158
  1013           takes refuge in Normandy                    172
  1017           marries Cnut                                182
  1036           Regent of Wessex                            186
  1037           expelled                                    187
  1042           her treasures seized by Edward              190
  1052           dies                                        200
   985   Ælfheah Bishop of Winchester                        131
   951           dies                                        136
   984   Ælfeah St. Bishop of Winchester                     149
   993          his counsel to Æthelred                      152
   994   Ælfeah St. conducts Anlaf to Æthelred               153
  1006          Archbishop of Canterbury                     160
  1012          martyred                                     170
  1023          relics of, removed to Canterbury             184
   963   Ælfhere, Alderman of Mercia (A. D. 972)             142
   975            expels the monks                           147
   983            dies                                       149
  1012   Ælfhun, Bishop of Durham, buries the body
           of St. Ælfheah                                    170
  1013           sent abroad with Æthelred’s sons            172
   792   Ælfled wife of Æthelred                              73
  1088   Ælfred, Monk, confined                              222
   634   Ælfric, the father of Osric                          30
   983   Ælfric, Alderman of Mercia                          149
   985           banished                                    149
   992   }                                                 { 151
  1003   }       his treachery                             { 159
   994   Ælfric Archbishop of Canterbury                     152
   997          goes to Rome                                 154
  1005          dies                                         160
  1016   Ælfric, Alderman, killed                            180
  1023   Ælfric, Archbishop of York                          184
  1038   Ælfric, Bishop of East Anglia, dies                 187
   963   Ælfsige, or Ælfsi, Abbot of Peterborough
           (A. D. 1006)                                      143
  1013            in Normandy with Queen Emma                173
  1041            dies                                       189
  1032   Ælfsige, Bishop of Winchester, dies                 186
   963   Ælfstan, Bishop, of London, witness to
           Edgar’s grant (A. D. 972)                         142
   992            commands Æthelred’s fleet                  151
  1044   Ælfstan, Abbot of St. Augustine’s, dies             191
   925   Ælfweard, son of King Edward, dies                  130
   679   Ælfwine, the brother of Eeferth, killed              49
  1032   Ælfwin Bishop of Winchester                         186
  1045          dies                                         191
  1046   Ælwine, Abbot, sent to St. Remy                     193
  1011   Ælfword, Sheriff, taken                             168
   656   Ælhmund, Alderman (A. D. 664)                        40
   477   Ælla arrives in Britain                              13
   490        takes Andredes-ceaster                          14
   560        succeeds Ida in Northumberland                  20
   588        dies                                            22
   827        his power noted                                 81
   867   Ælla, usurper of Northumberland, killed              90
  1011   Ælmær, Abbot, betrays Canterbury                    168
  1016   Ælmær the Darling                                   178
   455   Æsc reigns with his father Hengest                   12
   457   }
   466   }   his battles                                      13
   473   }
   488       sole King of Kent                                14
   992   Æscwig Bishop of Dorchester                         151
   674   Æscwine King of Wessex                               44
   675           fights with Wulfere                          45
   676           dies                                         49
   778   Æthebald                                             69
   716   Æthelbald (or Æthelwold) King of Mercia              57
   733             takes Somerton                             60
   737             lays waste Northumberland                  60
   743             fights with the Welsh                      61
   752             defeated by Cuthred                        62
   755             killed                                     65
   851   Æthelbald, Prince, son of Æthelwulf, fights
           with the Danes                                     85
   854              succeeds to the kingdom of Wessex     16, 88
   860              dies                                      88
   656   Æthelbold (A. D. 664)                                40
   552   Æthelberht (Æthelbriht or Ægelberht) born            20
   560              King of Kent                              20
   568              defeated by Ceawlin                       21
   616              dies                                      26
                    his dominion                              81
   766   Æthelberht Archbishop of York                        67
   780              dies                                      70
   776   Æthelberht Bishop of Whitehorn                       69
   797              dies                                      76
   854   Æthelbryht, King of Kent, Essex, & Sussex            88
   860               King of Wessex                       16, 88
  1055   Æthelbryht’s St. monastery burnt                    205
   748   Æthelbyrht King of Kent                              62
   760              dies                                      66
   792   Æthelbyrht King of East Anglia, beheaded             73
   633   Æthelburg, Edwin’s widow, takes refuge in Kent       30
   722   Æthelburh Queen demolishes Taunton                   58
   673   Ætheldryth St. founds Ely Monastery                  44
   679               dies                                     49
   963               relics of at Ely                        139
   897   Æthelere, Frisian, killed                           114
   593   Æthelferth, or Æthelfrith, King of Northumberland    23
   603               defeats Ægthan                           24
   607               defeats the Britons                      25
   617               killed                                   27
   897   Æthelferth Alfred’s herdsman killed                 114
   913   Æthelfled, Lady of Mercia, builds fenced towns      120
   916              takes Brecknock                          121
   918                    Derby                              123
   920                    Leicester                          124
   922              dies                                     129
   964   Æthelgar, Abbot of the new monastery, Winchester    144
   988             Archbishop of Canterbury                  150
   728   Æthelheard King of Wessex                        16, 58
   741              dies                                      61
   790   Æthelheard (or Athelard) Archbishop of Canterbury    72
   796              holds a synod                             75
   799              goes to Rome                              76
   803              dies                                      78
   794   Æthelheard, Alderman, dies                           74
   852   Æthelheard, Alderman                                 86
   837   Æthelhelm, Duke, killed                              84
   887   Æthelhelm, Alderman, carries alms to Rome           102
   655   Æthelhere, brother of Anna, killed                   34
   750   Æthelhun, Alderman                                   62
   894   Æthelm, Alderman of Wiltshire                       109
   898           dies                                        115
  1013   Æthelmer, Alderman, submits to Swegn                172
   800   Æthelmund, Alderman, killed                          77
   894   Æthelnoth, Alderman                                 109
  1022   Æthelnoth (or Ægelnoth) Archbishop of Canterbury    183
  1023             removes the relics of St. Ælfeah          184
  1023             dies                                      187
   664   Æthelred brother of Wulfhere at the consecration
           of Medeshamstede                                   36
   675            King of Mercia                              45
   676            lays waste Kent                             49
   680            confirms Wulfhere’s grant                   47
   695            loses his Queen                             55
   704            becomes a monk                              55
   716            buried at Bardney                           57
   774   Æthelred King of Northumberland                      68
   778            deposed                                     69
   790            regains the throne                          72
   792            marries Ælflæd                              73
   794            killed                                      73
   978   Æthelred King of England                            148
   986            lays waste the diocese of Rochester        149
   992   Æthelred raises a fleet                             151
   993            makes peace with Anlaf                     152
  1000            lays waste Cumberland                      156
  1002            makes peace with the Danes                 158
  1002            massacres the Danes                        158
  1011            sues for peace                             168
  1013            besieged in London                         171
  1013            goes abroad                                172
  1014            recalled                                   174
  1014            defeats the Danes in Lindsey               174
  1016            dies                                       178
   588   Æthelric King of Northumberland                      22
  1038   Æthelric, Bishop of Sussex, dies                    187
  1016   Æthelsige Alderman                                  180
  1016   Æthelsige, Abbot of Abingdon                        181
  1018              dies                                     182
  1061   Æthelsige, Abbot of St. Augustine’s                 206
   836   Æthelstan, King of Kent, Essex, and Sussex           83
   851              defeats the Danes                         85
   883   Æthelstan, Alderman, sent to Rome                    99
   925   Æthelstan King                                      130
   927             expels Guthfrith                          130
   934             invades Scotland                          131
   938             defeats Anlaf and Constantine             131
   941             dies                                      134
  1010   Æthelstan, Etheldred’s son in law, killed           166
  1043   Æthelstan Abbot of Abingdon                         190
  1046             dies                                      191
   888   Æthelswith, Queen, dies                             103
   661   Æthelwald, King of Sussex, receives Wight            42
   828   Æthelwald, Bishop of Litchfield, dies                81
   901   Æthelwald, Prince, revolts and defeated             115
   904              invades England                          116
   905              killed                                   117
   994   Æthelward, Alderman                                 153
  1016   Æthelward, son of Æthelsig, killed                  180
  1001   Æthelweard, High Sheriff, killed                    156
   963   Æthelwin, Alderman (A. D. 972)                      142
   992             dies                                      151
  1018   Æthelwin Abbot of Abingdon                          182
   737   Æthelwold, Bishop of Hexham, dies                    60
   888   Æthelwold, Alderman, dies                           103
  1017   Æthelword, son of Æthelmer, killed                  181
  1020   Æthelword, Alderman, outlawed                       182
   836   Æthelwulf King of Wessex                             83
   840   }         battles of, with the Danes               { 84
   851   }                                                  { 85
   853             conquers North Wales                       86
   854             grants the tithe of his lands to the
                     church                                   87
   854             goes to Rome                               87
   854             marries Judith (A. D. 855)                 87
   854             dies (A. D. 857)                           87
   860   } Æthelwulf, Alderman, defeats the Danes           { 88
   871   }                                                  { 91
   871                killed                                  92
   866   Æthered King of Wessex                               89
   868   Æthered, King of Wessex, aids Burhred                90
   871            battles of, with the Danes              91, 92
   871            dies                                        93
   870   Æthered Archbishop of Canterbury                     91
   888            dies                                       103
   886   Æthered, Alderman of Mercia, Governor of London     101
   894            godfather to a son of Hastings             108
   894            besieges the Danes at Bultington           109
   912            dies                                       120
   901   Æthered, Alderman of Devon, dies                    116
  1034   Ætheric, Bishop of Dorchester, dies                 186
   680   Agatho, Pope, rescript of                            45
   911   Agmund, Hold, killed                                120
   651   Aidan, Bishop of Lindisfarne, dies                   33
  1070   Ailnod, Abbot of Glastonbury, deposed
           (A. D. 1077)                                      219
   283   Alban St. martyred                                    8
               relics of, removed to Denmark (A. D. 1080)    242
  1116   Alban’s St. monastery consecrated                   284
   780   Alchmund, Bishop of Hexham, dies                     70
   788   Aldberht, Abbot, dies                                72
   709   Aldhelm, Bishop of Westwood, dies                    56
   727   Aldulf Bishop of Rochester                           58
   731          consecrates Archbishop Tatwine                59
   731   Aldwine Bishop of Litchfield                         59
  1127   Alein Fergan, Earl of Britanny and Richmond
           (A. D. 1084-1119)                                 301
   114   Alexander 1st, Pope, decree of                        6
  1070   Alexander 2d, Pope, decides for the supremacy
           of Canterbury (A. D. 1071)                   213, 217
  1107   Alexander King of Scotland                          278
  1124             dies                                      297
  1123   Alexander Bishop of Lincoln                         295
  1125             goes to Rome                              300
  1130             at the consecration of Christ Church      309
  1137             imprisoned by Stephen                     314
   853   Alfred, or Ælfred, sent to Rome                      86
   854           consecrated as King, by Leo (A. D. 857)      88
   871           defeated with Æthered                        91
   871           King of Wessex                               93
   875           defeats the Danes at sea                     95
   876           makes peace with the Danes                   95
   878           driven by the Danes to Athelney              97
   878           defeats the Danes, and is godfather to
                   Godrun                                     98
   883           sends alms to Rome and India                 99
   888           to Rome                                     103
   885           delivers Rochester                          100
   886           repairs London                              101
   894           defeats the Danes at Farnham                106
   894                             in the west          109, 110
   896           blocks up the Lea                           112
   897           long ships of, defeat the Danes             114
   901           dies                                        115
   907   Alfred, Sheriff of Bath, dies                       118
   799   Alfun, Bishop of Dunwich, dies                       76
   778   Alfwold, or Alwold, King of Northumberland           69
   780            sends to Rome                               70
   789            killed                                      72
   852   Alhhim Bishop (of Worcester?)                        86
   765   Alhred King of Northumberland                        67
   774          deposed                                       68
   798   Alric killed                                         76
  1123   Amalri, or Hamalri (Amaury 4th) Earl of
           Evreux, at war with Henry 1st                     295
  1124           defeated                                    296
  1130   Andrew St. monastery of, at Rochester,
           consecrated                                       309
   477   Andred, forest of                                    13
   490   Andredes-cester besieged                             14
   449   Angles arrive in Britain                             12
   653   Angles, Mid, converted                               33
   636   Anglia, East, converted                              31
   823           submits to Egbryht                           80
   836           receives a Danish army                       89
   890           colonized by Godrun                         103
   905           laid waste by Edward                        117
  1000   Anglesey plundered                                  156
         Anjou, Earls of--see Fulk 5th, Geoffrey, Henry
   911   Anlaf, the Black, killed                            119
   938   Anlaf, King, defeated by Æthelstan                  132
   942          dies                                         135
   944   Anlaf, King of Northumberland, expelled             135
   949          returns                                      136
   952          expelled                                     136
   654   Anna, King of East Anglia, killed                    33
  1093   Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury               225, 252
  1095           receives a pall                             260
  1097           leaves England                              263
  1100           recalled                                    268
  1103           goes to Rome                                272
  1109           dies                                        278
  1125           laws of, sanctioned                         299
  1115   Anselm, an Abbot of Rome, in England                284
  1123   Anselm, Abbot of St. Edmund’s Bury, goes to Rome    294
  1089   Anthony Prior of St. Augustine’s                    225
   875   Anwind, a Danish King                                95
  1070   Arnulf, Count of Flanders, and killed               217
  1041   Arnwi Abbot of Peterborough                         189
  1052         resigns                                       203
  1102   Arundel castle besieged by Henry 1st                270
  1016   Assandun battle of                                  180
  1020            church built at                            183
   910   Asser, Bishop of Sherborn, dies                     119
  1121   Athelis married to Henry 1st                        289
   961   Athelmod, Priest, dies                              138
   884   Athelwold, Bishop, dies                              99
   963   Athelwold Bishop of Winchester                      139
                   repairs Ely and Medeshamstede             139
   984             dies                                      149
   903   Athulf, Alderman, dies                              116
   972   Athulf Bishop                                       142
  1130   Audoenus Bishop of Evreux                           309
   597   Augustin St. arrives in Britain                      24
   601            receives a pall from Gregory                24
   604            consecrates Bishops                         24
   607            prediction of, verified                     25
  1070   Augustine’s St. monks, rebellion of (A. D. 1087)    221


  B

   871   Bagsæc, a Danish King, killed                        92
   924   Bakewell built                                      130
  1037   Baldwin 5th, Earl of Flanders, receives Ælfgiva     187
  1046           receives Earl Swegn                         194
  1064                    Earl Tostig                        208
  1070   Baldwin 6th, Earl of Flanders, dies                 217
  1111   Baldwin 7th, Earl of Flanders                       280
  1117           invades Normandy                            285
  1118           mortally wounded                            286
  1119           dies                                        288
  1098   Baldwin, Abbot of St. Edmund’s, dies                265
  1135   Baldwin de Redvers rebels                           313
   791   Baldwulf Bishop of Whitehorn                         72
   823   Balred, King of Kent, deposed                        80
   547   Bamborough built by Ida                              19
   993              pillaged                                 152
  1095              besieged and taken                  258, 260
  1124   Barley, high price of                               297
   669   Basse, a Priest, founds Reculver monastery           44
   577   Bath taken by Cuthwin                                22
   973        also called Acemannes-ceaster                  145
  1088        plundered                                      245
  1087   Battel Abbey founded (A. D. 1086)                   239
  1094          consecrated                                  255
   734   Bede dies                                            60
   571   Bedford, battle near                                 22
   919            fortified by Edward                        124
   921            garrison of defeats the Danes              126
  1016   Bedfordshire laid waste by Canute                   177
   482   Benedict St. miracles of                             13
   509            dies                                        17
   596            monastery of, destroyed                     23
  1087            order of, prevalent in England             239
  1022   Benedict 9th, Pope, consecrates Æthelnoth
           Archbishop of Canterbury                          183
  1058   Benedict 10th, Pope                                 205
  1059            expelled                                   205
   911   Benesing, Hold, killed                              119
   894   Benfleet fortress                              107, 108
   888   Beocca, Alderman, sent to Rome                      103
   775   Beonne, Abbot of Medeshamstede, lease of             68
   710   Beorhtfryth, Alderman, fights with the Picts         56
   851   Beorhtulf, King of Mercia, defeated                  85
   897   Beorhtulf, Alderman of Essex, dies                  113
   690   Beorhtwald, or Brihtwald, Archbishop of
           Canterbury                                         52
   693   Beorthwald, or Brihtwald, consecrated                53
   731               dies                                     59
   780   Beorn, Alderman, burnt                               70
  1046   Beorn, Earl, murdered                               194
   887   Beorngar, or Berenger, King of Lombardy             102
   890   Beornhelm, Alderman, sent to Rome                   103
   802   Beornmod Bishop of Rochester                         77
   905   Beornoth Prince                                     118
   755   Beornred, King of Mercia, and deposed                65
   823   Beornwulf, King of Mercia, slain                     80
   897   Beornwulf, Sheriff of Winchester, dies              113
   684   Berht, or Briht, Alderman, invades the Scots         50
   699          killed                                        55
  1088   Berkeley, Lordship of, laid waste                   245
  1123   Bernard, Bishop of St. David’s, goes to Rome        294
  1130            assists at the consecration of Christ
                    Church                                   309
   634   Bernicia, kingdom of                             30, 49
   501   Bieda arrives in Britain                             17
   671   Birds, battle of the                                 44
   628   Blecca, first Christian convert in Lindsey           29
   685   Blood, rain of                                       51
  1098   }                                                 { 265
  1100   }      springs of, in Berkshire                   { 266
  1103   }                                                 { 272
   678   Bosa, Bishop of York                                 49
   654   Botulf, founds a monastery at Boston                 33
   785   Botwine, Abbot of Rippon, dies                       71
         Boulogne, Earls of--see Eustace 2d, and
           Eustace 3d
   876   Bracelet, oath on the                                95
  1066   Brand, Abbot of Peterborough                        210
  1069          dies                                         212
   916   Brecknock taken                                     121
   759   Bregowine Archbishop of Canterbury                   66
   762             dies                                       66
  1127   Brian, son of Alein Fergan                          301
   912   Bridgenorth built                                   120
  1102               besieged                                271
  1038   Brihteh, Bishop of Worcester, dies                  187
   693   Brihtelm dies                                        53
   970   Brihtnoth Abbot of Ely                              139
   972   Brihtnoth Alderman                                  142
   993             killed                               150, 152
  1009   Brihtric accuses Wulfnoth                           163
  1009            fails in his expedition against
                    Wulfnoth                                 164
  1017   Brihtric killed                                     181
  1006   Brithwold, Bishop of Sherborn                       160
  1043              dies                                     190
  1087   Bristol plundered                                   244
         Britain, description of                               1
                  conquered by Julius Cæsar                    2
    46                      by Claudius                        5
   189   Britain conquered by Severus                          7
   189   Britons converted to Christianity                     7
   443           apply to the Angles for aid against the
                   Picts                                      11
   607   Brockmail, a British Alderman, defeated              25
   656   Brordan (A. D. 664)                                  40
   775   Brordan, Alderman, grant of                          68
   938   Brunanburh, battle of                               131
   918   Buckingham fortified                                123
  1016   Buckinghamshire ravaged                             177
   822   Burhelm, Alderman, killed                            80
   853   Burhred, King of Mercia, reduces North
           Wales, and marries Æthelwulf’s daughter            86
   874            expelled by the Danes                       94
  1066   Burton Abbey held by Leofric                        210
   685   Butter turned into blood                             51
  1131          scarcity of                                  310
   784   Byrhtric King of Wessex                              71
   787            marries Eadburga                            71
   800            dies                                        77
   905   Byrhtsig, son of Prince Beornoth, killed            117
   634   Byrinus, Bishop, converts the West Saxons            30
   635            baptizes Cynegils                           31
   639                     and Cuthred                        31
   932   Byrnstan Bishop of Winchester                       131
   934            dies                                       131


  C

  1097   Cadugan leader of the Welch Rebels                  263
  1087   Caen, St. Stephen’s Monastery at                    238
  1119   Calixtus 2d, Pope                                   288
  1124            dies                                       298
  1010   Cambridge burnt                                     166
  1010   Cambridgeshire men, valour of                       166
  1010   Cambridgeshire ravaged                              168
   918   Camaleac, Bishop of Landaff, taken prisoner         122
   754   Canterbury burnt                                     62
   851              taken                                     85
  1011              betrayed to the Danes                    168
  1013   Canute, or Cnut, the son of Swegn, in England       171
  1014           declared King by the fleet                  173
  1014           deserts the men of Lindsey                  174
  1015           reduces Wessex                              176
  1016           reduces Northumberland                      177
  1016           besieges London                             178
  1016           defeats Edmund                              180
  1016           treats with Edmund                          181
  1017           sole King of England                        181
  1017           marries Ælfgiva                             182
  1019           goes to Denmark                             182
  1020           returns                                     182
  1025           fights with the Swedes                      184
  1028           conquers Norway                             184
  1031           returns to England, goes to Rome, and
                   invades Scotland                          185
  1036           dies                                        186
  1064   Canute, or Cnut, laws of, renewed                   208
  1075   Canute, or Cnut, Prince of Denmark, invades
           England                                           228
  1085           King of Denmark designs of, against
                   England                                   232
  1087           murdered                                    242
  1119           stiled a saint                              288
  1092   Carlisle repaired                                   252
   897   }                                                 { 113
   986   }                                                 { 150
  1041   }                                                 { 189
  1054   }                                                 { 204
  1086   } Cattle, pestilence among                        { 235
  1103   }                                                 { 272
  1111   }                                                 { 280
  1125   }                                                 { 300
  1131   }                                                 { 310
   664   Ceadda Bishop of York                                43
   633   Ceadwalla ravages Northumberland                     30
   686                     Kent and Wight                     51
   687                     Kent                               52
   688             dies at Rome                               52
   560   Ceawlin King of Wessex                               20
   568           fights with Æthelbryht                       21
   591           deposed                                      23
   593           dies                                         23
   827           power of, noted                              81
   429   Celestine 1st, Pope, sends Palladius to the Scotch    9
   661   Cenbyrht, King, dies                                 42
   704   Cenred King of Mercia                                55
   709          goes to Rome                                  56
   716   Cenred King of Northumberland                        57
   676   Centwine King of Wessex                              49
   681            defeats the Britons                         50
   643   Cenwalh King of Wessex                               32
   645           expelled                                     33
   646           baptized                                     33
   648           grant of                                     33
   652   }
   658   }       battles of                               33, 42
   661   }
   672           dies                                         44
   796   Cenwulf, King of Mercia, ravages Kent                75
   819           dies                                         79
   905   Cenwulf, Abbot, killed                              117
   805   Ceolburh, Abbess, dies                               78
   697   Ceolmund, Alderman of Kent, dies                    113
   830   Ceolnoth Archbishop of Canterbury                    82
   870            dies                                        91
   709   Ceolred King of Mercia                               56
   715           fights with Ina                              57
   716           dies                                         57
   852   Ceolred Abbot of Medeshamstede                       85
   591   Ceolric King of Wessex                               23
   597   Ceolwulf King of Wessex                              23
   607            fights with the South Saxons                25
   794   Ceolwulf, Bishop (of Dorchester?) flees              74
   796             dies                                       74
   819   Ceolwulf King of Mercia                              79
   821             deposed                                    80
   874   Ceolwulf, Thane, made King of Mercia                 94
   877             retains a share of Mercia                  96
   851   Ceorl, Alderman, defeats the Danes                   84
   495   Cerdic arrives in Britain                            14
   519          conquers Wessex                           15, 18
   534          dies                                          18
   778   }                                                  { 70
   788   } Charles (Charlemagne), wars of                   { 72
   800             Emperor                                    77
   812             dies                                       79
   854   Charles (the Bald), King of France, receives
           Æthelwulf                                          87
   885   Charles (Carloman) killed                           100
   885   Charles (the Fat), King of France                   101
   887           deposed and dies                            102
  1119   Charles Earl of Flanders                            288
  1120           makes peace with Henry I.                   288
  1127           killed                                      302
  1131   Cheese scarce                                       310
  1110   Chertsey, monastery at, founded                     280
   894   Chester occupied by the Danish army                 110
   907           repaired                                    118
  1031   Christ Church, Canterbury, grant to                 185
  1066          burnt                                        210
  1071          rebuilt by Landfranc                         239
  1130          restored and consecrated by William Corboyl  308
  1070   Christien, a Danish Bishop, comes to Ely            214
   806   }          Circles round the sun                  {  78
  1104   }                                                 { 273
   477   Cissa son of Ælla                                    13
    46   Claudius conquers Britain                             5
   922   Cledauc, a Welch King, submits to Edward            120
    92   Clemens 1st, Pope dies                                6
   964   Clergy expelled from the Diocese of Winchester 139, 143
  1001   Clifton burnt                                       157
   568   Cnebba, Alderman, killed                             21
  1001   Cola, Sheriff, defeated                             157
   921   Colchester taken by the Danes                       127
   921              repaired                                 128
   679   Coldingham burnt                                     49
   664   Colman, Bishop of Lindisfarne, leaves England        43
   560   Columba Abbot of Iona                                21
  1070   Columban a seditious monk (A. D. 1087)              222
   678   }                                                 {  49
   729   }                                                 {  59
   891   }                                                 { 104
   905   } Comet                                           { 118
   975   }                                                 { 146
   995   }                                                 { 154
  1066   }                                                 { 210
  1097   }                                                 { 263
  1140   Constantia, daughter of Philip 1st, marries
           Prince Eustace (A. D. 1153)                       322
   938   Constantine defeated by Æthelstan                   133
         Corn injured--see Crops
  1039   }                                                 { 188
  1043   } Corn, high price of                             { 190
  1124   }                                                 { 297
  1137   }                                                 { 316
   254   Cornelius, Pope                                       8
   813   } Cornwall laid waste                             {  79
   997   }                                                 { 154
  1066   Coventry, Abbey of, founded (A. D. 1054)            210
  1086   Cristina, Princess, takes the veil                  235
  1041   }                                                 { 189
  1043   }                                                 { 190
  1086   }                                                 { 235
  1089   }                                                 { 248
  1095   }                                                 { 261
  1097   }                                                 { 264
  1098   }                                                 { 265
  1103   }                                                 { 272
  1105   } Crops, failure of                               { 274
  1110   }                                                 {
  1111   }                                                 { 280
  1116   }                                                 { 284
  1117   }                                                 { 286
  1124   }                                                 { 297
  1125   }                                                 { 300
  1137   }                                                 { 316
         }                                                 { 317
  1112   Crops good                                          281
   199   Cross Holy, found                                     7
   883   Cross Holy, a piece of the, sent to Alfred           99
   774   Cross seen in the Heavens                            68
   806              in the moon                               78
  1066   Croyland Abbey annexed to Peterborough              210
  1096   } Crusades                                        { 261
  1128   }                                                 { 306
   593   Cryda King of Mercia, dies                           23
   755   Cumbran, Alderman                                    63
   945   Cumberland reduced by Edmund                        135
  1000              laid waste by Ethelred                   156
   568   Cutha, or Cuthwulf, defeats Æthelbyrht               21
   571          killed                                        22
   656   Cuthbald Abbot of Medeshamstede (673)                42
   685   Cuthberht Bishop of Hexham                           50
   741   Cuthberht, or Cuthbryht, Archbishop of Canterbury    61
   758              dies                                      65
   775   Cuthbriht Alderman                                   68
         Cuthburh daughter of Cenred                          16
   718            founds Winborn Monastery                    57
   639   Cuthred King baptized                                31
   648           receives lands from Cenwalh                  33
   661           dies                                         42
   741   Cuthred King of Wessex                               61
   743   }       fights with the Welsh                      { 61
   753   }                                                  { 62
   752           defeats Æthelbald                            62
   754           dies                                         62
   805   Cuthred King of Kent dies                            78
         Cuthwin father of Cuthwulf or Cutha              16, 59
  577            defeats the Britons                          22
         Cwenburh the daughter of Cenred                  16, 57
  593    Cwichelm, the brother of Ceawlin, dies               23
  614    Cwichelm, son of Cynegils, defeats the Britons       25
  626              being King of Wessex with his
                     father, sends an assassin to
                      murder Edwin                            28
  628              fights with Penda                          29
  636              baptized and dies                          31
         Cycle of Easter                                      18
               of Dionysius                                   27
  477    Cymen arrives in England                             13
  799    Cynebryht, Bishop of Wessex, goes to Rome            76
  611    Cynegils, King of Wessex                         15, 25
  614              fights with the Britons                    25
  628                     with Penda                          29
  635              baptized                                   31
  754    Cyneheard, Bishop of Winchester                      62
  784    Cyneheard Prince, killed                         64, 71
  964    Cyneweard, Abbot of Milton                          144
  975               dies, Bishop of Somerset                 146
  721    Cynewulf Prince, killed                              68
  737    Cynewulf, Bishop of Lindisfarne                      60
  780              resigns his See                            70
  782              dies                                       70
  755    Cynewulf deposes Sigebryht, and made King
           of Wessex                                          63
  775             fights with Offa                            68
   784   Cynewulf killed                                  63, 71
   778   Cynewulf, High-sheriff, killed                       69
   495   Cynric arrives in Britain                            14
   495   }                                                  { 14
   508   }                                                  { 17
   519   }      his battles with the Britons                { 18
   527   }                                                  {
   530   }                                                  {
   556   }                                                  { 20
   534          succeeds to the kingdom of Wessex             19
   748   Cynric, Prince, killed                               62


  D

         Dælreodi                                          2, 24
   715   Dagobert 2d, dies                                    57
   787   Danes arrive in England                              71
   793         plunder Lindisfarne                            73
   794         their ships wrecked                            74
   832         ravage Sheppey                                 82
   833         defeat Egbryht                                 82
   835         defeated by Egbryght                           83
   837-851     harrass England                                84
   851         defeated by Æthelwulf                          85
   851         winter in the Thanet                           85
   854         winter in Sheppey                              87
   860         take Winchester, and defeated by Osric         88
   865         winter in Thanet and ravage Kent               89
   866         winter in East Anglia                          89
   867         conquer Northumberland                         90
   868   Danes treat with Mercia                              90
   869         at York                                        90
   870         defeat St. Edmund and conquer East
                 Anglia                                       91
   871         their battles with Æthered                 91, 92
   871         with Alfred                                    93
   872         winter at London                               94
   873         in Lindsey                                     94
   874         conquer Mercia                                 94
   875         in Northumberland and at Cambridge             95
   875         defeated by Alfred                             95
   876         make peace with Alfred                         95
   877         again defeated and make peace                  96
   878         reduce Wessex                                  96
   878         defeated by Alfred                             97
   879         colonize East Anglia                           98
   879         one division of, departs to France             98
   885         besiege Rochester                              99
   885         defeat Alfred’s fleet                         100
   893         from France, arrive at Limine-mutha           105
   893-897     their battles with Alfred and war in
                 England                                  105-15
   905         of East Anglia defeated by Edward             117
   907         of East Anglia and Northumberland
                 make a treaty with Edward                   118
   911         of Northumberland break the peace
                 and defeated                                119
   917         ravage Mercia                                 122
   918   Danes invade Wales and defeated                     122
   918         depart to Ireland                             123
   921         of Mercia and East Anglia ravage
                  England                                  125-7
   921         submit to Edward                         127, 128
   991         first receive tribute                         150
   992         defeat the East Anglian and London ships      151
   993         defeat Byrhtnoth near Malden                  152
   997-999     annoy the southern coast                    154-6
  1000         sail to Normandy                              156
  1001         ravage the south and west of England          157
  1002         receive tribute from Ethelred                 158
  1002         massacred by order of Ethelred                158
  1003         take Exeter                                   158
  1004         under Swegn, invade East Anglia               159
  1005         fleet of returns to Denmark                   159
  1006         again invade England and winter in
                 Wight                                       161
  1007         receive tribute                               163
  1009         plunder many parts of England, and
                 winter on the Thames                        165
  1010         defeat Ulfcytel in East Anglia                166
  1010         burn Northampton                              167
  1011         take Canterbury                               168
  1012         receive tribute                               169
  1012         45 ships of the, join Ethelred                170
  1013         under Swegn, conquer the north of
                 England, but repulsed at London             171
  1013   Danes masters of England                            172
  1014         choose Cnut as King on the death of
                 Swegn                                       173
  1016         ravage England                           176, 177
  1016         battles of the, with Edmund         178, 179, 180
  1018         and English united under Cnut                 182
   709   }                                                  { 59
   731   } Daniel Bishop of Winchester                      { 56
   721            goes to Rome                                58
   744            resigns his see                             61
   745            dies                                        61
  1124   David King of Scotland                              297
  1126         visits Henry 1st                              301
  1135         invades England                               313
  1135         makes peace with Stephen                      314
  1138         invades England, and defeated at the
                 battle of the Standard                      319
   634   }                                                  { 30
   644   } Deira, kingdom of                                { 32
   678   }                                                  { 49
   909   Denulf, Bishop of Winchester, dies                  118
   918   Derby taken by Æthelflæd                            123
   823   Devon, men of, fight with the Britons                80
   851   }                                                 {  85
   878   }                                                 {  97
   894   } Devonshire attacked by the Danes                { 107
   897   }                                                 { 113
   997   }                                                 { 154
  1001   }                                                 { 157
   665   Deusdedit, Archbishop of Canterbury                  35
   664              dies                                      43
  1092   Dolfin, Warden of Cumberland, expelled              252
  1085   Doomsday Book                                  234, 240
  1070   Donald, Bishop (1081)                               220
  1070   Donatus, Archbishop of Dublin (1085)                220
   998   } Dorsetshire invaded by the Danes                { 154
  1015   }                                                 { 175
  1048   Dover, riot at                                      196
   793   Dragons, fiery                                       73
   891   Dubslane, an Irish pilgrim                          104
   883   Dudda, Alderman, killed                              82
  1046   Dudoc, Bishop of Wells, sent to the Synod
           of St. Remy                                       192
  1061          dies                                         207
  1093   Dufenal, King of Scotland, and deposed              254
  1094            regains the throne                         257
  1097            again deposed                              264
   741   Dun, Bishop of Rochester                             61
  1093   Duncan, King of Scotland                            254
  1094           murdered                                    257
   925   Dunstan, St. born                                   130
   955            banished                                   137
   957            recalled, and receives the Bishopricks
                    of Worcester and London                  138
   961            Archbishop of Canterbury                   138
   978            escapes at Calne                           148
   988            dies                                       150


  E

   616   Eadbald, King of Kent                                26
                  renounces Christianity, and reconverted
                    by Laurentius                             26
   640            dies                                        31
   794   Eadbald, Bishop, leaves Northumberland               74
   725   Eadberht, King of Kent                               58
   748             dies                                       62
   664   Eadberht Alderman                                    40
   738   Eadbryht, or Eadberht, King of Northumberland        60
   757             becomes a monk                             65
   768             dies                                       67
   794   Eadbryht Præn King of Kent                           74
   796            taken prisoner, and loses his eyes          75
   787   Eadburhge, marries King Beorhtric                    71
   819   Eadbyrht, Alderman, dies                             79
  1043   Eadgith, or Editha, married to Edward               190
  1048            deprived of her treasures                  199
  1052            regains them                               203
  1075            dies                                       228
   678   Eadhed 2d, Bishop of Sidnacester, in Lincolnshire    49
  1012   Eadnoth 1st, Bishop of Dorchester, removes
           the body of St. Ælfeah                            170
  1016           killed at Assandun                          180
  1046   Eadnoth 2d, Bishop of Dorchester, dies              194
  1001   Eadsige, Sheriff, defeated                          157
  1038   Eadsige Archbishop of Canterbury                    187
  1040           goes to Rome                                188
  1042           consecrates Edward                          189
  1043   Eadsige resigns his Archbishoprick                  190
  1047           dies                                        195
   897   Eadulf, Thane, dies                                 113
   924   Eadulf, sons of, submit to Edward                   130
   905   Eadwald, the son of Acca, killed                    117
  1010   Eadwig, the brother of Æfic, killed                 166
  1017   Eadwig, the King of the Peasants, banished          182
   984   Eadwin Abbot of Abingdon                            149
   989          dies                                         150
   905   Eadwold, Thane, killed                              117
   851   Ealchere, or Ealhere, Alderman, defeats the Danes    85
   853             killed                                     86
   823   } Ealchstan Bishop of Sherborn defeats the Danes   { 80
   845   }                                                  { 84
   867               dies                                     90
   722   Ealdbryht, or Ealbyrht, Prince, exiled               58
   725              killed                                    58
   685   Ealdferth, or Aldfrith, King of Northumberland       50
   705              dies                                      55
   718              Cuthburh, his Queen                       57
  1047   Ealdred Bishop of Worcester sent to Rome            195
  1060           Archbishop of York                          206
  1066           consecrates William as King                 209
   727   Ealdulf Bishop of Rochester                          58
   778   Ealdulf, Sheriff, killed                             69
   972   Ealdulf, or Aldulf, Abbot of Peterborough (972)     140
   972            enriches the monastery                     143
   992            Archbishop of York                         151
  1002            dies                                       158
   897   Ealheard, Bishop of Dorchester, dies                113
   766   Ealhmund Bishop of Hexham                            67
   784   Ealhmund King of Kent                                71
   903   Ealhswitha Alfred’s Queen                           116
   905              dies                                     118
   780   Eadbald 1st, Archbishop of York                      70
   796           dies                                         74
   796   Eanbald 2d, Archbishop of York                       74
   797           receives a pall                              76
   806   Eanberht, Bishop of Hexham, dies                     78
   626   Eanfled, the daughter of Edwin, born                 28
   617   Eanfrid, the son of Æthelfrith, banished             27
   634            King of Bernicia                            30
   845   Eanwulf, Alderman, defeats the Danes                 84
   795   Eardwulf King of Northumberland                      74
   806            deposed                                     78
  1089   }                                                 { 248
  1119   }                                                 { 287
  1122   } Earthquakes (in England)                        { 291
  1129   }                                                 { 308
  1117                 (in Lombardy)                         286
   449   East Anglia, by whom peopled                         12
   636                converted to Christianity               31
   823                submits to Egbriht                      80
   838                harrassed by the Danes                  84
   870                conquered by the Danes                  91
   879                colonized by Danes                      98
   905                laid waste by Edward                   117
   907                makes peace with Edward                118
   921                submits to Edward                      128
  1004   }            invaded by the Danes                 { 159
  1010   }                                                 { 166
   678   Eata Bishop of Hexham                                49
   778   Ecga killed                                          69
   664   Ecbyrht or Ecbriht King of Kent                      43
   673           dies                                         44
   716   Ecbyrht St. reforms the monks of Iona                57
   729           dies                                         59
   734   Ecgbriht Archbishop of York                          60
   766            dies                                        67
   800   Ecgbyrht, or Ecgbryht, King of Wessex                77
   813             ravages Cornwall                           79
   823-827         conquests of, in England               80, 81
   828             reduces Wales                              82
   833             defeated by the Danes                      82
   835             defeats the Danes                          83
   836             dies                                       83
   803   Egberht Bishop of Lindisfarne                        78
   916   Egbriht, Abbot, killed                              121
   670   Ecgferth, or Ecverth, King of Northumberland         44
   678             expels Archbishop Wilfrid                  49
   684             sends an army against the Scots            50
   685   Ecgferth, or Ecverth, killed                         50
   794   Ecgferth’s monastery (Monk Wearmouth)
           plundered                                          74
   785   Ecgverth consecrated King                            71
   794            succeeds to the kingdom of Mercia,
                    and dies                                  74
   897   Ecgulf, Alfred’s Horse Thane, dies                  113
   538   }                                                 {  19
   540   }                                                 {  19
   664   }                                                 {  43
   733   }                                                 {  60
   807   } Eclipses of the Sun                             {  78
   879   }                                                 {  98
  1135   }                                                 { 312
  1140   }                                                 { 319

   795   }                                                 {  74
   800   }                                                 {  77
   802   }                                                 {  77
   806   }                                                 {  78
   827   }          of the Moon                            {  81
   904   }                                                 { 116
  1110   }                                                 { 279
  1117   }                                                 { 285
  1121   }                                                 { 289
   956   Edgar King of Mercia                                137
   957              of Wessex                                137
   957         recalls St. Dunstan                           138
   963         charters Medeshamstede (A. D. 972)            140
   969         lays waste Thanet                             144
   973         consecrated as King                           144
   975         dies                                          145
  1066   Edgar Ætheling, presumptive heir of Edward          210
  1067         takes refuge in Scotland                      211
  1068         invades Northumberland                        211
  1069         plunders York                                 212
  1074         received into favour by William               227
  1086         departs from William                          235
  1091         deprived of his estates by William
                 2d, takes refuge in Scotland                250
  1091         reconciled to William 2d                      251
  1097         aids Edgar the son of Malcolm                 264
  1106         taken prisoner by Henry 1st                   276
  1097   Edgar King of Scotland                              264
  1107         dies                                          278
   870   Edmund St. King of East Anglia, killed               91
   941   Edmund King                                         134
   942   }
   944   }      conquests of                                 135
   945   }
   946          dies                                         135
   971   Edmund, the son of Edgar, dies                      144
  1015   Edmund, son of Ethelred, marriage of                175
  1016   Edmund lays waste the western counties              177
  1016          chosen King                                  178
  1016          battles of, with the Danes         178, 179, 180
  1016          makes peace with Cnut and dies               181
   946   Edred King                                          136
   954         possesses himself of Northumberland           136
   955         dies                                          136
   901   Edward (the elder) King                             115
   905          lays waste East Anglia                       117
   907          makes peace with the East Angles
                  and Northumbrians                          118
   911          defeats the Danes                            119
   912          takes London and Oxford into his
                  own government                             120
   913   }                                            { 120, 121
   918   }                                            {      123
   919   }                                            {      124
   920   }      fortifies his towns                   {      125
   921   }                                            { 127, 128
   922   }                                            {      128
   923   }                                            { 129, 130
   921          receives the submission of East
                  Anglia                                     128
   922            of North Wales and Mercia                  129
   924            of the King of Scots                       130
   925          dies                                         130
   975   Edward (the Martyr) King                            146
   978          murdered                                     148
   980          body of, removed to Shaftesbury              149
  1013   Edward (the Confessor), the son of Æthelred,
                  sent abroad                                172
  1014          sent to England                              173
  1040          arrives from Normandy                        188
  1041          chosen King                                  189
  1042          consecrated                                  189
  1043          marries Emma, daughter of Godwin             190
  1048          banishes Earl Godwin and dismisses
                  his Queen                                  199
  1052          restores their estates                       203
  1066          dies                                         208
  1057   Edward, Prince, the son of Edmund, dies             205
  1093   Edward, Prince, the son of Malcolm, killed          253
   617   Edwin King of Northumberland                         27
   626         escapes assassination, and conquers
                 Wessex                                       28
   627         baptized                                       29
   633         killed                                         30
  1064   Edwin, son of Ælfgar, joins Morker                  207
  1066          defeats Tostig                               208
  1066          is defeated by Harold, King of Norway        209
  1071          flees from William 1st, and slain            225
   955   Edwy King                                           136
   957        dies                                           137
   686   Egbalth Abbot of Peterborough                        51
  1140   Eleanor, Queen of France, marries Henry
           Earl of Anjou (A. D. 1152)                        322
   189   Eleutherius Pope                                      7
  1070   Elfrin, Prior of St. Augustine’s, imprisoned
           (A. D. 1087)                                      221
  1099   Elias, Earl of Maine, expelled                      265
  1110          dies                                         280
   673   Ely, monastery at, founded                           44
   963        abbey at, founded by Bishop Athelwold
                (A. D. 970)                                  139
  1070        Danes at                                  214, 216
  1018   English and Danes united under Cnut                 182
  1066   English the, redeem their lands from William 1st    209
  1096   Eoda, Earl of Champaigne, loses his lands           261
   905   Eohric, a Danish King, killed                       117
   626   Eomer attempts to murder Edwin                       28
   661   Eoppa preaches Christianity in Wight                 43
   632   Eorpwald baptized                                    30
   911   Eowils, a Danish King, killed                       119
   640   Ercenberht, (or Arcenbryht) King of Kent             31
   664               dies                                     43
   640   Ercengota daughter of Ercenberht                     31
   640   Ermenred son of Eadbald                              31
  1107   Ernulf Abbot of Peterborough                        277
  1114          Bishop of Rochester                          282
  1123          assists at the installation of William
                  Corboyl                                    294
  1124          dies                                         297
   449   Essex, or kingdom of the East Saxons                 12
   604          converted to Christianity                     24
   823   Essex submits to Ecbryht                             80
   913   }     recovered from the Danes by Edward          { 120
   921   }                                                 { 128
   994         ravaged by the Danes                          153
  1011         under the power of the Danes                  168
  1130   Everard Bishop of Norwich, at the consecration
           of Christ Church                                  309
  1137   Eugenius 3d, Pope, grants certain privileges
           to Peterborough (A. D. 1145)                      317
  1048   Eustace 2d, Earl of Boulogne, his affray
           at Dover                                          196
  1088           concerned in the conspiracy against
                   William 2d                                247
  1096   Eustace 3d, Earl of Boulogne, goes to Jerusalem     262
  1100           returns                                     268
  1101           recovers his lands from Henry 1st           270
  1140   Eustace, son of Stephen, marries Constance,
                    the sister of Louis 7th                  322
  1140            dies (A. D. 1153)                          322
   877   Exeter taken by the Danes                            96
   894          besieged by the Danes                        107
   894          relieved by Alfred                           109
  1003          taken by the Danes                           158
  1135          besieged by Stephen                          313


  F

    46   Famine in Syria                                       5
   792   }                                                 {  73
   975   }                                                 { 147
   976   }                                                 { 149
  1005   }                                                 { 160
  1043   }                                                 { 190
  1070   }     in England                                  { 217
  1082   }                                                 { 230
  1087   }                                                 { 236
  1096   }                                                 { 262
  1125   }                                                 { 300
  1137   }                                                 { 316
   577   Farinmail, a British King, killed                    22
  1117   Farits, Abbot of Abingdon, dies                     286
   636   Felix, Bishop, converts the East Angles              31
   829   Feologild, Abbot, chosen Archbishop of
                      Canterbury                              82
   829              dies                                      82
   961   Fever in London                                     138
  1087            throughout England                         236
  1125   Flood                                               300
  1013   Florentine St. relics of                            173
  1087   Forest laws were enacted by William I.
           (A. D. 1084)                                      241
  1088          amendment of, promised by William II.        246
  1135                    of Henry 1st (A. D. 1108)          313
   626   Forthher stabbed by Eomer                            26
   709   Forthhere, Bishop of Westwood                        56
   737              goes to Rome                              60
   803   Forthred, Abbot, dies                                78
   871   Fræna, a Danish Earl, killed                         92
   993   Fræna, a leader of the English, flees               152
   425   France, first Kings of                                9
   887           Empire of, divided                          102
   780   French fight with the Old Saxons                     70
   766   Fritheberht, Bishop of Hexham, dies                  67
   993   Frithegist, an English General, flees               152
   910   Frithestan, Bishop of Winchester                    118
   933               dies                                    131
   763   Frithewald, Bishop of Whitehorn, dies                66
  1110   }                                                 { 279
  1115   } Frost severe                                    { 284
  1103   } Fruit trees injured                             { 272
  1110   }                                                 { 279
         }                                                 { 280
  1112                 productive                            281
   737   Frythogith, Queen, goes to Rome                      60
  1110   Fulk 5th, Earl of Anjou, seizes Maine               280
  1111   }                                                 { 280
  1112   }         at war with Henry I.                    { 281
  1118   }                                                 { 286
  1119             his daughter Matilda married to
                     William, son of Henry I.                287
  1121             returns from Jerusalem and takes
                     back Matilda                            290
  1123             sends messengers to Henry                 291
  1123             messengers of, return dissatisfied        293
  1124             at war with Henry I. because of
                   William, son of Robert Earl of
                   Normandy, who had married
                   his daughter Sibylla (afterwards
                   divorced)                                 297
  1127             makes peace with Henry I. on
                   the marriage of his son Geoffrey
                   with the Empress Matilda                  301


  G

  1118   Gelasius 2d, Pope                                   287
  1119            dies                                       288
  1096   Geoffrey Bainard, overcomes William of
           Eu, in single combat                              261
  1125   Geoffrey, Abbot of St. Alban’s, goes to Rome        300
  1127   Geoffrey Martel, son of the Earl of Anjou,
           marries the Empress Matilda                       302
  1140            being Earl of Anjou, reduces Normandy      322
  1140            dies (A. D. 1151)                          322
  1103   Gerard, Archbishop of York, his right to
           consecrate Bishops denied                         272
  1108           dies                                        278
   710   Gerent, a Welch King, fights with Ina                56
  1122   Ghosts seen                                         290
  1123   Gifard, Henry’s Chaplain, goes to Rome              294
   693   Gifemund, Bishop of Rochester, dies                  53
  1117   Gilebert, Abbot of Westminster, dies                286
  1130   Gilbert Universalis, Bishop of London, at
           the dedication of Christ Church                   308
  1061   Gisa Bishop of Wells                                206
  1070        assists at the consecration of William
                Bishop of Durham (A. D. 1080)                219
   688   Glastonbury monastery built by Ina
           (A. D. 698 or 708)                                 52
  1083              tumults at                               231
   577   Gloucester taken                                     22
  1122              burnt                                    290
   988   Goda, a Dane, killed                                150
  1070   Godfrey Bishop of Chichester (A. D. 1087)           220
  1123   Godfrey Bishop of Bath                              295
  1130           at the consecration of Christ Church        309
   693   Godwin a Gallican Bishop                             53
   994   Godwin flees from the Danes                         152
  1001   Godwin, Sheriff, killed                             156
  1011   Godwin 2d, Bishop of Rochester, taken
           prisoner                                          169
  1016   Godwin, Alderman, killed                            180
  1036   Godwin, Earl, supports Hardacnut                    186
  1043           his daughter Eadgitha marries Edward        190
  1048           accused of treason                          197
  1048           outlawed                                    199
  1052           invades England                             200
  1052           restored to the King’s favour               203
  1053           dies                                        204
  1061   Godwin 3d, Bishop of Rochester, dies                206
  1088   Gosfrith, Bishop, rebels                            244
   435   Goths take Rome                                      10
   592   Gregory 1st, Pope                                    23
   596           sends Augustine to Britain                   23
   606           dies                                         25
  1129   Gregory--see Innocent 2d                            308
  1055   Griffin, King of Wales, burns Hereford              205
  1063            killed                                     207
   903   Grimbald, Priest, dies                              116
  1038   Grymkytel Bishop of Selsey                          187
  1045             dies                                      191
  1070   Gundulph Bishop of Rochester (A. D. 1076)           219
   911   Guthferth, Hold, killed                             120
   927   Guthfrith King of Northumberland, expelled          131
   944             his son expelled                          135
   714   Guthlac St. dies                                     56
  1066   Gyrth, the brother of Harold, killed                209


  H

  1075   Hacon, a Danish Earl, invades England               228
   920   Hælfwin deprived of the government of
           Mercia                                            125
  1036   Hardacnut in Denmark at Cnut’s death                186
  1039             succeeds to the kingdom of England        188
  1041             dies                                      188
   871   Hareld, a Danish Earl, killed                        92
  1036   Harold 1st, King of England                         186
  1039   Harold 1st dies                                     187
  1046   Harold 2d, the son of Godwin, opposes his
           brother Swegn                                     193
  1048          accused of treason                           197
  1048          outlawed and goes to Ireland                 199
  1052          invades England                              201
  1052          reconciled to Edward                         203
  1053          succeeds to his father’s Earldom             204
  1063          conquers Wales                               206
  1064          negociates with Morker                       207
  1066          King of England                              208
  1066          killed at the battle of Hastings             209
  1066   Harold (Hardrada) King of Norway, invades
           England, & killed at Stanford bridge              209
  1076   Harold (Hein) King of Denmark                       229
   893   Hastings invades England                            105
   894            receives his wife and children from
                    Alfred                                   108
   805   Heabyrht, Alderman, dies                             78
  1045   Heaca Bishop of Selsey                              191
  1058         dies                                          205
   963   Headda, an Abbot of Medeshamstede
           (A. D. 870)                                       140
   871   Heahmund, Bishop of Sherborn, killed                 93
   898   Heahstan, Bishop of London, dies                    115
   871   Healfden, a Danish King, killed                      92
   875   Healfden conquers Northumberland                     95
   876            divides the land among his troops           96
   911   Healfden, a Danish King, killed                     119
  1098   }                                                 { 265
  1117   }                                                 { 286
  1122   }  Heaven the, appears on fire                    { 291
  1131   }                                                 { 310
   676   Hedda, Bishop of Winchester                          49
   703          dies                                          55
   449   Hengest arrives in Britain                           12
   455-473       fights with the Britons                      13
  1046   } Henry I. King of France, at war with William    { 192
  1054   }   Normandy                                      { 204
  1060              dies                                     206
  1056   Henry 3d (the Black) Emperor, dies                  205
  1056   Henry 4th, Emperor                                  205
  1106              dies                                     277
  1106   Henry 5th, Emperor                                  277
  1110              marries Matilda                          279
  1086   Henry, the son of William the Conqueror,
           knighted                                          234
  1087          heir to his father’s treasures               238
  1094          comes to England                             256
  1095          at war with Robert, Earl of Normandy         257
  1100          King of England                              267
  1100          marries Matilda, daughter of Malcolm         268
  1101          his war and treaty with Robert          269, 270
  1102          reduces Robert Earl of Shrewsbury            270
  1105   Henry invades Normandy                              274
  1106         again invades and conquers Normandy           276
  1107         fills up the vacant sees in England           277
  1108         at war with France                            278
  1110         gives his daughter in marriage to
                 the Emperor Henry 5th                       279
  1111         in Normandy                                   280
  1114         reduces Wales                                 281
  1115         causes the Barons of Normandy to
                 do homage to his son William                283
  1119         defeats Louis                                 287
  1120         makes peace with Louis                        288
  1121         marries Athelis of Louvain                    289
  1121         invades Wales                                 290
  1123         at war with his Thanes in Normandy
                 and with France                             295
  1124         his victories                            296, 297
  1126         returns to England                            300
  1127         causes the English to swear obedience
                 to Matilda                                  301
  1128         in Normandy                                   305
  1129         returns to England                            307
  1130         goes to Normandy                              309
  1131         returns to England                            310
  1132         returns to England                            312
  1135         goes to Normandy                              312
  1135         dies                                          313
  1123   Henry, Abbot, a Papal Legate in England             293
  1127   Henry, Abbot of St. Jean d’Angely (son
           of William 7th, Earl of Poitou),
           obtains the Abbacy of Peterborough                302
  1128          goes to Poitou                               305
  1130          returns, and promises to subject
                  Peterborough to Cluny                      309
  1131          goes to Normandy                             310
  1131          expelled from St. Jean d’Angely              311
  1132          fails in his attempt to subject Peterborough
                  to Cluny, and deprived of the Abbacy       312
  1129   Henry Bishop of Winchester                          308
  1140         deserts his brother Stephen                   320
  1140   Henry, Earl of Anjou, marries Eleanor,
           Queen of France (A. D. 1152)                      322
  1140          invades England (A. D. 1153)                 322
  1140          his treaty with Stephen (A. D. 1153)         323
  1154          King of England                              323
  1131   Hens, mortality amongst                             310
  1094   Herbert Losange, Bishop of Thetford, deprived
           of his staff                                      255
   838   Herebryht, Alderman, killed                          84
   833   Hereferth, Bishop of Winchester, killed              82
   656   Herefrid Alderman (664)                              40
  1055   Hereford burnt                                      205
  1043   Hereman Bishop of Sherborn                          191
  1047   Hereman sent to Rome                                195
  1077           dies                                        230
  1070   Hereward plunders Peterborough                      214
  1071            escapes from William 1st                   226
  1070   Hernost, Bishop of Rochester, and dies
           (A. D. 1075)                                      219
   710   Higbald killed                                       56
   780   Higbald, Bishop of Lindisfarne                       70
   795            assists at the consecration of King
                    Eardwulf                                  74
   803            dies                                        78
   785   Higebrybt, Archbishop of Lichfield               68, 71
   870   Higwais, a Dane, kills St. Edmund                    91
   680   Hilda, St. dies                                      50
   670   Hlothere, Bishop of Winchester                       44
   685   Hlothere, King of Kent, dies                         51
   905   Hold, a Danish title                           118, 127
   627   Honorius 1st, Pope                                   29
   627            writes to the Scots touching Easter         29
   634            sends Byrinus to England                    30
  1124   Honorius 2d, Pope                                   289
  1129            dies                                       308
   627   Honorius, Archbishop of Canterbury                   29
   654             dies                                       34
   449   Horsa arrives in Britain                             11
   455         killed                                         12
   922   Howel, a King of Wales, submits to Edward           129
   918   Hroald, Earl, invades England and killed            122
   887   Hrothulf (Rudolph) King of Burgundy                 102
   853   Huda, Alderman, killed                               86
  1003   Hugh loses Exeter                                   158
  1088   Hugh (Grentmesnil) rebels                           245
  1094   Hugh (Lupus) Earl of Chester, brings
           Prince Henry to England                           256
  1094   Hugh, Earl of Shrewsbury, defeats the Welch         257
  1098         killed                                        265
  1123   Hugh of Montfort revolts                            295
  1124        taken, and confined at Gloucester              296
  1124   Hugh, the son of Gervais, taken prisoner and
           confined at Rouen                                 296
  1126         removed to Windsor                            301
  1129         liberated                                     306
  1128   Hugh of the Temple proclaims a false
           crusade                                           306
  1137   Hugh of Waltville surrenders certain lands
           to Peterborough                                   318
   744   Hunferth, Bishop of Winchester                       61
   921   Huntingdon repaired                                 128
  1016   Huntingdonshire ravaged by Cnut                     177


  I

   547   Ida, King of Northumberland                          19
   560        dies                                            20
   640   Idols destroyed in Kent                              31
  1031   Iemarc, a Scotch King, submits to Cnut              185
   110   Ignatius, St. martyred                                6
   656   Immine, Alderman (A. D. 664)                         40
   688   Ina, King of Wessex                                  52
   694        his treaty with Kent                            53
   709        fights with Gerent                              56
   715               with Ceolred                             57
   721        kills Cynewulf                                  58
   722        fights with the South Saxons                    58
   728        goes to Rome, and remains there during
                the rest of his life                          58
   718   Ingild, the brother of Ina, dies                     57
   731   Ingwald, Bishop of London, assists at the
           consecration of Tatwine                            59
   403   Innocent 1st, Pope, rescript of                       9
  1129   Innocent 2d, Pope                                   308
  1014   Inundation of the sea                               174
   560   Iona, Abbey founded in (A. D. 565)                   21
   716         monks of, observe the Catholic Easter          57
   655   Ithamar, Bishop of Rochester, consecrates
           Deusdedit                                          35
   656            at the consecration of Medeshamstede
                    (A. D. 664)                               36


  J

   763   Jeanbyrht (or Anbryht), Archbishop of Canterbury     66
   785             deprived of part of his diocese            71
   790             dies                                       72
   922   Jeothwel, a Welch King, submits to Edward           129
   656   Jeruman, Bishop of Lichfield, witness of
           Wulfere’s grant to Medeshamstede (A. D. 664)       40
   431   Jews of Crete drowned                                10
  1137        of Norwich crucify a child (A. D. 1144)        318
   685   John, Bishop of Hexham                               51
   685         Archbishop of York (A. D. 705)                 51
   685         resigns (A. D. 718)                            51
   721         dies                                           58
  1070   John, Bishop of Wells (A. D. 1087)                  220
  1114   John, Abbot of Peterborough, and sent to Rome       283
  1115         returns                                       284
  1125         dies                                          300
  1114   } John, Archdeacon of Canterbury, goes to Rome    { 283
  1123   }                                                 { 294
  1130           Bishop of Rochester, at the consecration
                   of Christ Church                          308
  1125   John of Crema, Cardinal, in England                 299
  1125   John, Bishop of Glasgow, goes to Rome               300
  1130   John, Bishop of Seez, at the consecration
           of Christ Church                                  309
         Julius Cæsar invades Britain                          2
   604   Justus consecrated Bishop                            24
   604          receives the see of Rochester                 25
   616          Archbishop of Canterbury (A. D. 622)          27
   627          dies                                          29
   449   Jutes                                                12


  K

   449   Kent peopled by the Jutes                            12
   676        laid waste by Æthelred                          49
   686                   by Ceadwalla                         51
   865                   by the Danes                         89
   994                   by the Danes                        153
  1088                   by Bishop Odo, Earl of Kent         245
   992   Kenulf, Abbot of Medeshamstede                      151
   963           Bishop of Winchester (A. D. 1005)           143
  1006           dies                                        161
   656   Kyneburg and Kyneswith, sisters of Wulfere,
           witnesses of his grant to Medeshamstede
           (A. D. 664)                                        40
   963            bodies of removed to Peterborough
                  (A. D. 1005-1041)                          143
  1060   Kynsige, Archbishop of York, dies                   206


  L

  1070   Landfranc or Lanfranc, Archbishop of Canterbury     212
  1070             his dispute with Thomas, Archbishop
                     of York, touching the supremacy
                     of Canterbury                      212, 213
  1070             goes to Rome (A. D. 1072)                 213
  1070             the acts of his Prelacy,
                   (A. D. 1072-1089)                    217, 223
  1089             dies                                      248
  1086   Landholders of England swear allegiance
           to William I.                                     235
  1083   Land-tax                                            232
   616   Laurentius, Archbishop of Canterbury,
           dies (A. D. 617)                                   26
   896   Lee, river, blocked up by Alfred                    112
   920   Leicester taken by Æthelflæd                        124
   942             recovered from the Danes by Edward        135
   439   Leo I. Pope                                          11
   797   Leo III. Pope, deposed and restored                  76
   800            consecrates Charlemagne Emperor             77
   814            dies                                        79
  1046   Leo IX. Pope, holds a Synod at St.
           Remy (A. D. 1048)                                 192
  1054           dies                                        204
  1001   Leofric, Sheriff, killed                            156
  1036   Leofric, Earl, supports Harold                      186
  1048            with Edward, at Gloucester                 198
  1057            dies                                       205
  1066            founder of Coventry Abbey (A. D. 1057)     210
  1044   Leofric, Bishop of Exeter                           191
  1052   Leofric, Abbot of Peterborough                      203
  1066            dies                                       209
  1002   Leofsig, Alderman, banished                         158
  1001   Leofwin, High Sheriff, killed                       156
  1011   Leofwin, Abbot, taken at Canterbury                 169
  1022   Leofwin, Abbot of Ely, clears himself
           before Pope Benedict                              183
  1066   Leofwin, the brother of Harold, killed              209
  1070   Leofwin the Long, a Monk of Peterborough            215
   854   Leothete (or Judith) marries Æthelwulf               87
  1120   Light, supernatural, on the holy sepulchre          289
   793   }                                                 {  73
  1086   }                                                 { 235
  1109   } Lightning                                       { 278
  1117   }                                                 { 285
  1118   }                                                 { 286
  1122   }                                                 { 290
   626   Lilla, Edwin’s Thane, stabbed                        28
   942   Lincoln recovered by Edward                         135
  1123           burnt                                       295
  1140           besieged                                    319
   793   Lindisfarne pillaged                                 73
   627   Lindsey, Christianity preached in                    29
   838            slaughter in                                84
   993            laid waste                                 152
  1013            submits to Swegn                           171
  1014                    to Cnut, and laid waste by
                            Æthelred                         174
  1013   Living Archbishop of Canterbury                     170
  1020          dies                                         183
  1038   Living, Bishop of Devon, obtains the see
           of Worcester and Gloucester                       187
  1044           dies                                        191
   596   Lombards destroy St. Benedict’s monastery            23
   887   Lombardy, war in                                    102
  1117             earthquake in                             286
   839   London, slaughter at                                 84
   886           repaired by Alfred                          101
   994           besieged by Anlaf and Swegn                 152
  1009           attacked by the Danes                       165
  1016           besieged by Cnut                            178
  1077   }       fires of                                  { 229
  1086   }                                                 { 237
  1097           tower walled round, and bridge repaired     264
   896   London, men of, defeated                            111
   896                   seize the Danish ships              112
  1013                   submit to Swegn                     172
  1016                   treat with the Danes                181
  1140                   attempt to seize the
                           Empress Matilda                   320
  1046   Lothene plunders the coasts of England              192
   840   Louis 1st, Emperor of France, dies                   84
  1108   Louis 6th King of France                            278
  1116         at war with the Count de Blois                284
  1117         invades Normandy                              285
  1119         defeated by Henry                             287
  1120         makes peace with Henry                        288
  1124         again at war with Henry                       296
  1129         acknowledges Innocent II. as Pope             308
  1140   Louis 7th divorced from his Queen Eleanor
           (A. D. 1151)                                      322
   189   Lucius, a King of Britain converted to
           Christianity (A. D. 161)                            7
   897   Lucumon, Sheriff, killed                            114
   825   Ludecan, King of Mercia, killed                      81


  M

   891   Macbeth, an Irish pilgrim                           104
  1031   Mælbæth, a Scotch King, submits to Cnut             185
   891   Maelinmun, an Irish pilgrim                         104
  1067   Mærleswegn retires to Scotland                      211
  1100   Mahald (Matilda) married to Henry 1st               268
  1118          dies                                         287
  1062   Maine, province of reduced by William,
           when Duke of Normandy                             206
  1073          again reduced by William 1st                 227
  1099          conquered by William 2d                      265
  1110          seized by Fulk, Earl of Anjou                280
  1031   Malcolm 2d, King of Scotland, submits to Cnut       185
  1067   Malcolm 3d, King of Scotland, marries Margaret,
           the sister of Edgar Ætheling                      211
  1072           does homage to William 1st                  226
  1079   }       invades England                           { 230
  1091   }                                                 { 250
  1091           his treaty with William 2d                  251
  1093           his journey to Gloucester, and
                   quarrel with William 2d                   253
  1093           killed                                      253
   920   Malden fortified                                    124
   921          besieged                                     127
  1095   Malvoisin Castle                                    259
   923   Manchester repaired                                 129
   921   Manna, Earl, killed                                 127
  1087   Mante burnt by William 1st                          238
  1067   Margaret (the daughter of Edward, the son
           of King Edmund) marries King Malcolm              211
  1093            dies                                       253
   883   Marinus Pope, present from, to Alfred                99
   885           dies                                        101
  1098   Marsh lands, crops of, spoilt                       265
   444   Martin St. dies                                      11
  1132   Martin Abbot of Peterborough                        312
  1137          goes to Rome (A. D. 1145)                    317
  1154          dies                                         324
  1116   Mast scarce                                         284
  1103   Matthias, Abbot of Peterborough, dies               272
  1083   Matilda, Queen of William 1st, dies                 232
  1110   Matilda, daughter of Henry 1st, marries
           the Emperor Henry 5th                             279
  1126            returns to England                         300
  1127            receives oaths of allegiance               301
  1127            marries Geoffrey of Anjou                  301
  1140            comes to England (A. D. 1139)              320
  1140            besieged in Winchester and flees
                    (A. D. 1141)                             320
  1140   Matilda besieged in Oxford and escapes
           (A. D. 1142)                                      321
  1140           goes abroad (A. D. 1148)                    321
  1140   Matilda, the daughter of Eustace Earl of
           Boulogne, and Stephen’s Queen,
                  besieges the Empress Matilda
                    in Winchester (A. D. 1141)               320
  1140            dies (A. D. 1152)                          322
  1085   Maurice Bishop of London                            233
  1107           dies                                        277
   655   Medeshamstede Abbey founded by Peada and Oswy        34
   656                 chartered by Wulfhere,
                         (A. D. 664)                          37
   675                 chartered by Æthelred,
                         (A. D. 680)                          47
   686                 grant to from Ceadwalla                51
   775                          from Brordan                  69
   870                 burnt by the Danes                     91
   963                 rebuilt by Æthelwold and
                         chartered by Edgar (A. D. 972)      140
   963                 called Burch or Peterborough          143
  1052                 called the Golden Borough             203
  1066                 miserable state of                    210
  1070                 pillaged by Hereward                  214
  1102                          by pirates                   271
  1116                 burnt                                 285
  1127   Medeshamstede, apparition of hunters seen at        304
  1137                  enriched and improved by Martin      317
         Mellent (or Meulent) Earls of--see Robert
           3d, and Waleram 3d
   604   Mellitus Bishop of London sent into Essex            24
   616            Archbishop of Canterbury (A. D. 619)        27
   624            dies                                        27
   449   Mercia peopled by Angles                             12
   655          converted to Christianity                     34
   827          conquered by Egbryht                          81
   868   }      makes peace with the Danes                  { 90
   872   }                                                  { 94
   874          given by the Danes to Ceolwulf                94
   877          partition of, by the Danes                    96
   905   }      laid waste by the Danes                    { 117
   911   }                                                 { 119
   912          governed by Æthelflæd                        120
   922          submits to Edward                            129
  1016          ravaged by Cnut                         179, 180
  1033   Merehwit Bishop of Wells, dies                      186
   772   Mildred Bishop of Worcester, dies                    67
   759   Moll Æthelwold King of Northumberland                66
   761        kills Oswin                                     66
   963   Monasteries, many founded by Æthelwold              139
  1070                despoiled by William 1st               213
  1086                many built in his reign                239
   663   Moneyer at Stamford, for Peterborough               141
  1125   Moneyers punished for issuing bad coin              298
   734   }                                                 {  60
  1107   } Moon appears bloody                             { 277
   806          cross seen in the                             78
  1107          tokens in the                                277
  1106   Moons two, appearance of                            275
  1123   Montfort Castle taken by Henry 1st                  295
  1095   Montgomery Castle taken by the Welch                259
  1093   Moræl, Earl Robert’s steward, kills King Malcolm    253
  1095          surrenders Bamborough, and informs
                  against the conspirators                   260
  1015   Morcær, Thane, murdered                             175
  1064   Morker Earl of Northumberland                       207
  1066          defeated by the King of Norway               209
  1071          revolts from William 1st                     225
  1071          surrenders himself                           226
  1104   Mortaigne, William Earl of, revolts                 273
  1106              taken prisoner                           276
  1054   Mortemer, battle of                                 204
   822   Muca, Alderman, killed                               80
   686   Mul, the brother of Ina, ravages Kent                51
   687        burnt                                           51
   694        his death compounded for                        53


  N

   508   Natanleod, a British King, killed                    17
   810   Nicephorus 1st, Emperor of Constantinople            79
   343   Nicholas St. dies                                     8
  1059   Nicholas 2d, Pope                                   205
   921   Niel, a King of Ireland, killed                     129
   560   Ninna, Bishop, converts the southern Picts
           (A. D. 400)                                        21
  1070   Norman, a Monk of Christ Church                     224
   876   Normandy conquered by Rollo                          95
  1096            mortgaged to William 2d                    262
  1106            conquered by Henry 1st                     276
  1140            revolts to Geoffrey Earl of Anjou          322
                  Earls of, see Rollo, Richard 1st,
                    Richard 2d, Richard 3d, Robert
                    1st, William the Conqueror,
                    Robert 2d
  1010   } Northampton plundered                           { 167
  1064   }                                                 { 208
  1017   Northman killed                                     181
   449   Northumberland peopled by Angles                     12
   633                  ravaged by Ceadwalla                  30
   737                          by Æthelwold                  60
   793   }                      by the Danes                { 73
   794   }                                                  { 74
   827                  submits to Egbryht                    81
   867                  civil war in                          89
   875                  conquered by Healfden                 95
   876                  divided amongst the Danes             96
   924                  submits to Edward                    130
   944                  reduced by Edmund                    135
   954                          by Edred                     136
  1017                  under the government of Yric         181
  1064   Northumberland, men of, outlaw their Earl
           Tostig                                            207
  1069                   laid waste by William 1st           212
  1079                   laid waste by Malcolm               230
  1028   Norway conquered by Cnut                            184
  1030   Norwegians slay their King Olaf                     185
  1066              invade England                           209
  1004   Norwich plundered                                   159
  1075           bridal feast at                             159
  1075           castle of, defended by Emma wife
                   of Earl Ralph de Gwader                   228
  1088           castle of, defended by Roger Earl
                   of Hereford                               245
   736   Nothelm Archbishop of Canterbury receives a pall     60
   741           dies                                         61
   922   Nottingham repaired                                 129
   924              fortified                                130
   942              recovered from the Danes by Edmund       135
  1016   Nottinghamshire laid waste                          177
   710   Nun fights with Gerent                               56


  O

  1124   Oats price of                                       297
   887   Oda (Eudes) King of France                          102
  1048   Odda Earl of Devon                                  199
  1052        appointed to command the fleet                 200
   961   Odo, Archbishop of Canterbury, dies                 138
  1070   Odo, Bishop of Baieux, at Canterbury, (A. D. 1087)  220
  1082        arrested                                       230
  1087        his character                                  240
  1088        rebels against William 2d                      244
  1088        leaves England                                 248
   617   Offa, Prince, banished                               27
   709   Offa, King of the East Saxons, goes to Rome          56
   755   Offa King of Mercia                                  65
   775        fights with Cynewulf                            68
   792        beheads Æthelbyrht                              73
   794        dies                                            73
   911   Ohter, Earl, killed                                 119
   918   Ohtor, Earl, invades Wales                          122
  1028   Olaf (St.) King of Norway, expelled                 184
  1030        killed                                         185
   964   Ordbryht Abbot of Chertsey                          144
   894   Ordhelm, Thane, killed                              110
   997   Ordulf’s monastery burnt                            154
    46   Orkneys conquered by Claudius                         5
  1070           obtain a separate Bishop (A. D. 1076)       219
   871   Osbearn, Earl, killed                                92
  1069   Osbearn, Earl, invades England                      211
  1070            comes to Ely                               214
  1070   Osbern Bishop of Exeter (A. D. 1071)                218
  1070          at the consecration of William Bishop
                  of Durham (A. D. 1080)                     219
   867   Osbryht, King of Northumberland, deposed             89
   867            killed                                      90
   875   Oscytel a Danish King                                95
   905   Oscytel, Hold, killed                               118
   970   Oskytel, Archbishop of York, dies                   144
   911   Osferth, Collector of Tribute, killed               120
   633   Osfrith, the son of Edwin, killed                    30
  1044   Osgot Clapa banished                                191
   568   Oslac, Alderman, killed                              21
   617   Oslac, Prince, banished                              27
   966   Oslac Alderman                                      144
   975         banished                                      147
   617   Oslaf, Prince, banished                              27
   833   Osmod, Alderman, killed                              82
  1099   Osmond, Bishop of Salisbury, dies                   266
   705   Osred 1st, King of Northumberland                    55
   716         killed                                         57
   789   Osred 2d, King of Northumberland                     72
   790         deposed                                        72
   792         killed                                         73
   634   Osric 1st, King of Deira                             30
   716   Osric 2d, King of Deira (A. D. 71)                   57
   731         killed                                         59
   755   Osric Alderman                                       64
   845   } Osric, Alderman, defeats the Danes               { 84
   860   }                                                  { 88
   675   Ostrithe, Queen of Æthelred                          48
   695             killed                                     55
   757   Osulf, King of Northumberland                        65
   617   Oswald (St.) banished                                27
   634          King of Northumberland                        30
   642          killed                                        32
   827          his power noted                               81
   909          his body removed from Bardney into Mercia    118
   728   Oswald, the son of Æthelbald, fights with
           Æthelheard                                         58
   730           dies                                         59
   992   Oswald, Archbishop of York, dies                    151
  1010   Oswi killed                                         166
   644   Oswin King of Deira                                  32
   651         killed                                         33
   761   Oswin, Prince, killed                                66
   617   Oswiu or Oswy banished                               27
   642         King of Northumberland                         32
   655         founds Medeshamstede with Peada                34
   670         dies                                           44
   827         his power noted                                81
   617   Oswudu, Prince, banished                             27
   911   Othulf, Hold, killed                                119
  1120   Ottuel, brother of the Earl of Chester, drowned     289
  1009   Oxford burnt by the Danes                           165
  1140          held by the Empress Matilda against
                  Stephen (A. D. 1142)                       321


  P

   429   Palladius sent to the Scots                           9
  1001   Pallig revolts from Ethelred                        157
   816   Paschal 1st, Pope                                    79
  1115   Paschal 2d, Pope, sends a pall to Archbishop
           Ralph                                             284
  1118           dies                                        287
   430   Patrick St. sent to the Scots                        10
  1070   Patrick Archbishop of Dublin (A. D. 1073)           218
   961   } St. Paul’s burnt                                { 138
  1087   }                                                 { 237
   601   Paulinus                                             24
   625            Bishop of Northumberland                    27
   626            baptizes Eanfled                            28
   627            baptizes Edwin                              29
   633            escapes to Kent and receives the
                    Bishoprick of Rochester                   30
   644            dies                                        32
   653   Peada Alderman                                       33
   655   Peada King of Mercia, and founds Medeshamstede       34
   656         killed                                         35
   381   Pelagian heresy                                       9
   626   Penda King of Mercia                                 29
   628         fights with Cynegils                           29
   633         ravages Northumberland                         30
   642         defeats Oswald                                 32
   645         expels Cenwalh                                 33
   655         killed                                         34
  1124   } Penny bad                                       { 297
  1125   }                                                 { 299
   714   Pepin, King, dies                                    56
  1087   Pershore, Thurstan Abbot of, dies                   243
   664   }                                                 {  43
   871   }                                                 {  93
   897   } Pestilence                                      { 113
   961   }                                                 { 138
  1112   }                                                 { 281
  1125   }                                                 { 300
   616   Peter St. chastises Laurentius                       26
  1070   Peter Bishop of Litchfield and Chester
                 (A. D. 1072)                                218
  1070         sent to assist at the consecration of a
                 Bishop of the Orkneys (A. D.
                 1076)                                       219
  1129   Peter (Anacletus 2d) chosen Pope                    308
  1130   Peter, Abbot of Cluny, comes to England             309
  1060   Philip 1st, King of France                          206
  1076          at war with William 1st                      229
  1077          makes peace with William 1st                 229
  1087          at war with William 1st                      237
  1090   }      deserts Robert Earl of Normandy            { 249
  1094   }                                                 { 256
  1108          dies                                         278
  1110   Philip de Brause loses his lands                    279
  1112          regains them                                 281
         Picts from Scythia arrive in Ireland                  1
               sent to Britain                                 2
   560         southern converted (A. D. 400)                 21
   560   Picts northern converted                             21
   710         fight with Beorhtfrith                         56
   875         invaded by the Danes                           95
   890   Plegemund Archbishop of Canterbury                  103
   923             dies                                      130
  1127   Poitou, Earl of, (William 7th) gives St.
           Jean d’Angely to Henry                            303
  1140   Poitou, Earldom of, devolves to Henry
           Earl of Anjou, on his marriage (A. D.
           1152)                                             322
  1120   Ponthieu, Earl of, (William 3d) makes
           peace with Henry 1st                              288
   501   Port arrives in Britain                              17
  1052   Portland plundered by Godwin                        201
   775   Pusa Abbot of Medeshamstede                          69
   675   Putta, Bishop of Rochester, at the Synod
           of Hatfield (A. D. 680)                            49
   763   Pyhtwine Bishop of Whitehorn                         66
   776            dies                                        69


  R

   685   Rain of blood                                        51
  1098   }                                                 { 265
  1116   } Rains heavy                                     { 284
  1117   }                                                 { 286
  1052   Ralph, Earl, commands Ethelred’s fleet              200
  1075   Ralph de Gwader, Earl of Norfolk, marriage of       227
  1075         his rebellion and flight                      228
  1114   Ralph Archbishop of Canterbury                      282
  1115         receives a pall                               284
  1122         dies                                          291
  1124   Ralph Basset                                        298
  1140   Randolf, Earl of Chester, revolts from
           Stephen                                           319
  1140            together with the Earl of Gloucester
                    defeats and imprisons
                    Stephen (A. D. 1141)                     320
  1140            reconciled to Stephen (A. D. 1144)         320
  1140            imprisoned (A. D. 1145)                    321
  1099   Rannulf Passeflambard Bishop of Durham              265
  1100           imprisoned                                  268
  1101           escapes to Normandy                         270
  1128           dies                                        305
   669   Reculver monastery founded                           43
   878   Raven, the Danish standard, taken                    97
   617   Redwald, King of East Anglia, defeats Æthelfrith     27
   827            his power noted                             81
   923   Regnold or Regnwald, King, takes York               129
   924           submits to Edward                           130
   942           confirmed                                   135
   944           expelled                                    135
         Reoda, a leader of the Scots, conquers
           part of Britain                                     2
   942   Richard the elder, Earl of Normandy                 135
   994           dies                                         54
   994   Richard 2d, Earl of Normandy                        154
  1002           his daughter Queen Emma comes to
                   England                                   158
  1013           receives Ethelred                           172
  1024           dies                                        184
  1024   Richard 3d, Earl of Normandy                        184
  1107   Richard, Abbot of Ely, dies                         277
  1120   Richard, son of Henry 1st, drowned                  289
  1120   Richard, Earl of Chester, drowned                   289
  1123   Richard, Bishop of London, assists at the
           installation of William Corboyl                   294
   604   Ricola                                               24
  1024   Robert 1st, Earl of Normandy                        184
  1031          goes to Jerusalem                            185
  1031          dies (A. D. 1035)                            185
  1048   Robert Archbishop of Canterbury                     195
  1048          dispute of, with Sparhafoc                   195
  1052          flees from England                           202
  1052          outlawed                                     203
  1068   Robert, Earl of Northumberland, slain               211
  1070   Robert 1st, seizes the Earldom of Flanders          217
  1085          in alliance with Cnut                        232
  1096   Robert 2d, Earl of Flanders, goes to Jerusalem      262
  1100          returns                                      268
  1111          dies                                         280
  1070   Robert Bishop (of Hereford?) at the consecration
           of William Bishop of Durham (A. D. 1080)          219
  1079   Robert, son of William 1st, rebels                  230
  1087           succeeds to the Earldom of Normandy         238
  1088           his party in England                        244
  1088           attempts to invade England                  246
  1091           his treaty with William 2d                  249
  1091           accompanies William to England              251
  1091           returns to Normandy                         252
  1094   }       again at war with William            { 255, 256
  1095   }                                            {      257
  1096           sells Normandy to William, and
                   goes to Jerusalem                         262
  1100           returns                                     268
  1101           invades England, and treats with
                   Henry 1st                            269, 270
  1103           gives up his pension                        272
  1104           aids Robert of Belesme                      273
  1106           taken prisoner by Henry 1st                 276
  1126           confined at Bristol                         301
  1085   Robert 1st, Bishop of Chester and Coventry          233
  1123   Robert 2d, Bishop of Chester and Coventry,
           buries the Bishop of Lincoln                      292
  1093   Robert Bloet Bishop of Lincoln                      252
  1123          dies                                         292
  1088   Robert de Mowbray Earl of Northumberland
           plunders Bristol                                  244
  1093          defeats Malcolm                              253
  1095          rebels against William 2d, and taken
                  prisoner                              258, 259
  1095   Robert de Mowbray confined at Windsor               260
  1098   Robert de Belesme Earl of Shrewsbury                265
  1102          quarrels with Henry 1st and loses
                  his estates                                270
  1104          favored by the Earl of Normandy              273
  1105          returns to England                           274
  1106          again quarrels with Henry, returns
                  to Normandy, and defeated             275, 276
  1112          seized and imprisoned                        281
  1113          removed to Wareham castle                    281
  1106   Robert de Stutteville taken prisoner                276
  1107   Robert, Abbot of St. Edmund’s Bury, dies            277
  1118   Robert 3d, Earl of Mellent, dies                    287
  1126   Robert, Earl of Gloucester, keeper of the Earl
           of Normandy                                       301
  1140           rebels against Stephen                      319
  1140           takes Stephen prisoner (A. D. 1141)         320
  1140           taken prisoner and exchanged for the
                   King (A. D. 1141)                    320, 321
   604   Rochester                                            25
   839            slaughter at                                84
   885            siege of, raised by Alfred                 100
   986            bishoprick of, laid waste                  149
  1088            castle besieged by William 2d              248
  1130            burnt                                      309
   876   Rodla (Rollo) conquers Normandy                      95
  1075   Roger, son of William Fitz Osborne, Earl of
           Hereford, rebels against Wm. 1st.                 227
  1075          taken and imprisoned                         228
  1088   Roger, Earl of Shrewsbury, rebels against
           William 2d                                        244
  1094   Roger of Poitou taken prisoner                      255
  1123   Roger, Bishop of Salisbury, power of                293
  1123          Regent of England                            295
  1125          inflicts punishment on the moneyers          299
  1130          at the consecration of Christ Church         309
  1132          opposes Henry Abbot of Peterborough          312
  1137          imprisoned by Stephen                        314
  1120   Roger, Bishop of Coventry, at the consecration
           of Christ Church                                  309
  1137   Roger, the Chancellor, imprisoned                   314
   418   Romans collect the gold of Britain                    9
   435          reign of, in Britain, ended                   10
   616   Romanus Bishop of Rochester (A. D. 624)              27
  1095   } Romescot                                        { 260
  1123   }                                                 { 293
  1048   Rothulf Abbot of Abingdon                           195
   913   Runckhorn built                                     121


  S

  1137   Sachentege                                          315
   604   Sæbyrht King of East Anglia                          24
  1031   Sandwich harbour given to Christ Church             185
   449   Saxons, Old (or Continental), arrive in England      12
   780           fight with the French                        70
   885                 with a fleet of pirates               100
   655   Saxulf Abbot of Medeshamstede                        34
   656          Bishop of Litchfield (A. D. 676)              42
   705          dies                                          55
   816   School, English, at Rome, burnt                      79
   885           enfranchized                                101
         Scots of Ireland                                      1
   684         invaded by Egferth                             50
   924   Scotland subject to Edward                          130
   934            invaded by Athelstan                       131
   946            subject to Edred                           136
  1031                    to Cnut                            185
  1072                    to William 1st                226, 240
  1070   Scotland, Abbot of St Augustine’s (A. D. 1071)      218
   911   Scurfa, Earl, killed                                119
  1123   Sefred, Abbot of Glastonbury, goes to Rome          294
   746   Selred, King of Essex, killed                        62
   852   Sempringham let                                      85
   774   Serpents in Sussex                                   68
   189   Severus invades Britain (A. D. 207)                   7
   640   Sexburh wife of Ercenberht                           31
   672   Sexburh Queen of Wessex                              44
   832   } Sheppey plundered                               {  82
  1052   }                                                 { 201
   897   Ships built by Alfred                               113
  1008               by Æthelred                             163
   789   Sicga kills Alfwold                                  72
   793         dies                                           73
   977   Sideman, Bishop of Devon, dies                      147
   871   Sidrac, Earl (the Elder) killed                      91
   871   Sidrac, Earl (the Younger) killed                    92
   754   Sigebriht King of Wessex                             62
   755             deposed                                    62
   905   Sigebryht killed                                    117
   961   Sigeferth, King, kills himself                      138
  1015   Sigeferth, Thane, murdered                          175
  1130   Sigefrid, Bishop of Chichester, at the
           consecration of Christ Church                     309
   883   Sighelm sent to Rome with alms                       99
   905           killed                                      117
   921   Sihtric, King, kills Niel                           129
  1130   Simon, Bishop of Worcester, at the
           consecration of Christ Church                     309
   799   Siric, King of Essex, goes to Rome                   76
   989   Siric, or Sigeric, Archbishop of Canterbury         150
   991          advises the payment of tribute               150
   994          dies                                         152
  1043   Siward assistant to Archbishop Eadsige              190
  1046          dies                                         191
  1048   Siward, Earl, with Edward at Gloucester             198
  1055           dies                                        204
  1058   Siward Bishop of Rochester                          205
  1071   Siward Bearn                                        225
   905   Siwulf, Alderman, killed                            117
   124   Sixtus 1st, Pope                                      6
  1115   Snow                                                284
   733   Somerton taken                                       60
  1015   Somersetshire plundered                             175
   981   Southampton plundered                               149
  1046   Spearhafoc Abbot of Abingdon                        191
  1048              refused consecration as Bishop of London 195
  1048              expelled                                 199
   913   Stafford built                                      121
  1016   Staffordshire plundered                             177
   922   Stamford fortified                                  129
   942            recovered by Edmund                        135
  1138   Standard, battle of, the                            319
  1066   Stanford bridge, battle of                          209
   744   } Stars falling                                   {  61
  1095   }                                                 { 258
  1106   }                                                 { 275
  1110   }       strange                                   { 279
  1114   }                                                 { 282
   814   Stephen 5th, Pope                                    79
   816           dies                                         79
  1057   Stephen 9th, Pope                                   205
  1058           dies                                        205
  1135   Stephen, Earl of Blois, King of England             313
  1137            goes to Normandy                           314
  1137            state of England during his reign        { 314
                                                           { 317
  1140            at war with the Earls of Gloucester
                    and Chester                              319
  1140   Stephen taken prisoner and released
                   (A. D. 1141)                         320, 321
  1140           takes Oxford (A. D. 1142)                   321
  1140           his treaty with Henry of Anjou
                   (A. D. 1153)                              322
  1154           dies                                        323
  1042   Stigand Bishop of Elmham                            189
  1043           obtains possession of his Bishoprick        190
  1045           translated to Winchester                    191
  1052                      to Canterbury                    203
  1058           receives a pall                             205
  1087   Stigand, Bishop of Chichester, dies                 243
   875   Strathclyde Britons invaded by the Danes             95
   924               submit to Edward                        130
   514   Stuf arrives in Britain                              17
   534        Lord of Wight                                   19
   823   Surrey submits to Egbryht                            80
   449   Sussex, kingdom of                                   12
   823           submits to Egbryht                           80
   994   }       plundered                                 { 153
  1009   }                                                 { 165
  1025   Swedes fight with Cnut                              184
   994   Swegen 2d, King of Denmark besieges London          152
  1003          plunders Wiltshire                           159
  1004                   East Anglia                         159
  1013          again invades England                        170
  1013          received as King                             172
  1014          dies                                         173
  1045   Swegen, Earl, goes to Flanders                      191
  1046           treats with Edward                          193
  1046           murders Beorn and sails to Flanders         194
  1047           comes to England                            195
  1048           accused of treason & outlawed          197, 198
  1048           goes to Flanders                            199
  1069   Swegen 3d, King of Denmark, sends a fleet
           against England                                   211
  1070          invades England                              213
  1070          makes peace with William 1st                 216
  1075          sends a fleet against England                228
  1076          dies                                         229
   891   Swifneh dies                                        104
  1131   Swine, mortality amongst                            310
   861   Swithin St. Bishop of Winchester, dies               89
   897   Swithulf, Bishop of Rochester, dies                 113
   673   Synod of Hertford                                    44
   680         of Hatfield                                    50
   694         of Baccanceld                                  53
   742         of Cloveshou                                   61
   782         of Aclea                                       70
   785         of Ceale-hithe                                 71
   788         of Pincanheale                                 72
   789         of Aclea                                       72
   796         held by Athelard                               75
   822         of Cloveshou                                   80
   977         of Kyntlingtune                               147
  1046   Synod of St. Remy                                   192
  1047         of Rome                                       195
  1047         of Vercelli                                   195
  1070         of Winchester (A. D. 1071)                    217
  1070         of Pinnenden (A. D. 1072)                     218
  1070         of London (A. D. 1074)                        218
  1070         of Winchester (A. D. 1075)                    219
  1070   }     of Gloucester (A. D. 1080)                  { 219
  1085   }                                                 { 223
  1102         of Westminster                                271
  1119         of Rheims                                     288
  1125   }     of London                                   { 299
  1129   }                                                 { 307


  T

   913   Tamworth fortified                                  120
   731   Tatwine Archbishop of Canterbury                     59
   734           dies                                         60
   722   Taunton razed                                        58
   921   Tempsford taken from the Danes                      126
  1106   Tenchebray, battle near                             276
  1137   Tenserie, payment of                                314
  1001   Teynton burnt                                       157
  1114   Thames, extraordinary ebb of the                    282
   969   Thanet laid waste                                   144
   923   Thelwall fortified                                  129
   603   Theobald, brother of Æthelferth, killed              24
  1116   Theobald 4th, Earl of Blois, aided by
           Henry 1st against Louis 6th                       284
  1140   Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury                   319
   668   Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury                    43
   690            dies                                        52
  1004   } Thetford burnt                                  { 160
  1010   }                                                 { 166
  1124   Thieves 44 executed                                 298
  1070   Thomas 1st, Archbishop of York, denies
           the supremacy of Canterbury                       212
  1070          loses his cause at Rome (A. D. 1071)    213, 217
  1100          dies                                         268
  1108   Thomas 2d, Archbishop of York                       278
  1114          dies                                         282
   966   Thored ravages Westmoreland                         144
   992          commands Ethelred’s army                     151
   656   Thorney Monastery founded (A. D. 664)                39
  1066           held by Leofric Abbot of Peterborough       210
   640   Thunor                                               31
  1017   Thurcyll Governor of East Anglia                    181
  1021            outlawed                                   183
   918   Thurcytel, a Danish Earl, submits to Edward         123
   920              goes to France                           124
  1010   Thurcytel Myranheafod                               166
  1016   Thurcytel, the son of Nafana, killed                177
   970   Thurkytel Abbot of Bedford                          144
   911   Thurferth, Hold, killed                             119
   921   Thurferth, Earl, submits to Edward                  128
  1083   Thurstan, Abbot of Glastonbury, quarrels
           with his monks                                    231
   963   Tibba St. relics of                                 143
  1099   Tide high                                           266
  1114        low                                            282
   799   Tidfrith Bishop of Dunwich                           76
   780   Tilberht Bishop of Hexham                            70
   854   Tithe granted to the Church by Æthelwulf             87
   693   Tobias Bishop of Rochester                           53
   727          dies                                          58
   921   Toglos, Earl, killed                                126
  1046   Tostig the son of Godwin                            193
  1055          receives Siward’s Earldom                    204
  1064          outlawed and goes to Flanders           207, 208
  1066          invades England and repulsed                 208
  1066          joins Harold of Norway, killed               209
   793   } Tokens strange                                  {  73
  1122   }                                                 { 290
   921   Towcester fortified                            125, 127
   991   Tribute first paid to the Danes                     150
   681   Trumbriht Bishop of Hexham                           50
   681   Trumwine Bishop of the Picts                         50
   656   Tuda, Bishop of Lindisfarne, at the consecration
           of Medeshamstede (A. D. 664)                   36, 40
   664         dies                                           43
   852   Tunberht Bishop                                      86
  1070   Turold Abbot of Peterborough                        214
  1098   Turold dies                                         265
  1114   Turstein, or Thurstan, Archbishop of York           282
  1119             goes to Rome and deprived of his
                     Archbishoprick                          288
  1120             reconciled to the King                    289
  1123   }         journeys to Rome                        { 294
  1125   }                                                 { 300


  U

   870   Ubba, a Dane, kills St. Edmund                       91
  1006   Ufegeat blinded                                     161
  1013   Uhtred, Earl of Northumberland, submits
           to Swegn                                          171
  1016           submits to Cnut, and killed                 177
  1046   Ulf Bishop of Dorchester                            194
  1047       reproved at Vercelli                            195
  1052       leaves England                                  202
  1004   Ulfkytel, Earl of East Anglia, buys a truce
           from Swegn                                        159
  1004             attacked by Swegn                         160
  1010             defeated by the Danes                     166
  1016             killed                                    180
  1095   Urban 2d, Pope, sends a Pall to Anselm              260
  1096         promotes the first crusade                    261


  V

  1041   Valentine St. head of, at Winchester                189
   202   Victor 1st, Pope, decree of                           8
  1054   Victor 2d, Pope                                     204
  1057          dies                                         205
   403   Victricius Archbishop of Roan                         9
   903   Virgilius, Abbot of the Scots, dies                 116
   656   Vitalianus, Pope, confirms Wulfere’s grant
           to Medeshamstede (A. D. 664)                       41
  1076   Vithele Abbot of Westminster                        229
   455   Vortigern, King, fights with Hengist                 12


  W

   782   Wærburh, Queen, dies                                 70
  1070   Walcelin or Walkelm, Bishop of Winchester,
           sent to enquire into the rebellion of the Monks
           of St. Augustine (A. D. 1089)                     224
  1098            dies                                       264
  1080   Walcher, Bishop of Durham, killed                   230
  1123   Waleram 3d, Earl of Mellent, revolts from
           Henry 1st                                         295
  1124           taken and imprisoned                        296
  1126           removed to England                          300
  1129           released                                    306
  1129           his friendship with Henry 1st               307
   828   Wales invaded by Egbryht                             82
   853                 by Æthelwulf                           86
   916                 by Æthelflæd                          121
   918                 by pirates from Britanny              122
  1063                 by Earl Harold                        206
  1081                 by William 1st                        230
  1095   }             by William 2d                       { 259
  1097   }                                                 { 263

  1114   }             by Henry 1st                        { 281
  1121   }                                                 { 290
  1060   Walter Bishop of Hereford                           206
  1095   Walter, Legate, in England                          260
  1069   Waltheof, Earl, revolts                             212
  1070             treats with William 1st                   213
  1075             revolts, and taken prisoner          227, 228
  1076             beheaded                                  229
  1114   Warner, a Monk, sent to Rome                        283
   913   Warwick built                                       121
  1016   Warwickshire ravaged                                176
   997   Watchet plundered                                   154
  1048   Welch accuse Godwin and his sons                    197
  1075         concerned in Earl Ralph’s revolt              229
  1094         revolt of the                                 256
  1095         storm Montgomery Castle                       259
  1121         treat with Henry 1st                          290
   800   Weoxtan, Alderman, killed                            77
   852   Werhtherd Abbot                                      86
   449   Wessex, kingdom of, by whom founded                  12
   495   }       Kings of                                   { 15
   519   }                                                  { 18
   626           invaded by Edwin                             28
   634           converted to Christianity                    30
   878   }       harrassed by the Danes                    {  96
   897   }                                                 { 113

   887   }                                                 { 102
   888   }       send alms to Rome                         { 103
   890   }                                                 { 103
  1015           submits to Cnut                             176
  1016   Wessex, kingdom of, submits to Edmund               178
  1066   } Westminster Abbey                               { 208
  1070   }                                                 { 220

  1097   } Westminster Hall                                { 264
  1099   }                                                 { 265

   966   Westmoreland ravaged by Thored                      154
  1039   }                                                 { 188
  1043   } Wheat, high price of                            { 190
  1124   }                                                 { 297
   775   Wickins monastery granted to Medeshamstede,
           in Offa’s reign                                    69
  1070   Wido Abbot of St. Augustine’s (A. D. 1017)          220
  1070   }    rebellions against (A. D. 1087)              { 221
  1070   }                       (A. D. 1088)              { 223
  1076   Wido Monk (1088)                                    224
   812   Wigbryht, Bishop of Winchester, goes to Rome         79
   833   Wigen, Bishop, killed                                82
   667   Wigheard, Archbishop of Canterbury elect, dies       43
   449   Wight, island, peopled by Jutes                      12
   530          conquered by Cerdic                           18
   661          ravaged by Wulfere                            42
   661          converted to Christianity                     43
   686          ravaged by Ceadwalla                          51
   897   }                                                 { 113
  1001   }      by the Danes                               { 157
  1009   }                                                 { 165
   825   Wiglaf King of Mercia                                81
   828          regains his kingdom                           81
   921   Wigmore fortified and besieged                 125, 126
   799   Wihtburh, relics of, found                           76
   514   Wihtgar arrives in Britain                           17
   544           dies                                         19
   694   Wihtred King of Kent                                 53
   725           dies                                         58
   852   Wihtred Abbot                                        86
   656   Wilfrid, or Wilverth, Priest, at the consecration
           of Medeshamstede (A. D. 664)                   36, 40
   664            Archbishop of York                          43
   675            sent to Rome                                45
   678            ejected                                     49
   685            restored (A. D. 688)                        51
   709            dies                                        56
   685   Wilfrid or Wilferth 2d, Archbishop of
           York (A. D. 718)                                   51
   744           dies                                         61
   928   William 1st, Earl of Normandy                       130
  1031   William 2d, Earl of Normandy (the Conqueror)        185
  1046   }       battles of                                { 192
  1064   }                                                 { 204
  1062           conquers Maine                              206
  1066           defeats Harold, and consecrated
                   King of England                           209
  1067           goes abroad                                 211
  1068           sacks York                                  211
  1069           lays the north waste                        212
  1070           despoils monasteries                        213
  1070           makes peace with Swegn                      216
  1072           reduces Scotland                            226
  1073           reduces Maine                               227
  1074           again in Normandy                           227
  1075           quells rebellion                            228
  1076           at war with France                          229
  1077           makes peace with France                     229
  1079           fights with his son Robert                  230
  1081           invades Wales                               230
  1082           arrests Odo                                 230
  1085           causes a survey to be made of England  234, 240
  1086           goes to Normandy                            235
  1087           invades France & burns Mante           237, 238
  1087           dies                                        238
  1087           his character                           238-242
  1079   William, Prince, wounded                            230
  1087            2d, King of England                   220, 243
  1087            his gifts to the Church                    243
  1088            quells Odo’s rebellion                     247
  1090            at war with his brother Robert             249
  1091            makes peace with Robert                    250
  1091                        with Malcolm                   251
  1092            repairs Carlisle                           252
  1093            his illness                                252
  1093            quarrels with Malcolm                      253
  1094   William 2d, King of England, at war with Robert     255
  1095           invades Wales                               259
  1095           quells the Northumbrian rebellion      259, 260
  1096           receives Normandy for a sum of money        262
  1097           invades Wales                               263
  1098           in Normandy                                 264
  1090           reduces Maine                               265
  1100           killed, and his character              266, 267
  1048   William Bishop of London                            199
  1070   William Fitz Osborne, Earl of Hereford, killed      217
  1075           his daughter’s marriage                     227
  1070   William Bishop of Durham (A. D. 1080)               219
  1088           rebels                                      244
  1096           dies                                        261
  1085   William Bishop of Elmham                            233
  1096   William, Earl of Eu, blinded                        261
  1096   William de Aldrey hanged                            261
  1100   William Giffard Bishop of Winchester                267
  1103           leaves England                              271
  1123           assists at the consecration of
                   William Corboyl                           294
  1129           dies                                        307
  1106   William Crispin taken prisoner                      276
  1112           loses his lands                             281
  1110   William Mallet loses his lands                      279
  1110   William Baynard loses his lands                     279
  1112   William, Earl of Evreux, expelled                   281
  1115   William, Prince, son of Henry 1st, receives
           homage from the Normans                           283
  1119            marries the Earl of Anjou’s daughter       287
  1120            drowned                                    288
  1123   William Corboyl, Archbishop of Canterbury           293
  1123           with difficulty obtains a pall at Rome      294
  1125           again journeys to Rome                      300
  1129           holds a synod                               307
  1135           consecrates Stephen                         313
  1140           dies                                        319
  1137   William, St. crucified (A. D. 1144)                 318
  1138   William, Earl of Albemarle, defeats David
           at the battle of the Standard                     319
  1140   William of Romare, Earl of Lincoln, revolts
           and defeats Stephen                          319, 320
  1124   William, son of Robert, Earl of Normandy,
           at war with Henry 1st                             297
  1127            divorced from Sibylla of Anjou             302
  1127            Earl of Flanders                           302
  1128            killed                                     305
  1154   William de Waltville, Abbot of Peterborough         324
  1003   Wilton burnt                                        159
  1015   Wiltshire plundered                                 175
   660   Wina, Bishop of Winchester                           42
   656         Bishop of London, at the consecration
                 of Medeshamstede (A. D. 664)             36, 40
   718   Winborn minster built                                57
   643   Winchester, old minster at, built                    32
   963               monasteries at, founded by Athelwold    139
  1140               besieged by Stephen’s Queen,
                       Matilda, (A. D. 1141)                 320
  1103   }                                                 { 272
  1114   }                                                 { 282
  1118   } Winds high                                      { 287
  1121   }                                                 { 290
  1122   }                                                 { 290
         }                                                 { 291

   761   }                                                 {  66
  1111   } Winter severe                                   { 280
  1115   }                                                 { 284
  1116   }                                                 {
   465   Wipped killed                                        13
   887   Witha (Guido) King of Lombardy                      102
   913   Witham fortified                                    120
   755   Wiverth Thane                                        64
   477   Wlencing arrives in England                          13
   495   }                                                  { 15
   552   } Woden, ancestor of Cerdic, and the West Saxon    {
         }   Kings                                          { 20
   597   }                                                  { 24
   854   }                                                  { 87
   547                     of Ida, and the Northumbrian
                             Kings                            19
   560                     of Ælla                            20
   449   }                 of Penda, and the Mercian Kings  { 12
   626   }                                                  { 29
   755   Woden, ancestor of Offa                              65
   800   Worr, Alderman, dies                                 77
  1006   Wulfeah blinded                                     161
   989   Wulfgar Abbot of Abingdon                           150
  1016           dies                                        181
  1006   Wulfgeate disgraced                                 160
   823   Wulfheard, Alderman, invades Kent                    80
   837              defeats the Danes, and dies               83
   897   Wulfheard, a Frisian, killed                        114
   925   Wulfhelm, Archbishop of Canterbury                  130
   927             goes to Rome                              131
   656   Wulfhere King of Mercia                              35
   656            charters Medeshamstede (A. D. 664)          37
   661            gives Wight to Æthelwald                    42
   675            dies                                        45
  1001   Wulfhere, a Bishop’s Thane, killed                  156
  1009   Wulfnoth, revolt of                            163, 164
   803   Wulfred Archbishop of Canterbury                     78
   812           goes to Rome                                 79
   813           returns                                      79
   829           dies                                         82
   852   Wulfred rents Sempringham                            85
   897   Wulfred, Alderman of Hampshire, dies                113
   897   Wulfric, Sheriff of Wales, dies                     115
  1010   Wulfric, the son of Leofwin, killed                 166
  1043   Wulfric Abbot of St. Augustine’s                    191
  1046           sent to the Synod of St. Remy               193
  1061           dies                                        206
  1070   Wulfric, Abbot of the new Monastery,
           Winchester, deposed (A. D. 1071)                  218
   963   Wulfstan, Deacon, dies                              139
  1084   Wulfwold, Abbot of Chertsey, dies                   232
  1016   Wulsige, Abbot of Ramsey, killed                    180
   956   Wulstan 1st, Archbishop of York, dies               137
  1023   Wulstan or Wulfstan 2d, Archbishop of York, dies    184
  1070   Wulstan, Bishop of Worcester, assists in
           consecrating a Bishop of the Orkneys
          (A. D. 1076)                                       219
  1070            at the consecration of William
                    Bishop of Durham (A. D. 1080)            219
  1088            defeats the rebels                         245
  1070   Wulstcetel, Abbot of Croyland, ejected (A. D. 1085) 220


  Y

   626   York, church built at (A. D. 627)                28, 29
   741         burnt                                          61
   923         taken                                         130
  1068   }     sacked                                      { 211
  1069   }                                                 { 212
   952   Yric King of Northumberland                         136
   954        expelled                                       136
  1016   Yric Earl of Northumberland                         177
  1017        confirmed in his government                    181
  1046   Yrling plunders Sandwich                            192
   905   Ysopa, Hold, killed                                 118
  1070   Ywar Churchwarden of Peterborough                   214




ERRATA.


  Page 9, for 410 read 418.
      22, for Ætheric read _Æthelric_.
      32, line 9, for Oswin read _Oswiu_.
      43, for Wilver read _Wilverth_.
      49, for St. Æthelfrith read St. _Ætheldrith_.
      56, for Beorht read _Beorhtfrith_.
      58, for Ealdherht read _Eadberht_.
      69, for Æthelbald read _Æthebald_.
     180, note, for Ashdon, &c. read _Assington, near Rochford_.
     181, for Æthelwold read _Æthelword_.


STEVENSON, MATCHETT, AND STEVENSON, PRINTERS, NORWICH.


FOOTNOTES:

[A] Caligula.

[B] Caracalla.

[C] Valentinian had reigned in the west from the year 425, therefore
the Cotton MS. is more correct in saying, “Martian and Valentinian
_reigned_,” &c.

[D] The _Weald_ of Kent and Sussex; this forest formerly extended into
Hampshire.

[E] A Roman station in the forest of Andred, probably on the Sussex
coast; Somner supposes it to be Pevensey, Gibson a fort near Hastings.

[F] Generally supposed to be Chersley, Buckinghamshire; Gibson thinks
that the Britons must have retired further westward, and that therefore
this is not the place; but in 556 they are found at Banbury.

[G] Deira.

[H] Dalston, Cumberland, according to Gibson: Turner (Hist. of the
Anglo Saxons), supposes it to be Dawston, near Jedburgh.

[I] Now Peterborough.

[J] Uncertain--but the ditch Assendik is mentioned as the northern
boundary of Croyland by the charter of Ethelbald, and described by
Ingulphus as falling into the Welland.

[K] Bishop of Lindisfarn, expelled because he would not observe the
appointed time of Easter.

[L] Unknown. Bede gives Pægnalauh as the place of his death, and Smith
supposes this to be Pinkley, near Durham.

[M] Henry of Huntingdon says that the birds fought and killed each
other, and gives a similar story of his own time.

[N] Perhaps some place near Cosgrave, Northamptonshire, if Stretford be
Old Stratford (opposite to Stony Stratford).

[O] Pepin 2d Mayor.

[P] Uncertain, but Simeon of Durham says that this battle was fought
“_juxta Eldunum secus Melross_.”

[Q] This place uncertain--the final ee marks a Bishop’s residence, as
Hagulstades-ee, Hexham.

[R] Perhaps either Northallerton, or Aller-thorn, near Pocklington,
Yorkshire.

[S] Perhaps Kilcheth, on the southern border of Lancashire.

[T] Inhabitants of the country east of the Severn--the ancient diocese
of Worcester.

[U] He had been deposed by Egbryht.

[V] So it seems from a var. reading, “And Æthelstan his other (or 2d)
son succeeded to the kingdom of Kent, to Surrey, and to Sussex.” Henry
of Huntingdon and Roger de Hoveden also make Æthelstan the son of
Egbert, but Ethelwerd, William of Malmesbury, and Asser, speak of him
as the son of Æthelwulf.

[W] Supposed to be Aston Tyrrell, Berkshire; or Ashendon,
Buckinghamshire.

[X] Omitted in the Cotton MS. the elder Sidrac having been killed
before.

[Y] Turner supposes this to be Morton, Berkshire, “because the
Chronicle of Mailros, p. 144, places the battle at Reading, and
according to the map Morton Hundred joins Reading, and contains both
North Morton and South Morton.”--Hist. Anglo Saxons, vol. i. p. 240.

[Z] So Lye explains sumor-lida, and with most probability; but Gibson
translates it “_quies æstiva_;” and Henry of Huntingdon and Ethelwerd
turn it into “_æstivus exercitus_.”

[AA] The chief oath among the Northern nations. In Iceland, in the
time of heathenism, a silver or brazen ring or bracelet was kept on
the altars, and being sprinkled with the blood of sacrifices, it was
touched by those who took any solemn oath. For the same purpose it was
worn on the Judge’s arm during trials. See the Chrymogæa of Arngrim
Jonas, p. 62 and 76.

[AB] Over sea to Louvain, according to Ethelwerd.

[AC] To oppose a fleet of heathen Germans.

[AD] After the defeat and death of the King St. Edmund.--Simeon of
Durham.

[AE] It seems that Alfred had left part of his troops to watch the
Danes in Essex, and had gone himself in another direction.

[AF] Of Devonshire.--Henry of Huntingdon.

[AG] Torfæus, Hist. Norv. T. ii. p. 50, says, that the Danish Haulldur,
or Hold, was a Noble by birth, as distinguished from the Hersir, who
held an official rank.

By the laws of Athelstan, the Wergyld of a Hold and of a Heh-gerefa was
fixed at 4000 thrymsas--whilst that of a Bishop and of an Alderman was
8000 thrymsas.

  Wilkin’s Leg. Ang. Sax. p. 71.


[AH] Gibson supposes this place to be somewhere in the tract of the New
Forest; possibly Ifford.

[AI] Eddesbury, in Cheshire; a place now called the Chamber in the
Forest.

[AJ] Probably Cherbury, on the borders of Shropshire--possibly Kirkby,
in Cheshire, or Monk’s Kirkby, Warwickshire, according to Dugdale.

[AK] Probably Wednesbury or Weedsbury, Staffordshire.

[AL] In this part of the Chronicle the Saxon word Burh, which I have
translated town, recurs perpetually; it would appear that the predatory
warfare, existing every where, had compelled the inhabitants of the
country to gather themselves into townships, for the sake of mutual
protection; these were probably surrounded by some species of inclosure
as a defence against sudden attacks. The erection of a stone wall seems
to be considered worthy of mention, as a work but rarely undertaken.

[AM] Turner, in a note, p. 365 of the 1st vol. of his Anglo-Saxon Hist.
gives the following passage from a manuscript of the Chronicle relating
to this year:--

“This year the Northumbrians revolted from their allegiance, and chose
Anlaf of Ireland for their King.”

[AN] Almost every writer differs in the position which he would assign
to this place.

[AO] “It was widely known how he ended his day, when Liofa stabbed him
at Pulcancyrca (Pucklechurch, in Gloucestershire.)” From another MS.
Turner, vol. i. p. 368.

[AP] Alfsin was the immediate successor of Odo, but he died of cold on
the Alps, in his journey to Rome for the pall.

[AQ] His plunder to the ships.

[AR] Enumerated an. 942.

[AS] Comprehending the “Five towns,” with York and Chester.

[AT] “Certain of his auxiliaries.”--Simeon of Durham.

[AU] Saresden, Oxon.

[AV] Ashdon, Assington, near Rochford.

[AW] Bishop of Lincoln.

[AX] This year Cnut was chosen King.--Var. read.

[AY] To observe respectively the laws of King Edgar.

  Simeon of Durham.


[AZ] William of Malmesbury says that this Church was much out of repair
in his time.--Gough considers Assandun to be Assington, near Rochford.

[BA] Near Calmar or near Christianstadt.

  Torfæus Hist. Norv. t. iii. p. 147.


[BB] Eadsige was not a Bishop, but the King’s Chaplain.

[BC] From Normandy.

[BD] In Normandy: between William, assisted by Henry of France, and the
Barons who refused to acknowledge his right to the succession.

[BE] Of Dorchester, Oxon.

[BF] In Normandy: between the forces of William, and those of Henry of
France, in which the latter were totally routed.

[BG] S. Wales.

[BH] He would have substituted the chant of William of Fescamp for that
of Gregory.

  Florence of Worcester.


[BI] A Church at Odensee, dedicated to St. Alban, whose relics had been
brought from England by this Canute.

[BJ] Carlisle?

[BK] A payment to the superior Lord for protection.

       *       *       *       *       *





Transcriber’s note


Minor punctuation errors have been changed without notice.
Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized. Other spelling
has also been retained as originally published except for the changes
below.

Text has been corrected to match the Errata page. Since the footnotes
begin right after the Errata, the note, "for Ashdon, &c. read
Assington, near Rochford" which points to page 180 actually is footnote
AV.


Other changes:

  Page 7:   “Pope Telesphorns ordered”       “Pope Telesphorus ordered”
  Page 49:  “subcribe to it”                 “subscribe to it”
  Page 81:  “the forth Rædwald”              “the fourth Rædwald”
  Page 220: “examined and conserated”        “examined and consecrated”
  Page 265: “Robert suceeded him”            “Robert succeeded him”
  Page 269: “And in the mean time”           “And in the meantime”
  Page 353: “818   depart to Ireland”        “918 depart to Ireland”
  Page 361: “recals St. Dunstan”             “recalls St. Dunstan”
  Page 387: “Moreal, Earl Robert’s”          “Moræl, Earl Robert’s”
  Page 420: “Ealdherht read _Eadberht_”      “Ealdberht read _Eadberht_”

Footnote AA : “the Northen nations” “the Northern nations”

Page number references in the index are as published in the original
publication and have not been checked for accuracy.









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LITERAL TRANSLATION OF THE SAXON CHRONICLE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


