The Project Gutenberg eBook of Charity's birthday text
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Charity's birthday text

Author: Agnes Giberne

Release date: June 26, 2025 [eBook #76384]

Language: English

Original publication: London: The Religious Tract Society, 1882


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHARITY'S BIRTHDAY TEXT ***



Transcriber's note: Unusual and inconsistent spelling is as printed.



[Illustration: CHARITY'S BIRTHDAY TEXT.]



                           [Illustration]


                             CHARITY'S

                           BIRTHDAY TEXT.


                          BY THE AUTHOR OF

                 _"Willie and Lucy at the Sea-Side,"_
                  _"Hungering and Thirsting," Etc._

                          [Agnes Giberne]


                           [Illustration]


                              LONDON:
                   THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY
       56, PATERNOSTER ROW; 65, ST. PAUL'S CHURCHYARD; AND
                         164, PICCADILLY.



                             CONTENTS.

   CHAPTER I.

   CHAPTER II.

   CHAPTER III.

   CHAPTER IV.

   CHAPTER V.



                           [Illustration]

                     CHARITY'S BIRTHDAY TEXT.

                           [Illustration]

CHAPTER I.

IT was little Charity Mitchel's tenth birthday. Poor Charity had no
mother. Mrs. Mitchel had died many years before, and ever since then
Charity had lived in London with her father and her only brother.
Edwin—a timid, delicate little fellow—was two years and a half younger
than herself; and he was very fond of Charity, who was a warm-hearted,
unselfish sister. Their father was usually away all day at his business
in the city, but they had a kind nurse to take care of them in his
absence, and a governess for some hours every morning.

Charity's birthday was quite an event in the quiet household. And
though some little girls might think her presents few in number,
Charity was more than satisfied, and declared that they were the
loveliest things she had ever seen in her life. There was a pretty
little workbasket from her father, and a storybook from Edwin—the
result of many weeks' saving, and a marker from nurse, besides
something else which Charity did not at all expect. She was quite
surprised when a fourth parcel was put into her hand, and her father
said, with a smile—

"From Edwin and me together, my little Charity. I could not resist
getting it for you."

Charity opened it almost trembling with impatience. When the paper was
removed, there lay before her an illuminated card, framed and glazed.
First there was a very handsome red and gold "Charity," at the top,
and beneath it, "Suffereth long, and is kind," in dark letters, with a
delicate blue scroll running around and about them.

[Illustration: THE PRESENTS.]

"Oh, how lovely! How kind of you!" Charity exclaimed, clasping her
hands. "Dear papa, how very, very pretty it is. I can't thank you
enough. But, Edwin, you could not have painted this?"

Edwin nodded in silence.

"Yes, the colouring is his work," said Mr. Mitchel. "I saw the card in
a shop the other day, and your name at the top drew my attention. Then
I remembered how handy my little boy was with his paint-box, and it
struck me that if he could manage to colour it nicely, you would like
to have it."

"I've worked hard at it in the mornings, before breakfast," remarked
Edwin. "Sometimes I was so frightened for fear I should spoil it."

"I could not have done it so well," said Charity. "But then I never can
illuminate as you can. I believe I am not patient enough. Papa,—" and
she paused a moment, looking earnestly at her new treasure—"did you
choose it because you thought I wanted that text?"

"I was not aware that you wanted it," replied Mr. Mitchel, smiling.
"However, I am glad you have it, if such was your wish."

"I don't mean that, papa, I mean did you give it me because you thought
it would do me good?"

Mr. Mitchel patted her head, and rejoined gravely, "Well, dear, whether
I thought so or not, it certainly is a text from which we may all learn
something."

"I think it just like Charity," said Edwin. "She couldn't have a better
name."

"Oh no, it isn't like me," said Charity, quickly. "But I was
thinking—papa, I don't think it is a text that does suit me just now,
because I really haven't anything at all to 'suffer;' everybody is so
kind to me."

"But you have to be kind to people, and you are," said Edwin, eagerly.
"You are always kind."

Mr. Mitchel drew Charity to him, and kissed her flushed cheek.

"God has given you a happy, loving spirit, my little girl," he said,
"and you ought to be very thankful for it. You may, however, some day,
be in a less peaceful home than now, and perhaps then you will find our
little present more suitable than now—though in a measure it must be
suitable to every one in whatever condition of life."

Ah, poor little Charity! How far was she from dreaming how soon the
change would come. She smiled in reply, remarking, "I hope that won't
be for a long, long time, papa. I think it would be very hard to bear
unkindness."

"Very hard. But remember, darling, that nothing overcomes unkindness
like charity—that is, 'love'—the love which can 'suffer long and be
kind;' the love which can make us 'forgive even as we are forgiven.'"

There was a slight pause, and then he added, cheerfully—

"But we have no business to be talking of unkindness on your birthday,
Charity. I hope you will have some merry games with Edwin. I intend to
be back by five o'clock this evening, so that we can have an early tea
all together, and a long merry evening afterwards."

Charity threw her arms round his neck with warm thanks, and Edwin
looked no less pleased in his quiet way.

It was now time for Mr. Mitchel to leave the house, but the children
were at no loss for occupation, although no governess was coming that
morning. First there were the new presents to examine and re-examine,
and the new book to read. But Charity felt too happy to settle down
quietly to so sober an employment as reading, so she and Edwin ran out
into the garden for a game of play.

It was bright weather in the end of May, very warm for the time of
year, but the little garden was shady, so they did not find it too hot.
It was only a square piece of ground, with a round bed in the centre of
a grass plot, and high walls all round, and a clump of small trees at
the farther end. But Charity had never known a better one, so she and
Edwin were very fond of their "playground," as they called it.

The trees, indeed, formed a very favourite retreat at all times. And
when the sunshine came creeping more and more into the garden, they
went to the shady end, and sat down together on a low bench. Then
Charity fetched her new book, and between talking and reading aloud the
hours passed very pleasantly until dinner-time.

After dinner, nurse took them out for a long ramble into the country.
They had a great many streets to pass through first, but at length they
reached some nice shady lanes and green fields, where they enjoyed
themselves greatly.

Charity, being the Birthday-Queen, was allowed to choose where she
would go, and her choice fell on "cowslip-field," as they called a
large meadow where cowslips were very abundant. Nurse feared they would
all be over, but by dint of a long close search, they actually found
enough to make a very nice little round yellow ball. Nurse had a piece
of string in her pocket, and while Charity and Edwin held it stretched
out, one at each end, she hung the pretty bright flowers upon it, then
drew the string and tied it tight. When that was done, it was time to
think about returning home.

Charity and Edwin agreed that the birthday had been a very happy one so
far, and felt sure the evening with dear papa would be still happier.

But five o'clock came, and no papa made his appearance. It was
perplexing, for the children had never before known him fail to keep
his word. It was not often that he promised to return home early, but
when he did, he always managed to come back punctually at the time
mentioned. A cloud came over Charity's face as the minutes flew by—not
a cloud of temper but of disappointment. For they must go to bed at
eight o'clock, and every minute's delay would shorten the pleasant
evening they had hoped for.

Edwin tried to comfort her by remarking:—

"I dare say he'll be here directly, Charity. It's only half-past five.
And perhaps for once he'll let us sit up till half-past eight. I'm
almost sure he will."

"I can't think what has kept him," said Charity, looking sadly out of
the window. "Papa always comes home early when he says he will."

"But perhaps he couldn't," began Edwin.

"Of course he couldn't," said Charity with a sigh. "He would have come
if he had been able. But that doesn't make it any the better."

"He'll be here soon," said Edwin, cheerfully. "There's somebody's
footstep on the pavement,—no, it isn't papa. But I dare say they had
some stoppages in the city, so the omnibus is late."

"I wonder if it has yet gone past the end of the road," said Charity.
"Edwin, I wish you would ask nurse to come here. It will make the time
go faster. Would you mind, dear?"

Edwin jumped up readily, but at this moment nurse came in.

"I'm afraid, Miss Charity, your papa wasn't able to come so soon as he
expected," she said, kissing the little girl's anxious face. "It's very
tiresome for you on your birthday. But I've seen two omnibuses go by,
from the nursery window, and now there isn't another he can come by
until his regular one at seven."

Tears rose in Charity's eyes, and Edwin came close to her.

"Come now, Miss Charity, you mustn't be sorrowful on your birthday,"
said nurse, smiling. "That will never do. Your papa would have come if
he could, and as he wasn't able we must make the best of it. Come along
and have tea with me, and by-and-by you shall look out for him again."

"It won't be the same—we shall hardly have any time with him," said
Charity, mournfully, "at least, only our usual hour."

"I'll ask him to let you have another half-hour, Miss Charity. I'm
going to tell you stories all tea-time, and seven o'clock will come
before you know what you are about."

Charity felt ashamed of looking sorrowful any longer, when they were
both so kind to her. With a great effort she shook off her dull,
disappointed feeling, wiped away her tears, and taking Edwin's hand,
ran into the dining-room, where tea was laid out. They had a merry meal
all together, and when it was over they went out into the garden to
water the flowers—nurse still telling stories—till Charity was quite
startled to hear the clock strike seven.

But still no Mr. Mitchel came. The omnibus went by, and he was not
in it. Even nurse began to look grave, though she still treated it
lightly, and said he must have been detained by business. But poor
little Charity's heart sank very low. She felt sure that no business
of ordinary importance would keep him so late, especially when he had
said he would be home early. It was no longer possible to keep up her
spirits.

A quarter-past seven came—then half-past—then a quarter to eight—then
eight—and still no Mr. Mitchel! The two children sat together in the
window, gazing out into the street, Edwin holding his sister's hand,
and Charity's tears dropping steadily. Nurse stood by them, watching no
less anxiously. She had never known her master return so late before.
What could be the reason?

"It is bed-time," she began, when the clock struck eight. "Miss
Charity, don't you think you had better come upstairs, and I'll let you
know the moment he is here?"

"Oh no, no! Not till I have seen him," said Charity, imploringly.

And for the first time little Edwin's eyes were full of tears.

"I never went to bed before without kissing him on my birthday. Please,
please don't let us go till he comes."

Nurse did not mention the subject again for a while. She felt that it
would be almost cruel. "What 'could' have kept him?" she asked herself
again and again. But to find an answer was beyond her powers.

Neither of the children spoke, but they clung more closely together
as the minutes crept by. Gradually the daylight faded away, and after
a long silence they were startled by the sudden striking of the
clock—nine distinct strokes. Nurse bent over Edwin, whose eyes were
closing heavily.

"You mustn't sit up any longer, my dear," she said, gently. "Come,
Master Edwin, something must have kept your papa in London. After all
there's no reason why he shouldn't be sleeping there. Miss Charity,
dear, I'll let you wait one more half-hour, and then you must go too."

Charity only shivered in answer. Edwin kissed her, and went away with
nurse. Charity sat alone in the dim twilight, oppressed by a nameless
dread.

"Oh, papa! Papa!" she murmured once or twice.

And then she tried to pray, but no words would come.

She felt dull and stupefied. And as the moments passed, and nurse did
not return, she sank into a kind of heavy doze, with her head leaning
against the window.

Suddenly she was roused to full consciousness by the opening of the
hall-door, followed by confused sounds in the passage, a man's gruff
voice, and a faint scream from nurse. Trembling, she raised herself,
but did not move from her place. And after a few seconds of suspense
there was the glare of a candle dazzling her eyes, and nurse standing
by her side, looking, oh, so strange and pale!

Charity turned quite white herself, and tried to ask what was the
matter, but the only word she could utter was, "Papa!"

"Miss Charity! Oh, my poor little darling!" And nurse clasped Charity
tightly, in an agony of tears. "My poor, poor child!"

"Nurse, where's papa?" asked Charity, hoarsely.

But nurse only sobbed in answer, and Charity tried to disengage herself.

"Please let me go, nurse. I must see papa!"

"Not yet—not yet! Oh, how shall I tell you? Poor Miss Charity!—Poor
Master Edwin! Who will take care of you now?"

"Nurse, is papa hurt?" asked Charity, quite steadily. "Please tell me."

Ah, poor nurse! No wonder she shrank from revealing the terrible
truth—the sad, sad truth that Charity and Edwin were orphans. In
crossing a crowded street Mr. Mitchel had been thrown down, the wheels
of a heavy cart passing over him. And when he was taken up, life was
almost gone. One murmured message of love for his little ones, and all
was over.

Poor Charity! Poor Edwin! The stroke was indeed a fearful one. Charity
was slow to understand what had happened, but nurse never forgot the
wild cry of anguish with which the truth at length gained entrance to
her mind.

[Illustration]



[Illustration]

CHAPTER II.

CHARITY and Edwin had very few relatives. Their father had lost all
his brothers and sisters in early life. There was only their mother's
sister, who had for many years been married and settled in a distant
part of England. She was written to at once about Mr. Mitchel's sad
and unexpected death. And her husband, Mr. Hawke, at once travelled to
London, to be present at the funeral, and to take his little niece and
nephew home with him. Ill-health prevented Mrs. Hawke from coming with
her husband.

Poor Charity! How she dreaded the first sight of her strange uncle! How
she shrank from the first sound of his voice!

Nor was the first sight of him such as to cheer her. He was a tall,
stout man, with a somewhat harsh face and sharp manner. He was not
wanting in kindly feelings towards the little orphans, and he really
wished to set them at their ease, but his quick loud voice terrified
Edwin, and made Charity long for her father's gentle tones. Mr. Hawke
had not intended to alarm them, but he did not know how to speak to
shy, timid children. And they soon crept away from him to nurse, where
they sobbed out their sorrows together.

"Oh, nurse, he isn't the very least like dear papa," said poor Charity.

"I wish, oh, I wish he had never come!"

"My dear, that isn't right," said nurse, tenderly. "He'll give you a
home, and you ought to be very thankful for that. You'll be well taken
care of—please God," she added, reverently.

"I don't like him—I can't go with him," said Edwin, clinging to her arm
with fast-falling tears. "He speaks so loud;—oh, nursie, let us stay
with you."

"So I would with all my heart, if I had a home to offer you," said
nurse, fondly. "My poor little ones!" she added, sadly. "It's a bitter
grief for you both. But there now, Miss Charity, don't you cry so.
You'll be very happy in a little while with your cousins and your aunt.
Why, she's your own mamma's sister."

"I shan't be happy—I can't without papa," sobbed Charity. "I shall
never be happy again."

"That isn't what your dear papa would have liked you to say, Miss
Charity. Don't you think he would wish you to be happy?" She stroked
back the damp disordered hair from Charity's brow as she spoke. "I know
it's very hard; I've gone through it all myself. But you mustn't forget
that your dear papa is in heaven, with the Lord Jesus Christ. And you
must try now to do the things that he would like, if he were still
here."

Charity's head dropped sadly on nurse's knee.

"Ah, if I could!" she murmured. "But I will try—I will try."

"And may be, dear Miss Charity, you will find many things in your new
home not like what we have here. Things won't go so smoothly, perhaps,
and then you'll find it trying to the temper."

"My birthday text!" Charity interrupted with a sob. "Papa said I should
want it more some day. Oh, I will try—I will try, nursie. But I do want
papa so very, very much. Oh, if I had only known that morning that I
should never see him again! Oh, papa—dear papa!" And throwing herself
into nurse's arms, the poor child wept long and bitterly,—wept, till
from very weariness her tears ceased to flow, and she fell asleep.


Two days after this the funeral took place, and the following day Mr.
Hawke desired that speedy arrangements should be made for the return
journey. Parting with nurse and leaving their old home was a great
trial to both the children.

They paid a farewell visit to every spot in the garden, and every
corner in the house. But Charity's pale cheeks, when it was over, made
nurse doubt her own wisdom in allowing such a tour.

The last moment came, and patting kisses were somewhat roughly cut
short by Mr. Hawke, who was in great fear of being late for the train,
and also much dreaded tears. He did not take the best means to check
them. Edwin looked only bewildered and distressed, but Charity sobbed
all the way to the station, and long after she was seated in the
quickly-moving train.

It was a melancholy journey to them both, of many hours' duration.
Mr. Hawke spoke to them every now and then, and handed them plentiful
supplies of buns and sandwiches, but otherwise he left them very much
to themselves. At length the train stopped at a small country station,
and Mr. Hawke started up, hurried them out on the platform, and secured
their luggage. Then they went to the back of the station, where a
small chaise was waiting. The two children were helped into the little
back seat, Mr. Hawke took his place in front beside the driver, and in
another moment they were trotting down a narrow green lane.

"How pretty!" Edwin whispered; and Charity nodded.

The fresh evening breeze, the bright rays of the setting sun, and the
fair beauty of the country around, all combined to give her a feeling
of quiet enjoyment, despite the weight of sorrow at her heart. Mr.
Hawke looked back at them after awhile.

"So you like this, little ones?" he said in his blunt tones, which
Charity was beginning to think less rough than she had at first
imagined. "Worth a hundred of London streets!"

"It's prettier," said Charity, her throat swelling at any allusion to
the old home.

"And you will like it better in every way before long, or I am much
mistaken. Have you ever been in the country before?"

"Not country like this," said Edwin. "We've been often to the parks.
And once we went to the sea-side."

"That's a different thing," said Mr. Hawke.

He turned away again as he spoke, and left them to themselves during
the remainder of the drive.

Presently they drew near a small country house, and at the gate Charity
could see a girl and two boys—the former seeming to be about her own
age, and the latter, one older, one younger. They stood looking on as
the chaise stopped, and the children were lifted down, till Mr. Hawke
called out:—

"Here, Lottie, come and see after your cousins. Boys, you had better
take Edwin under your care."

Lottie, a pretty, lively, but somewhat untidy little girl, stepped
forward and kissed them both. George, a tall lad of twelve or thirteen,
shook hands carelessly; and Wilfred, a stout boy about nine years old,
followed his example. They both looked, half in surprise and half
with disdain, upon Edwin's small slight figure and pale timid face.
His little cold hand was clasping Charity's, and she held it tightly,
despite George's audible whisper,—

"What a baby! He looks fit for nothing but to be tied to his nurse's
apron-strings."

"Mamma told me to bring you into the house," said Lottie. "She can't
walk easily, you know."

Charity knew, though she had just then forgotten, that her aunt was
lame, and much confined to the sofa. She followed Lottie in silence,
still pressing her little brother's hand. But the first glimpse of the
sweet face that awaited them in the drawing-room swept a load from
Charity's heart. She felt from that they had found a friend, and she
sobbed aloud with the very relief, as she found herself clasped in her
aunt's arms.

"Poor child!" Mrs. Hawke said softly once or twice, while with her
disengaged hand she patted and caressed Edwin's cheeks. "Come, don't
cry so, Charity. You must both be very happy here. It is to be your
home, you know."

"I wouldn't let papa come in and find you crying, if I were you," said
Lottie, in the quick, almost sharp tone that was so like her father's.
"He doesn't like tears, does he, mamma?"

"He generally thinks little girls have something better to do than to
cry," said Mrs. Hawke, smoothing down Charity's hair. "Suppose you run
upstairs with Lottie, and take off your things, and bathe your eyes,
while I make friends with Edwin. When you come down again we will have
tea."

"I hear your box being taken up now," remarked Lottie. "You are going
to sleep in my room, Charity. Come along," and seizing her cousin's
hand she ran quickly upstairs.

The bedroom that they entered was airy and light, with a bunch of
flowers on the table, the very sight of which had a soothing effect
upon Charity. Lottie ran away for a few minutes, and she was not sorry
for a little quiet time, in which to collect her thoughts.

She leaned out of the window, looking up into the wide expanse of clear
blue sky, with the soft breeze blowing her hair away from her forehead.
And gradually the sorrowful feeling and the tendency to cry gave way
to a quiet, peaceful trust. Lonely, orphaned, sad, she still was. And
she felt even more than she had hitherto done that she might have
many trials to undergo in her new home, much to try her pride and her
temper, much that might tend to draw her away from her dear Saviour.

Yet Charity remembered the promise of that loving Saviour,—

   "I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee."

And it was a great comfort to her. "I must not forget it," she thought.
"I will pray that I may not. Nurse told me I must never forget to pray;
and dear, dear papa always said that was the first thing that we were
inclined to be careless about. And I must try not to seem dull and
unhappy, for darling Edwin's sake. I do think dear Aunt Lottie will
love me. I ought to be very thankful for such a kind, sweet aunt. I
never expected to like her so much. I'm afraid the boys are not so
nice. But I must try not to be angry with them, even if they do say
unkind things. I must try hard to 'suffer long and be kind.' And the
only way is to pray for help. I will not forget that."

With these and many more such thoughts, Charity stood by the window for
nearly ten minutes, unaware how time was going. She was roused by a
touch, and found Lottie standing by her side.

"Are you dreaming, Charity? I thought I should find you ready for tea."

"Oh, I am sorry!" exclaimed Charity, looking distressed. "I was
thinking, and I quite forgot. But I have only to take off my boots and
smooth my hair."

"Never mind; there's no hurry," said Lottie. Something in her cousin's
face touched her, for she came close to her, and said in a manner quite
different from her usual abrupt quickness, "Charity, I hope you will be
happy here. I really am glad to see you, only it isn't my way to say
much."

Charity's arms were round Lottie's neck in an instant. "Are you really
glad? Oh, Lottie, will you love me, and be my sister? I never had a
sister."

"I'll try," Lottie replied, gravely. "I never had one either. Only I
know I shall be cross to you sometimes, because I can't help it. You
mustn't mind when I am, because it is my way when I am provoked."

"I hope I shall not provoke you," said Charity, gently. "I want to be
kind—and to bear things."

"There are some things that one can't bear," said Lottie, decidedly.
"You don't know what it is to have brothers like George and
Wilfred—noisy, romping, teasing fellows. I expect you will hate the
sight of them before you have been here a week."

"Oh, I hope not," said Charity, surprised and shocked that Lottie could
speak in such a way of her brothers.

"You don't know them," repeated Lottie. "Nobody can manage them except
papa,—and mamma always keeps them good when they are with her, but not
when they are away from her. But I mean to try and defend you from
them."

"Thank you," said the little girl, slowly and thoughtfully. "But
perhaps—perhaps the best way would be—" she hesitated a moment, and
then added, in a lower tone,—"'Charity suffereth long, and is kind.'"

"That's a text," remarked Lottie. "Mamma sometimes talks like that, but
it really is of no use to be kind to the boys. The more you bear, the
more they provoke you."

Charity did not argue the point, though she was not convinced. Lottie
now took her downstairs, where Edwin was still seated by his aunt's
side, chatting more freely than Charity could have expected so soon
after his arrival among those who really were strangers to him. The
boys were very quiet and subdued in their father's presence, and
altogether the little orphans' first evening in their new home was a
peaceful one.

Mr. Hawke did not pay them much attention, but when he noticed them,
it was done kindly. Mrs. Hawke's gentle ways won both their hearts at
once, and Lottie's manner was warmth itself.

Both children were too tired that night for any walking out of doors,
and they went to bed early. Charity did not forget, when she knelt
by her bed, to thank her heavenly Father for guiding them to a home,
where, if they could not quite expect the peace and happiness to which
they had been accustomed, they would not be without care and affection.
Earnestly too did she pray for grace and strength to continue in
the right way, and for a spirit of love to bear with all trials and
vexations that might cross her path.

[Illustration]



[Illustration]

CHAPTER III.

FOR some days things went on very quietly in Charity's new home. The
gentle little girl soon made herself loved by all around her. Before
long even Mr. Hawke's rough voice softened, when it was addressed to
her, while Lottie was quite devoted to her new sister. Charity became
very fond of Lottie, but still her happiest time was when seated by her
aunt's side, sometimes reading or talking, but at other times with her
face leaning against the sofa, and her tears dropping steadily as her
thoughts roamed over all that she had lost. The tears were a relief to
her, but Mrs. Hawke never allowed them to continue too long. Not that
Charity was always in such low spirits. It would have been strange, at
her age, if this had been the case. Sometimes the grief and the longing
to see her father again were almost overpowering, but at other times
she was very happy in a quiet way.

Charity had troubles to bear in this now home. Even Lottie, kind as
she usually showed herself, was often a trial. She was somewhat wilful
and passionate; and Charity, who had been so much accustomed to have
her own way, found it not a little difficult to give up to Lottie in
everything. Never in her life before had she felt so often angry and
vexed. It was quite a new discovery to her that she really had an
irritable temper.

Hardest of all to bear, however, was the boys' treatment of Edwin,
though they did not really mean to be unkind. They could not
understand—strong country lads that they were—how the little delicate
orphaned boy, unaccustomed to companions of his own age, shrank from
their rough play, and dreaded their approach. No one but Charity had an
idea of what he suffered, and even she was hardly aware of how far it
went. She knew that they teased him, and laughed at him, but she did
not know how constantly it was done. Midsummer holidays had begun not
long after their arrival, and George and Wilfred had in consequence
full liberty to do what they liked.

One day, Charity and Lottie had been working together for some time
in the garden, when the former fancied she heard a slight and distant
cry of distress. Was it Edwin's voice? She started up, with flushing
cheeks, and Lottie looked at her in surprise.

"What is the matter, Charity?"

"I thought I heard Edwin call out. Where can he be?"

"Having a game of play, most likely. How frightened you always are
about that child!"

"There it is again!" Charity exclaimed, as she dropped her work and
flew in the direction whence the sound proceeded.

Once or twice she heard it repeated, and at length, on coming in sight
of a small plantation, she saw Edwin with his cousins. He was standing
by a tree, looking pale and frightened, while George and Wilfred
were laughing loudly. What they were doing Charity did not pause to
consider. In another moment she had rushed past the elder boys, and
had thrown her arm protectingly round her brother—her poor little
fatherless Edwin!

"Here comes Charity to spoil the fun and coddle her baby!" said George,
with a tone of contempt. "I say, Charity, you had better leave him to
us. He's too old to be spoiled and coddled, and we are going to cure
him of his babyish ways."

"'Charity suffereth long, and is kind,'" breathed a little voice in
Charity's heart, but indignation at their daring to treat Edwin so
was the strongest, and facing the boys with crimson cheeks, she said
resolutely, "You shall not! I won't have you do it! You are unkind,
cruel boys, and I shall tell Aunt Lottie about you."

"Tell her—tell her by all means," said George, laughing. "Mamma doesn't
approve of spoilt children any more than we do." He laid his hand on
her arm as he spoke. "Now, Miss Charity, please to walk off, and don't
interfere. We are not going to hurt him, but he is to do as he is told."

"What do you want him to do?" asked Charity, clasping Edwin tightly.

"Never you mind. We won't do him any harm."

Poor little Edwin's tears began to fall. "Oh, Charity, 'don't' let
them," he sobbed. "I can't—I can't—"

"What do they want you to do, Edwin?"

"To climb that tree, and take down the nest. I can't climb—and—and—I
can't take the nest. 'He' said he hoped I never should."

Well Charity remembered her father's strong feelings about the cruelty
of birds'-nesting. "You shan't do it, Edwin," she said, resolutely. "If
George and Wilfred like to be cruel, they shall not teach you to be so."

Had her look been more gentle, her tone less angry, they might have
yielded. But they were excited by her manner, and George laid hold of
her arm to pull her away, unaware how rough was his grasp. Charity in
her turn burst into passionate tears.

"Don't!—You hurt me!" And in her anger she sobbed out words for which
in her cooler moments she would be sorry. Even as she spoke them, she
knew they were wrong, and checked herself.

Then, as she dashed away her tears, and glanced round, she saw her
uncle on the grass at some distance. In her excitement she forgot her
fear of him, broke away from George before he knew what she was about
to do, and rushing after Mr. Hawke begged him in a choked voice to keep
them from teasing Edwin.

"Who—George and Wilfred?" asked Mr. Hawke. "Don't cry, child! What are
they doing?"

Charity gasped out an explanation, already almost repenting her haste.
It happened that he strongly disapproved of birds'-nesting, and had
forbidden his boys to attempt anything of the kind. Their disobedience
procured them a severe rebuke, in the midst of which Lottie came up,
and seemed to understand matters at a glance.

"Did you really ask papa to scold them?" she whispered. "I wonder you
dared! They will never forgive you. I don't envy you now, Charity!"

Charity had no spirit to answer. Her anger was all gone now, and
conscience was reproaching her loudly. What must Lottie think of her
for being so easily overcome, after all she had said to her about
keeping her temper?

Lottie made no remarks, but Charity fancied there was a look of quiet
triumph in her face. Perhaps she was not mistaken. Lottie was fond of
her cousin, but not with the Christian love that would have made her
grieve over such a failure.

Edwin had escaped to his own room, and Charity was glad to leave her
cousins and follow him. On the way, however, she passed the open door
of the drawing-room, and her aunt's voice called her in. Mrs. Hawke was
lying on the sofa, and motioning Charity to a seat by her side, she
raised her hand to the child's heated face.

"What is wrong, dear?" she asked.

Charity hung her head.

"They have been teasing Edwin," she said. "And I was angry."

"I am sorry for that, Charity—sorry my boys could have been so unkind
and unmanly as to tease a little boy like Edwin. And I am sorry, too,
that my little niece was angry, for I do not think it could have done
much good, and it certainly was not right."

Charity's tears came in spite of herself.

"It was wrong," she said; "I know it was."

"Will you tell me how it happened, dear?"

Charity obeyed, in a low tone, and with burning cheeks. She did not
attempt to lighten the boys' misconduct, but she was still more careful
to give a fair account of the temper she had herself shown.

Mrs. Hawke heard in silence.

"I do not wonder your uncle was displeased with them," she said at the
close. "I am ashamed that they can act in such a manner. But still I do
think that if you had spoken more gently, and 'asked' them not to tense
Edwin, instead of declaring that he should not do what they wished,
they would have given way. You know you are a little girl—two years
younger than George, and boys do not like to be dictated to."

"I know I was very cross," said Charity, mournfully. "It seemed as if I
could not help it."

"Did you seek for help, Charity?" asked her aunt, quietly.

"There wasn't time," said Charity, faintly.

"Charity, have you forgotten that beautiful birthday text that you
showed me a few days ago?"

Charity shook her head.

"Do you think we should be told in the Bible to be kind, and
tender-hearted, and forgiving, if it were out of our power to be so? I
do not mean that we can do it in our own strength. But you know where
we can obtain help."

"The Lord Jesus Christ," Charity whispered.

"Yes; He will always hear and answer the very faintest cry for help.
One moment of time is enough to pray in. You know that beautiful hymn,
which says—

   "'Prayer is the burden of a sigh,
       The falling of a tear,
     The upward glancing of an eye,
       When none but God is near.'

"There is always time for one glance upward, Charity."

"Yes—I know," said Charity. "I don't know what made me say that. I
can't think how I could go into such a passion. I never did at home,—"
and a sob cut her short.

"You had few companions there, and little to try your temper. There
must always be more to bear when several children are together. Unless
they learn to bear with one another, they can never be happy. You must
not think, dear, that I am excusing your cousins, for they have acted
very wrongly. But I do not believe they really meant to be unkind to
Edwin. He is a timid little fellow, and they have always been strong
and bold, so they cannot understand him."

"It's so hard to see them tease him. And he has no one but me to take
care of him," murmured Charity.

"No one!" repeated Mrs. Hawke.

"Only you, Aunt Lottie. He is always happy with you, but he can't be
with you always," said Charity, throwing her arms round Mrs. Hawke.

"And no one else, Charity, besides you and me?" asked her aunt.

Charity knew what she meant, but she did not speak.

And Mrs. Hawke added—

"There is One who can take more care of Edwin, and make him far
happier, than either you or I can. Our dear Saviour loves little
children, Charity."

Charity sighed.

"I wish I were more like that text," she said, after a pause. "I 'wish'
I could 'suffer long, and be kind.' It isn't a good name for me."

"'Charity,' do you mean? Why should it not be a good name for you,
dear? It only means love—love to God and man. True Charity 'must'
'suffer long and be kind.' If you love the Lord Jesus, you cannot help
trying to serve and obey Him; and if you love your neighbour, you
cannot but be kind and gentle to him."

"Everybody hasn't charity," said the little girl, with perhaps a
thought of George and Wilfred.

"No; none have true charity but the children of God. And no one in the
world has so much charity that he needs not to pray for more." Mrs.
Hawke was silent a minute, and then said, in a low, earnest voice, "It
is my deepest wish that your cousins may have this heavenly charity in
their hearts. Will you pray that they may, darling, and that the beauty
of it may be shown forth in your conduct and mine?"

Charity's kisses were her only answer, but more was not needed. They
were interrupted, and Charity went away to think over what had passed.
She could not feel easy until she had told the boys that she was sorry
for having been so angry.

And though George turned away in silence, and Wilfred whistled
contemptuously, she felt far more happy afterwards.



[Illustration]

CHAPTER IV.

GEORGE and Wilfred were at no pains to conceal from Charity that
they had not forgiven her for having drawn upon them their father's
displeasure. They had almost ceased to tease Edwin, probably from a
fear of arousing it again, but they had now turned their powers to the
far from difficult task of "paying Charity out," as they called it.
They felt pretty sure that it would be long before she would appeal to
her uncle on her own behalf, readily as she had done it for the sake of
her brother. In the presence of Mr. and Mrs. Hawke they did not venture
to molest her, but at no other time of day was she safe from unkind
remarks and jokes.

It was very hard to bear, yet Charity did bear it, and that so
patiently that neither her uncle nor her aunt knew anything of what was
going on. Lottie by turns grumbled at the boys for being so "tiresome,"
and wondered at Charity for "taking it all so meekly—" little thinking
of the words spoken by our Saviour, "Blessed are the meek; for they
shall inherit the earth."

But it was not from Lottie that Charity looked for help. It was to the
Fountain of Strength that she went for assistance. And she never forgot
her aunt's words,—

   "There is always time for one glance upwards."

Many a time as she endured the boys' provoking words, with flushed
cheek and unsteady lip, yet without a look of anger in return, they
little knew of the mental "glance upwards" which was the secret of her
gentleness. Few words are needed at such a time:

   "Please help me to be patient, for Jesus Christ's sake," was often
breathed up from little Charity's heart, and received its answer in the
feeling of quiet peace which no unkind words could disturb.

It was not always equally easy. Sometimes they went so far as to make
allusions to her home and father, and this always broke her down.
Lottie found her on one of these occasions, sobbing afterwards most
bitterly, and could not help remarking—

"Well, I do think, Charity, you are going almost too far. Of course one
oughtn't to get angry, but if you are so very meek, and never say one
word in answer, they will only grow worse and worse."

"Oh no, I hope not," sighed poor Charity. "If only they would not say
such things—"

"As what George did—that Edwin had been quite spoiled by uncle, and you
not taught to behave properly? Oh, I shouldn't care about that. What
does George know about your home? They only say it to provoke you."

"And it does—that makes it worse," said Charity, sadly. "If I did not
feel angry, I should not mind so much."

"If that is all, you may be satisfied, I should think," said Lottie.
"You certainly bear it wonderfully. It almost provokes me to see you so
quiet."

Charity shook her head.

"You don't mean it, Lottie. You know it is wrong to get out of temper.
It is not like—"

Charity paused, colouring.

And Lottie looked curious. "Not like what?"

"I was going to say that it was not like the Lord Jesus Christ," said
Charity in a low tone. "You know if we love Him, we must pray to be
made like Him. Papa often said so."

Lottie looked at her in silence for some minutes.

"I wish I were more like you," she said. "'I' never can keep my temper
when I'm provoked."

"But, Lottie, every one may. We only have to pray—and to try—"

"You can, because you are a Christian like mamma," said Lottie,
abruptly, and the words sent a thrill of joy through little Charity.
"I'm quite different."

"But you may be one too," said Charity, humbly. "You know the Lord
Jesus has promised to cast out no one that goes to Him."

A lump seemed to rise in Lottie's throat. "I wish I could," she said.
"I know I should be happier."

And then, drawing her hand away, she ran out of the room. But her
cousin's words were not forgotten, and before long they bore fruit,
though not in the course of a week or a month.

This little conversation was a great help to Charity, in her struggle
to "suffer long and be kind," through all the boys' unkind treatment.
Her hope and aim were to conquer them by kindness—not to "be overcome
of evil," but to "overcome evil with good."

The task was a long one, requiring much patience and many prayers, but
Charity did not despair of success, nor would she let Edwin despair.
Often the poor little fellow shed tears of distress at the manner in
which she was treated, and at his own inability to defend her. But
Charity soothed him, and made him promise not to breathe a word of what
passed to her uncle or aunt.

"If only I might tell Aunt Lottie," Edwin often said, "I'm sure she
would have them punished."

"But I don't want them to be punished for me," said Charity. "I want to
make them love me, Edwin, and then they will be kind. They would not
dislike me so much if I had not been in such a passion with them, and
asked uncle to speak to them."

"They oughtn't to dislike you," cried Edwin, indignantly. "It is very,
very wrong of them. Oh, I do wish I were a great strong boy like
George."

"I don't," said Charity, smiling. "I would rather keep you, my dear
'little' brother, than have a great strong one. Never mind it all,
Edwin. In a little while, I think they will be kinder. You know
'Charity suffereth long,' and I haven't borne it long yet."

"I think you have—very long," said Edwin, sighing. "And you are always
kind to them."

"No; I don't feel so, Edwin. I often feel angry, and I know it is
wrong. But there is Lottie calling you, so you must run away."


A few days after this, the five children went to spend a long afternoon
in a neighbouring wood. Lottie and her brothers had often been there
before, but Charity and Edwin had not yet walked so far, and it was
a great treat to them. The boys carried a basket full of bread and
butter and plain cake. Charity was in better spirits than she had yet
been since her arrival, and she walked lightly along by Lottie's side,
enjoying the bright sunshine and the cheerful singing of the little
birds, while Edwin ran about and shouted with delight. It was not that
either of them forgot the past, or ceased to grieve for the dear father
they had so lately lost. But they were both very young, and it was not
surprising that at times the thought of their sorrow should be for a
while banished.

On reaching the wood, a discussion began as to what path they should
take. The boys declared for one, and Lottie for another. Charity's
bright look was overcast as she listened to the hot argument that
followed, and at length she whispered to Lottie—

"Couldn't we go their way, and come back yours?"

"No, we couldn't," said Lottie, pettishly. "It's too bad. The boys
always want their own way about everything."

"You don't want yours, of course!" said George, meaningly.

"Not always, as you do. You ought to let Charity decide."

"Catch me doing any such thing," returned George, rudely. "Of course
she would go your way just to provoke me."

The colour rushed into Charity's face. "No, I should not," she said,
quietly. "Lottie dear, won't you come the boys' way this once, just to
please me?"

The boys looked completely silenced, and Lottie annoyed.

"I don't care about the path," she said. "But I don't see why George is
always to have his own way."

Charity said no more, but she looked beseechingly, and after a minute's
wavering Lottie gave way, with an ungracious—

"Well, do as you like. I suppose we shall have to give up to them in
the end," and she walked along the path in silent displeasure.

The boys cared little for the latter fact. They were only vexed at the
manner in which they had obtained their will; for after the way in
which they had treated Charity, it was not pleasant to feel that they
ought to be grateful to her. They managed to keep clear of her until
sufficient time had passed, as they thought, for it to be supposed that
they had forgotten the matter.

If Charity was disappointed at their conduct, she had at least the
comfort of an approving conscience. Lottie's annoyance soon gave way,
and she and her two cousins hunted about for flowers, ran races, and
played games, so merrily that George and Wilfred were ere long fain to
join them, though it cannot be said that their presence added much to
the pleasure of the others.

Five o'clock came, and the basket was opened, the contents being
arranged upon a small cloth laid on the ground. They had a very
cheerful "tea" as they called it, and then began to think of returning
home. Another discussion now took place between Lottie and her
brothers. This time Charity felt it to be only fair and just that
the former should have her turn in choosing the homeward route. She
kept her opinion to herself until asked for it, and then gave it very
gently, but the boys were not a little vexed with her, as she could
plainly see.

They gave way at length, but Charity soon found that her walk home was
to be less pleasant than her walk there had been. First, the boys ran
so fast that the tired girls could hardly keep up with them. Then they
began throwing small pebbles about, and more than one came with a sharp
rap against Charity's hat. Whether by accident or no she could not
say, but she tried to believe it was, and to keep down the tears which
threatened to rise, while Lottie grumbled and scolded in a manner that
only made the boys worse.

[Illustration: A DIFFICULTY.]

Presently they arrived at a very high, awkward stile, and the boys did
not lose this opportunity of making themselves disagreeable. They went
over first, and no sooner had Lottie with some difficulty scrambled to
the other side, and assisted Edwin to do the same, than they rushed
forward, seized hold of them and drew them away.

"Now we'll see," George exclaimed mockingly. "We are going to look on,
while the agile, light-footed Miss Charity Mitchel gets over the stile.
She was very anxious to come this way, no doubt to show off her powers,
SO she shall make the most of her opportunity."

"I did not know there was any stile this way," said Charity, as she
stood on the other side. "Please let Lottie help me, George. I have
hardly ever climbed stiles, and I am sure I could not get over this
alone."

"Then you'll have to stay there all night," shouted Wilfred. "It's to
pay you out for choosing to come this way."

Tears came into Charity's eyes, as she again glanced at the four
awkward crooked bars, placed so very far apart, and the long step that
must be made on the other side down upon a narrow, unsteady plank of
wood. If she missed the latter, she must have a fall of several feet
into a deep ditch, and might hurt herself severely. Lottie saw the
same, and was struggling angrily with her brother.

"Let me go, George! I tell you she is as likely as not to fall. Don't
you know she hardly ever climbed a stile until she came here?"

"Then it's high time she should learn," responded George, holding her
tight. "It's of no use you struggling, for you won't go to her till she
is on this side. It's to teach her not to be so fond of interfering."

In vain Lottie fought, for George was far the stronger of the two.
Edwin was in the same way Wilfred's captive, positively crying with
distress at his helplessness. Charity could not bear to look on and
feel that it was all on her account.

"Don't, don't, Lottie—don't, Edwin!" she cried. "I'll try to get over,
and I daresay I shall manage it. Never mind."

She began to climb at once, though trembling with fear. It was easy
to reach the top bar, and get half over it, but there she remained
clinging helplessly.

"Step down, Charity," cried Lottie, eagerly. "You are quite safe; only
take care to put your foot on the plank."

Charity caught her breath painfully and made the attempt. Whether she
missed the plank, or whether she lost her hold of the bars, she never
afterwards knew. But the next moment, with a terrified cry, she fell
into the ditch.

Lottie screamed, and the boys rushed forward. With some difficulty
George climbed down, and half pulled, half lifted her up upon the
grass. She looked very white, and lay without speaking, while they all
crowded round her, asking if she were hurt.

"I don't know," she tried to say, but her voice failed her. A kind of
grey look came over her face, and her eyes closed. Charity had fainted
away.

[Illustration]



[Illustration]

CHAPTER V.

"YOU have grieved me more than I can tell, boys! I could never have
imagined such conduct on your part. From you, George, especially, it is
disgraceful. I did not know you were capable of such cruelty towards a
poor little orphan girl. I am ashamed of you."

It was late in the evening of the day on which the accident had
occurred. Charity had been brought home in a cart, belonging to a
farmhouse which stood near the place where she fell. Lottie, in her
indignation, had poured out the whole story to her parents. The doctor
had just gone after paying a long visit. And after his departure, Mr.
Hawke came into the drawing-room, where the boys were sitting, with the
above words.

George looked fully as much ashamed of himself as his father could have
been of him. He sat with downcast eyes, without attempting to defend
himself.

Wilfred fidgeted uneasily, and Edwin asked tearfully—

"Please, is Charity much hurt, uncle?"

"I am afraid she will have to lie down a long time, and bear a great
deal of pain, my little man. But, thank God, it is nothing dangerous.
Her ankle is very severely sprained, and there is a small bone broken,
so that it must be a tedious affair. It is very sad, especially when we
think of the way in which it has happened."

Poor little Edwin began to sob, and a hot flush came up into George's
cheeks. He turned away his head, and fidgeted with the things on the
table. But his father saw how nearly he was overcome, and this decided
him to say no more just then. So he only remarked—

"If you will be a good quiet boy, Edwin, you may come and see her for a
moment. Only you must not cry or do anything to excite her."

Edwin could hardly believe it was the rough, stern uncle, of whom he
had been so much afraid, who was now clasping his hand, and leading him
so kindly out of the room. There was silence after they had gone, till
Lottie came in with red eyes.

"Well, George, I hope you think you have 'paid out' poor Charity at
last," she said, bitterly. "She certainly won't be much in your way
again for some time to come. The doctor says it will be weeks before
she will put her foot to the ground. But I suppose you are glad to hear
it."

Lottie stopped suddenly, for George had broken down, and was sobbing
aloud.

Lottie was quite silent, almost dismayed at the effect of her words.

Wilfred jumped up and ran out of the room, and then she ventured to say—

"I didn't quite mean that. I did not know you minded it."

"I do," sobbed George. "It's dreadful, Lottie. I shall never be happy
again until she is well."

"Perhaps she will get over it sooner than the doctor thinks," said
Lottie.

"I don't know," was George's desponding answer. "If I could only
see her, and tell her that I really did not mean any harm,—" and he
sighed heavily, not only at the thought of having caused her so much
suffering, but he could not forget the manner in which he had long
treated her, and induced Wilfred to treat her. Still less could he
forget her gentle forbearance, and "long-suffering," and "kindness."


But it was many days before he obtained his wish, and was allowed to
enter her room. When the time came he began to think he would almost
rather have stayed away, but he could not well draw back, so he went in
and sat down by the sofa on which she was lying, with a shawl spread
over her.

Nurse was present, but she left then alone, saying she should be in the
next room, and George could call her if she was wanted. Perhaps she
guessed what he wished to say.

"Charity, can you ever forgive me?" he asked.

"Oh, George, you mustn't talk like that," said Charity. "I forgave you
long ago. I wish you would never speak about it again."

"I must," replied George. "You know, Charity, it was all my fault. 'I'
thought of it, and proposed it to Wilfred, and made him do it. I can't
think how I could have behaved to you in such a shabby way, when you
have been so good."

"Not good," said Charity, quietly. "None of us are good, George."

"Then how was it that you bore things as you did? I can tell you that I
often felt ashamed of myself. I did that day in the woods, but I tried
to forget it."

Charity put her hand out to the little side-table by the sofa, and took
up her birthday gift, the illuminated text.

"Look," she said, "I never showed you this, George. I always keep it
hanging up on the wall, but I have had it down this morning. Papa gave
it me on my birthday, that last birthday!" And tears came into her eyes.

George read the words in silence—"Charity suffereth long, and is kind."

"But I don't see how that can help you," he said.

"Charity means love," said the little girl, quietly laying it down on
the table again.

"Well?" said George, still looking puzzled.

"It means that if we love God we shall pray to be made meek and kind
like the Lord Jesus," said Charity, slowly. "You know that, George?"

George knew very little about it. He had been taught from childhood the
truths of the Gospel, and knew many parts of the Bible by heart. But
this was mere head-knowledge, which without the teaching of the Holy
Spirit is of no more avail than utter ignorance. He looked gravely for
a moment at his cousin's face, and then said—

"I think Charity is just the name for you."

"I wish it were," said Charity.

"It wouldn't do for me—I mean if I were a girl," said George.

"But it ought," said Charity, gently. "It ought to do for all God's
children."

"I'm not," George began, and then stopped. After a pause he went on, in
a lower voice, "I'm 'not' one of them."

Perhaps Charity had expected him to say so. A gentle, tender look came
into her face as she said timidly—

"Won't you pray that you may be one, George?"

"I don't know how;" and the stout strong boy looked anxiously at his
little cousin. "I should like to be what you are, Charity, and to be
sure that I should not treat any one again in such a way."

Charity hardly noticed the last few words. "You must know how," she
said; "you must know, George."

"I don't," George repeated.

"Aunt Lottie will tell you."

"I can't ask her. I want you to tell me. Nurse will come back directly."

Charity hesitated no longer, though she flushed as she laid her hand
in George's. "You must go to the Lord Jesus Christ, and tell Him you
are sorry, and ask Him to forgive you, and cleanse you in His blood. He
will make you His child, and teach you all you don't know. I can't tell
you any more, George. Only He has promised that all who believe in Him
shall be saved."

Quickly and almost in a whisper the words fell from little Charity's
lips. George listened in silence. Then nurse came back, and warned him
that he must leave the room, as he had promised not to stay beyond a
certain time.

He only bent over the sofa, and said, "Thank you!" very softly, before
he went.

But little Charity felt very glad that strength had been given her to
say so much.


For many long weeks she was confined to the sofa, from the effects of
her fall. All through the bright, warm, summer days, she was obliged
to lie quiet and still, or to move about very slowly for a few yards
at a time, when she began to improve. But she bore it all without a
murmur—without a word or look to show that she remembered who had
caused her all this suffering.

George might, and often did, allude to it, but a remark on the subject
never passed her lips, unless in answer to him.

Everything, however, was done to make her captivity to the couch a
happy one, not only by kind Aunt Lottie and by Edwin, but by George,
and Wilfred, and Lottie, and by Uncle Hawke himself. Charity had never
expected to grow so fond of her Uncle as she did in the course of
this summer. He was, for a long time, very much displeased with the
two boys, and it was Charity who persuaded him to take them back into
favour again, and showed him how much George had grieved over his
conduct.

Indeed, George was now as much her friend as was Lottie, which is
saying a good deal, and Wilfred and Edwin were almost always to be
seen together. Little did Charity know how much of this happy state of
things was owing to herself! Little did she think how often Mr. and
Mrs. Hawke had grieved over their children's irritable tempers, or how
grateful they felt to their little niece, whose gentle, forbearing
spirit had, by God's blessing, worked so much good among them.

Had not Charity's prayer been fully answered—that she might have grace
given her to "suffer long and be kind," in her new home?



                           THE END.



                  ————————————————————————
      Pardon & Sons, Printers, Paternoster Row, London.









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHARITY'S BIRTHDAY TEXT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


