The Project Gutenberg eBook of The illustrated Tarzan book no. 1
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The illustrated Tarzan book no. 1
        Picturized from the novel Tarzan of the apes

Author: Edgar Rice Burroughs

Illustrator: Harold R. Foster

Release date: April 8, 2025 [eBook #75817]

Language: English

Original publication: Tarzana, CA: Edgar Rice Burroughs, Inc, 1929

Credits: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ILLUSTRATED TARZAN BOOK NO. 1 ***





                           _The Illustrated_
                           TARZAN BOOK No.1
                      _Picturized from the novel_

                          TARZAN OF THE APES

                        By Edgar Rice Burroughs

                             300 PICTURES

                           COPYRIGHT 1929 BY
                      EDGAR RICE BURROUGHS, INC.

                _Made in the United States of America_




THE CREATOR OF TARZAN


Is there living in the world to-day any writer whose creations are more
widely read and followed than those of Edgar Rice Burroughs?

This--TARZAN OF THE APES--is the first of Mr. Burroughs' famous novels
to be published in picturized or strip form.

Other TARZAN novels include "The Return of Tarzan," "The Beasts of
Tarzan," "The Son of Tarzan," "Tarzan and the Jewels of Opar," "Jungle
Tales of Tarzan," "Tarzan the Untamed," "Tarzan the Terrible," "Tarzan
and the Golden Lion," "Tarzan and the Ant Men," "Tarzan, Lord of the
Jungle."

More than seven million TARZAN novels have been sold in the United
States and Great Britain. They have been published in Braille for the
blind, and in 16 different foreign languages--Arabic, Czecho-Slovakian,
Danish, Dutch, Hungarian, Finnish, French, German, Italian, Polish,
Icelandic, Roumanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish and Urdu (Hindustani).

In motion pictures, on the stage, as magazine and newspaper serials
and as newspaper strips the TARZAN stories have demonstrated the eager
interest of persons of all ages in the adventures of the young English
lord who was brought up by the apes.

The author of these fascinating tales has himself had an adventurous
career. Born in Chicago in 1875 and educated at Phillips Academy,
Andover, and Michigan Military Academy, Mr. Burroughs served for a
time with the Seventh United States Cavalry at Fort Grant, Arizona;
he became a cowboy and storekeeper in Idaho, a policeman in Salt Lake
City, and he went to Oregon as a gold miner. Returning to more humdrum
pursuits in the business world, he found an outlet for his adventurous
nature in writing "Tarzan of the Apes."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

In 1888 young Lord Greystoke and his bride of three months sailed from
Dover on their way to Africa. He had been commissioned to investigate
alleged atrocities on black subjects in a British West Coast African
colony. Lord Greystoke never made the investigation; in fact, he never
reached his destination.

[Illustration]

Arrived at Freetown, they chartered the Fuwalda, which was to bear
them to their final destination. And here, Lord and Lady Greystoke
mysteriously vanished forever from the eyes and from the knowledge of
man. Two months later, six British war vessels were scouring the South
Atlantic for trace of them.

[Illustration]

Beyond sight of land, the Fuwalda's captain, with a terrific blow,
felled an old sailor who had accidentally tripped him. The swarthy
bully's brutality caused big Black Michael to crush the captain to his
knees. This was mutiny. The enraged captain suddenly whipped a revolver
from his pocket and fired.

[Illustration]

Lord Greystoke struck down the captain's arm, saving Black Michael's
life, and thus forged the first link of what was destined to form a
chain of amazing circumstances ending in a life _for one then unborn_
such as has probably never been paralleled in the history of man.

[Illustration]

With suspicion of organized mutiny confirmed, they hurried to their
quarters. Even their beds had been torn to pieces. A thorough search
revealed the fact that only Lord Greystoke's revolvers and ammunition
were gone. An undefinable something presaged bloody disaster!

[Illustration]

Lord Greystoke, unfolding the scrap of paper that had been pushed
in under the cabin door, found it was a message printed in uncouth
letters, warning him to refrain from reporting the theft of his
revolvers, on pain of death. Lady Greystoke paled, wondering what her
fate might be.

[Illustration]

The sight that met Lord Greystoke's eyes, as he emerged on deck the
next morning, confirmed his worst fears. A shot rang out, and then
another and another. Facing the little knot of five officers was the
entire motley crew of the Fuwalda, and at their head stood Black
Michael.

[Illustration]

Enraged, the blood-thirsty ruffians charged the officers representing
the hated authority of the ship. Most of them were armed with
boathooks, axes, and crowbars. The officers retreated before the
infuriated rush of their men. An axe cleft the captain from forehead to
chin.

[Illustration]

Both sides were cursing and swearing in a frightful manner, which,
together with the reports of the firearms and the screams and groans
of the wounded, turned the deck of the Fuwalda to the likeness of a
madhouse. Short and grisly had been the work of the mutineers.

[Illustration]

Though outwardly calm, Lord Greystoke was inwardly apprehensive, for
he feared for the safety of his wife, and the little unborn Greystoke,
at the hands of the ignorant half-brutes. "Here's two more for the
fishes," snarled one of the crew, as he rushed toward them with
uplifted axe.

[Illustration]

Black Michael was even quicker than the brute who had attacked Lord and
Lady Greystoke with an axe, and the sailor went down with a bullet in
his back. "I'm captain of this ship now, an' what I says goes," said
the mutineers' leader, looking threateningly on his fellows. "These
here are my friends. Don't touch 'em."

[Illustration]

Following the murder of the officers, land was sighted, and they
learned they were to be put ashore with their belongings. Remonstrance
against the inhumanity of landing them upon an unknown shore, to be
left to the mercies of the savage beasts, and possibly still more
savage men, was absolutely useless.

[Illustration]

Before dark, the barkentine lay peacefully at anchor in a land-locked
harbor. The surrounding shores were beautiful with semi-tropical
verdure, while in the distance the country rolled from the ocean in
hill and table-land, almost uniformly clothed in primeval forest. No
signs of habitation were to be seen.

[Illustration]

No pleas, threats, or promises of reward could move Black Michael. "I'm
the only man on board who would not rather see you both dead; but you
saved my life once, and in return I'm going to spare yours. We put you
ashore to-morrow." The deep roar of a lion came from the dark shadows
of the distant jungle!

[Illustration]

As darkness settled upon the earth, the woman shrank closer to the man
in terror-stricken anticipation of the horrors lying in wait for them
in the awful blackness of the nights to come, when they too should be
alone upon that wild and lonely shore. What treachery awaited them in
that dark, mysterious tropical forest?

[Illustration]

Early next morning Lord and Lady Greystoke's chests and boxes were
hoisted on deck and lowered to waiting small boats for transportation
to shore. There was a great quantity and variety of stock, arms, and
ammunition, as they had expected a possible five years' residence in
their new West Coast African home.

[Illustration]

The man shuddered as he meditated upon the awful gravity, the fearful
helplessness of their situation. But it was a merciful providence that
prevented him from seeing the hideous reality that awaited them in the
grim depth of that dense jungle. They silently sat, each wrapped in
gloomy forebodings, wondering.

[Illustration]

They had escaped death at the hands of the mutineers; but were faced
with far graver dangers. Alone, he might hope to survive for years. But
what of his wife, and that _other little life_ so soon to be launched
amid the hardships and grave dangers of a primeval world? His heart
sunk in despair, considering their future.

[Illustration]

Having filled the ship's casks with fresh water, the small boats
moved slowly over the water to the ship. As the Fuwalda passed out
of sight behind a projecting point, Lord Greystoke and his wife--in
the breasts of both, a feeling of impending disaster and utter
helplessness--bravely stood, silently watching.

[Illustration]

And behind them, over the edge of a low ridge, _other eyes WATCHED
THEM--close-set wicked eyes, gleaming beneath shaggy brows!_

[Illustration]

Now that the horror of absolute solitude was upon them, Lady
Greystoke's overwrought nerves gave way, and the reaction came. "Oh,
John, the horror of it. What are we to do? If it were only you and I,"
she sobbed, "we could endure it, I know; but, the baby--" His great
heart yearned to comfort her.

[Illustration]

After calming her, he opened the box containing the rifles and
ammunition, that they might both be armed against possible attack.
His first thought was to arrange a sleeping shelter for the night;
something that might serve to protect them from prowling beasts.
Together they sought a favorable location.

[Illustration]

Four trees were selected that formed a rectangle, and, cutting long
branches from other trees, he constructed a framework around them,
fastening the ends of the branches securely to the trees by means of
rope, a quantity of which Black Michael fortunately had furnished him
from the hold of the Fuwalda.

[Illustration]

During the day the forest about them had been filled with excited birds
of brilliant plumage, and dancing, chattering monkeys, who watched
these new arrivals and their wonderful nest-building operations with
every mark of keenest interest and fascination. By dusk the snug
shelter was completed.

[Illustration]

A sharp lookout was kept while they worked, and once they saw their
little simian neighbors come screaming over the near-by ridge, and
casting affrighted glances over their shoulders, evincing as plainly as
though by speech that they were fleeing some _terrible thing_ that lay
concealed there. What was it?

[Illustration]

In the comparative safety of their aërial chamber, Lady Greystoke
suddenly grasped her husband's arm. "Look!" she whispered. "What is it?
A man?" Silhouetted dimly against the shadows, a great figure stood
upright, as though listening, then turned slowly and melted into the
shadows of the jungle.

[Illustration]

"What was it?" she whispered. "I do not know," he answered, gravely.
"It is too dark to see so far, perhaps only a shadow cast by the rising
moon." "No, John, if it was not a man, it was some huge and grotesque
mockery of man. Oh, I am afraid." He could feel her heart beat as she
clung to him, trembling and terrified.

[Illustration]

The night noises of a great jungle teeming with myriad animal life kept
their overwrought nerves on edge; many times they were startled by
the stealthy movement of great bodies beneath them. He lay facing the
opening at the front of their aerie, a rifle and revolvers at his hand.

[Illustration]

Scarcely had they closed their eyes than the terrifying cry of a
panther rang out from the jungle. Closer and closer it came until they
could hear the great beast directly beneath them. For an hour or more
it sniffed and clawed at the trees that supported their platform.

[Illustration]

At last it roamed away across the beach, where Lord Greystoke could
see it clearly in the brilliant moonlight--a great handsome beast; the
largest he had ever seen. From the dark shadows of the mighty forest
came the wild call of savage beasts--the deep roar of a lion.

[Illustration]

They soon realized they could hope for no safety or peace of mind until
four strong walls effectually barred the jungle life from them. Next
morning, after their meager breakfast, Lord Greystoke commenced work
upon their house. The task was an arduous one, though he built but one
small room.

[Illustration]

Two months after, they were well settled and, but for the constant
dread of attack by wild beasts and the ever-increasing loneliness,
they were not uncomfortable or unhappy. At night great beasts snarled
and roared around their tiny cabin, but they soon became accustomed to
these oft-repeated, weird noises.

[Illustration]

Thrice had they caught fleeting glimpses of great man-like figures, but
never at sufficiently close range to know whether these forms were men
or brutes. One afternoon while Greystoke was working upon an addition
to their cabin, a number of little frightened monkeys came shrieking
and scolding through the trees.

[Illustration]

Even as they fled, they cast fearful glances back of them and finally
they stopped near Greystoke, jabbering excitedly as if to warn him of
approaching danger. At last he saw it--the thing the little monkeys
so feared--the horrible man-brute of which the Greystokes had caught
occasional fleeting glimpses.

[Illustration]

It was approaching through the jungle--a great anthropoid ape--and
as it advanced it emitted deep guttural growls and an occasional low
barking sound. Greystoke, who was at some distance from the cabin, was
armed only with an axe, and the ferocious monster cut him off from
escape to his retreat.

[Illustration]

Lord Greystoke knew his chances with this ferocious monster were small.
He thought of his wife--what would become of her? There was yet a
slight chance of reaching the cabin. He ran, shouting to his wife to
close the great door should the enraged ape cut off his retreat.

[Illustration]

The brute succeeded in intercepting Greystoke. He stood at bay,
grasping his axe with both hands, ready to swing it upon the infuriated
animal when it made its final charge. "Close and bolt the door, Alice,"
cried Greystoke. He knew he was facing a horrible death--and so did
she!

[Illustration]

Over the brute's shoulder Greystoke saw with horror and fear his young
wife come through the cabin door, armed with one of his rifles. Always
before she was afraid of firearms, never touching them. Now she rushed
toward the ape with the fearlessness of a lioness protecting its young.

[Illustration]

"Alice," shouted Greystoke, "for God's sake--go back!" The ape
charged--the man swung his axe with mighty strength, but the powerful
brute tore it from Greystoke's hands, hurled it far to one side and
with an angry snarl closed upon its defenseless victim.

[Illustration]

Came a sharp report and a bullet entered the ape's back! The beast
turned upon its new enemy. Lady Greystoke, terrified, tried to fire
another bullet. Greystoke, regaining his feet, rushed to drag the ape
from his wife's prostrate form. The bullet had done its work! The ape
was dead.

[Illustration]

A hasty examination of his wife revealed no marks upon her, and Lord
Greystoke decided the huge brute had died the instant he had sprung
toward her. Gently he lifted his wife's still unconscious form and
bore her to the little cabin. Fully two hours later she regained
consciousness.

[Illustration]

Her first words filled Greystoke with vague apprehension. For some time
after regaining her senses she gazed wonderingly about the interior of
the little cabin, and then, with an satisfied sigh, said: "Oh, John, it
is so good to be REALLY home. I have had an awful dream, dear."

[Illustration]

"There, there, Alice," he said, stroking her forehead. "Try to sleep
again and don't worry." That night, while a leopard screamed before the
door and the deep notes of a lion's roar sounded from beyond the ridge,
a little son was born in the tiny cabin beside the primeval jungle
forest.

[Illustration]

Lady Greystoke never recovered from the shock of the great ape's
attack. She was never again outside the cabin nor did she ever realize
that she was not in England. But she took joy and happiness in the
possession of her little son and the constant attentions of her
husband.

[Illustration]

So that year was a very happy one. Greystoke had long since given up
all hope of rescue. With unremitting zeal he had worked to beautify
the cabin. The tiny life that had come to cheer them little knew what
amazing experiences lay ahead of it in the depths of the African
jungle.

[Illustration]

During the first year, Greystoke was several times attacked by the
great apes. But he never again ventured outside without both rifle and
revolvers. He had strengthened the cabin and fitted locks to the door,
so he had little fear of the huge beasts now continually infesting the
vicinity.

[Illustration]

In his leisure, Greystoke read, often aloud, to his wife from the store
of books he had brought. Among these were many for little children.
Also he wrote in his diary recording the details of their strange life
and this book he kept locked in a little metal box. It was written in
French.

[Illustration]

A year from the day her little son was born, Lady Greystoke passed
quietly away in the night. Her end was peaceful and the horror of the
situation came to him very slowly--the fearful responsibility that had
devolved upon him with the care of his nursing infant son.

[Illustration]

The last entry in his diary was made the morning following her death
and there he recites the sad details in a matter-of-fact way that adds
to the pathos, sorrow, and hopelessness of this cruel blow: "My little
son is crying for nourishment--O Alice, Alice--what shall I do?"

[Illustration]

And as Lord Greystoke wrote the last words his hand was destined ever
to pen, he dropped his head wearily into his arms upon the table. For
a long time no sound broke the death-like stillness of the jungle save
the piteous wailings of the tiny, hungry man-child. _Then came the
apes!_

[Illustration]

In the forest of the table-land a mile back from the ocean old Kerchak
the Ape King was on a rampage of rage among his people. The younger and
lighter members of his tribe all scattered to the higher tree branches,
risking their lives to escape his uncontrolled anger.

[Illustration]

The other males scattered in all directions, but not before Kerchak had
crushed one between his great foaming jaws. A luckless young female
slipped from an insecure hold. With a wild scream he was upon her,
striking her viciously with a broken tree limb until her skull was
crushed.

[Illustration]

Then he spied Kala, returning from a search for food, with her young
babe. Ignorant of the state of the King's temper, the shrill warning
of her fellows caused her to scamper madly for safety. But Kerchak was
close upon her--so close that he had almost grasped her ankle.

[Illustration]

She made a furious leap far into space--from one tree to another--made
it successfully. But as she grasped the limb of the further tree, the
sudden jar loosed the hold of the tiny babe. She saw the little thing
hurled--turning, twisting--to the ground thirty feet below.

[Illustration]

With a low cry of dismay, Kala rushed to her baby's side, thoughtless
now of danger. When she gathered the wee, mangled form to her bosom,
life had left it. Nor did Kerchak attempt to molest her. His fit of
demoniac rage passed as suddenly as it had seized him.

[Illustration]

When the tribe saw Kerchak's rage had ceased, they came slowly down
from their arboreal retreats. They had passed an hour or so pursuing
again their various occupations when Kerchak called them together and
with a word of command to them to follow him, set off toward the sea.

[Illustration]

And all the way Kala carried her little dead baby hugged closely to her
breast. Shortly after noon they reached a ridge overlooking the beach
where below them lay the tiny cottage which was Kerchak's goal. He had
made up his mind to explore the interior of that mysterious den.

[Illustration]

He wanted very, very much to own that little black stick that had often
roared out its terrible message of death to some member of the tribe.
To-day there was no sign of the man about. Slowly, cautiously and
noiselessly they crept through the jungle toward the little cabin.

[Illustration]

Kerchak himself slunk slowly to the very door and peered within. Behind
him were two males and then Kala clasping her dead babe. They saw the
strange white ape lying half across a table and a figure covered by a
sail cloth. A plaintive wailing came from a tiny cradle.

[Illustration]

Kerchak entered. Greystoke rose with a sudden start and faced them. The
sight that met his eyes must have frozen him with horror! His revolvers
and rifle hung on the far wall. Within the door stood three great bull
apes. Behind them crowded many more--HOW MANY HE NEVER KNEW!

[Illustration]

When the king-ape released the limp form that had been Lord Greystoke,
he turned his attention toward the little cradle. Kala was there before
him and, ere he could intercept her, snatched the child herself,
dropping her own dead babe in the cradle, and bolted through the door.

[Illustration]

High up among the branches of a mighty tree she took refuge, hugging
the shrieking infant to her bosom. Then hunger closed the gap between
them and soon he became quiet. The son of an English Lord and an
English Lady nursed at the breast of Kala, the great ape!

[Illustration]

Meanwhile the beasts within the cabin were warily examining its strange
contents. Once satisfied they were dead, Kerchak did not again molest
the body of either Lady or Lord Greystoke. Presently he halted before
the rifle hanging upon the wall. Finally he tore it down and examined
it closely.

[Illustration]

The other apes sat huddled together watching their chief. Suddenly
Kerchak's finger closed upon the trigger. There was a deafening roar!
The apes fell over one another in their wild anxiety to escape.
Kerchak, equally frightened, but still clutching the rifle, sprang
through the door, which shut tightly after him.

[Illustration]

The rifle sight had caught upon the door's edge and the latch had
sprung as Kerchak passed out. When the apes again brought themselves
to approach the cabin, they found it securely fastened. After roaming
about for a while, they began their homeward march. And Kala joined
them with the man-child.

[Illustration]

Kala would not allow the other apes to touch her adopted baby. She
held the small form of the little Lord Greystoke tightly to her
breast, repulsing with bared fangs and low, menacing growls the apes
who attempted to examine this strange baby. Tenderly, Kala nursed her
little waif.

[Illustration]

It was nearly a year from the time the little fellow came into her
possession before he would walk alone. He couldn't climb nor even find
food alone like the little apes of their tribe. Tublat, Kala's mate,
was sorely vexed, wanting to put the child out of the way.

[Illustration]

Tublat argued with Kala until she grew furious and would not listen to
him. Then Tublat went to Kerchak, urging him to use his authority with
Kala and force her to give up the little TARZAN, which was the name
they had given little Lord Greystoke, and which meant "White-Skin."

[Illustration]

But when Kerchak spoke to her about it, Kala threatened to run away
from the tribe. They did not wish to lose her, and so they bothered
her no more. By the time Tarzan was ten years old he was an excellent
climber and could do many wonderful things.

[Illustration]

Tarzan was fully as strong as the average man of thirty, and far
more agile. Day by day his strength was increasing. His life among
these fierce apes had been happy. He was nearly ten before he began
to realize that a great difference existed between himself and his
fellows.

[Illustration]

In the higher land that the tribe frequented was a little lake. Here it
was that Tarzan first saw his face in the clear, still waters of its
bosom. He was appalled! He turned red with shame as he compared his
face and naked body with his more fortunate brother's.

[Illustration]

So intent was he upon this personal appraisement of his features that
he did not hear the parting of the tall grass behind him as a great
body pushed itself stealthily through the jungle. Not thirty paces
behind the two she crouched--Sabor, the huge lioness--lashing her tail.

[Illustration]

Cautiously she moved a great padded paw forward, noiselessly placing it
before she lifted the next. Thus she advanced--a great cat preparing
to spring upon its prey. An instant she paused. Then with an awful
scream--voiced to freeze her victim in a paralysis of terror--she
sprang!

[Illustration]

The little ape crouched tremblingly. Not so Tarzan, the man-child.
Before him lay the deep waters of the little lake--behind him certain
death! Tarzan had always hated water. He could not swim. But before the
great beast had covered half her leap, Tarzan felt the chill waters
close above him.

[Illustration]

Rapidly he moved his hands and feet. Soon his nose was above water.
Sabor was intently watching. Tarzan raised his voice in the tribal call
of distress. Presently fifty great apes swung rapidly toward the scene.
Then Sabor disappeared quickly into the brush and Tarzan was assisted
to dry land by some of his ape friends.

[Illustration]

Tarzan had early learned to form ropes by twisting and tying long
grasses together. By constant experimenting, he learned to tie rude
knots and make sliding nooses. Then, with painstaking practice, he
learned the art of roping. He would catch some playfellow thus, to the
other apes' unlimited amusement.

[Illustration]

To Tarzan the closed and silent cabin was always a source of
never-ending mystery and pleasure. His own connection with the cabin
had never been told him. Kala had explained vaguely that his father
had been a strange white ape. He didn't know that Kala was not his own
mother.

[Illustration]

The apes avoided the deserted abode. Only too well they remembered its
deadly thunder-stick! One day Tarzan found the door, spending hours
examining it and fussing with the hinges, the knob, and latch. Finally
he stumbled upon the right combination--the door swung creakingly open
before his astonished eyes.

[Illustration]

Tarzan slowly and cautiously entered. He saw three skeletons, giving
but passing heed. The other contents riveted his attention! He opened
chests, examining minutely strange tools, weapons, books, and clothing.
Finding a sharp hunting-knife, he immediately cut his finger. A child's
illustrated alphabet interested him greatly. Dusk was approaching.

[Illustration]

Tarzan departed, taking the hunting-knife to show his fellows. Suddenly
a great form rose up--it was Bolgani, the huge gorilla! Tarzan knew
he must stand and fight for his life. He met the brute mid-way in its
charge. They rolled upon the ground in the fierce frenzy of combat.

[Illustration]

Tarzan in one hand still clutched the knife he had found in his
father's cabin. Accidentally he turned its point toward the hairy
breast. As it sank into its body the gorilla shrieked in pain and rage.
Then Tarzan plunged the blade repeatedly and to the hilt into Bolgani's
breast.

[Illustration]

The gorilla tore the flesh at the boy's throat and chest with its
mighty tusks. More and more weakly the torn and bleeding arm struck
home with the long, sharp blade. Then the little figure stiffened with
a spasmodic jerk, and Tarzan, the young Lord Greystoke, rolled lifeless
upon the ground.

[Illustration]

Far off the tribe heard the fierce challenge of the gorilla. It was
soon discovered that Tarzan was missing. Kerchak, the king-ape, was
strongly opposed to sending assistance. He had no liking for the
strange little waif. But Kala was of a different mind. She fairly flew
through the matted branches!

[Illustration]

Presently she came upon them under the brilliant moonlight--little
Tarzan's torn and bloody form and beside it a great bull gorilla--stone
dead. Rushing to Tarzan's side, Kala listened for a sign of life.
Faintly she heard it. Tenderly she carried him through the inky jungle,
back to the tribe.

[Illustration]

Many days and nights Kala sat guard beside Tarzan, bringing food and
water in her mouth. She licked his wounds, thus keeping them clean.
After what seemed an eternity to the little sufferer, he was able to
walk once more. In another month he was as strong and active as ever.

[Illustration]

Tarzan was anxious to return to the cabin and continue his
investigations of its wondrous contents. So early one morning he set
forth alone. He found the knife, beside the bones of the gorilla.
Entering, he closed and locked the door and then turned his attention
to the picture books.

[Illustration]

The pictures caught his fancy most. One, of a little ape similar to
himself, fascinated him mightily. It had a strange colored fur, for
such he thought the coat and trousers were. Beneath the picture were
these little bugs--B-O-Y. Under another picture the "bugs" appeared
again--A B-O-Y AND A D-O-G.

[Illustration]

Long he puzzled; but slowly, very slowly, he learned. By the time he
was fifteen he knew the various combinations of letters that stood for
every picture in the little primer and in one or two of the picture
books. He persevered for months--each time he came to the cabin.

[Illustration]

One day he found a number of lead pencils in a drawer. Scratching upon
the table top with one of them, he was delighted to find the black line
it left behind it. He attempted to reproduce some of the little "bugs"
of his books. It was a difficult task.

[Illustration]

Repeated experiments taught him how to hold a pencil. Thus he made a
beginning at writing. From then on his progress was rapid. His reason
now told him he was of a different race from his companions. He was a
M-A-N. He didn't know he could not speak man's language.

[Illustration]

On the day Tarzan established his right to respect, the tribe
was gathered in a small natural amphitheater. Here, safe from
interruptions, they celebrated victories. In the center was one of
those strange earthen drums the anthropoids build for their queer
rites, which men have sometimes heard but never witnessed.

[Illustration]

Tarzan, Lord Greystoke, is doubtless the only human being who ever
joined in the fierce, mad, intoxicating revel of the Dum-Dum. This day
the grisly rites marked the killing of a giant ape--a member of another
tribe. Two mighty bulls laid the body before the earthen drum.

[Illustration]

They squatted there beside it as guards. The other apes curled
themselves up to sleep until the rising moon should give the signal for
the commencement of the savage orgy. For hours absolute quiet reigned.
At length, as darkness settled upon the jungle, the apes commenced to
bestir themselves.

[Illustration]

They formed a great circle around three old females, who, armed with
knotted branches, began softly tapping upon the resounding surfaces of
the drum, as the ascending moon silvered the treetops. Presently a wild
rhythmic din pervaded the jungle for miles around. It rose to almost
deafening volume.

[Illustration]

Kerchak sprang into the open space, threw his head far back and,
beating his breast, emitted thrice his fearful roaring shriek. Other
males repeated the horrid, blood-thirsty screams. Then began the
mad whirl of the death dance. And Tarzan, sweat-streaked, muscular,
glistening, was one of the wild leaping horde!

[Illustration]

The weird dance went on. Then at a signal from Kerchak the drums
ceased. The males rushed headlong upon the thing which their terrific
blows had reduced to a mass of hairy pulp. They now turned their
attention to devouring their late enemy. The mightiest apes obtained
the choicest morsels.

[Illustration]

Tarzan with his sharp knife slashed off a more generous portion than he
had hoped for. Old Tublat spied Tarzan with the prize and wicked gleams
of hate shot from his little eyes. Tarzan saw the great beast's purpose
and leaped nimbly away--Tublat, however, close upon his heels.

[Illustration]

Swiftly he sprang. Gaining a lower limb, he climbed rapidly, followed
closely by Tublat. Up, up he went to the highest branches, where his
heavy pursuer dared not follow. There he perched, hurling taunts and
insults at the raging, foaming beast fifty feet below him. And then
Tublat went mad!

[Illustration]

With horrifying screams and roars, he rushed to the ground among the
females and young, sinking his great fangs into a dozen tiny necks.
Tarzan witnessed the whole mad carnival of rage. Now he saw Tublat dash
toward Kala, his foster-mother. Tarzan dropped swiftly and faced the
infuriated brute.

[Illustration]

With a roar of triumph, Tublat leaped. Tarzan plunged a keen
hunting-knife a dozen times into him. The ape rolled to the ground.
Tarzan, his foot upon the neck of his enemy, threw back his head and,
beating his mighty breast, screamed out the fierce ape cry of defiance.

[Illustration]

The morning after the Dum-Dum, the tribe started slowly back through
the forest toward the coast. The body of Tublat lay where it had
fallen, for the people of Kerchak do not eat their own dead. The march
was but a leisurely search for food. Once old Sabor crossed their path.

[Illustration]

This sent them scurrying to the safety of the higher branches. Tarzan
sat directly above the lioness--and hurled a pineapple at their ancient
enemy. Into his mind a great plan sprung. He had killed the fierce
Tublat; now would he track down the crafty Sabor and slay her likewise!

[Illustration]

At the bottom of his little English heart bent the great desire to
cover his nakedness with clothes. He had learned from his picture books
that all MEN were so covered, while APES and every other living thing
went naked. So he desired the skin of Sabor, the lioness.

[Illustration]

On this day he had other things to attract his attention. Suddenly it
became as midnight. Faintly came a low, sad moaning. The great trees
bent. Vivid and blinding lightning flashed from the whirling, inky
clouds above. Roaring thunder belched forth its fearsome challenge. The
deluge came--pandemonium broke loose!

[Illustration]

The tribe huddled in shivering fear from the cold rain at the bases
of great trees. For hours it raged--ending suddenly. To Tarzan came a
dawning light to explain the mystery of clothes. How snug he'd have
been beneath Sabor's heavy coat! So was added a further incentive.

[Illustration]

Tarzan always kept his grass rope lasso in readiness when journeying
through the forest, catching many small animals. At last came she whom
he sought--Sabor, the lioness. Nearer and nearer--to where Tarzan of
the Apes crouched upon his limb, the coils of his long rope poised
ready.

[Illustration]

Like a thing of bronze sat Tarzan. Sabor passed beneath. Three strides
she took. Then the silent coil shot out and settled about her neck.
With a quick jerk, Tarzan snapped the noose tight about the glossy
neck. She made a bound and fell upon her neck! Sabor was trapped.

[Illustration]

But Sabor had now found that it was only a slender cord that held her,
and, grasping it in her huge jaws, she severed it! Tarzan was much
hurt. His well-laid plan had come to naught. Sabor paced back and forth
beneath the tree for hours, often springing at him.

[Illustration]

Tarzan mocked and danced above her, hurling twigs and branches at her
unprotected face. At last he tired of the sport. With a parting roar of
challenge, and a well-aimed ripe fruit that spread over her face, he
swung rapidly through the trees a hundred feet above the ground.

[Illustration]

In a short time he was among the members of his tribe. And here he
recounted the details of his adventure, with swelling chest and so
considerable a swagger that he impressed even his bitterest enemies,
while Kala fairly danced for joy and pride at her foster-son's bravery
and prowess.

[Illustration]

Tarzan of the Apes lived on in his wild jungle existence with little
change for several years, growing stronger and wiser. With Tantor the
Elephant he made friends. On many moonlit nights Tarzan and Tantor
walked together. All else of the jungle were his enemies, except his
own tribe.

[Illustration]

At eighteen, Tarzan had never seen a human being other than himself.
But as he sat one day in a tall tree, trying to solve the mystery of
the cabin, the ancient security of his jungle was broken forever. _A
strange cavalcade strung in single file over a low hill._

[Illustration]

In advance were fifty black warriors armed with wooden spears, long
bows, and poisoned arrows. Then came several hundred women and children
followed by more warriors. They were fleeing from the white man's
soldiers, having massacred a white officer. They set to work to build a
new village. Tarzan wondered.

[Illustration]

A month later it was complete, and they had taken up their old life
in their new home. Several moons passed before they ventured far from
their safety, for many had fallen prey to the jungle animals. But one
day Kulonga, son of their old king, wandered far toward the west.

[Illustration]

Warily he stepped--his long shield grasped close to his sleek, ebony
body. Night found him far from his father's village. He climbed into
the fork of a great tree, fashioned a rude platform, and curled himself
for sleep. Three miles to the west of him slept the tribe of Kerchak.

[Illustration]

Early the next morning, the apes were astir, moving through the jungle
in search of food. Tarzan, as was his custom, prosecuted his search
in the direction of the cabin. Kala, busily engaged, had moved slowly
east, when the faintest shadow of a strange noise brought her to
startled attention.

[Illustration]

Down the leafy trail she saw the stealthily advancing figure of a
strange and fearsome creature. It was Kulonga. Kala moved rapidly back
along the trail, seeking rather to avoid than to escape. Close after
her came Kulonga. Here was meat! He could kill and feast well! His
spear poised for the throw.

[Illustration]

The spear sped toward Kala. It but grazed her side! With a cry of rage
and pain, the she-ape turned and charged. Instantly the trees crashed
beneath her hurrying fellows--swinging rapidly to Kala's scream.
Kulonga fitted a poisoned arrow, and drove it straight into the heart
of the great anthropoid.

[Illustration]

With a horrible scream, Kala plunged forward upon her face before the
astonished members of her tribe. Roaring and shrieking, the apes dashed
toward Kulonga, who fled down the trail. None had ever seen a man
before other than Tarzan, so they wondered what strange creature had
invaded their jungle.

[Illustration]

Tarzan heard. He knew something was amiss. He found the entire tribe
gathered jabbering about the dead body of his foster-mother. His grief
and anger were unbounded. He roared out his hideous challenge, beat his
breast, and then fell upon the body of Kala, sobbing out his lonely
heart.

[Illustration]

After the first outburst of grief, Tarzan controlled himself and
questioned the tribe concerning the killing of Kala. They told him
of a strange hairless black ape with feathers on its head, who
launched death from a slender branch--then fled with the fleetness of
Bara-the-deer toward the setting sun.

[Illustration]

It was enough. Tarzan sped rapidly to intercept the black warrior. He
took his knife and rope. He struck the trail and in the mud he found
footprints such as his own--but larger. His heart beat fast! Could it
be that he was trailing a MAN? One of his own race?

[Illustration]

Soon he came upon the black warrior. Tarzan looked with wonder. Horta,
the boar, was charging and Kulonga shot a little poisoned arrow. Horta
staggered and lay still. Kulonga cut several long pieces from the
boar's body, built a fire, and ate as much as he wanted, leaving the
rest.

[Illustration]

Tarzan was an interested spectator. He decided to follow further this
savage creature, killing him at his leisure. When Kulonga departed,
Tarzan of the Apes dropped and severed several pieces--but didn't cook
them. He knew not the use of fire. So he gobbled down a lot of the raw
flesh.

[Illustration]

And then Tarzan, Lord Greystoke, wiped his greasy fingers upon his
naked thighs and took up the trail of Kulonga. In far-off London
another Lord Greystoke--Tarzan's uncle--sent back his chops to the
Club's chef because they were underdone, and when _he_ finished, dried
_his_ hands on snowy damask!

[Illustration]

All day Tarzan followed Kulonga. Twice more he saw him hurl his arrows
of destruction. Tarzan thought much on this wondrous method of slaying.
He must look into the matter. That night Kulonga slept in the crotch of
a mighty tree, and far above him crouched Tarzan of the Apes.

[Illustration]

When Kulonga awoke he found that his bow and arrows had disappeared.
The black warrior was panic-stricken. He was defenseless except for a
single knife. Now his only hope lay in quickly reaching his village. He
took the trail at a rapid trot. Tarzan followed quietly in his wake.

[Illustration]

He was almost ready for the kill, but he was anxious to ascertain the
black warrior's destination. Presently he saw it. As Kulonga emerged
from the jungle a slender coiled rope sped above him. A quick noose
tightened about his neck. Then Tarzan drew the threshing victim up into
the sheltering tree.

[Illustration]

Tarzan fastened the rope securely to a sharp branch. Then, descending,
he plunged his hunting-knife into Kulonga's heart. _Kala was avenged!_
He examined the black minutely--never had he seen another human being.
He admired the tattooing, the sharp filed teeth. On himself he put the
feathered head-dress, copper anklet, belt, and knife.

[Illustration]

Tarzan of the Apes was ravenously hungry. Here was meat, which jungle
ethics permitted him to eat. His knife was poised to dismember Kulonga.
Suddenly a strange doubt stayed his hand. He never before hesitated to
eat of his kill, but was not this a man? Did men _eat_ men?

[Illustration]

Tarzan's instinct overcame his cannibalistic impulse. He lowered
Kulonga's body and viewed the savage village, wondering over many
features of this new, strange life. A woman directly beneath him stood
over a small caldron, dipping arrows into a seething substance. He knew
that this was the deadly stuff that killed.

[Illustration]

Tarzan wanted some of those little death-dealing slivers. He heard a
wild cry from across the clearing, and saw an excited black warrior
standing beneath the tree in which he had killed Kulonga, the murderer
of his ape-mother, Kala. The fellow was shouting, waving his spear and
pointing.

[Illustration]

The village was in on uproar instantly. Armed men raced madly toward
the excited sentry. Tarzan of the Apes knew they had found the body
of his victim. Quickly he dropped into the now deserted village and
gathered some arrows. Entering a near-by hut, he saw many weapons _and
skulls_!

[Illustration]

Tarzan made a pile of the hideous skulls. On the top skull he fastened
the head-dress of Kulonga, the chief's dead son. Then he heard a
mighty wailing and long, mournful howls. Quickly he disappeared into
the foliage above, kicking over the seething caldron, after securing a
supply of poisonous arrows.

[Illustration]

The natives filed up the street bearing Kulonga's body, taking it to
the very hut in which Tarzan wrought his depredations. They came out in
wild jabbering confusion. The awesome discoveries filled their hearts
with terror. They conjured in their poor brains only the most frightful
of superstitious explanations.

[Illustration]

It was a well-laden Tarzan who dropped into the midst of Kerchak's
tribe. With swelling chest he narrated the glories of his adventures
and exhibited the spoils of conquest. Kerchak was jealous of this
strange member of his tribe. He sought some excuse to wreak his hatred
upon Tarzan.

[Illustration]

A month Tarzan practiced with his bow and arrows. During this time he
further investigated the cabin, and found the metal box containing his
father's diary, some photographs, and a diamond locket. This took his
fancy. He placed it about his neck, in imitation of the black men he
had visited.

[Illustration]

When his arrows were gone, Tarzan renewed the supply, repeating his
former pranks while the natives were enjoying a cannibal feast. They
were filled with fear at this new manifestation of some unseen,
unearthly evil power. Returning homeward, Tarzan encountered Sabor, the
lioness, and sent an arrow into her.

[Illustration]

Removing the great pelt, he hastened to the tribe, who gathered to see
this new proof of his wondrous prowess. Only Kerchak hung back--nursing
his hatred and rage. Suddenly something snapped in Kerchak's brain. He
sprang biting and killing among the assembly. "Come down, Tarzan," he
cried, "come and fight!"

[Illustration]

Breathlessly the tribe watched as Kerchak, roaring, charged the
relatively puny figure. Tarzan tore loose his knife and drove it into
Kerchak--below the heart! They struggled along. Then the great body
shuddered, stiffened--sank limply. Kerchak was dead. Thus came the
young Lord Greystoke into the KINGSHIP OF THE APES.

[Illustration]

The apes were more than content with Tarzan as their new king. Food was
more plentiful. He settled all their disputes wisely. Next he moved the
tribe inland to a place undefiled by the foot of a human being. But he
spent more and more time away from the tribe.

[Illustration]

He tired of the kingship and longed for the little cabin and the
sun-kissed sea. As he had grown older, he found his interests were
different from those of the tribe. He now preferred the peace and
solitude of the cabin to his leadership duties among the band of wild
apes.

[Illustration]

He had still one enemy. Before he renounced his kingship of the apes,
Tarzan wished to subdue the ugly Terkoz without recourse to knife or
arrows. Terkoz one day offended the tribal laws by beating an old
female and defying Tarzan's command to stop. So came they to that
well-remembered fight!

[Illustration]

Never had the ape-man fought so terrible a battle since that day when
Bolgani, the king gorilla, had so horribly mangled him. But he won,
though he did not kill his enemy. This time he spared, after forcing
Terkoz to cry: "Ka-goda," meaning, "I surrender!" And all the tribe
heard--and marveled.

[Illustration]

Tarzan let him up. Before darkness settled he called the old males
about him. "Tarzan," he said, "is going back to the lair of his own
people. You must choose another ruler. Tarzan will not return." Thus he
started toward his goal, the finding of other white men like himself.

[Illustration]

Many days it was before Tarzan recovered from his victorious battle
with Terkoz, the rebellious bull-ape. And then, one day, he had another
encounter with three of the natives, emerging victor, taking their
weapons, ornaments, and wondrous finery. The natives, now thoroughly
frightened, believed him some unseen, terrible god.

[Illustration]

"Munango-Keewati," they called him, the evil spirit of the jungle,
believing that those who looked upon him died. So the king ordered
arrows and food to be placed just without the village to appease him.
As long as they supplied him with these, they thought, he would not
harm them.

[Illustration]

Tarzan was returning to the cabin. When he came in sight of the beach,
a strange and unusual spectacle met his vision. On the placid waters of
the land-locked harbor floated a great ship, and on the beach a small
boat was drawn up. And men--like himself--were moving about!

[Illustration]

He crept closer, saw ten men talking loudly, gesticulating, shaking
their fists. Presently a little man laid his hand upon the shoulder of
a giant next him, pointing inland. As the big man turned to look, the
mean-faced one shot him in the back, tumbling him forward--dead!

[Illustration]

The report of the weapon, the first Tarzan had ever heard, filled him
with wonderment. Were such white men his brothers? Presently the men
launched the boat, jumped into it and rowed away toward the great ship.
Then Tarzan slipped back to the cabin. Everything had been ransacked!

[Illustration]

Tarzan saw his books and weapons strewn on the floor; his little store
of treasures littered about. A great wave of anger surged through
him. Ah--but the men had not found his tin box with its precious
contents!... _What was that?..._ His quick ear had caught a faint but
unfamiliar sound.

[Illustration]

He ran to the window, looking toward the harbor. He saw a boat being
lowered from the great ship beside the one already in the water. Soon
he saw many people clambering over the ship's sides and dropping into
the boats. They were coming back in full force!

[Illustration]

He watched bundles and boxes being lowered. As they shoved off, the
ape-man snatched up a piece of paper and with a pencil printed several
lines of strong well-made characters. This notice he stuck upon the
door with a sharp wood splinter. Then gathering his precious box and
weapons he disappeared into the forest.

[Illustration]

Fifteen villainous-appearing seamen landed from the boats.
Blood-thirsty and filthy they looked. The five others comprised two
elderly men--evidently scholars--a handsome young man in white ducks, a
huge negress, and a very beautiful girl of about nineteen. In silence
the party advanced toward the cabin.

[Illustration]

The sailors carried the boxes and bales followed by the five of so
different a class. Coming to the cabin, they saw with puzzled surprise
the new-made sign. Few of the sailors could read. "Hi, perfesser," one
shouted, "read the bloomin' notis." The old gentleman addressed, read,
and murmured, "Most remarkable!"

[Illustration]

A sailor grasped him by the collar and bawled into his ear: "Read it
out loud, you blithering idiot!" The professor read: THIS IS THE HOUSE
OF TARZAN THE KILLER OF BEASTS AND MANY BLACK MEN. DO NOT HARM THE
THINGS WHICH ARE TARZAN'S. TARZAN WATCHES. TARZAN OF THE APES.

[Illustration]

The thought uppermost in their minds was: "Who is Tarzan of the Apes?"
The rat-faced sailor growled out an insulting oath! The young man's
face paled in anger. "You've murdered our officer and robbed us," he
said. "Now shut up or I'll break your neck with my bare hands."

[Illustration]

He deliberately turned his back upon the sailor and walked away.
The sailor's hand crept slyly to his revolver. His eyes glared
vengefully.... Two keen eyes had watched every move of the party from
a near-by tree. Tarzan saw the surprise caused by his notice and now
watched the quarrel.

[Illustration]

The act of the rat-faced sailor in killing his comrade, the day before,
had aroused a strong dislike in Tarzan. He liked the fine-looking young
man. But now he naturally expected to see the young man murdered. Spear
in hand, his mighty arm was ready to strike.

[Illustration]

Then three things happened almost simultaneously. The sailor leveled
his weapon at the young man's back, the girl screamed a warning, and
a long spear shot like a bolt from above. It passed through the man's
right shoulder, and the seaman crumpled up with a scream of pain and
terror.

[Illustration]

The sailors stood in a frightened group, with drawn revolvers. The
wounded man writhed and shrieked upon the ground. The young man, whose
name was Clayton, picked up the fallen revolver. Jane, the girl, ran to
him. "Who could it have been?" she whispered. Meanwhile her father and
his scholarly companion had wandered into the primeval jungle.

[Illustration]

"I daresay Tarzan of the Apes is watching us all right!" Clayton
answered. "Go into the cabin while I go in search of your father." He
gave Jane his revolver and when he saw the door close safely behind
Jane and her servant, Esmeralda, he strode into the dense jungle.

[Illustration]

When Jane and Esmeralda found themselves safely behind the cabin door,
the negress's first thought was to barricade the portal from within.
She turned to search for some means to do it. With her first look, she
gave a shriek of terror, running to her mistress like a frightened
child.

[Illustration]

Jane saw the cause of her cry! Lying prone upon the floor beside
them was the whitened skeleton of a man. A further glance revealed
the second skeleton upon the bed. And then the tiny skeleton in the
cradle! "What horrible place are we in?" murmured the awe-struck girl.
Esmeralda trembled.

[Illustration]

What might lie before them in this ill-fated cabin? She endeavored
to shake off the gloomy forebodings. She bade Esmeralda cease her
wailings, and the two of them barred the heavy door. Then they sat down
upon a bench, their arms about one another, two thoroughly frightened
women, and waited.

[Illustration]

Meanwhile, the cowardly crew of the "Arrow" pulled rapidly for the
ship. Tarzan watched. The most wonderful sight of all to him was the
face of the beautiful white girl. Here at last was one of his own kind.
He decided to follow young Clayton and learn his errand.

[Illustration]

Presently Tarzan came up with him. Clayton was lost. At intervals he
called aloud. Tarzan decided he was searching for the old man. Suddenly
Tarzan caught the yellow glint of a sleek hide moving cautiously toward
the unsuspecting young man. It was Sheeta, the leopard, crouching for
the spring!

[Illustration]

And then, shrill and horrible, there rose upon the jungle stillness
the awful cry of the challenging ape. Sheeta hesitated, then turned,
crashing into the underbrush. Clayton's blood ran cold--he felt the icy
fingers of fear upon his heart. Never had so fearful a sound smote upon
his ears.

[Illustration]

Clayton could not know that to that very voice he owed his life nor
that the creature who hurled it forth _was his own cousin_--the _real_
Lord Greystoke. He started stumbling back to where he thought the cabin
lay. Darkness was quickly setting in. Heavens!--to die here alone!

[Illustration]

Presently he heard a faint sound. Then he saw it! The lithe body of a
huge lion. Agonized he watched--powerless to fly. Came a noise above
him, an arrow hit the beast, who sprang in pain and terror. Then a
naked giant dropped from the tree above--squarely on the brute's back!

[Illustration]

The scene Clayton witnessed there in the twilight depths of the African
jungle was burned forever into the Englishman's brain. The giant man
before him encircled the lion with his powerful right arm while with
his left hand he plunged a knife time and again into the beast's
unprotected side.

[Illustration]

It was all accomplished quickly. The lion sank lifeless. Then the
strange figure that had vanquished it stood erect upon the carcass, and
throwing back the wild and handsome head, gave out the fearsome cry
that a few minutes earlier had so startled Clayton. Then he gathered up
his weapons.

[Illustration]

Clayton spoke to the stranger in English, thanking him. The only answer
was a steady stare and a shrug of the mighty shoulders. Tarzan drew
his knife, deftly carving a dozen strips from the lion's carcass. Then
squatting upon his haunches, he proceeded to eat, motioning Clayton to
join him.

[Illustration]

Clayton could not bring himself to share the uncooked meat his strange
host was so apparently relishing. Again he essayed speech with the
ape-man, who replied in a strange tongue, like monkeys chattering. Then
he arose, motioning Clayton to follow him. Bewildered and confused,
Clayton hesitated to do so.

[Illustration]

The ape-man, seeing Clayton disinclined to follow, grasped him by the
coat, dragging him along for a while. The Englishman concluded he was
a prisoner. Thus they traveled into the impenetrable forest amid wild
calls of savage life and falling night. Suddenly there came a faint
report--a single shot--then silence.

[Illustration]

In the cabin by the beach two thoroughly terrified women crouched. The
negress sobbed hysterically. The white girl, dry-eyed, was torn by
fears and forebodings. They heard the almost incessant roars from the
savage jungle. And now there came the sound of a heavy body brushing
against the cabin's side!

[Illustration]

Silence--then she distinctly heard an animal outside, sniffing at the
door. They shuddered instinctively. A gentle scratching--the beast was
trying to force an entrance. Now, silhouetted against the moonlit sky
beyond, Jane saw the head of a huge lioness, its gleaming eyes fastened
upon her in intent ferocity.

[Illustration]

For twenty minutes the huge brute alternately sniffed and tore at the
door. Then she launched her great weight against the timeworn window
lattice. They saw a portion of it give way. Esmeralda fainted. The
horrified prisoner within beheld one great paw ... then its head thrust
within the room.

[Illustration]

Slowly the powerful neck and shoulders spread the bars apart.... The
girl rose as in a trance, seeking with ever-increasing terror some
loophole of escape.... Suddenly her hand, tight pressed against her
bosom, felt the outline of Clayton's revolver. Quickly she leveled
it ... and pulled the trigger.

[Illustration]

There was a flash of flame, a roar of pain. This was the shot heard by
Tarzan and Clayton. Then Jane, too, fainted. But Sabor was not killed.
She saw her prey resistless. Slowly she forced her great bulk through
the opening. On this sight Jane again opened her eyes!

[Illustration]

When Clayton heard the shot, he became agonized with fear and
apprehension. He knew Jane was threatened with some danger. Tarzan
heard also and quickened his pace. Soon Clayton was left hopelessly
behind. He called aloud to the ape-man. Tarzan dropped lightly to his
side from the branches above.

[Illustration]

Stooping down before Clayton, Tarzan motioned him to grasp him about
the neck, and with the white man upon his back, took to the trees.
The next few minutes were such as the Englishman never forgot. High
into swaying branches he was borne with what seemed to him incredible
swiftness.

[Illustration]

From one lofty branch the agile creature swung with Clayton through
a dizzy arc to a neighboring tree; then for a hundred yards maybe,
the sure feet threaded a maze of interwoven limbs, balancing like a
tight-rope-walker high above the black depths. How Clayton admired
those giant muscles!

[Illustration]

Clayton fairly caught his breath at the sight of the horrid depths
below them. Yet, with all his seeming speed, Tarzan was actually
feeling his way with comparative slowness, searching constantly for
limbs of adequate strength to hold this double weight. Presently they
came to the clearing before the beach.

[Illustration]

Tarzan's quick ears had heard the strange sounds of the lioness's
efforts to force the cabin. They dropped a hundred feet--landing with
scarcely a jar. The ape-man darted ahead, just in time to see the huge
lioness's tawny body slowly disappearing through the window of the
cabin!

[Illustration]

Within the cabin Jane saw the lioness almost through the window. She
reached for the fallen revolver. Raised it. Then she saw Esmeralda,
inert but alive. She could not leave her. She must use one cartridge on
the senseless woman before she turned the cold muzzle toward herself
again.

[Illustration]

Quickly Jane ran to the side of Esmeralda. She pressed the muzzle
of the revolver tight against that devoted heart, closed her eyes,
and--Sabor, the lioness, emitted a frightful shriek. The girl,
startled, recoiled and turned to face the brute, again raising the
weapon against her own temple.

[Illustration]

She didn't fire again. Surprised, she saw the huge animal being drawn
slowly back through the window and in the moonlight the heads of two
men. Tarzan had seized the long tail in both his hands, braced himself,
and thrown all his mighty strength into the effort to draw the beast
back.

[Illustration]

Slowly the lioness was emerging from the window. Tarzan, suddenly
releasing his hold upon her, sprang full upon her back. Tighter
his strong young arms forced her head lower and lower. The immense
muscles of Tarzan's shoulders and biceps leaped into corded knots--a
super-human effort--and Sabor's vertebrae snapped!

[Illustration]

Instantly Tarzan was on his feet. For the second time Clayton heard
Tarzan give the bull-ape's savage roar of victory. He ran toward Jane's
agonized cry. Calming her fears, they came out to the dead body of the
lioness, to thank their rescuer. But Tarzan of the Apes was gone.

[Illustration]

Tarzan went in search of Jane's father. Finally he found the old man,
and the professor, brought them safely to the cabin, and again vanished
into the jungle. Esmeralda "came to" at the lioness's last shriek. The
reunited party of castaways related their experiences and talked long
of the mysterious ape-man.

[Illustration]

When it grew light, they ate of their scanty store of food. They
decided to bury the skeletons. The professor discovered they were those
of white people. On the man's finger he found a massive ring. Clayton
gave a cry of astonishment!... It bore the crest of the house of
Greystoke.

[Illustration]

And then Jane in a book saw the single name: Greystoke. Thus they
identified the skeletons and with deep reverence buried them. The
professor had noted that the infant's bones were not a human's. He
murmured "Most remarkable," but said nothing. From the trees Tarzan of
the Apes watched the solemn ceremony.

[Illustration]

Most of all he watched the sweet face and graceful figure of Jane. He
knew that she was created to be protected and that he was created to
protect her. Esmeralda chanced to glance toward the harbor. She cried
out, pointing to the "Arrow" slowly sailing seaward!

[Illustration]

Now they knew they were deserted--marooned by merciless sailors on this
jungle shore. Tarzan saw their consternation; also the departure of the
ship. He swung through the trees to see closely this strange floating
house. Presently his keen eyes saw the faintest suspicion of smoke on
the horizon.

[Illustration]

The sailors also saw that smoke. The ship came about and headed for
land. There was a great scurrying about on deck. A boat was lowered; in
it a great chest was placed. Men bent to the oars; pulled rapidly to
the very point where Tarzan crouched, hidden in a tree.

[Illustration]

Beaching the boat, the men lifted out the great chest. They argued
angrily--they quarreled, and a sailor buried his pick in the brain of
the rat-faced man. Digging a deep trench, they buried the treasure with
the corpse, obliterating all signs. Then they pulled rapidly back to
the "Arrow."

[Illustration]

The smoke on the horizon increased, and the sailors lost no time
in getting under full sail. Tarzan, an interested spectator, sat
speculating on the strange actions. He wondered what the chest
contained. Dropping to the ground he found a spade and began digging
until he uncovered the body.

[Illustration]

He dragged it from the grave, then unearthed the chest, replacing the
body and the earth. Four sailors had sweated beneath the burden of that
chest. Tarzan of the Apes picked it up easily and carried it into the
densest part of the jungle. He traveled for several hours.

[Illustration]

His brain told him the chest contained valuables. He desired to open
it, but the iron lock and bands baffled even his strength. So he buried
it. Darkness settled before he was back in the cabin's vicinity.
Astonished, he saw the interior of the cabin appear as bright as day.

[Illustration]

Within the cabin, lights were burning. Clayton had found an unopened
tin of oil and lamps, still usable. Tarzan peered within. He saw his
cabin divided into two rooms, partitioned by boughs and sailcloth. The
men were reading and talking. He sought the other window. There was the
girl.

[Illustration]

How beautiful her features--how delicate her snowy skin! She was
writing at Tarzan's own table. Upon a pile of grasses lay the negress
asleep. For an hour Tarzan feasted his eyes upon her as she wrote. How
he longed to speak to her. At length she arose, leaving her manuscript.

[Illustration]

She went to the bed, loosened her soft mass of golden hair. Below her
waist it tumbled. Tarzan was spellbound! Then she extinguished the lamp
and all within was darkness. Still Tarzan watched. Creeping close he
waited, listening. At last she was asleep. Cautiously he intruded his
arm within the cabin.

[Illustration]

Carefully he felt upon the desk. At last he grasped the manuscript Jane
had been writing. Cautiously he withdrew it. Tarzan folded the precious
sheets into a small parcel, tucking them into his arrow quiver. Then he
melted away into the jungle as softly and as noiselessly as a shadow.

[Illustration]

Tarzan awoke early. His first thought was of that writing, hidden
in his quiver. How he hoped he could read what the beautiful girl
had written. Tarzan suffered a bitter disappointment, baffled by the
strange writing. Long he pored over it. Finally he recognized the
letters. His heart leaped for joy.

[Illustration]

Slowly Tarzan deciphered Jane's letter. It was to a friend in America.
In it she narrated their strange experiences. How her father had
come into possession of an old Spanish manuscript telling of buried
treasure; how they had finally found it; how it had brought misfortune
to them, and of Tarzan.

[Illustration]

Tarzan sat long in a brown study after reading the letter. He couldn't
understand much of the new and wonderful things it told of. He wrote
beneath Jane's signature "I am Tarzan of the Apes." Next morning
she found her missing letter in the exact spot from which it had
disappeared.

[Illustration]

A cold, clammy chill ran up her spine as she saw the printed words. But
as days passed without mishap, her fears calmed. Unseen by them, Tarzan
left offerings of food at the cabin. He told himself that one day he
would venture into the camp and talk with them.

[Illustration]

A month passed before Tarzan visited the camp by daylight. He found all
gone. His golden-haired divinity had vanished! So he printed a message
for her.... "I WANT YOU.... I AM YOURS.... KNOW THAT TARZAN OF THE APES
LOVES YOU." Suddenly his keen ears heard a familiar sound.

[Illustration]

It was the passing of a great ape through the forest. For an instant he
listened intently. Then from the jungle came the agonized scream of a
woman, and Tarzan of the Apes, dropping his first love letter upon the
ground, shot like a panther into the forest.

[Illustration]

After Tarzan left the tribe of apes, it was torn by continual strife
and confusion. Terkoz, now their king, proved a cruel and capricious
leader. In desperation the apes decided to turn him out. So one day as
he returned to the tribe, five huge, hairy beasts sprang upon him.

[Illustration]

At heart Terkoz was a coward. So he did not remain to fight and die.
Tearing himself away, he fled, foaming with rage and hatred, into the
jungle. Several days he wandered aimlessly. Swinging from tree to tree,
this horrible, man-like beast came suddenly upon the two women.

[Illustration]

He was right above when Jane saw him, his awful face thrust within a
foot of her. One piercing scream escaped her ere the brute had clutched
her arm. Then another mood seized him. He leaped into the trees,
bearing Jane to a fate a thousand times worse than death.

[Illustration]

Jane did not once lose consciousness as she was borne farther into the
impenetrable jungle. The scream that brought Clayton stumbling through
the underbrush had led Tarzan of the Apes straight to where lay the
fainting Esmeralda. His ape training told him plainly the whole story.
He instantly gave chase.

[Illustration]

On he sped in the track of Terkoz and his prey. Terkoz heard and was
spurred to greater effort. Three miles were covered before Tarzan
overtook them. Seeing flight was futile, Terkoz dropped groundward.
Tarzan bounded like a leopard into the open glade. Terkoz turned to
fight for his prize.

[Illustration]

Like two charging bulls they came together, and like two wolves they
sought each other's throat. Jane, her lithe young figure flattened
against a tree trunk, hands pressed tight against her bosom, and eyes
wide with mingled horror, fascination, fear, and admiration, watched
ape and ape-man battle for possession of her.

[Illustration]

The great muscles of Tarzan's back and shoulders knotted beneath the
tension of his efforts. His huge biceps and forearm held at bay those
mighty tusks. The long knife drank deep a dozen times of Terkoz's life
blood. Then the great carcass rolled lifeless upon the ground.

[Illustration]

The veil of centuries of civilization and culture was swept from Jane!
It was a primeval woman who sprang forward with outstretched arms
toward the primeval man who had fought for her and won her.... And
Tarzan took his woman in his arms and smothered her upturned, panting
lips with kisses.

[Illustration]

Suddenly her face suffused with scarlet blushes. She thrust Tarzan of
the Apes from her and buried her face in her hands. He came close again
and took hold of her. She turned like a tigress, striking his great
breast with her tiny hands. Tarzan could not understand it.

[Illustration]

A moment before Tarzan had intended to hasten Jane back to her people.
That moment was lost. He had felt a warm, lithe form pressed close to
his. Again he sought her ... again she repulsed him. _Then Tarzan took
his woman in his arms and carried her into the jungle._

[Illustration]

Early the following morning, the men in the cabin were awakened by
the booming of a cannon. Clayton rushed out and saw two vessels lying
in the harbor. One was the "Arrow"--the other a small French cruiser.
Quickly he ran to light the pile of wood he kept in readiness.

[Illustration]

Before the flames arose. Clayton saw in consternation the cruiser
steaming away. Stripping off his shirt, he waved it back and forth
above him. Now the great column of smoke rose high, attracting the
attention of the ship's lookout. The cruiser steamed slowly back toward
shore. A boat was lowered.

[Illustration]

As it beached, a young officer stepped out. Quickly Clayton told their
story, ending with Jane's abduction. Lieutenant d'Arnot then narrated
the capture of the "Arrow"; how it had drifted in heavy seas many days,
without water or food until all but two of the mutineers were dead.

[Illustration]

The sight that met the Frenchman's eyes as they clambered over the
ship's side was appalling! Dead and dying rolled upon the pitching
deck. Two of the corpses appeared partially devoured. Hunger had
changed the mutineers to wild beasts. The sole survivor told the whole
ghastly tale to the French commander.

[Illustration]

The cruiser then sought the little camp. By the time the two parties
had narrated their several adventures, the cruiser's boat returned with
supplies and arms. With twenty sailors, they set off upon that hopeless
and ill-fated quest into the untracked jungle to find the stolen girl.

[Illustration]

Jane realized she was being borne away a captive. She struggled
desperately. But Tarzan's strong arms held her more tightly. Once
he looked down into her eyes and smiled. The face above her was of
extraordinary beauty. Presently he took to the trees. On and on they
went for many miles.

[Illustration]

Now they had come to their destination. In his strong arms Tarzan
placed her softly upon the green turf. She noted his magnificent figure
towering above her, its perfect symmetry, the poise of his fine head
upon his broad shoulders. Surely his purpose could not be base or
cruel.

[Illustration]

With a bound Tarzan sprang into the trees and disappeared. Had he left
her there to her fate in the lonely jungle?... She heard a sudden,
slight sound!... There stood Tarzan, his arms filled with luscious,
ripe fruit. He stroked her hair and tried to comfort and quiet her.

[Illustration]

The last few hours had taught her to trust this strange, wild creature.
It commenced to dawn upon her that she had, possibly, learned something
she had never really known before--LOVE. She wondered--and then she
smiled.... And still smiling, she pushed Tarzan gently away, pointing
to the food.

[Illustration]

Together, in silence they ate. He made a little bower of boughs and
grasses. Then he did the only thing he knew to assure Jane of her
safety. He handed her his knife--motioning her to sleep. She entered,
while Tarzan stretched himself upon the ground across the entrance.

[Illustration]

The rising sun found them still separated. A great wonderment rose in
Jane's heart. Though she had been in such terrible danger, yet she was
unharmed. She moved to the entrance and Tarzan's lithe form dropped
lightly from a near-by tree, his face lighted with a smile.

[Illustration]

Jane's heart beat faster. She could not understand it. They finished
breakfast. The magnificent diamond locket hanging about Tarzan's neck
was a source of much wonderment to Jane. She pointed to it and Tarzan
removed and handed it to her. Opening it, she beheld the likeness of
Lord and Lady Greystoke.

[Illustration]

She concluded this wild creature had simply found the locket in the
cabin. But she could not account for the strange likeness between Lord
Greystoke and this forest-god. Tarzan placed the locket about her neck.
Protesting, she would have removed it, but he held her hands tightly.

[Illustration]

Motioning her to follow him, Tarzan walked toward the trees. Taking her
in one strong arm, he swung to the branches above. The ardor of his
first fierce passion had cooled. He knew _why_ the ape had not killed
Jane. But _he_ must not be guided by the laws of beasts.

[Illustration]

It was nearly sunset when they came to the clearing. Tarzan parted the
tall jungle grass. There stood the cabin. He turned to leave her. Then
she threw her arms about his neck and kissed him, unashamed. "I love
you," she murmured. "I shall wait for you--always." He was gone.

[Illustration]

The little expedition searching for Jane pushed their way slowly
through the tangled jungle. Lieutenant d'Arnot was in the lead, a
hundred yards in advance. Suddenly six black warriors arose about him.
He gave a warning shout, but before he could draw his revolver he was
dragged into the jungle.

[Illustration]

Alarmed, the sailors came running to the scene. A volley of arrows fell
among them. They answered with their rifles, shooting toward their
concealed enemies. After a terrific hand-to-hand fight, leaving many
dead on both sides, the natives fled, taking Lieutenant d'Arnot with
them to their village.

[Illustration]

Arriving there at dusk, a great throng rushed out to meet them. Then
began for the French officer the most terrifying experience that man
can encounter--the reception of a white prisoner into a village of
African cannibals. They fell upon him, beating him with merciless
blows, tearing his clothes away.

[Illustration]

D'Arnot was bound securely to a great post. The women fetched pots and
water; others built a row of fires. He watched them, half-fainting with
pain, but not once did he cry out. The dance of death commenced to
circle around the doomed officer, moving nearer and nearer.

[Illustration]

He saw the bestial faces, daubed with color, the shining, naked bodies,
the cruel spears. Another spear, then another, touched him. He felt the
hot trickling blood.... He set his teeth ... he would show these beasts
how an officer and a gentleman died.... Suddenly they halted ... as
though turned to stone.

[Illustration]

Tarzan of the Apes needed no interpreter to translate the story of
those distant shots. With incredible rapidity he was swinging through
the trees straight toward the savages' village. White men, men of his
own race, might even now be suffering the agonies of torture. On he
sped.

[Illustration]

Presently he caught the reflection of a distant blaze. Ah--he was
not quite too late! The death blow had not been struck. From the
nearest tree Tarzan coiled his rope. Then there arose suddenly above
the fiendish cries of the dancing demons, the awful challenge of the
ape-man.

[Illustration]

The rope sped with singing whir above the blacks' heads. A huge fellow
lunged backward; struggling and shrieking, his body moved toward the
trees. Then straight into the air, disappearing into the foliage.
The blacks, screaming with fright, raced madly for the village gate.
D'Arnot was left alone!

[Illustration]

Now from the trees came a crash and the black came sprawling to earth
again, to lie quietly where he had fallen. Immediately after came a
white body, alighting erect. D'Arnot saw a clean-limbed young giant
emerge and come quickly to him.... Some new creature of torture,
doubtless.

[Illustration]

Without a word Tarzan of the Apes cut the bonds that held the
Frenchman. Weak from suffering and loss of blood, he would have fallen
but for the strong arm that caught him. He felt himself lifted from the
ground. There was a sensation as of flying. Then he lost consciousness.

[Illustration]

When d'Arnot regained consciousness, he found himself lying in a little
shelter of boughs. Soon he recalled the whole hideous scene at the
stake; the strange white figure carrying him away. What fate lay in
store for him now?... Outside the hut he saw the squatting figure of a
man.

[Illustration]

He called faintly. The man crawled in. D'Arnot spoke to him in French,
then English, but he shook his handsome head. After examining d'Arnot's
wounds he disappeared, coming back with fruit, water, pieces of smooth
bark, and a pencil. Squatting beside d'Arnot, he wrote, handing the
message to the Frenchman.

[Illustration]

D'Arnot read with astonishment: I am Tarzan of the Apes. Who are you?
So d'Arnot wrote in English, about himself. Thus conversing, he learned
the story of the fight and found Jane was safe. Then for three days he
was in a delirium. Tarzan feared to leave him long.

[Illustration]

Days after, d'Arnot very weak, but recovering, sat conversing with
Tarzan by means of the smooth bark. He wrote: What can I do to repay
you? Tarzan replied: Teach me to speak the language of men. Slowly he
taught him to speak in French. Tarzan was a very eager student.

[Illustration]

Soon Tarzan asked d'Arnot if he felt strong enough to be carried back
to the cabin. Both were anxious to go, longing to see Jane again.
D'Arnot wrote: You cannot carry me all that distance. "That's easy,"
Tarzan laughed. So they set out. Mid-afternoon, they arrived. _The
cabin was deserted._

[Illustration]

The men turned and looked at one another. D'Arnot knew that his people
thought him dead, but Tarzan thought only of the woman who had kissed
him in love, then fled. A great bitterness rose in his heart. He would
go far into the jungle and rejoin his tribe.

[Illustration]

As Tarzan stood on the threshold brooding, d'Arnot entered the cabin.
He found many comforts left behind. There were two notes addressed to
Tarzan of the Apes. One, in a woman's hand, was sealed. Turning toward
the door, he found Tarzan gone. He called aloud, but there was no
response.

[Illustration]

To be left alone in the jungle, a prey to solitude and hopelessness!
Brave man that he was, d'Arnot was frightened. He closed the cabin
door.... Far to the east Tarzan was speeding back to his tribe.... But
he couldn't escape his thought. He should not have deserted one of his
own people.

[Illustration]

D'Arnot read the unsealed letter to Tarzan. It told how the rescuing
party had been forced to give up in despair. Also of the gifts they
were leaving for him, of their eternal gratitude for his protection and
service and ended: "We sail in an hour--never to return."

[Illustration]

D'Arnot threw himself face downward on the cot.... An hour later he
started up, listening. Someone at the door... trying to enter.... Dusk
was falling. His hair rose on his scalp.... He reached for the loaded
rifle.... Gently the door opened.... Something stood just without....
And then d'Arnot pulled the trigger.

[Illustration]

With the gun's report, d'Arnot saw a man pitch headlong into the cabin.
In an instant he realized he had shot his friend and protector, Tarzan
of the Apes. With a cry of anguish, d'Arnot sprang to the ape-man's
side, lifted his head, calling Tarzan's name aloud. There was no
response.

[Illustration]

Placing his ear above the man's heart, he heard to his joy its steady
beating. D'Arnot, relieved, set about bathing Tarzan's face. He saw
there was an ugly flesh wound. Soon the cool water revived him, and
d'Arnot explained the terrible mistake. Laughing, Tarzan said: "It is
nothing. Forget it."

[Illustration]

For a week they did little but rest. Now they could converse quite
easily in French. Tarzan, heart-broken, read Jane's farewell letter.
Where was this America to which she had sailed? It took a long time
for him to understand, even imperfectly, d'Arnot's explanations. He
resolved to follow and find her.

[Illustration]

So on the following morning they started north along the shore,
carrying rifles, ammunition, and food. For a month they traveled,
with no signs of natives, nor were they molested by wild beasts. One
morning they came to a clearing. In the distance were several buildings
surrounded by a strong stockade.

[Illustration]

Tarzan, followed by d'Arnot, struck across the field, his head held
high, the tropical sun beating on his smooth brown skin. It proved to
be a French mission. They were welcomed, remaining until black women
made them clothes to continue their journey. Thus came Tarzan of the
Apes to the first outpost of civilization.

[Illustration]

During the long trek up the coast, Tarzan had spoken freely of himself
to d'Arnot, and asked many questions of the world toward which they
were heading. D'Arnot taught him many of civilization's refinements.
Tarzan told about the great chest he had seen the sailors bury; how he
had hidden it.

[Illustration]

Once d'Arnot questioned him about his parents, and Tarzan told him of
Kala, his mother, the great fine ape. D'Arnot looked long and earnestly
at him. "Tarzan, it is impossible that Kala the ape was your mother.
You are pure man. Have you no clue to your past?"

[Illustration]

Tarzan replied: "I have read everything that was in the cabin with the
exception of one book. Possibly you can read it." He fished the little
black book from the bottom of his quiver. And d'Arnot read aloud the
diary of the unfortunate Lord Greystoke, written in French.

[Illustration]

It ended just as Lord Greystoke was struck down by Kerchak, the king
ape.... "_To-day our little son is six months old. He is sitting beside
me. Now he has grabbed my pen, and with his ink-begrimed fingers placed
the seal of his tiny finger-prints upon this page...._"

[Illustration]

And there in the margin were the partially blurred imprints of four
wee fingers.... Finishing the diary, d'Arnot sat in silence. In his
mind had sprung the determination to prove a theory. He believed he had
discovered the key that alone could unlock the mystery of Tarzan of the
Apes.

[Illustration]

Another month and they reached a little river port. Here d'Arnot cabled
his government for a three months' leave and his banker for funds.
During their wait the handsome "Monsieur Tarzan" became the wonder of
both blacks and whites.... A huge native had run amuck and terrorized
the town.

[Illustration]

On the hotel veranda the black spied Tarzan. With a roar he charged the
ape-man. Tarzan met the rush; his steel muscles gripped the black wrist
of the uplifted knife hand, a single wrench left the hand dangling
below a broken bone. Crying with agony, the fellow ran away. Tarzan
resumed reading.

[Illustration]

Again, Tarzan accepted a challenge. He was to kill a lion
single-handed. Naked he went into the jungle armed only with knife and
rope. With his wild-days methods, at last he got the beast. Shouting
the awesome victory cry, he shouldered the carcass, returned to the
amazed group, and claimed the reward.

[Illustration]

Often Tarzan longed for the freedom of the jungle. But loyalty to
d'Arnot, the vision of a beautiful face, and the memory of warm kisses
lured him onward. At length d'Arnot succeeded in chartering a small
boat, and they set sail down the coast, to dig for the buried treasure.

[Illustration]

Arriving, Tarzan, garbed once more in his jungle regalia, set out alone
for the ape's haunts where lay the treasure. Next day he returned
bearing the great chest. Three weeks later they boarded a French
steamer. D'Arnot was taking Tarzan to Paris, nor would he divulge the
reason for their journey.

[Illustration]

One of the first things d'Arnot did upon their arrival in Paris was
to arrange to visit a high official of the police department, an
old friend. He took Tarzan with him. Here was explained to them the
fascinating science of identifying criminals by finger-prints. Tarzan
was intensely interested.

[Illustration]

Tarzan requested that his own finger-prints be taken. This done,
d'Arnot drew forth a little book, turning to a page where were several
tiny smudges. Surprised, Tarzan watched, recalling how he had given the
diary to his friend. Now he realized the meaning of their visit to the
police bureau!

[Illustration]

The answer to his life's riddle lay in those tiny marks! With tense
nerves Tarzan leaned forward. Was he a pure-blooded white man, the son
of Lord Greystoke? Or only a half-savage ape-man?... Much depended upon
the absolute correctness of the comparisons. Several days' delay was
necessary.

[Illustration]

And now Tarzan was able at last to see the treasure. When the great
oak, iron-bound chest was forced open, it was found to contain gold
coin--"doubloons" and "pieces of eight" from pirates' raids along the
Spanish Main. Tarzan desired to take it intact to America with him.

[Illustration]

What crime, suffering, and sorrow the thing had caused in its bloody
history! So d'Arnot advised disposing of it forever. When the gold
was appraised, it brought more than two hundred thousand dollars. And
now Tarzan was doubly anxious to start upon his way to find Jane in
America.

[Illustration]

D'Arnot, the only son of an aristocratic French family of wealth, was
unable to express his gratitude to Tarzan sufficiently. Never could he
forget those terrible times among the cannibals when Tarzan had saved
him from being eaten alive. Now he was heart-broken at the thought of
parting.

[Illustration]

Tarzan wished to work his way across the Atlantic. D'Arnot would not
consent. He had deposited money to Tarzan's credit and had given him a
fine French motor car. Making him promise to return to Paris, d'Arnot
reluctantly bid him adieu and wished him "Bon voyage" as Tarzan boarded
the great liner.

[Illustration]

The handsome "Monsieur Tarzan" was a great favorite during the voyage.
One morning as he watched the dancing spray, he heard a cry "Man
overboard," and saw a youth slip to the dark waters below. Quick as a
flash, Tarzan dived after, clasping him almost before the waters closed
over them.

[Illustration]

Tarzan became the idol of the ship. It happened that the rescued boy's
grateful parents knew Jane's father. And so Tarzan easily found his
way. The day after docking, a big black car stopped at the modest home
and an black-haired giant leaped happily up the porch.

[Illustration]

Our old friend Esmeralda opened the door. "If 'tain't the ape-man," she
cried, and as usual was about to faint, but excitement prevented her.
He learned that "Miss Jane had gone up north to be married." It needed
no further incentive to speed Tarzan over the miles toward Clayton's
camp.

[Illustration]

The lovely Jane had never forgotten her strange experience in the
African jungle. Nor her handsome forest-god. But many troubles beset
her. Their depleted fortunes, her father's health, the ardent wooing
of young Clayton, now an avowed suitor, all worried her. Still loving
Tarzan, Jane never expected to see him again.

[Illustration]

For her father's sake she had accepted Clayton's invitation to visit
his hunting-camp. She admired this rich, titled Englishman--but Love
was another matter. She must decide.... To-day she had wandered far
into the woods, absorbed in her thoughts. Suddenly to the east she was
aware of approaching smoke.

[Illustration]

For a week a forest fire had raged near them, but no danger threatened.
Now she perceived the rushing flames were swiftly forcing their way
between herself and the cottage. She gave herself up for lost....
Suddenly she heard a shout ... her name called in a strong, clear
voice ... a strange one.

[Illustration]

She answered ... saw a figure swing through the smoke. Suddenly she
felt a great arm about her ... felt herself lifted and borne aloft.
Jane thought she was living over in a dream the experiences of the far
African jungle. Would it _were_ he of that other day again saving her!
But that was impossible.

[Illustration]

Yet who else in all the world was there with the strength and agility
to do what this man was now doing? She stole a sudden glance at the
face close to hers and then she gave a little frightened gasp. It was
he ... her man.... TARZAN OF THE APES.

[Illustration]

"My Man." Jane must have spoken aloud. The eyes above her lightened
with a smile. "Yes, 'tis I, Tarzan, come out of the jungle to claim
you--the woman who run away from me," he added fiercely. They had come
to a point beyond the fire. The wind had changed.

[Illustration]

The fire was burning back upon itself.... He led her to his car....
Swiftly, silently, they drove campward. Suddenly she exclaimed:
"Tarzan--oh _why_ did you come back?" "Because I love you," he replied
happily. "You are mine."... Jane buried her face in her hands and
sobbed, bitterly.

[Illustration]

Tarzan was eagerly welcomed when they all assembled at the camp.
Overwhelming him with gratitude, they voiced their surprise and
pleasure at seeing their jungle friend again. Long into the night they
talked, asking questions of Tarzan and reliving those days beside the
African wild, and what there befell them.

[Illustration]

Then the conversation turned to the ill-fated pirates' chest. Tarzan,
turning to Jane's father, said: "Your treasure has been found, sir!"
Then he related its history since they had seen it last. Great was
their amazement, and greater when Tarzan produced the letter of credit
and gave it to Jane.

[Illustration]

Tarzan, saying good night, asked the Professor to recall the burial
from the African cabin. "Were all _three_ human skeletons?" Jane's
father eyed him narrowly. "No," he replied. "The smallest one--that
found in the crib--was the skeleton of an anthropoid ape!" "Thank you,"
said Tarzan quietly. _Dawn was breaking._

[Illustration]

All the following day Jane thought fast and furiously. She had felt the
purpose for which Tarzan had asked a few words with her. She knew she
must be prepared to give him her answer. What was it to be? _Did_ she
love him?... She did not know _now_.

[Illustration]

She realized the spell that had been upon her in the depths of the
far-off jungle. Here there was no spell of enchantment. Nor did this
immaculate young Frenchman appeal to the primal woman in her as had the
stalwart forest-god. Why, he had not even a name!

[Illustration]

She thought of Clayton. Here was a man of social position, culture,
and wealth. She knew his was the sort of love a civilized woman should
crave. Clayton sought her in the garden. "Won't you say Yes, Jane?" he
pleaded. "I will devote my life to making you happy." What could she
say?

[Illustration]

That evening Tarzan caught Jane alone. For the first time she realized
the depths of his love. "You do not love me then?" Tarzan asked
quietly. She was miserably silent.... "You will be happier without me,"
came her faint reply. "Civilization will bore you. Soon you will long
for freedom."

[Illustration]

"I'd rather see you happy than be happy myself. I know now you couldn't
be happy with--an Ape." Bitterness tinged his voice. "Don't say that!"
she cried. "You don't understand.... Forgive me, for I may never
see you again."... Tarzan heard his name called. Unmindful, he felt
something pressed into his hand.

[Illustration]

Tarzan held in his hand a cablegram from Paris. He tore it open,
almost dreading to know its contents. The message was from his
friend, d'Arnot. It read: "Finger-prints prove you Lord Greystoke.
Congratulations." At last he knew the truth. The mystery was solved.
His great chest heaved with emotion.

[Illustration]

Tarzan turned toward the window. But he saw nothing without. Instead in
his mind's eye he beheld a patch of greensward in the African jungle
matted with tropical plants and flowers. Above, the waving foliage of
mighty trees and over all the blue of an equatorial sky! It was HOME.

[Illustration]

A lovely girl sat upon a mound of earth. Beside her was a young giant.
They ate pleasant fruit and looked into each other's eyes and smiled.
They were very happy--and they were all alone. He heard her voice....
"I hope your message bears no bad news?" Jane asked gently.

[Illustration]

Tarzan came to with a start. He looked toward Clayton, the man who had
Tarzan's title and estates. He was going to marry the woman Tarzan
loved. One word from Tarzan would take them all from him ... AND JANE!
Tarzan made his decision, made his noble act of self-renunciation.

[Illustration]

Then he answered Jane. "It means I must return to Africa." He heard her
half-choked sob.... "We owe you our lives," said Clayton humbly....
"How'd you get into that bally jungle, anyway?"... "I was born there,"
said Tarzan quietly.... "My mother was an ape.... I never _knew who my
father was_!"

       *       *       *       *       *

                     EDGAR RICE BURROUGH'S NOVELS

                  May be had wherever books are sold.
                   Ask for Grosset and Dunlap's list


                          THE OUTLAW OF TORN
                      TARZAN AND THE GOLDEN LION
                             THE MAD KING
                             THE MOON MAID
                           THE ETERNAL LOVER
                       THE BANDIT OF HELL'S BEND
                             THE CAVE GIRL
                       THE LAND THAT TIME FORGOT
                          TARZAN OF THE APES
                     TARZAN AND THE JEWELS OF OPAR
                        TARZAN AND THE ANT MEN
                          TARZAN THE TERRIBLE
                          TARZAN THE UNTAMED
                         THE BEASTS OF TARZAN
                         THE RETURN OF TARZAN
                           THE SON OF TARZAN
                        JUNGLE TALES OF TARZAN
                          AT THE EARTH'S CORE
                              PELLUCIDAR
                              THE MUCKER
                          A PRINCESS OF MARS
                           THE GODS OF MARS
                          THE WARLORD OF MARS
                         THUVIA, MAID OF MARS
                         THE CHESSMEN OF MARS


               GROSSET & DUNLAP, _Publishers_, NEW YORK





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ILLUSTRATED TARZAN BOOK NO. 1 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


