The Project Gutenberg eBook of The wonders of the world
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The wonders of the world
        a complete museum, descriptive and pictorial, of the wonderful phenomena and results of nature, science and art

Author: John Loraine Abbott

Release date: January 4, 2025 [eBook #75040]

Language: English

Original publication: Hartford: Case, Tiffany & Co, 1856

Credits: Brian Coe, KD Weeks, Thiers Halliwell, who created the book cover, which is placed in the public domain and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was created from images of public domain material made available by the University of Toronto Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WONDERS OF THE WORLD ***


------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          Transcriber’s Note:

This version of the text cannot represent certain typographical effects.
Italics are delimited with the ‘_’ character as _italic_.

Footnotes have been moved to follow the paragraphs in which they are
referenced.

There are numerous illustrations, which are represented here by their
captions and which have been moved slightly to fall in between
paragraphs or sections.

Minor errors, attributable to the printer, have been corrected. Please
see the transcriber’s note at the end of this text for details regarding
the handling of any textual issues encountered during its preparation.

[Illustration:

  WONDERS
  of the
  WORLD.
]


                                  THE

                         WONDERS OF THE WORLD:

                                   A

              COMPLETE MUSEUM, DESCRIPTIVE AND PICTORIAL,

                                 OF THE

                    WONDERFUL PHENOMENA AND RESULTS

                                   OF

                        NATURE, SCIENCE AND ART.


                               ----------

                                   BY

                          JOHN LORAINE ABBOTT.

                               ----------


       ILLUSTRATED FROM ORIGINAL DESIGNS BY BILLINGS AND OTHERS.

                           =Hartford:=
                PUBLISHED BY CASE, TIFFANY AND COMPANY.
                                 1856.




------------------------------------------------------------------------

       Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1855, by
                       CASE, TIFFANY AND COMPANY,
      in the Clerk’s Office of the District Court of Connecticut.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                PREFACE.


The _ancients_ boasted of their SEVEN WONDERS OF THE WORLD. These were
the Pyramids of Egypt, the Colossus of Rhodes, the Aqueducts of Rome,
the Labyrinth on the banks of the Nile, the Pharos of Alexandria, the
Walls of Babylon, and the temple of Diana at Ephesus. But the WONDERS
known to those of the _present_ day, may be counted by hundreds: wonders
of Nature, wonders of Science, wonders of Art, and Miscellaneous
wonders; each department full, to overflowing, of themes of the richest
instruction and deepest interest.

To present some of the most striking of these wonders, in a manner that
shall be acceptable to the man of science and profound research, and at
the same time full of interest to the general reader, and the family at
the fireside, has been the aim of the editor of the following pages. The
exaggerated and marvelous stories which the mischievous fancy of
travelers has too often imposed on the credulity of the weak, as well as
the foolish fables founded in bigotry and superstition, which were too
often received as truths in the dark ages, have been carefully avoided,
and, where the narrative permitted, exposed; and nothing has been
brought forward that has not been confirmed by the concurrent testimony
of enlightened travelers, and men of science, and extended observation.
On the subjects in which Nature, in her various departments, displays
her most wondrous magnificence and beauty; or in those in which Science
and Art have sought out their most wondrous inventions, and wrought out
the most wondrous results, the best authorities have been carefully
consulted. And the endeavor has been, so to assemble and arrange the
multiplied objects of wonder and delight, as to confer a lasting benefit
on the rising generation, and on families, and at the same time to
present a work that shall commend itself to those whose lives have been
wholly devoted to researches among the sublime wonders of nature,
science and art. Believing that the standard of general reading is
constantly rising higher, and that the sphere of intellectual tastes and
pursuits is constantly growing wider, the writer has endeavored to
prepare a volume that shall have more than the interest of fiction, and,
at the same time, the ripe and rich instruction of the book of travels,
or the work of science or descriptive art. The table of contents makes
manifest how extensive the range of the topics presented; while the list
of engravings may show how profusely and richly the enterprise of the
publishers has illustrated a work, which it is hoped may meet with
universal acceptance.

                                                            J. L. A.




                               CONTENTS.

                                                                PAGE.
   Preface                                                          3
   List of Illustrations                                            8

                               MOUNTAINS.
   The Andes                                                        9
   Chimborazo                                                      12
   Cotopaxi                                                        13
   Pichincha                                                       14
   Mount Etna                                                      15
   Mount Vesuvius                                                  21
   Mount Hecla                                                     28
   The Geysers                                                     32
   The Sulphur Mountain (Iceland)                                  36
   Mont Blanc                                                      37
   The Glaciers, or Ice Masses                                     51
   The =Mer de Glace=                                              51
   View from the Buet                                              55
   Montserrat                                                      57
   The Peak of Teneriffe                                           59
   The Souffriere Mountain, (St. Vincent, W. I.)                   69
   Peter Botte’s Mountain, (Mauritius)                             73
   Kilauea, (Sandwich Islands)                                     74
   The Peak of Derbyshire                                          82
   Mountains of Great Britain                                      97
   Stromboli                                                      101
   Lipari                                                         103
   Vulcano                                                        104
   The Himalaya Mountains                                         105
   Asiatic Volcanoes                                              115
   Islands which have risen from the Sea                          119

                         SUBTERRANEAN WONDERS.
   The Grotta del Cane                                            131
   The Grotto of Antiparos                                        136
   Caverns in Hungary and Germany, containing Fossil Bones        139
   The Mammoth Cave                                               141
   The Great Cavern of Guacharo                                   157
   Fingal’s Cave, or Grand Staffa Cavern                          161
   Other Grottos and Caverns                                      164

                        MINES, METALS, GEMS, &C.
   Introductory                                                   168
   Diamond Mines                                                  169
   Gold and Silver Mines                                          178
   Quicksilver Mines                                              193
   Iron Mines                                                     195
   Copper Mines                                                   204
   Tin Mines                                                      209
   Lead Mines                                                     211
   Coal Mines                                                     212
   Salt Mines                                                     223

                        PHENOMENA OF THE OCEAN.
   Introductory                                                   230
   Saltness of the Sea                                            231
   Congelation of Sea-Water                                       234
   Ice-Islands                                                    235
   Icebergs                                                       244
   Luminous Points in the Sea                                     245
   Tides and Currents                                             246

                        CATARACTS AND CASCADES.
   Introductory                                                   252
   Falls of Niagara                                               253
   Falls of the Montmorenci                                       270
   The Tuccoa Fall                                                272
   Falls of the Missouri                                          272
   Catskill Falls                                                 274
   Trenton Falls                                                  275
   Waterfall of South Africa                                      275
   Cataracts of the Nile                                          276
   Cataract of the Mender                                         276
   Other Cataracts                                                277

                           SPRINGS AND WELLS.
   St. Winifred’s Well                                            280
   Wigan Well                                                     282
   Dropping Well at Knaresborough                                 283
   Broseley Spring                                                284
   Hot Springs of St. Michael                                     284
   Hot Springs of the Troad                                       285
   Other Springs                                                  286

                      BITUMINOUS AND OTHER LAKES.
   Pitch Lake of Trinidad                                         290
   Mud Lake of Java                                               291
   Salt Lake of Utah                                              292

                        ATMOSPHERICAL PHENOMENA.
   Meteors                                                        294
   Aerolites                                                      307
   Aurora Borealis and Aurora Australis                           312
   Lumen Boreale, or Streaming Lights                             314
   Luminous Arches                                                316
   Ignes Fatui, or Mock Fires                                     317
   Specter of the Brocken                                         319
   The Mirage                                                     322
   Fata Morgana                                                   323
   Atmospherical Refraction                                       324
   Parhelia, or Mock Suns                                         328
   Lunar Rainbow                                                  330
   Concentric Rainbows                                            330
   Thunder and Lightning                                          331
   Remarkable Thunder-Storms                                      334
   Hail-Storms                                                    338
   Hurricanes                                                     339
   The Monsoons                                                   341
   Whirlwinds and Waterspouts                                     342
   Sounds and Echoes                                              348

                             BURIED CITIES.
   The Yanar, or Perpetual Fire                                   350
   Pompeii                                                        351
   The Museum at Naples                                           360
   Herculaneum                                                    362
   Pompeii                                                        365
   The Museum                                                     375
   Herculaneum                                                    379

                              EARTHQUAKES.
   Introductory                                                   384
   Earthquakes of Ancient Times                                   389
   Earthquake in Calabria                                         389
   The Great Earthquake of 1755                                   391
   Earthquake in Sicily and in the Two Calabrias                  401
   Earthquakes in Peru                                            409
   Earthquake in Jamaica, 1692                                    411
   Earthquake in Venezuela, 1812                                  412

               CONNECTION OF EARTHQUAKES WITH VOLCANOES.
   Island of Java                                                 413

                      BASALTIC AND ROCKY WONDERS.
   The Giant’s Causeway                                           417
   Basaltic Columns                                               422

                            NATURAL BRIDGES.
   Natural Bridges of Icononzo                                    424
   Natural Bridge in Virginia                                     427

                      PRECIPICES AND PROMONTORIES.
   Besseley Ghaut                                                 432
   The Cape of the Winds                                          433
   The North Cape                                                 435
   Precipices of San Antonia                                      436

                    GEOLOGICAL CHANGES OF THE EARTH.
   Introductory                                                   438
   Extraneous Fossils                                             446
   Fossil Crocodiles                                              448
   Large Fossil Animal of Maestricht                              449
   Fossil Remains of Ruminantia                                   450
   Fossil Remains of Elephants                                    451
   Fossil Remains of the Mastodon                                 453
   Fossil Remains of the Rhinoceros                               454
   Fossil Remains of the Siberian Mammoth                         455
   Fossil Shells                                                  457
   Subterranean Forests                                           458
   Moors, Mosses and Bogs                                         460
   Coral Reefs and Islands                                        465

                     WIDE AND INHOSPITABLE DESERTS.
   Asiatic Deserts                                                469
   Arabian Deserts                                                470
   African Deserts                                                470
   Pilgrimage across the Deserts                                  474
   Sands of the Desert                                            486

                            WONDERS OF ART.
   The Pyramids of Egypt                                          491
   The Tombs at Sakkara                                           506
   The Sphinx                                                     509
   Ruins and Pyramids of Meroë                                    511
   Pyramids and Ruins of Merawe                                   516
   Egyptian Temples and Monuments                                 520
   Bathing in the East                                            526
   Egyptian Temples, Monuments, &c.                               527
   Other Ruins in Egypt, &c.                                      554
   The River Nile                                                 562
   The African Birds-nest                                         568
   Ruins of Palmyra                                               569
   Ruins of Balbec                                                570
   Ruins of Babylon                                               572
   Babylonian Bricks                                              579
   Later Discoveries at Babylon                                   580
   Ruins of Nineveh                                               582
   The Ruins of Persepolis                                        587
   Royal Palace of Ispahan                                        589
   The Temple of Mecca                                            589

                             THE HOLY LAND.
   Jacob’s Well                                                   591
   Bethlehem                                                      592
   Nazareth                                                       594
   The Holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem                                594
   Mount Tabor                                                    596
   The Mount of Olives                                            598
   Other Revered Sites                                            599
   Mount Carmel                                                   599
   Mount Ararat                                                   600

                        WONDERS OF ART RESUMED.
   The Mosque of Omar                                             601
   Mosque of St. Sophia at Constantinople                         602
   Ruins of Carthage                                              603
   The Plain of Troy                                              604
   Athens                                                         607
   Temples of Elephants                                           610
   Temples of Salsette                                            612
   Mausoleum of Hyder Ali                                         614
   The Taje Mahal                                                 614
   Great Wall of China                                            616
   Porcelain Tower at Nankin                                      618
   The Shoemadoo at Pegu                                          618
   Colossal Figure of Jupiter Pluvius, or the Apennine Jupiter    621
   The Leaning, or Hanging Tower of Pisa, in Tuscany              624
   The Coliseum at Rome                                           627
   The Pantheon                                                   630
   Roman Amphitheater at Nismes                                   632
   Trajan’s Pillar                                                634
   Column of Antonine                                             635
   Naison Carré, at Nismes                                        635
   The Pont du Gard                                               636
   Ancient Aqueduct near Rome                                     637
   The Roman Forum                                                638
   St. Peter’s of Rome                                            642
   The Soil of Rome                                               646
   Eddystone Light-house                                          647
   Bell Rock Light-house                                          649
   Stonehenge                                                     652
   Rocking Stones                                                 654
   The Round Towers of Ireland                                    656
   St. Paul’s Cathedral                                           657
   First Church in England                                        661
   Westminster Abbey                                              662
   Cathedral of Notre Dame                                        665
   Strasburg Cathedral                                            665
   Cathedral of Cologne                                           669
   Church of St. Mark, at Venice                                  669
   The Cathedral of Milan                                         670
   The Tower of London                                            671
   The Bank of England                                            674
   Monument of the Great Fire of 1666 in London                   675
   The Louvre                                                     676
   The British Museum                                             679
   Madame Tusseau’s Museum                                        686
   The Palace of Blenheim                                         689
   The Palace of Versailles                                       691
   The Palace of St. Cloud                                        693
   The Crystal Palace in New York                                 697
   The Crystal Palace in London                                   702
   The Capitol at Washington                                      712
   The Smithsonian Institute                                      714
   The Washington Monument                                        715
   The Column of Vendome, Paris                                   718
   The Bunker Hill Monument                                       719
   The Arc de Triomphe (Paris)                                    721
   The Cooper Institute (New York)                                723
   Vergnais’s Improved Bridge over the Seine at Paris             725
   Railroad Bridge at Portage, New York                           726
   The Britannia Tubular Bridge, over Menai Strait                728
   The Suspension Bridge over the Menai Strait                    730
   Great Railway Suspension Bridge at Niagara Falls               731
   Other Immense Bridges                                          732
   The High Bridge at Harlem                                      733
   The Boston Reservoir                                           734
   Aqueduct at the Peat Forest Canal (England)                    735
   The Thames Tunnel                                              737
   Railroad Tunnels                                               739
   The Colossus at Rhodes                                         741

                         MISCELLANEOUS WONDERS.
   Youle’s Shot-Tower                                             744
   The Emperor Fountain                                           746
   The United States Mint in Philadelphia                         747
   The Air Balloon                                                749
   The Progress of Navigation                                     755
   Steam Navigation                                               758
   Chinese Junks                                                  766
   The Artesian Well of Grenelle                                  767
   The Banyan-Tree                                                768
   The Wedded Banyan-Tree                                         771
   The Cocoa-Tree                                                 771
   The Reindeer Sledge                                            772
   The Upas or Poison-Tree                                        773
   The Prairie on Fire                                            775
   The Mammoth Tree of California                                 776
   Other Mammoth Trees in California                              778
   The Palm-Tree                                                  778
   The Bamboo-Tree                                                781
   The Manna-Tree                                                 783
   Continental Money                                              783
   The Milk-Tree                                                  784
   The Signal Telegraph                                           786
   The Electro-Magnetic Telegraph                                 787
   The Art of Printing                                            788
   The India-Rubber Tree                                          793
   The Round Tower at Newport                                     795
   Diving Armor                                                   796
   Tree House in Caffraria                                        799
   The Raining-Tree                                               800
   The Traveler’s Friend                                          800
   The Camphor-Tree                                               801
   The Cinnamon Plant                                             802
   The Tree Temple at Matibo in Piedmont                          803
   The Termites, or White Ants                                    804
   Huts in Kamtschatka                                            806
   The Whale                                                      807
   Landing of the Pilgrims                                        808
   Plymouth Rock                                                  809
   A Wonder of Art                                                811
   The Whale Killer                                               812
   A Pile of Serpents                                             813
   American Ruins                                                 814
   Insect Slavery                                                 815

                         List of Illustrations.


                                                                PAGE.

   The Cordilleras, or Andes, near Quito                           10

   Crater of Mount Etna                                            16

   The “Castano de Cento Cavilli,” or Great Chestnut Tree of       18
     Mount Etna

   Mount Vesuvius                                                  22

   Mount Hecla and the Geysers                                     29

   Mont Blanc and the Glaciers                                     38

   The Peak of Teneriffe                                           59

   Peter Botte’s Mountain                                          74

   Bridge over the Wye                                             92

   Source of the Jumna                                            109

   St. Michael’s Volcano                                          122

   Sabrina Island                                                 125

   Grotto of Antiparos                                            136

   The Mammoth Cave                                               141

   Diamond Washing in Brazil                                      171

   Discovery of Silver in Peru                                    179

   Silver Mine at Königsberg, Sweden                              185

   Gold Washing in California                                     188

   Place where Gold was first discovered in Australia             190

   Copper Mine in Cornwall                                        207

   Thin Plates of Coal                                            213

   Great Salt Mine of Cracow                                      225

   Icebergs, or Ice-Islands                                       236

   The Maelstrom                                                  250

   Niagara Falls                                                  256

   Niagara Falls on the American side                             259

   Suspension Bridge over Niagara River                           265

   Falls of Montmorenci                                           270

   Catskill Falls                                                 274

   Dropping Well at Knaresborough, England                        283

   The Emigrant Family                                            293

   Specter of the Brocken                                         320

   Ship refracted in the Air                                      327

   Waterspout on the Ocean                                        346

   Temple of Isis at Pompeii                                      356

   Papyri                                                         361

   Earthquake at Lisbon                                           394

   Natural Bridge in Virginia                                     428

   Skeleton of the Siberian Mammoth                               456

   The Sphinx and Pyramids                                        492

   Entrance to one of the Pyramids of Gizeh                       499

   Entrance to the Tombs of Sakkara                               507

   Great Gallery of the Tombs of Sakkara                          510

   Cleopatra’s Needle                                             521

   The Two Colossi                                                535

   The Nilometer                                                  565

   African Birds-nest                                             568

   Tower near Babylon                                             573

   Colossal Winged Bull from Nineveh                              584

   Jacob’s Well                                                   591

   Church of the Holy Sepulcher                                   595

   Mount Tabor                                                    597

   The Areopagus                                                  608

   Temple of Jupiter Olympius                                     609

   Great Wall of China                                            615

   Porcelain Tower at Nankin                                      617

   Jupiter Pluvius, or the Apennine Jupiter                       622

   The Leaning Tower at Pisa                                      624

   The Coliseum at Rome                                           629

   Ancient Roman Aqueduct                                         638

   The Arch of Titus                                              640

   St. Peter’s as seen from the Tiber                             643

   The Eddystone Light-house                                      648

   Stonehenge                                                     653

   The First Church in England                                    661

   Strasburg Cathedral                                            666

   The Crystal Palace in New York                                 697

   The Capitol at Washington                                      712

   The Smithsonian Institute                                      715

   The Washington Monument                                        716

   The Bunker-Hill Monument                                       720

   Vergnais’s Herculean Bridge                                    725

   The Britannia Tubular Bridge                                   728

   The High Bridge at Harlem                                      733

   The Boston Reservoir                                           735

   Aqueduct on the Peat Forest Canal                              736

   Tunnel in Shakspeare’s Cliff                                   740

   The Colossus of Rhodes                                         742

   The Emperor Fountain                                           747

   The Air Balloon                                                750

   Early Navigation                                               756

   The Launch of a Packet-Ship                                    757

   Fulton’s First Steamboat                                       759

   An Ocean Steamer                                               762

   Chinese Junks                                                  766

   The Banyan-Tree                                                769

   The Reindeer Sledge                                            772

   The Prairie on Fire                                            775

   The Date-Palm                                                  779

   The Bamboo-Tree                                                782

   Continental Money                                              783

   The Signal Telegraph                                           785

   The Electro-Magnetic Telegraph                                 787

   Faust taking First Proof from movable types                    789

   Franklin’s Printing-Press                                      790

   Hoe’s Eight-Cylinder Power Press                               792

   The India-Rubber Tree                                          793

   The Old Round Tower at Newport                                 795

   Submarine or Diving Armor                                      796

   Manner of working the Diving-Armor                             797

   Tree House in Caffraria                                        799

   The Camphor-Tree                                               801

   Tree Temple at Matibo in Piedmont                              803

   Ant-Hills of the White Ant                                     805

   Huts in Kamtschatka                                            806

   Taking a Whale                                                 807

   Landing of the Pilgrims                                        809

   Plymouth Rock                                                  810

   Early Settlers of New England going to Church                  811

                                  THE

                     =Wonders of the World.=

                  ------------------------------------

                               MOUNTAINS.

         “And lo! the mountains print the distant sky,
           And o’er their airy tops faint clouds are driven,
         So softly blending that the cheated eye,
           Forgets or which is earth, or which is heaven!”—FAY.


“Mountains and all hills—let them praise the name of the Lord, for his
name alone is excellent; his glory is above the earth and
heaven.”—DAVID.

Among the _wonders_, or uncommon phenomena of the world, may be classed
stupendous _mountains_. For though compared with the entire diameter of
the earth, the highest elevations on its surface are no more than the
inequalities on the skin of the orange to the orange itself, yet to our
eyes they often appear immensely lofty and sublime. Descriptions of such
vast and striking objects often fail to excite corresponding ideas; so
that however accurate or poetical may be the accounts of this class of
the prodigies of nature, no just notions of their vastness can be
conveyed, by any written or graphical representation. The magnitude of
an object must be seen to be duly conceived; and the mountain-wonders of
the world will best be understood and felt by those who have visited
Wales, Scotland, Switzerland, or the mountainous regions of America or
Asia.


                               THE ANDES.

Some of the loftiest and most extensive mountains in the world, are the
Andes, in South America. These stupendous hills, called by the Spaniards
the =Cordilleras=, (from the word _cord_ or _chain_,) =i. e.=, the
chains of the Andes, stretch north and south near the western coast,
from the isthmus of Darien, through the whole of the continent of South
America, to the straits of Magellan. In the north, there are three
chains of separate ridges; but in advancing from Popayan toward the
south, the three chains unite into a single group, which is continued
far beyond the equator. In Equador, near Quito, the more elevated
summits of this group are ranged in two rows, (as seen in the cut
below,) which form a double crest to the Cordilleras. The extent of the
Andes mountains is not less than four thousand three hundred miles, from
one end to the other.

[Illustration: THE CORDILLERAS, OR ANDES, NEAR QUITO.]

       “Rocks rich in gems, and mountains big with mines,
       That on the high equator ridgy rise,
       Whence many a bursting stream auriferous plays.”—THOMSON.

In this country, the operations of nature appear to have been carried on
on a larger scale, and with a bolder hand, than elsewhere; and in
consequence, the whole is distinguished by a peculiar magnificence. Even
the plain of Quito, which may be considered as the base of the Andes, is
more elevated above the sea than the summits of many European mountains.
In different places the Andes rise more than one-third higher than the
famous peak of Teneriffe, the highest land in the ancient hemisphere.
Their cloud-enveloped summits, though exposed to the rays of the sun in
the torrid zone, are covered with eternal snows, and below them the
storm is seen to burst, and the exploring traveler hears the thunder
roll, and sees the lightnings dart beneath his feet. Throughout the
whole of the range of these extensive mountains, as far as they have
been explored, there is a certain boundary, above which the snow never
melts; which boundary, in the torrid zone, has been ascertained to be
fourteen thousand, six hundred feet, or nearly three miles above the
level of the sea.

The ascent to the plain of Quito, on which stands Chimborazo, Cotopaxi,
Pichincha, &c., is thus described by Don Juan de Ulloa:

“The ruggedness of the road from Taraguaga, leading up the mountain, is
not easily described. The declivity is so great, in some parts, that the
mules can scarcely keep their footing; and, in others, the acclivity is
equally difficult. The trouble of sending people before to mend the
road, the pain arising from the many falls and bruises, and the being
constantly wet to the skin, might be supported; but these inconveniences
are augmented by the sight of such frightful precipices and deep
abysses, as excite in the mind constant terror. The road, in some
places, is so steep, and yet so narrow, that the mules are obliged to
slide down without making any use whatever of their feet. On one side of
the rider, in this situation, rises an eminence of many hundred yards;
and, on the other, is an abyss of equal depth; so that, if he should
give the least check to his mule, and destroy the equilibrium, both must
inevitably perish.

“Having traveled nine days in this manner, slowly winding along the
sides of the mountains, we began to find the whole country covered with
a hoar-frost; and a hut, in which we reposed, had ice in it. At length,
after a perilous journey of fifteen days, we arrived upon a plain, at
the extremity of which stands the city of Quito, the capital of one of
the most charming regions in the world. Here, in the center of the
torrid zone, the heat is not only very tolerable, but, in some places,
the cold is even painful. Here the inhabitants enjoy the temperature and
advantages of perpetual spring; the fields being constantly covered with
verdure, and enameled with flowers of the most lively colors. But
although this beautiful region is more elevated than any other country
in the world, and it employs so many days of painful journey in the
ascent, it is itself overlooked by tremendous mountains, their sides
being covered with snow, while their summits are flaming with volcanoes.
These mountains seem piled one upon the other, and to rise, with great
boldness, to an astonishing hight. However, at a determined point above
the surface of the sea, the congelation is found at the same hight in
all the mountains. Those parts which are not subject to a continual
frost, have here and there growing upon them a species of rush,
resembling the broom, but much softer and more flexible. Toward the
extremity of the part where the rush grows, and the cold begins to
increase, is found a vegetable with a round bulbous head. Higher still,
the earth is bare of vegetation, and seems covered with eternal snow.
The most remarkable of the Andes are the mountains of Chimborazo,
Cotopaxi, and Pichincha.”


                              CHIMBORAZO.

This is the most lofty and majestic peak of the Andes, and has a
circular summit. It is twenty-two thousand feet, or more than four miles
high. On the shores of the ocean, after the long rains of winter,
Chimborazo appears like a cloud in the horizon. It detaches itself from
the neighboring summits, and raises its lofty head over the whole chain
of the Andes. Travelers who have approached the summits of Mont Blanc
and Mont Rose, are alone capable of feeling the effect of such vast,
majestic, and solemn scenery.

The bulk of Chimborazo is so enormous, that the part which the eye
embraces at once, near the limit of the snows, is twenty-two thousand,
nine hundred and sixty-eight feet, or four miles and a third in breadth.
The extreme rarity of the strata of air across which the summits of the
Andes are seen, contributes greatly to the splendor of the snow and the
magical effect of its reflection. Under the tropics, at a hight of
sixteen thousand, four hundred feet, or upward of three miles, the azure
vault of the heavens appears of an indigo tint; while, in so pure and
transparent an atmosphere, the outlines of the mountains seem to detach
themselves from the sky, and produce an effect at once sublime, awful,
and profoundly impressive.

With the exception of the loftiest of the Himalaya, in Asia, Chimborazo
is the highest known mountain in the world. Humboldt, Bonpland, and
Montufar, were persevering enough to approach within one thousand, six
hundred feet of the summit of this mighty king of mountains. Being aided
in their ascent by a train of volcanic rocks, destitute of snow, they
thus attained the amazing hight of nearly four miles above the level of
the sea; and the former of these naturalists is persuaded that they
might have reached the highest summit, had it not been for the
intervention of a great crevice, or gap, which they were unable to
cross. They were, therefore, obliged to descend, after experiencing
great inconveniences and many unpleasant sensations. For three or four
days, even after their return into the plain, they were not free from
sickness, and an uncomfortable feeling, owing, as they suppose, to the
vast proportion of oxygen in the atmosphere above. Long before they
reached the above surprising hight, they had been abandoned by their
guides, the Indians, who had taken alarm and were fearful of their
lives. So great was the fall of snow on their return, that they could
scarcely recognize each other, and they all suffered dreadfully from the
intenseness of the cold.

A great number of Spaniards formerly perished in crossing the vast and
dangerous deserts which lie on the declivity of Chimborazo; being now,
however, better acquainted with them, such misfortunes seldom occur,
especially as very few take this route, unless there be a prospect of
calm and serene weather.


                               COTOPAXI.

This mountain is the loftiest of those volcanoes of the Andes which, at
recent epochs, have undergone eruptions. Notwithstanding it lies near
the equator, its summits are covered with perpetual snows. The absolute
hight of Cotopaxi is eighteen thousand, eight hundred and seventy-six
feet, or three miles and a half; consequently it is two thousand, six
hundred and twenty-two feet, or half a mile, higher than Vesuvius would
be, were that mountain placed on the top of the peak of Teneriffe!
Cotopaxi is the most mischievous of the volcanoes in the vicinity of
Quito, and its explosions are the most frequent and disastrous. The
masses of scoriæ, and the pieces of rock, thrown out of this volcano,
cover a surface of several square leagues, and would form, were they
heaped together, a prodigious mountain. In 1738, the flames of Cotopaxi
rose three thousand feet, or upward of half a mile, above the brink of
the crater. In 1744, the roarings of this volcano were heard at the
distance of six hundred miles. On the fourth of April, 1768, the
quantity of ashes ejected at the mouth of Cotopaxi was so great, that it
was dark till three in the afternoon. The explosion which took place in
1803, was preceded by the sudden melting of the snows which covered the
mountain. For twenty years before no smoke or vapor, that could be
perceived, had issued from the crater; but in a single night the
subterraneous fires became so active, that at sunrise the external walls
of the cone, heated to a very considerable temperature, appeared naked,
and of the dark color which is peculiar to vitrified scoriæ. “At the
port of Guyaquil,” observes Humboldt, “fifty-two leagues distant in a
straight line from the crater, we heard, day and night, the noise of
this volcano, like continued discharges of a battery; and we
distinguished these tremendous sounds even on the Pacific ocean.”

The form of Cotopaxi is the most beautiful and regular of the colossal
summits of the high Andes. It is a perfect cone, which, covered with a
perpetual layer of snow, shines with dazzling splendor at the setting of
the sun, and detaches itself in the most picturesque manner from the
azure vault above. This covering of snow conceals from the eye of the
observer even the smallest inequalities of the soil; no point of rock,
no stony mass, penetrating this coat of ice, or breaking the regularity
of the figure of the cone.


                               PICHINCHA.

Though celebrated for its great hight, Pichincha is three thousand,
eight hundred and forty-nine feet, or three-fourths of a mile, lower
than the perpendicular elevation of Cotopaxi. It was formerly a volcano;
but the mouth or crater on one of its sides is now covered with sand or
calcined matter, so that at present neither smoke nor ashes issue from
it.

When it was ascended by Don George Juan and Don Antonio de Ulloa, for
the purpose of their astronomical observations, they found the cold on
the top of this mountain extremely intense, the wind very violent, and
the fog, or, in other words, the cloud, so thick, that objects at the
distance of six or eight paces were scarcely discernible. On the air
becoming clear, by the clouds descending nearer the earth, in such a
manner as to surround the mountain on all sides to a vast distance,
these clouds afforded a lively representation of the sea, in which the
top of the mountain seemed to stand, like an island in the center.

         “With aspect mild, and elevated eye,
         Behold him seated on a mount serene,
         Above the fogs of sense, and passion’s storm:
         All the black cares and tumults of this life,
         Like harmless thunders, breaking at his feet.”—YOUNG.

When the clouds descended, the astronomers heard the dreadful noise of
tempests, which discharged themselves from them on the adjacent country.
They saw the lightning issue from the clouds, and heard the thunder roll
far beneath them. While the lower parts were thus involved in tempests
of thunder and rain, they enjoyed a delightful serenity; the wind
abated, the sky cleared, and the enlivening rays of the sun moderated
the severity of the cold. But when the clouds rose, their density
rendered respiration difficult: snow and hail fell continually, and the
winds returned with such violence, that it was impossible to overcome
the fear of being blown down the precipices, or of being buried by the
accumulation of ice and snow, or by the enormous fragments of rocks
which rolled around them. Every crevice in their hut was stopped, and
though the hut was small, was crowded with inhabitants, and several
lamps were constantly burning, the cold was so great, that each
individual was obliged to have a chafing-dish of coals, and several men
were employed every morning in removing the snow which had fallen during
the night. Their feet were swollen, and they became so tender and
sensible, that walking was attended with extreme pain; their hands also
were covered with chilblains, and their lips were so swollen and
chapped, that every motion in speaking brought blood.


                              MOUNT ETNA.

        “Now under sulphurous Cuma’s sea-bound coast,
          And vast Sicilia, lies the shaggy breast
        Of snowy Etna, nurse of endless frost,
          The pillared prop of heaven, forever pressed:
        Forth from whose sulph’rous caverns issuing rise
          Pure liquid fountains of tempestuous fire,
        Which vail in ruddy mists the noonday skies,
          While wrapt in smoke the eddying flames aspire,
        Or gleaming through the night with hideous roar,
        Far o’er the redd’ning main huge rocky fragments pour.

        “But he, Vulcanian monster, to the clouds
          The fiercest, hottest inundations throws,
        While, with the burthen of incumbent woods,
          And Etna’s gloomy cliffs o’erwhelmed he glows.
        There on his flinty bed outstretch’d he lies,
          Whose pointed rock his tossing carcass wounds;
        There with dismay he strikes beholding eyes,
          Or frights the distant ear with horrid sounds.”—WEST.

Mount Etna, one of the most majestic of all the volcanoes, which the
ancients considered as one of the highest mountains in the world, and on
the summit of which they believed that Deucalion and Pyrrha sought
refuge, to save themselves from the universal deluge, is situated on the
plain of Catania, in Sicily.

Its elevation above the level of the sea has been estimated at ten
thousand, nine hundred and sixty-three feet, or upward of two miles. On
clear days it is distinctly seen from Valetta, the capital of Malta, a
distance of one hundred and fifty miles. It is incomparably the largest
burning mountain in Europe. From its sides other mountains arise, which,
in different ages, have been ejected in single masses from its enormous
crater. The most extensive lavas of Vesuvius do not exceed seven miles
in length, while those of Etna extend to fifteen, twenty, and some even
to thirty miles. The crater of Etna is seldom less than a mile in
circuit, and sometimes is two or three miles; but the circumference of
the Vesuvian crater is never more than half a mile, even when widely
distended, in its most destructive conflagrations. And, lastly, the
earthquakes occasioned by these adjacent volcanoes, their eruptions,
their showers of ignited stones, and the destruction and desolation
which they create, are severally proportionate to their respective
dimensions.

[Illustration: CRATER OF MOUNT ETNA.]

A journey up Etna is considered as an enterprise of importance, as well
from the difficulty of the route, as from the distance, it being thirty
miles from Catania to the summit of the mountain. Its gigantic bulk, its
sublime elevation, and the extensive, varied, and grand prospects which
are presented from its summit, have, however, induced the curious in
every age to ascend and examine it; and not a few have transmitted,
through the press, the observations which they have made during their
arduous journey. From its vast base it rises like a pyramid to the
perpendicular hight of two miles, by an acclivity nearly equal on all
sides, forming with the horizon an angle of about fifteen degrees, which
becomes greater on approaching the crater; but the inclination of the
steepest part of the cone nowhere exceeds an angle of forty-five
degrees. This prodigious volcano may be compared to a forge, which, in
proportion to the violence of the fire, to the nature of the fossil
matters on which it acts, and of the gases which urge and set it in
motion, produces, destroys, and reproduces, a variety of forms; and of
this, as of all active volcanoes, we may say in the language of Young,

             “The dread volcano ministers to good;
             Its smothered flames might undermine the world
             Loud Etnas fulminate in love to man.”

The top of Etna being above the common region of vapors, the heavens, at
this elevation, appear with an unusual splendor. Brydone and his company
observed, as they ascended in the night, that the number of the stars
seemed to be infinitely increased, and the light of each was brighter
than usual. The whiteness of the milky way was like a pure flame which
spread across the heavens; and, with the naked eye, they could observe
clusters of stars which were invisible from below. They likewise noticed
several of those meteors called falling stars, which appeared as much
elevated here as when viewed from the plain beneath.

This single mountain contains an epitome of the different climates
throughout the world, presenting at once all the seasons of the year,
and all the varieties of produce. It is accordingly divided into three
distinct zones or regions, which may be distinguished as the torrid,
temperate, and frigid, but which are known by the names of the
cultivated region, the woody or temperate region, and the frigid or
desert region. The former of these extends through twelve miles of the
ascent toward the summit, and is almost incredibly abundant in pastures
and fruit-trees of every description. It is covered with towns, villages
and monasteries; and the number of inhabitants spread over its surface
is estimated at one hundred and twenty thousand. In ascending to the
woody or temperate region, the scene changes; it is a new climate, a new
creation. Below, the heat is suffocating; but here, the air is mild and
fresh. The turf is covered with aromatic plants; and the gulfs, which
formerly ejected torrents of fire, are changed into woody valleys.
Nothing can be more picturesque than this; the inequality of the soil
displaying every moment some variety of scene: here, the ash and
flowering thorns form domes of verdure; and there, the chestnut-trees
grow to an enormous size. The one called =castagno de cento cavilli=,
according to Brydone and Glover, has a circumference of two hundred and
four feet. Many of the oaks also are of a prodigious size. Mr. Swinburne
measured one which had a circumference of twenty-eight feet. The last,
or desert region, commences more than a mile above the level of the sea.
The lower part is covered with snow in winter only; but on the upper
half of this sterile district the snows continually lie.

[Illustration: THE “CASTAGNO DE CENTO CAVILLI,” OR GREAT CHESTNUT TREE
OF MOUNT ETNA.]

The cone of Etna is, in a right line, about a mile in ascent. The crater
is about a mile and a half in circumference; and from the inner part of
this, a column of smoke constantly rises; while the liquid fiery matter
may be seen rolling, rising and falling within. As to the vastness and
beauty of the prospect from the summit of Etna, all writers agree that
it is probably unsurpassed. M. Houel was there at sunrise, when the
horizon was perfectly clear, and the coast of Calabria, as seen in the
distance, appeared to the eye misty, and undistinguishable from the sea.
The sky above was specked with the light floating clouds that are so
often seen in that delightful climate before the rising of the sun; and
in the calm silence all nature seemed waiting the coming of the orb of
day. And very soon the promise thus given began to be fulfilled. In a
short time a fiery radiance appeared in the east. The fleecy clouds were
tinged with purple; the atmosphere became strongly illuminated, and,
reflecting the rays of the sun, seemed to be filled with a bright
refulgence of flame. Although the heavens were thus enlightened, the sea
still retained its dark azure, and the fields and forests did not yet
reflect the rays of the sun. The gradual rising of this luminary,
however, soon diffused light over the hills which lie below the peak of
Etna. This last stood like an island in the midst of the ocean, with
luminous points multiplying every moment around, and spreading over a
wider extent with the greatest rapidity. It was, he said, as if the
world had been observed suddenly to spring from the night of
non-existence.

                          “Ere the rising sun
          Shone o’er the deep, or ’mid the vault of night
          The moon her silver lamp suspended; ere
          The vales with springs were watered, or with groves
          Of oak or pine the ancient hills were crowned;
          Then the Great Spirit, whom his works adore,
          Within his own deep essence viewed the forms,
          The forms eternal of created things:
          The radiant sun; the moon’s nocturnal lamp;
          The mountains and the streams: the ample stores
          Of earth, of heaven, of nature. From the first,
          On that full scene his love divine he fixed,
          His admiration. Till, in time complete,
          What he admired and loved, his vital power
          Unfolded into being. Hence the breath
          Of life, informing each organic frame;
          Hence the green earth, and wild resounding waves;
          Hence light and shade, alternate; warmth and cold;
          And bright autumnal skies, and vernal showers,
          And all the fair variety of things.”—AKENSIDE.

The most sublime object, however, which the summit of Etna presents, is
the immense mass of its own colossal body. Its upper region exhibits
rough and craggy cliffs, rising perpendicularly, fearful to the view,
and surrounded by an assemblage of fugitive clouds, to increase the wild
variety of the scene. Amid the multitude of woods in the middle or
temperate region, are numerous mountains, which, in any other situation,
would appear of a gigantic size, but which, compared to Etna, are mere
mole-hills. Lastly, the eye contemplates with admiration the lower
region, the most extensive of the three, adorned with elegant villas and
castles, verdant hills and flowery fields, and terminated by the
extensive coast, where to the south stands the beautiful city of
Catania, to which the waves of the neighboring sea serve as a mirror.

Etna has been celebrated as a volcano from the remotest antiquity.
Eruptions are recorded by Diodorus Siculus, as having happened five
hundred years before the Trojan war, or sixteen hundred and ninety-three
years before the Christian era.

                    “Etna roars with dreadful ruins nigh,
          Now hurls a bursting cloud of cinders high,
          Involved in smoky whirlwinds to the sky;
          With loud displosion to the starry frame,
          Shoots fiery globes, and furious floods of flame:
          Now from her bellowing caverns burst away
          Vast piles of melted rocks in open day.
          Her shattered entrails wide the mountain throws,
          And deep as hell her flaming center glows.”—WARTON.

In 1669, the torrent of burning lava inundated a space fourteen miles in
length, and four in breadth, burying beneath it part of Catania, till at
length it precipitated itself into the sea. For several months before
the lava broke out, the old mouth, or great crater of the summit, was
observed to send forth much smoke and flame, and the top had fallen in,
so that the mountain was much lowered.

Eighteen days before, the sky was very thick and dark, with thunder,
lightning, frequent concussions of the earth, and dreadful subterraneous
bellowings. On the eleventh of March, about sunset, an immense gulf
opened in the mountain, into which when stones were thrown, they could
not be heard to strike the bottom. Ignited rocks, fifteen feet in
length, were hurled to the distance of a mile; while others of a smaller
size were carried three miles. During the night, the red-hot lava burst
out of a vineyard twenty miles below the great crater, and ascended into
the air to a considerable hight. In its course, it destroyed five
thousand habitations, and filled up a lake several fathoms deep. It
shortly after reached Catania, rose over the walls, whence it ran for a
considerable length into the sea, forming a safe and beautiful harbor,
which was, however, soon filled up by a similar torrent of inflamed
matter. This is the stream, the hideous deformity of which, devoid of
vegetation, still disfigures the south and western borders of Catania,
and on which part of the noble modern city is built.

The showers of scoriæ and sand which, after a lapse of two days,
followed this eruption, formed a mountain called Monte Rosso, having a
base of about two miles, and a perpendicular hight of seven hundred and
fifty feet. On the twenty-fifth, the whole mountain, even to the most
elevated peak, was agitated by a tremendous earthquake. The highest
crater of Etna, which was one of the loftiest parts of the mountain,
then sunk into the volcanic gulf, and in the place which it had
occupied, there now appeared nothing but a wide gulf, more than a mile
in extent, from which issued enormous quantities of smoke, ashes and
stones.

In 1809, twelve new craters opened about half-way down the mountain, and
threw out rivers of burning lava, by which several estates were covered
to the depth of thirty or forty feet; and during three or four
successive nights, a very large river of red-hot lava was distinctly
seen, in its whole extent, running down from the mountain.

In 1811, several mouths opened on the eastern side of the mountain:
being nearly in the same line, and at equal distances, they presented to
the view a striking spectacle; torrents of burning matter, discharged
with the greatest force from the interior of the volcano, illuminated
the horizon to a great extent. An immense quantity of matter, which was
driven to considerable distances, was discharged from these apertures,
the largest of which continued for several months to emit torrents of
fire. Even at the time when it had the appearance of being choked, there
suddenly issued from it clouds of ashes, which descended, in the form of
rain, on the city of Catania and its environs, as well as on the fields
situated at a very considerable distance. A roaring, resembling that of
a sea in the midst of a tempest, was heard to proceed from the interior
of the mountain; and this sound, accompanied from time to time by
dreadful explosions, resembling thunder, reëchoed through the valleys,
and spread terror on every side.


                            MOUNT VESUVIUS.

                          “The fluid lake that works below,
            Bitumen, sulphur, salt, and iron scum,
            Heaves up its boiling tide. The lab’ring mount
            Is torn with agonizing throes. At once,
            Forth from its sides disparted, blazing pours
            A mighty river; burning in prone waves,
            That glimmer through the night, to yonder plain.
            Divided there, a hundred torrent streams,
            Each plowing up its bed, roll dreadful on,
            Resistless. Villages, and woods, and rocks,
            Fall flat before their sweep. The region round,
            Where myrtle-walks and groves of golden fruit
            Rose fair; where harvest wav’d in all its pride;
            And where the vineyard spread its purple store,
            Maturing into nectar; now despoiled
            Of herb, leaf, fruit and flower, from end to end
            Lies buried under fire, a glowing sea!”—MALLET.

This celebrated volcano, which has for so many ages attracted the
attention of mankind, and the desolating eruptions of which have been so
often and so fatally experienced, is distant, in an eastern direction,
about seven miles from Naples. It rises, insulated, upon a vast and well
cultivated plain, presenting two summits on the same base, in which
particular it resembles Mount Parnassus. One of these, La Somma, is
generally agreed to have been the Vesuvius of Strabo and the ancients;
the other, having the greatest elevation, is the mouth of the volcano,
which almost constantly emits smoke. Its hight above the level of the
sea, is thirty-nine hundred feet, and it may be ascended by three
different routes, which are all very steep and difficult, from the
conical form of the mountain, and the loose ashes which slip from under
the feet: still, from the base to the summit, the distance is not more
than three Italian miles. The circumference of the platform on the top,
is five thousand and twenty-four feet, or nearly a mile. Thence may be
seen Portici, Capræa, Ischia, Pausilippo, and the whole coast of the
gulf of Naples, bordered with orange-trees: the prospect is that of
Paradise seen from the infernal regions.

[Illustration: MOUNT VESUVIUS.]

On approaching the mountain, its aspect does not convey any impression
of terror, nor is it gloomy, being cultivated for more than two-thirds
of its hight, and having its brown top alone barren. There all verdure
ceases; yet, when it appears covered with clouds, which sometimes
encompass its middle only, this circumstance rather adds to than
detracts from the magnificence of the spectacle. Upon the lavas which
the volcano long ago ejected, and which, like great furrows, extend into
the plain and to the sea, are built houses, villages and towns. Gardens,
vineyards and cultivated fields surround them; but a sentiment of
sorrow, blended with apprehensions about the future, arises on the
recollection that, beneath a soil so fruitful and so smiling, lie
edifices, gardens and whole towns swallowed up. Portici rests upon
Herculaneum; its environs upon Resina; and at a little distance is
Pompeii, in the streets of which, after more than seventeen centuries of
non-existence, the astonished traveler now walks. After a long interval
of repose, in the first year of the reign of Titus, (the seventy-ninth
of the Christian era,) the volcano suddenly broke out, ejecting thick
clouds of ashes and pumice-stones, beneath which Herculaneum, Stabia and
Pompeii were completely buried. This eruption was fatal to the elder
Pliny, the historian, who fell a victim to his humanity and love of
science. Even at this day, in speaking of Vesuvius, the remembrance of
his untimely death excites a melancholy regret. All the coast to the
east of the gulf of Naples was, on the above occasion, ravaged and
destroyed, presenting nothing but a long succession of ejected matters
from Herculaneum to Stabia. The destruction did not extend to the
western part, but stopped at Naples, which suffered comparatively
little.

Thirty-eight eruptions of Vesuvius are recorded in history up to the
year 1806. That of 1779, has been described by Sir William Hamilton, as
among the most remarkable, from its extraordinary and terrific
appearance. During the whole of July, the mountain was in a state of
considerable fermentation, subterraneous explosions and rumbling noises
being heard, and quantities of smoke thrown up with great violence,
sometimes with red-hot stones, scoriæ, and ashes. On the fifth of
August, the volcano was greatly agitated, a white sulphurous smoke,
apparently four times the hight and size of the volcano itself, issuing
from the crater, at the same time that vast quantities of stones, &c.,
were thrown up to the supposed hight of two thousand feet. The liquid
lava, having cleared the rim of the crater, flowed down the sides of the
mountain to the distance of four miles. The air was darkened by showers
of reddish ashes, blended with long filaments of a vitrified matter
resembling glass.

On the seventh, at midnight, a fountain of fire shot up from the crater
to an incredible hight, casting so bright a light, that the smallest
objects were clearly distinguishable at any place within six miles of
the volcano. On the following evening, after a tremendous explosion,
which broke the windows of the houses at Portici, another fountain of
liquid fire rose to the surprising hight of ten thousand feet, (nearly
two miles,) while puffs of the blackest smoke accompanied the red-hot
lava, interrupting its splendid brightness here and there by patches of
the darkest hue. The lava was partly directed by the wind toward
Ottaiano, on which so thick a shower of ashes, blended with vast pieces
of scoriæ, fell, that had it been of longer continuance, that town would
have shared the fate of Pompeii. It took fire in several places; and had
there been much wind, the inhabitants would have been burned in their
houses, it being impossible for them to stir out. To add to the horror
of the scene, incessant volcanic lightning darted through the black
cloud that surrounded them, while the sulphureous smell and heat would
scarcely allow them to draw their breath. In this dreadful state they
remained nearly half an hour. The remaining part of the lava, still
red-hot and liquid, fell on the top of Vesuvius, and covered its whole
cone, together with that of La Somma, and the valley between them, thus
forming one complete body of fire, which could not be less than two
miles and a half in breadth, and casting a heat to the distance of at
least six miles around.

The eruption of 1794 is accurately described by the above writer; but
has not an equal degree of interest with the one cited above. We subjoin
a few particulars, among which is a circumstance well deserving notice,
as it leads to an estimate of the degree of heat in volcanoes. Sir
William says that although the town of Torre del Greco was instantly
surrounded with red-hot lava, the inhabitants saved themselves by coming
out of the tops of their houses on the following day. It is evident,
observes Mr. Kirwan, that if this lava had been hot enough to melt even
the most fusible stones, these persons must have been suffocated.

This eruption happened on the fifteenth of June, at ten o’clock at
night, and was announced by a shock of an earthquake, which was
distinctly felt at Naples. At the same moment a fountain of bright fire,
attended with a very black smoke and a loud report, was seen to issue,
and rise to a considerable hight, from about the middle of the cone of
Vesuvius. It was hastily succeeded by other fountains, fifteen of which
were counted, all in a direct line, tending for the space of about a
mile and a half downward, toward the towns of Resina and Torre del
Greco. This fiery scene, this great operation of nature, was accompanied
by the loudest thunder, the incessant reports of which, like those of a
numerous heavy artillery, were attended by a continued hollow murmur,
similar to that of the roaring of the ocean during a violent storm.
Another blowing noise resembled that of the ascent of a large flight of
rockets. The houses at Naples were for several hours in a constant
tremor, the doors and windows shaking and rattling incessantly, and the
bells ringing. At this awful moment the sky, from a bright full moon and
starlight, became obscured; the moon seemed eclipsed, and was soon lost
in obscurity. The murmur of the prayers and lamentations of a numerous
population, forming various processions, and parading the streets, added
to the horrors of the scene.

On the following day a new mouth was opened on the opposite side of the
mountain, facing the town of Ottaiano: from this aperture a considerable
stream of lava issued, and ran with great velocity through a wood, which
it burnt; but it stopped, after having run about three miles in a few
hours, before it reached the vineyards and cultivated lands. The lava
which had flowed from several new mouths on the south side of the
mountain, reached the sea into which it ran, after having overwhelmed,
burnt and destroyed the greater part of Torre del Greco, through the
center of which it took its course. This town contained about eighteen
thousand inhabitants, all of whom escaped, with the exception of about
fifteen, who through age or infirmity, were overwhelmed in their houses
by the lava. Its rapid progress was such, that their goods and effects
were entirely abandoned.

It was ascertained some time after, that a considerable part of the
crater had fallen in, so as to have given a great extension to the mouth
of Vesuvius, which was conjectured to be nearly two miles in
circumference. This sinking of the crater was chiefly on the west side,
opposite Naples, and, in all probability, occurred early in the morning
of the eighteenth, when a violent shock of an earthquake was felt at
Resina, and other places situated at the foot of the volcano. The clouds
of smoke which issued from the now widely extended mouth of Vesuvius,
were of such a density as to appear to force their passage with the
utmost difficulty. One cloud heaped itself on another, and, succeeding
each other incessantly, they formed in a few hours such a gigantic and
elevated column, of the darkest hue, over the mountain, as seemed to
threaten Naples with immediate destruction, it having at one time been
bent over the city, and appearing to be much too massive and ponderous
to remain long suspended in the air.

From the above time, till 1804, Vesuvius remained in a state of almost
constant tranquillity. Symptoms of a fresh eruption had manifested
themselves for several months, when at length on the night of the
eleventh of August, a deep roaring was heard at the hermitage of
Salvador, and the places adjacent to the mountain, accompanied by shocks
of an earthquake, which were sensibly felt at Resina. On the following
morning, at noon, a thick black smoke rose from the mouth of the crater,
which, dilating prodigiously, covered the whole volcano. In the evening,
loud explosions were heard; and at Naples a column of fire was seen to
rise from the aperture, carrying up stones in a state of complete
ignition, which fell again into the crater. The noise by which these
igneous explosions were accompanied, resembled the roaring of the most
dreadful tempest and the whistling of the most furious winds; while the
celerity with which the substances were ejected was such, that the first
emission had not terminated when it was succeeded by a second. Small
monticules were at this time formed of a fluid matter, resembling a
vitreous paste of a red color, which flowed from the mouth of the
crater; and these became more considerable in proportion as the matter
accumulated.

In this state the eruption continued for several days, the fire being
equally intense, with frequent and dreadful noises. On the
twenty-eighth, amid these fearful symptoms, another aperture, ejecting
fire and stones, situated behind the crater, was seen from Naples. The
burning mass of lava which escaped from the crater on the following day,
was distinguished from Torre del Greco, having the appearance of a
vitreous fluid, and advancing toward the base of the mountain between
the south and south-west. It reached the base on the thirtieth, having
flowed from the aperture, in less than twenty-four hours, a distance of
three thousand and fifty-three feet, while its mean breadth appeared to
be about three hundred and fifty, but at the base, eight hundred and
sixty feet. In its course it divided into four branches, and finally
reached a spot called the Guide’s Retreat. Its entire progress to this
point was more than a mile, so that, taking a mean proportion, this lava
flowed at the rate of eighty-six feet an hour.

At the time of this eruption, Kotzebue was at Naples. Vesuvius lay
opposite to his window, and when it was dark he could clearly perceive
in what manner the masses of fire rolled down the mountain. As long as
any glimmering of light remained, that part of the mountain was to be
seen on the declivity of which the lava formed a straight but oblique
line. As soon, however, as it was perfectly dark, and the mountain
itself had vanished from the eye, it seemed as if a comet with a long
tail stood in the sky. The spectacle was awful and grand!

Kotzebue ascended the mountain on the morning succeeding the opening of
a new gulf, and approached the crater as nearly as prudence would allow.
From its center ascended the sulphurous yellow cone which the eruption
of this year had formed: on the other side, a thick smoke perpetually
arose from the abyss opened during the preceding night. The side of the
crater opposite to him, which rose considerably higher than that on
which he stood, afforded a singular aspect; for it was covered with
little pillars of smoke, which burst forth from it, and had some
resemblance to extinguished lights. The air over the crater was actually
embodied, and was clearly to be seen in a tremulous motion. Below, the
volcano boiled and roared dreadfully, like the most violent hurricane;
but occasionally a sudden deadly stillness ensued for some moments,
after which the roaring renewed with double vehemence, and the smoke
burst forth in thicker and blacker clouds. It was, he observes, as if
the spirit of the mountain had suddenly tried to stop the gulf, while
the flames indignantly refused to endure the confinement.

It is remarkable, that the great eruption of 1805, happened on the
twelfth of August, within a day of that of the preceding year.
Subterraneous noises had been previously heard, and a general
apprehension of some violent commotion prevailing, the inhabitants of
Torre del Greco and Annunciada had left their homes, through the
apprehension of a shower of fire and ashes, similar to that which buried
Pompeii. The stream of lava took the same course with that of 1794,
described above, one of the arms following the direction of the great
road, and rolling toward the sea. The stream soon divided again, and
spreading itself with an increased celerity, swept away many houses and
the finest plantations. The other branch, at first, took the direction
of Portici, which was threatened; but turning, and joining the preceding
one, formed a sort of islet of boiling lava in the middle, both ending
in the sea, and composing a promontory of volcanic matters. In the space
of twenty minutes the whole extent of ground which the lava occupied was
on fire, offering a terrible yet singular spectacle, as the burning
trees presented the aspect of white flames, in contrast with those of
the volcanic matters, which were red. The lava swept along with it
enormous masses of whatever occurred in its course, and, on its reaching
the sea, nothing was to be seen or heard for a great extent of shore,
beside the boiling and hissing arising from the conflict of the water
and fire.

It remains now to introduce a slight notice of the eruption of 1806,
which, without any sensible indication, took place on the evening of the
thirty-first of May, when a bright flame rose from the mountain to the
hight of about six hundred feet, sinking and rising alternately, and
affording so clear a light, that a letter might have been read at the
distance of a league around the mountain. On the following morning,
without any earthquake preceding, as had been customary, the volcano
began to eject inflamed substances from three new mouths, pretty near to
each other, and about six hundred and fifty feet from the summit. The
lava took the direction of Torre del Greco and Annunciada, approaching
Portici, on the road leading from Naples to Pompeii. Throughout the
whole of the second of June, a noise was heard, resembling that of two
armies engaged, when the discharges of artillery and musketry are very
brisk. The current of lava now resembled a wall of glass in a state of
fusion, sparks and flashes issuing from it from time to time, with a
powerful detonation. Vines, trees, houses—whatever objects, in short, it
encountered on its way, were instantly overthrown or destroyed. In one
part, where it met with the resistance of a wall, it formed a cascade of
fire. In a few days Portici, Resina, and Torre del Greco, were covered
with ashes thrown out by the volcano; and on the ninth, the two former
places were deluged with a thick black rain, consisting of a species of
mud filled with sulphurous particles. On the first of July, the ancient
crater had wholly disappeared, being filled with ashes and lava, and a
new one was formed in the eastern part of the mountain, about six
hundred feet in depth, and having about the same width at the opening.
Several persons, on the above day, descended about half-way down this
new mouth, and remained half an hour very near the flames, admiring the
spectacle presented by the liquid lava, which bubbled up at the bottom
of the crater, like the fused matter in a glass-house. This eruption
continued until September, made great ravages, and was considered as one
of the most terrible that had occurred in the memory of the inhabitants.


                              MOUNT HECLA.

                          [See cut, page 29.]

          “Still pressing on beneath Tornea’s lake,
          And Hecla flaming through a waste of snow,
          And farthest Greenland, to the pole itself,
          Where, falling gradual, life at length goes out,
          The Muse expands her solitary flight;
          And hov’ring o’er the wide stupendous scene,
          Beholds new scenes beneath another sky.
          Throned in his palace of cerulean ice,
          Here Winter holds his unrejoicing court,
          And through his airy hall the loud misrule
          Of driving tempest is forever heard;
          Here the grim tyrant meditates his wrath;
          Here arms his winds with all-subduing frost,
          Molds his fierce hail, and treasures up his snows.”

On proceeding along the southern coast of Iceland, and at an
inconsiderable distance from Skalholt, Mount Hecla, with its three
summits, presents itself to the view. Its hight is five thousand feet,
or nearly a mile above the level of the sea. It is not a promontory, but
lies about four miles inland. It is neither so elevated nor so
picturesque as several of the surrounding Icelandic mountains; but has
been more noticed than many other volcanoes of an equal extent, partly
through the frequency of its eruptions, and partly from its situation,
which exposes it to the view of many ships sailing to Greenland and
North America. The surrounding territory has been so devastated by these
eruptions, that it has been deserted.

           “Vast regions dreary, bleak and bare!
           There on an icy mountain’s hight,
           Seen only by the moon’s pale light
           Stern Winter rears his giant form,
           His robe a mist, his life a storm:
           His frown the shiv’ring nations fly,
           And, hid for half the year, in smoky caverns lie.”

[Illustration: MOUNT HECLA AND THE GEYSERS.]

The natives assert that it is impossible to ascend the mountain, on
account of the great number of dangerous bogs, which, according to them,
are constantly emitting sulphurous flames and exhaling smoke; while the
more elevated summit in the center is covered with boiling springs and
large craters, which continually propel fire and smoke. To the south and
west the environs present the most desolating results of frequent
eruptions, the finest part of the territory being covered by torrents of
melted stone, sand, ashes, and other volcanic matter; notwithstanding
which, between the sinuosities of the lava in different parts, some
portion of meadows, walls and broken hedges may be observed. The
devastation is still greater on the north and east sides, which present
dreadful traces of the ruin of the country and its habitations. Neither
plants nor grass are to be met with to the extent of two leagues round
the mountain, in consequence of the soil being covered with stones and
lava; and in some parts, where the subterraneous fire has broken out a
second time, or where the matter which was not entirely consumed has
again become ignited, the fire has contributed to form small red and
black hillocks and eminences, from scoriæ, pumice-stones and ashes. The
nearer the mountain the larger are these hillocks, and there are some of
them, the summits of which form a circular hollow, whence the
subterraneous fire ejects the matter. On approaching Hecla the ground
becomes almost impassable, particularly near the higher branches of lava
thrown from the volcano. Round the latter is a mountain of lava,
consisting of large fused stones, from forty to seventy feet high, and
in the form of a rampart or wall. These stones are detached, and chiefly
covered with moss; while between them are very deep holes, so that the
ascent on the western side requires great circumspection. The rocks are
completely reduced to pumice, dispersed in thin horizontal layers, and
fractured in every direction, from which some idea may be formed of the
intensity of the fire that has acted on them.

            “There Winter, armed with terrors here unknown,
            Sits absolute on his unshaken throne;
            Piles up his stores amidst the frozen waste,
            And bids the mountains he has built stand fast;
            Beckons the legions of his storms away
            From happier scenes to make the land a prey;
            Proclaims the soil a conquest he has won,
            And scorns to share it with the distant sun.”

Sir Joseph Banks, Dr. Solander, Dr. James Lind, of Edinburgh, and Dr.
Van Troil, a Swede, were the earliest adventurous travelers who ascended
to the summit of Mount Hecla. This was in 1772; and the attempt was
facilitated by a preceding eruption in 1766, which had greatly
diminished the steepness and difficulty of the ascent. On their first
landing, they found a tract of land sixty or seventy miles in extent,
entirely ruined by lava, which appeared to have been in a state of
complete liquefaction. To accomplish their undertaking, they had to
travel from three hundred to three hundred and sixty miles over
uninterrupted tracts of lava. In ascending, they were obliged to quit
their horses at the first opening from which the fire had burst: a spot,
which they describe as presenting lofty glazed walls and high glazed
cliffs, differing from anything they had ever seen before. At another
opening above, they fancied they discerned the effects of boiling water;
and not far from thence, the mountain, with the exception of some bare
spots, was covered with snow. The difference of aspect they soon
perceived to be occasioned by the hot vapor ascending from the mountain.
The higher they proceeded, the larger these spots became; and, about two
hundred yards below the summit, a hole about a yard and a half in
diameter, was observed, whence issued so hot a stream, that they could
not measure the degree of heat with a thermometer. The cold now began to
be very intense. Fahrenheit’s thermometer, which at the foot of the
mountain was at fifty-four degrees, fell to twenty-four degrees; while
the wind became so violent, that they were sometimes obliged to lie
down, from a dread of being blown into the most dreadful precipices. On
the summit itself they experienced, at one and the same time, a high
degree of heat and cold; for, in the air, Fahrenheit’s thermometer
constantly stood at twenty-four degrees, but when placed on the ground,
it rose to one hundred and fifty-three degrees.

Messrs. Olafsen and Povelsen, two naturalists, whose travels in Iceland
were undertaken by order of his Danish majesty, after a fatiguing
journey up several small slopes, which occurred at intervals, and seven
of which they had to pass, at length reached the summit of Mount Hecla
at midnight. It was as light as at noonday, so that they had a view of
an immense extent, but could perceive nothing but ice; neither fissures,
streams of water, boiling springs, smoke, nor fire, were apparent. They
surveyed the glaciers in the eastern part, and in the distance saw the
high and square mountain of Hærdabreid, an ancient volcano, which
appeared like a large castle.

Sir G. S. Mackenzie, in his travels in Iceland, ascended Mount Hecla;
and from his account we extract the following interesting particulars.
In proceeding to the southern extremity of the mountain, he descended,
by a dangerous path, into a valley, having a small lake in one corner,
and the opposite extremity bounded by a perpendicular face of rock,
resembling, in its broken and rugged appearance, a stream of lava. While
advancing, the sun suddenly broke through the clouds, and the brilliant
reflection of his beams, from different parts of this supposed lava, as
if from a surface of glass, delighted our traveler by the instantaneous
conviction that he had now attained one of the principal objects
connected with the plan of his expedition to Iceland. He hastened to the
spot, and all his wishes were fully accomplished in the examination of
an object which greatly exceeded the expectations he had formed. On
ascending one of the abrupt pinnacles, which rose out of this
extraordinary mass of rock, he beheld a region, the desolation of which
can scarcely be paralleled. Fantastic groups of hills, craters, and
lava, leading the eye to distant snow-crowned “jockuls,” (inferior
mountains,) the mist rising from a waterfall; lakes, embosomed among
bleak mountains; an awful profound silence; lowering clouds; marks all
around of the furious action of the most destructive of elements; all
combined to impress the soul with sensations of dread and wonder. The
longer he and his companions contemplated this scene, the more unable
they were to turn their eyes from it; and a considerable time elapsed
before they could bring themselves to attend to the business which had
tempted them to enter so frightful a district of the country.

Having proceeded a considerable distance along the edge of a stream of
lava, a narrow part of which they crossed, they gained the foot of the
south end of Mount Hecla. While, in ascending, they had to pass over
rugged lava, they experienced no great difficulty in advancing; but when
they reached the steepest part of the mountain, which was covered with
loose slags, they sometimes lost at one step by the yielding of these, a
space which had been gained by several.

Having passed a number of fissures, by leaping across some, and stepping
along masses of slags which lay over others, they at length reached the
summit of the first peak. The clouds now became so thick, that they
began to despair of being able to proceed any further: it was, indeed,
dangerous even to move; for the peak consists of a very narrow ridge of
slags, not more than two feet broad, having a precipice on each side,
several hundred feet in depth. One of these precipices forms the side of
a vast hollow, which seems to have been one of the craters. At length
the sky cleared a little, and enabled them to discover a ridge below,
which seemed to connect the peak they had ascended with the middle or
principal one. They lost no time in availing themselves of this
opportunity, and, by balancing themselves like rope-dancers, succeeded
in passing along a ridge of slags, so narrow that there was scarcely
room for their feet. After a short, but very steep ascent, they gained
the highest part of this celebrated mountain.

Its earliest eruption is said to have happened in 1004, since which time
upward of twenty have occurred. That of 1693 was the most dreadful, and
occasioned terrible devastations, the ashes having been thrown over the
island in every direction, to the distance of more than one hundred
miles. In 1728, a fire broke out among the surrounding lava; and also in
that to the west of the volcano, in 1754, which lasted for three days.
There has not been any eruption of lava since 1766; but for some years
after, flames issued from the volcano.


                              THE GEYSERS.

                         [See cut on page 29.]

          “Nor stops the restless fluid, mounting still,
          Though oft amid th’ irriguous vale of springs;
          But to the mountain courted by the sand,
          That leads it darkling on in faithful maze,
          Far from the parent main, it boils again!
          Fresh into day; and all the glittering hill
          Is bright with spouting rills.
          The crystal treasures of the liquid world,
          Through the stirred sands a bubbling passage burst;
          And welling out, around the middle steep,
          Or from the bottoms of the bosomed hills,
          In pure effusion flow.”—THOMSON.

These celebrated fountains, or hot spouting water springs, being nearly
connected with the operations of subterraneous fire, so visible in every
part of Iceland, may be properly introduced after the description of
Mount Hecla, given above.

They are seldom very near the volcanoes, but are dispersed over the
whole country, and are even to be found on the summits of several of the
ice mountains. The largest and most remarkable of these is situated in a
large field, about sixteen miles to the north of Skalholt. At a great
distance from it, on one side, are high mountains covered with ice, and
on the other Hecla is seen rising above the clouds, while opposite to it
is a ridge of rocks, at the foot of which water from time to time rushes
forth. At the distance of a mile and a half, a loud roaring noise is
heard, like that of a torrent precipitated from stupendous rocks, each
ejection being accompanied by violent subterraneous detonations. The
depth of the opening from which the water rushes, has not been
ascertained; but some seconds elapse before a stone thrown in reaches
the surface. The Danish traveler, Olafsen, asserts, that the water rises
as high as sixty fathoms: while Van Troil estimates the highest jet at
not more than sixty feet: the latter allows, however, that the jets may
be more elevated, particularly in bad weather. The greatness of the
explosive power is evinced by its not only preventing stones thrown in
from sinking, but even forcing them up to a very great hight, together
with the water, and splitting the pebbles into a thousand pieces. The
heat was found by Van Troil to be two hundred and twelve degrees of
Fahrenheit, the boiling point. The edges of the pipe or basin are
covered by a coarse stalactitic rind, and the water has been found to
have a petrifying quality. The opening is perfectly circular, in
diameter nineteen feet, and forms above, on the surface of the ground, a
basin fifty-nine feet in diameter, the edge of which is nine feet above
the orifice or hole.

In speaking of the Geysers, or hot spouting springs, Horrebow observes,
that if you fill a bottle at one of them, the water it contains will
boil three or four times, at the same time with the water in the well.
The inhabitants boil their meat in it, by putting the meat in a vessel
of cold water, which they place in the hot spring.

Sir G. S. Mackenzie, whose travels in Iceland we have already cited,
visited the Geysers at a season favorable to his observations, the
latter end of July. He found the cultivation of the surrounding
territory much higher than might have been inferred from the idea
generally entertained of the barren and unproductive state of Iceland.
All the flat ground in that quarter of the island was swampy, but not so
much so as to impede the progress of the party, who, having passed
several hot springs to the eastward of Skalholt, and others rising among
the low hills they had left to the right, in proceeding to the great
Geyser, came to a farm-house, situated on a rising ground in the midst
of the bogs. Here the people were busily employed in making hay, a scene
which afforded a pleasing change from the dreary solitude they had
quitted. The whole of this extensive district, which abounds in grass,
would, if drained, our traveler observes, prove a very rich pasture
country. Farther on they came to several cottages at the foot of the
mountain, round which they turned, and came in sight of the hill having
the Geysers at one of its sides. This hill, in hight not more than three
hundred feet, is separated from the mountain, toward the west, by a
narrow slip of flat boggy ground, connected with that which extends over
the whole valley. Having crossed this bog, and a small river which ran
through it, the party came to a farm-house at the east end of the hill,
and arrived at a spot where the most wonderful and awful effects of
subterraneous heat are exhibited.

On the east side of the hill there are several banks of clay, from some
of which steam rises in different places; and in others there are
cavities, in which water boils briskly. In a few of these cavities, the
water being mixed with clay, is thick and varies in color; but is
chiefly red and gray. Below these banks there is a gentle and uniform
slope, composed of matter which, at some distant period, has been
deposited by springs which no longer exist. The strata or beds thus
formed, seemed to have been broken by shocks of earthquakes,
particularly near the great Geyser. Within a space not exceeding a
quarter of a mile, numerous orifices are seen in the old incrustations,
from which boiling water and steam issue, with different degrees of
force. At the northern extremity is situated the great Geyser,
sufficiently distinguishable from the others by every circumstance
connected with it. On approaching this spot, it appeared that a mount
had been formed of irregular, rough-looking depositions, upon the
ancient regular strata, the origin of which had been similar. The slope
of the latter has caused the mount to spread more on the east side; and
the recent depositions of the water may be traced till they coincide
with them. The perpendicular hight of the mount is about seven feet,
measured from the highest part of the surface of the old depositions.
From these the matter composing the mount may be readily distinguished,
on the west side, where a disruption has taken place. On the top of this
mount is a basin, which was found to extend fifty-six feet in one
direction, and forty-six in another.

At a quarter before three o’clock in the afternoon, when the party
reached the spot, they found the basin full of hot water, a little of
which was running over. Having satisfied their curiosity at that time,
they proceeded to examine some other places, whence they saw water
ascending. Above the great Geyser, at a short distance, they came to a
large irregular opening, the beauties of which, the writer observes, it
is hardly possible to describe. The water with which it was filled was
as clear as crystal, and perfectly still, although nearly at the boiling
point. Through it they saw white incrustations, forming a variety of
figures and cavities, to a great depth, and carrying the eye into a vast
and dark abyss, over which the crust supporting them formed a dome of an
inconsiderable thickness; a circumstance which though not of itself
agreeable, contributed much to the effects of this awful scene.

Having pitched their tent at the distance of about one hundred yards
from the Geyser, and so arranged matters that a regular watch might be
kept during the night, Sir G. S. Mackenzie took his station at eleven
o’clock, and his companions lay down to sleep. About ten minutes before
twelve he heard subterraneous discharges, and waked his friends. The
water in the basin was greatly agitated, and flowed over, but there was
not any jet. The same occurred at half past two. At five minutes past
four on Saturday morning, an alarm was given by one of the company. As
our traveler lay next the door of the tent, he instantly drew aside the
canvas, when at the distance of little more than fifty yards, a most
extraordinary and magnificent appearance presented itself. From a place
they had not before noticed, they saw water thrown up, and steam issuing
with a tremendous noise. There was little water; but the force with
which the steam escaped, produced a white column of spray and vapor, at
least sixty feet high. They enjoyed this astonishing and beautiful sight
until seven o’clock, when it gradually disappeared.

The remaining part of the morning was occupied in examining the environs
of the Geysers; and at every step they received some new gratification.
Following the channel which had been formed by the water escaping from
the great basin during the eruptions, they found several beautiful and
delicate petrifactions. The leaves of birch and willow were seen
converted into white stone, and in the most perfect state of
preservation, every minute fiber being entire. Grass and rushes were in
the same state, and also masses of peat. Several of these rare and
elegant specimens were brought safely to Great Britain. On the outside
of the mount of the Geyser, the depositions, owing to the splashing of
the water, are rough and have been justly compared to the heads of
cauliflowers. They are of a yellowish brown color, and are arranged
around the mount, somewhat like a circular flight of steps. The inside
of the basin is comparatively smooth: and the matter forming it is more
compact and dense than the exterior crust; when polished it is not
devoid of beauty, being of a gray color, mottled with black and white
spots and streaks. The white incrustation formed by the water of the
beautiful cavity before described, had taken a very curious form at the
water’s edge, very much resembling the capital of a Gothic column.


                         THE SULPHUR MOUNTAIN.

This mountain of Iceland, distant about three miles from the village of
Krisuvik, presents a phenomenon very different from the one which has
just been described, _viz._, that of a CALDRON OF BOILING MUD. We
extract the following particulars of this singular curiosity from the
relation given by Sir G. S. Mackenzie in his travels in Iceland.

At the foot of the mountain is a small bank, composed chiefly of white
clay and sulphur, from every part of which steam issues. Having ascended
this bank, a ridge presents itself, immediately beneath which is a deep
hollow, whence a profusion of vapor arises, with a confused noise of
boiling and splashing, accompanied by steam escaping from narrow
crevices in the rock. This hollow, as well as the whole side of the
mountain opposite, being covered with sulphur and clay, it was very
hazardous to walk over a soft and steaming surface of such a
description. The vapor concealing the party from each other occasioned
much uneasiness; and there was some hazard of the crust of sulphur
breaking, or of the clay sinking beneath their feet. They were thus
several times in danger of being scalded, as indeed, happened to one of
the party, Mr. Bright, who accidentally plunged one of his legs into the
hot clay. When the thermometer was immersed in it, to the depth of a few
inches, it generally rose to within a few degrees of the boiling point.
By stepping cautiously, and avoiding every little hole from which steam
issued, they soon ascertained how far they might venture. Their good
fortune, however, Sir George observes, ought not to tempt any person to
examine this wonderful place, without being provided with two boards,
with which every part of the banks may be traversed in perfect safety.
At the bottom of the hollow, above described, they found the caldron of
mud, which boiled with the utmost vehemence. They approached within a
few yards of it, the wind favoring them in viewing every part of this
singular scene. The mud was in constant agitation, and often thrown up
to the hight of six or eight feet. Near this spot was an irregular space
filled with water, boiling briskly. At the foot of the hill, in a hollow
formed by a bank of clay and sulphur, steam rushed with great force and
noise from among the loose fragments of rock.

In ascending the mountain, our travelers met with a spring of cold
water, which was little to be expected in such a place. At a greater
elevation, they came to a ridge, composed entirely of sulphur and clay,
joining two summits of the mountain. The smooth crust of sulphur was
beautifully crystallized; and beneath it was a quantity of loose
granular sulphur, which appeared to be collecting and crystallizing, as
it was sublimed along with the steam. On removing the sulphurous crust,
steam issued, and annoyed the party so much, that they could not examine
this place to any depth.

Beneath the ridge, on the farther side of this great bed of sulphur, an
abundance of vapor escaped with a loud noise. Having crossed to the side
of the mountain opposite, they walked to what is called the principal
spring. This was a task of much apparent danger, as the side of the
mountain to the extent of about half a mile, was covered with loose
clay, into which the feet of our travelers sunk at every step. In many
places there was a thin crust, beneath which the clay was wet, and
extremely hot. Good fortune attended them; and without any serious
inconvenience, they reached the object they had in view. A dense column
of steam, mixed with a small portion of water, forced its way
impetuously through a crevice in a rock, at the head of a narrow valley,
or break in the mountain. The violence with which it rushed out was so
great, that the noise, thus occasioned, might often be heard at the
distance of several miles. During the night while the party lay in their
tent at Krisuvik, they more than once listened to it with mingled awe
and astonishment. Behind the column of vapor was a dark-colored rock,
which added to the sublimity of the effect.

“It is quite beyond my power,” observes Sir George Mackenzie, “to offer
such a description of this extraordinary place, as would convey adequate
ideas of its wonders, or of its terrors. The sensations of a person,
even of firm nerves, standing on a support which feebly sustains him,
over an abyss where, literally, fire and brimstone are in dreadful and
incessant action; having before his eyes tremendous proofs of what is
going on beneath him; enveloped in thick vapors; his ears stunned with
thundering noises—must be experienced before they can be understood.”

                              MONT BLANC.

                          [See cut, page 38.]

         “When mid the lifeless summits proud
     Of Alpine cliffs, where to the gelid sky
     Snows piled on snows in wint’ry torpor lie,
     The rays divine of vernal Phœbus play;
     Th’ awakened heaps, in streamlets from on high,
     Roused into action, lively leap away,
   Glad warbling through the vales, in their new being gay.”—THOMSON.

[Illustration: MONT BLANC AND THE GLACIERS.]

This mountain, in Switzerland, so named on account of its white aspect,
belongs to the great central chain of the Alps. It is truly gigantic,
and is the most elevated mountain in Europe, rising no less than fifteen
thousand, eight hundred and seventy-two feet, somewhat more than three
miles, above the level of the sea, and fourteen thousand, six hundred
and twenty-four feet above the lake of Geneva, in its vicinity. It is
encompassed by those wonderful collections of snow and ice, called
glaciers, two of the principal of which, are called Mont Dolent and
Triolet. The highest part of Mont Blanc, named the Dromedary, is in the
shape of a compressed hemisphere. From that point it sinks gradually,
and presents a kind of concave surface of snow, in the midst of which is
a small pyramid of ice. It then rises into a second hemisphere, which is
named the Middle Dome; and thence descends into another concave surface,
terminating in a point, which among other names bestowed on it by the
Savoyards, is styled “Dome de Goute,” and may be regarded as the
inferior dome.

The first successful attempt to reach the summit of Mont Blanc was made
in August, 1786, by Doctor Paccard, a physician of Chamouny. He was led
to make the attempt by a guide, named Balma, who, in searching for
crystals, had discovered the only practicable route by which so arduous
an undertaking could be accomplished. The ascent occupied fifteen hours,
and the descent five, under circumstances of the greatest difficulty;
the sight of the doctor, and that of his guide, Balma, being so affected
by the snow and wind, as to render them almost blind, at the same time
that the face of each was excoriated, and the lips exceedingly swelled.

On the first of August of the following year, 1787, the celebrated and
indefatigable naturalist, M. de Saussure, set out on his successful
expedition, accompanied by a servant and eighteen guides, who carried a
tent and mattresses, together with the necessary accommodations and
various instruments of experimental philosophy. The first night they
passed under the tent, on the summit of the mountain of La Cote, four
thousand, nine hundred and eight-six feet above the Priory, a large
village in the vale of Chamouny, the journey thither being exempt from
trouble or danger, as the ascent is always over turf, or on the solid
rock; though above this place it is wholly over ice or snows.

Early next morning they traversed the glacier of La Cote, to gain the
foot of a small chain of rocks, inclosed in the snows of Mont Blanc. The
glacier is both difficult and dangerous, being intersected by wide,
deep, irregular chasms, which frequently can be passed only by three
bridges of snow, which are suspended over the abyss. After reaching the
ridge of rocks, the track winds along a hollow, or valley, filled with
snow, which extends north and south to the foot of the highest summit,
and is divided at intervals by enormous crevices. These show the snow to
be disposed in horizontal beds, each of which answers to a year, and
notwithstanding the width of the fissures, the depth can in no part be
measured. At four in the afternoon, the party reached the second of the
three great platforms of snow they had to traverse, and here they
encamped, at the hight of nine thousand, three hundred and twelve feet
above the Priory, or twelve thousand, seven hundred and sixty-eight feet
(nearly two miles and a half) above the level of the sea.

From the center of this platform, inclosed between the farthest summit
of Mont Blanc on the south, its high steps, or terraces, on the east,
and the Dome de Goute on the west, nothing but snow appears. It is quite
pure, of a dazzling whiteness, and on the high summits presents a
singular contrast with the sky, which in these elevated regions is
almost black. Here no living being is to be seen; no appearance of
vegetation: it is the abode of cold and silence. “When,” observes M. de
Saussure, “I represent to myself Dr. Paccard and James Balma first
arriving, on the decline of day, in these deserts, without shelter,
without assistance, and even without the certainty that men could live
in the places which they proposed to reach, and still pursuing their
career with unshaken intrepidity, it seems impossible to admire too much
their strength of mind and their courage.”

The company departed, at seven the next morning, to traverse the third
and last platform, the slope of which is extremely steep, being in some
places thirty-nine degrees. It terminates in precipices on all sides;
and the surface of the snow was so hard, that those who went foremost
were obliged to cut places for the feet with hatchets. The last slope of
all presents no danger; but the air possesses so high a degree of
rarity, that the strength is speedily exhausted, and on approaching the
summit it was found necessary to stop at every fifteen or sixteen paces
to take breath. At eleven they reached the top of the mountain, where
they continued four hours and a half, during which time M. de Saussure
enjoyed, with rapture and astonishment, a view the most extensive as
well as the most rugged and sublime in nature, and made those
observations which have rendered this expedition important to
philosophy.

A light vapor, suspended in the lower regions of the air, concealed from
the sight the lowest and most remote objects, such as the plains of
France and Lombardy; but the whole surrounding assemblage of high
summits appeared with the greatest distinctness.

M. de Saussure descended with his party, and the next morning reached
Chamouny, without the smallest accident. As they had taken the
precaution to wear vails of crape, their faces were not excoriated, nor
their sight debilitated. The cold was not found to be so extremely
piercing as it was described by Dr. Paccard. By experiments made with
the hygrometer, on the summit of the mountain, the air was found to
contain a sixth portion only of the humidity of that of Geneva; and to
this dryness of the air, M. de Saussure imputes the burning thirst which
he and his companions experienced. The balls of the electrometer
diverged three lines only, and the electricity was positive. At times
the air seems filled with electricity. A recent traveler (1854) says,
that, in the night, his guide having come out from the cabin of the
Grand Mulets, saw the ridges of the mountain apparently all on fire. He
immediately communicated what he had observed to his companions, who all
rushed to assure themselves of the fact, and then they saw that through
the electricity generated by the tempest, all the rocks of the Grand
Mulets were illuminated. They found the same phenomenon on their own
persons. When they raised their arms, their fingers became
phosphorescent. M. de Saussure found it required half an hour to make
water boil, while at Geneva fifteen or sixteen minutes sufficed, and
twelve or thirteen at the seaside. None of his party discovered the
smallest difference in the taste or smell of bread, wine, meat, fruits
or liquors, as some travelers have pretended is the case at great
hights; but sounds were of course much weakened, from the want of
objects of reflection. Of all the organs, that of respiration was most
affected, the pulse of one of the guides beating ninety-eight times in a
minute, that of the servant one hundred and twelve, and that of M. de
Saussure one hundred and one; while at Chamouny, the pulsations
respectively were forty-nine, sixty, and seventy-two. A few days
afterward, Mr. Beaufoy, an English gentleman, succeeded in a similar
attempt, although it was attended with greater difficulty, arising from
enlargements in the chasms in the ice.

A late traveler, wandering amid the same sublime scenery that has been
described, says:

“Mont Blanc is clearly visible from Geneva, perhaps once in the week, or
about sixty times in the year. When he is visible, a walk to the
junction of the Arve and the Rhone, either by the way of the plains on
the Genevan side, or by the hights on the side toward the south of
France, affords a wonderful combination of sublimity and beauty on the
earth and in the heavens. Those snowy mountain ranges, so white, so
pure, so dazzling in the clear azure depths, do really look as if they
belonged to another world; as if, like the faces of supernatural
intelligences, they were looking sadly and steadfastly on our world, to
speak to us of theirs. Some of these mountain peaks of snow you can see
only through the perspective of other mountains, nearer to you, and
covered with verdure, which makes the snowy pyramids appear so distant,
so sharply defined, so high up, so glorious; it is indeed like the voice
of great truths stirring the soul. As your eye follows the range, they
lie in such glittering masses against the horizon, in such grand repose;
they shoot into the sky in bright weather in such infinite clearness, so
pure, so flashing; that they seem never to lose the charm of a sudden
and startling revelation to the mind. Are they not sublime images of the
great truths of God’s own word, that sometimes indeed are vailed with
clouds, but in fair weather do carry us, as in a chariot of fire and
with horses of fire, into eternity, into the presence of God? The
atmosphere of our hearts is so misty and stormy, that we do not see them
more than sixty times a year in their glory: if every Sabbath-day we get
a view of them without clouds, we do well; but _when_ we see them as
they are, then we feel their power, then we are rapt by them from earth,
away, away, away, into the depths of heaven!

“In some circumstances, when we are climbing the mountains, even the
mists that hang around them do add to the glory of the view; as in the
rising sun, when they are so penetrated with brightness, that they
softly rise over the crags as a robe of misty light, or seem like the
motion of sweet Nature breathing into the atmosphere from her morning
altars the incense of praise. And in the setting sun how often do they
hang around the precipices, glowing with the golden and crimson hues of
the west, and preventing us from clearly defining the forms of the
mountains, only to make them more lovely to our view. So it is sometimes
with the very clouds around God’s word, and the lights and shades upon
it. There is an inscrutability of truth which sometimes increases its
power, while we wait with solemn reverence for the hour when it shall be
fully revealed to us; and our faith, like the setting sun, may clothe
celestial mysteries with a soft and rosy-colored light, which makes them
more suitable to our present existence, than if we saw them in the clear
and cloudless atmosphere of a spiritual noon.

“You have a fine point for viewing Mont Blanc, without going out of the
city, from the ramparts on the west side of Rousseau’s island. Here a
brazen indicator is erected, with the names of the different mountain
summits and ridges, so that by taking sight across the index, you can
distinguish them at once. You will not mistake Mont Blanc, if you see
him; but until you get accustomed to the panorama, you may easily
mistake one of his court for the king, when the monarch himself is not
visible.

“A still better point of view you will have at Coppet, ascending toward
the Jura. In proportion as you rise from the borders of the lake, every
part of the landscape becomes more beautiful, though what you wish to
gain is the most commanding view of the mountains, every other object
being secondary. In a bright day, nothing can be more clearly and
distinctly defined than Mont Blanc, with his attendant mighty ranges,
cut in dazzling snowy brightness against the clear blue sky. The sight
of those glorious glittering fields and mountains of ice and snow,
produces immediately a longing to be there among them. They make an
impression upon the soul, of something supernatural, almost divine.
Although the whole scene lying before you is so beautiful, (the lake,
the verdant banks, the trees, and the lower ranges of verdure-covered
mountains, constituting in themselves alone one of the loveliest
pictures in the world,) yet the snowy ranges of Mont Blanc are the grand
feature. Those glittering distant peaks are the only thing in the scene
that takes a powerful hold upon the soul; but they do quite possess it,
and tyrannize over it, with an ecstatic thralldom. One is never wearied
with gazing and wondering at the glory. I will lift up mine eyes unto
the hills, from whence cometh my help!

“Another admirable point, much farther from the lake and the city than
the preceding, and at a greater elevation, is what is called the
promenade of the point Sacconex. A fine engraving of this view is
printed on letter-paper for correspondence; but there is not sufficient
distinctness given to the outlines of Mont Blanc and the other summits
of the glittering snowy range, that seems to float in the heavens like
the far-off alabaster walls of Paradise. No language, nor any engraving,
can convey the ravishing magnificence and splendor, the exciting
sublimity and beauty of the scene. But there are days in which the air
around the mountains seems itself of such a hazy whiteness, that the
snow melts into the atmosphere as it were, and dies away in the heavens
like the indistinct outline of a bright but partially remembered dream.
There are other days in which the fleecy clouds, like vails of light
over the faces of angels, do so rest upon and mingle with the snowy
summits, that you can hardly tell where one begins and the other ends.
Sometimes you look upon the clouds thinking they are mountains, and then
again Mont Blanc himself will be revealed in such far-off, unmoving,
glittering grandeur, in such wonderful distinctness, that there is no
mistaking the changeful imitations of his glory for the reality.
Sometimes the clouds and the mountains together are mingled in such a
multitudinous and interminable array of radiances, that it seems like
the white-robed armies of heaven with their floating banners, marching
and countermarching in front of the domes and jeweled battlements of the
celestial city. When the fog scenery (of which I shall give you a
description) takes place upon the earth, and at the same time there are
such revelations of the snowy summits in the heavens, and such goings on
of glory among them, and you get upon the mountain to see them, it is
impossible to describe the effect, as of a vast enchantment, upon the
mind.

“The view of Geneva, the lake, and the Jura mountains from Coligny is
much admired; and at sunset, perhaps the world can not offer a more
lovely scene. It was here that Byron took up his abode; a choice which I
have wondered at, for you can not see Mont Blanc from this point, and
therefore the situation is inferior to many others. Ascending the hill
farther to the east, when you come to Col. Tronchin’s beautiful
residence, you have perhaps the finest of all the views of Mont Blanc,
in or around Geneva. Go upon the top of Col. Tronchin’s tower about half
an hour before sunset, and the scene is not unworthy of comparison even
with the glory of the sunrise as witnessed from the summit of the Righi.
It is surprising to see how long Mont Blanc retains the light of day,
and how long the snow burns in the setting sun, after his orb has sunk
from your own view entirely behind the green range of the Jura. Then
after a succession of tints from the crimson to the cold gray, it being
manifest that the sun has left the mountain to a companionship with the
stars alone, you also are ready to depart, the glory of the scene being
over, when suddenly and unaccountably the snowy summits redden again, as
if the sun were returning upon them, the countenance of Mont Blanc is
filled with rosy light, and the cold gray gives place for a few moments
to a deep warm radiant pink, (as if you saw a sudden smile playing over
the features of a sleeping angel,) which at length again dies in the
twilight. This phenomenon is extremely beautiful, but I know not how to
account for it; nor was any one of our party wiser than I; nevertheless,
our ignorance of causes need never diminish, but often increases the
pleasure of beautiful sights.”

“I have said I would give you a description of the ‘fog-scenery.’ In the
autumn, when the fogs prevail, it is often a thick drizzling mist in
Geneva, and nothing visible, while on the mountain tops the air is pure,
and the sun shining. On such a day as this, when the children of the
mist tell you that on the mountains it is fair weather, you must start
early for the range nearest Geneva, on the way to Chamouny, the range of
the Grand Saléve, the base of which is about four miles distant,
prepared to spend the day upon the mountains, and you will witness one
of the most singular and beautiful scenes to be enjoyed in Switzerland.

“The day I set out was so misty, that I took an umbrella, for the fog
gathered and fell like rain, and I more than doubted whether I should
see the sun at all. In the midst of this mist I climbed the rocky zigzag
half hewn out of the face of the mountain, and half natural, and passing
the village that is perched among the high rocks, which might be a
refuge for the conies, began toiling up the last ascent of the mountain,
seeing nothing, feeling nothing, but the thick mist, the vail of which
had closed below and behind me over village, path and precipice, and
still continued heavy and dark above me, so that I thought I never
should get out of it. Suddenly my head rose above the level of the fog
into the clear air, and the heavens were shining, and Mont Blanc, with
the whole illimitable range of snowy mountain tops around him, was
throwing back the sun! An ocean of mist, as smooth as a chalcedony, as
soft and white as the down of the eider-duck’s breast, lay over the
whole lower world; and as I rose above it, and ascended the mountain to
its overhanging verge, it seemed an infinite abyss of vapor, where only
the mountain tops were visible, on the Jura range like verdant wooded
islands, on the Mont Blanc range as glittering surges and pyramids of
ice and snow. No language can describe the extraordinary sublimity and
beauty of the view. A level sea of white mist in every direction, as far
as the eye could extend, with a continent of mighty icebergs on the one
side floating in it, and on the other a forest promontory, with a slight
undulating swell in the bosom of the sea, like the long, smooth
undulations of the ocean in a calm.

“Standing on the overhanging crags, I could hear the chime of bells, the
hum of busy labor, and the lowing of cattle, buried in the mist, and
faintly coming up to you from the fields and villages. Now and then a
bird darted up out of the mist into the clear sun and air, and sailed in
playful circles, and then dived and disappeared again below the surface.
By and by the wind began to agitate the cloudy sea, and more and more of
the mountains became visible. Sometimes you have a bright sunset athwart
this sea of cloud, which then rolls in waves burnished and tipped with
fire. When you go down into the mist again, and leave behind you the
beautiful sky, a clear, bracing atmosphere, the bright sun and the
snow-shining mountains, it is like passing from heaven to earth, from
the brightness and serenity of the one, to the darkness and cares of the
other. The whole scene is a leaf in nature’s book, which but few turn
over; but how rich it is in beauty and glory, and in food for
meditation, none can tell but those who have witnessed it. This is a
scene in Cloud-land, which hath its mysteries of beauty, that defy the
skill of the painter and engraver.

“The poet Wordsworth has given two very vivid descriptions of these mist
phenomena, under different aspects from that in which I witnessed them.
The first is contained in his descriptive sketches of a pedestrian tour
among the Alps.

           “‘’Tis morn: with gold the verdant mountain glows,
           More high, the snowy peaks with hues of rose.
           Far stretched beneath the many-tinted hills
           A mighty waste of mist the valley fills,
           A solemn sea! whose vales and mountains round
           Stand motionless, to awful silence bound.
           A gulf of gloomy blue, that opens wide
           And bottomless, divides the midway tide.
           Like leaning masts of stranded ships appear
           The pines, that near the coast their summits rear.
           Of cabins, woods and lawns a pleasant shore
           Bounds calm and clear the chaos still and hoar.
           Loud through that midway gulf ascending, sound,
           Unnumbered streams with hollow roar profound.
           Mount through the nearer mist the chant of birds,
           And talking voices, and the low of herds,
           The bark of dogs, the drowsy tinkling bell,
           And wild-wood mountain lutes of saddest swell.’

“But this extract is not to be compared for power to the following from
the same poem, describing an Alpine sunset after a day of mist and storm
upon the mountains.

          “‘’Tis storm, and hid in mist from hour to hour,
          All day the floods a deepening murmur pour.
          The sky is vailed, and every cheerful sight,
          Dark is the region as with coming night,
          But what a sudden burst of overpowering light
          Triumphant on the bosom of the storm
          Glances the fire-clad eagle’s wheeling form.
          Eastward, in long perspective glittering, shine
          The wood-crowned cliffs, that o’er the lake recline.
          Wide o’er the Alps a hundred streams unfold,
          At once to pillars turned, that flame with gold.
          Behind his sail the peasant tries to shun
          The west, that burns like one dilated sun,
          Where in a mighty crucible expire
          The mountains, glowing hot, like coals of fire!’

“There was a time during the middle ages, when Chamouny was inhabited by
monks. The reigning lord of the country made a present of the whole
valley to a convent of Benedictine friars, in the eleventh century. Two
English travelers, Messrs. Pococke and Windham, drew attention to its
wonderful scenery in 1741, and now it is a grand highway of summer
travel, visited annually by three or four thousand people. A visit to
Mont Blanc has become a pilgrimage of fashion. Fashion does some good
things in her day; and it is a great thing to have the steps of men
directed into this grand temple of nature, who would otherwise be
dawdling the summer perhaps at immoral watering-places. A man can hardly
pass through the vale of Chamouny, before the awful face of Mont Blanc,
and not feel that he is an immortal being. The great mountain looks with
an eye, and speaks with a voice, that does something to wake the soul
out of its slumbers.

“The sublime hymn by Coleridge, in the vale before sunrise, is the
concentrated expression of all the inspiring and heaven-directing
influences of the scenery. The poem is as remarkably distinguished above
the whole range of poetry in our language, for its sublimity, as the
mountain itself among all the great ranges of the Alps. I am determined
to quote it in full, for that and the tour of Mont Blanc ought to go
together; and I will present along with it the German original of the
poem in twenty lines, nearly as translated by Coleridge’s admiring and
affectionate relative. I am not aware that Coleridge himself ever
visited the vale of Chamouny; and if not, then that wonderful hymn to
Mont Blanc was the work of imagination solely, building on the basis of
the original lines in German. This was a grand and noble foundation, it
is true; but the hymn by Coleridge was a perfect transfiguration of the
piece, an inspiration of it with a higher soul, and an investiture of it
with garments that shine like the sun. It was the greatest work of the
poet’s great and powerful imagination, combined with the deep worshiping
sense of spiritual things in his soul.

“On visiting the scene, one is apt to feel as if he could not have
written it in the vale itself: the details of the picture would have
been somewhat different; and, confined by the reality, one may doubt if
even Coleridge’s genius could have gained that lofty ideal point of
observation and conception, from which he drew the vast and glorious
imagery that rose before him. Not because the poem is more glorious than
the reality, for that is impossible; but because, in painting _from_ the
reality, the force and sublimity of his general conceptions would have
been weakened by the attempt at faithfulness in the detail, and nothing
like the impression of the aerial grandeur of the scene, its despotic
unity in the imagination, notwithstanding its variety, would have been
conveyed to the mind.

“Yet there are parts of it which at sunrise or sunset either, the poet
might have written from the very windows of his bedroom, if he had been
there in the dawn and evenings of days of such extraordinary brilliancy
and glory, as marked and filled the atmosphere, during our sojourn in
that blessed region. A glorious region it is, much nearer heaven than
our common world, and carrying a sensitive, rightly constituted mind far
up in spirit toward the gates of heaven, toward God, whose glory is the
light of heaven, and of whose power and majesty the mountains,
ice-fields and glaciers, whether beneath the sun, moon, or stars, are a
dim, though grand and glittering, symbol. ‘Fire and hail, snow and
vapor, stormy wind, fulfilling His word, mountains and all hills,
fruitful trees and all cedars, praise the Lord. He looketh on the earth
and it trembleth; He toucheth the hills, and they smoke.’

“The following is the original German hymn, in what the translator
denominates a very bald English translation, to be compared as a
curiosity with its glorification in Coleridge. It occupies but five
stanzas of four lines, and is entitled, ‘Chamouny at Sunrise. To
Klopstock.’ I have here put it into the metrical form of the original.

      “Out of the deep shade of the silent fir-grove,
      Trembling I survey thee, mountain-head of eternity,
      Dazzling (blinding) summit, from whose vast hight
      My dimly perceiving spirit floats into the Everlasting.

      “Who sank the pillar deep in the lap of earth
      Which, for past centuries, fast props thy mass up?
      Who uptowered, high in the vault of ether,
      Mighty and bold, thy beaming countenance?

      “Who poured you from on high, out of eternal Winter’s realm,
      O jagged streams, downward with thunder-noise?
      And who bade aloud, with the Almighty Voice,
      ‘Here shall rest the stiffening billows?’

      “Who marks out there the path for the Morning Star?
      Who wreathes with blossoms the skirt of eternal Frost?
      To whom, wild Arveiron, in terrible harmonies,
      Rolls up the sound of thy tumult of billows?

      “Jehovah! Jehovah! crashes in the bursting ice!
      Avalanche-thunders roll it in the cleft downward:
      Jehovah! it rustles in the bright tree-tops;
      It whispers murmuring in the purling silver-brooks.

“This is very grand. Who but a mighty poet, one seeing with ‘the vision
and the faculty divine’—what, but a transfusing, all-conquering
imagination—would have dared the attempt to compose another poem on the
same subject, or to carry this to a greater hight of sublimity, by
melting it down anew, so to speak, and pouring it out into a vaster,
more glorious mold? The more one thinks of it, the more he will see, in
the poem so produced, a proof most remarkable, of the spontaneous,
deep-seated, easily exerted, and almost exhaustless power and
originality of Coleridge’s genius. Now let us peruse, ‘with mute thanks
and secret ecstacy,’ his own solemn and stupendous lines.

             HYMN BEFORE SUNRISE, IN THE VALE OF CHAMOUNY.

[Besides the rivers Arve and Arveiron, which have their sources in the
foot of Mont Blanc, five conspicuous torrents rush down its sides; and,
within a few paces of the glaciers, the Gentiana Major grows in immense
numbers, with its ‘flowers of loveliest blue.’]

         “Hast thou a charm to stay the Morning Star
         In his steep course? so long he seems to pause
         On thy bald, awful head, O Sovran Blanc?
         The Arve and Arveiron at thy base
         Rave ceaselessly; but thou, most awful form!
         Risest from forth thy silent sea of pines,
         How silently! Around thee and above,
         Deep is the air, and dark, substantial, black;
         An ebon mass: methinks thou piercest it
         As with a wedge! But when I look again,
         It is thine own calm home, thy crystal shrine,
         Thy habitation from Eternity!

         “O dread and silent Mount! I gazed upon thee,
         Till thou, still present to the bodily sense,
         Didst vanish from my thought: entranced in prayer
         I worshiped the Invisible alone.

           “Yet, like some sweet, beguiling melody,
         So sweet, we know not we are listening to it,
         Thou, the meanwhile, wast blending with my thought,
         Yea, with my life, and life’s own secret joy,
         Till the dilating Soul, enrapt, transfused,
         Into the mighty vision passing,—there,
         As in her natural form, swelled vast to heaven!

           “Awake my Soul! not only passive praise
         Thou owest! not alone these swelling tears,
         Mute thanks and secret ecstacy! Awake,
         Voice of sweet song! Awake, my heart, awake!
         Green vales and icy cliffs, all join my hymn.

           “Thou first and chief, sole sovran of the vale
         Oh, struggling with the darkness all night long,
         And all night visited by troops of stars,
         Or when they climb the sky, or when they sink!
         Companion of the morning star at dawn,
         Thyself earth’s rosy star, and of the dawn
         Coherald: wake, oh wake, and utter praise!
         Who sank thy sunless pillars deep in earth?
         Who filled thy countenance with rosy light?
         Who made thee parent of perpetual streams?

           “And you, ye five wild torrents, fiercely glad!
         Who called you forth from night and utter death,
         From dark and icy caverns called you forth,
         Down those precipitous, black, jagged rocks,
         Forever shattered, and the same forever?
         Who gave you your invulnerable life,
         Your strength, your speed, your fury and your joy,
         Unceasing thunder and eternal foam?
         And who commanded (and the silence came,)
         Here let the billows stiffen and have rest?

           “Ye ice-falls! ye that from the mountain’s brow,
         Adown enormous ravines slope amain—
         Torrents, methinks, that heard a mighty voice,
         And stopped at once, amidst their maddest plunge!
         Motionless torrents! silent cataracts!
         Who made you glorious as the gates of heaven
         Beneath the keen full moon? Who bade the sun
         Clothe you with rainbows? Who, with living flowers
         Of loveliest blue, spread garlands at your feet?
         GOD! let the torrents, like a shout of nations,
         Answer! and let the ice-plains echo, GOD!
         GOD! sing, ye meadow-streams, with gladsome voice!
         Ye pine-groves, with your soft and soul-like sounds!
         And they, too, have a voice, yon piles of snow,
         And in their perilous fall shall thunder, GOD!

           “Ye living flowers, that skirt the eternal frost!
         Ye wild goats sporting round the eagle’s nest!
         Ye eagles, playmates of the mountain-storm!
         Ye lightnings, the dread arrows of the clouds!
         Ye signs and wonders of the elements!
         Utter forth GOD! and fill the hills with praise!

           “Thou, too, hoar Mount, with thy sky-pointing peaks,
         Oft from whose feet, the avalanche, unheard,
         Shoots downward, glittering through the pure serene
         Into the depths of clouds, that vail thy breast;
         Thou too again, stupendous mountain! thou,
         That as I raise my head, awhile bowed low
         In adoration, upward from thy base
         Slow traveling with dim eyes suffused with tears,
         Solemnly seemest, like a vapory cloud,
         To rise before me,—Rise, oh ever rise!
         Rise, like a cloud of incense, from the earth!
         Thou kingly spirit throned among the hills,
         Thou dread embassador from Earth to Heaven,
         Great Hierarch! tell thou the silent sky,
         And tell the stars, and tell yon rising sun,
         Earth, with her thousand voices, praises God!

“Thanks to thee, thou noble poet, for giving this glorious voice to
Alpine nature, for so befitting and not unworthy an interpretation of
Nature’s own voice, in words of our own mother-tongue. Thanks to God for
his grace vouchsafed to thee, so that now thou praisest Him amidst the
infinite host of flaming seraphs, before the mount supreme of glory,
where all the empyrean rings with angelic hallelujahs! The creation of
such a mind as Coleridge’s, is only outdone by its redemption through
the blood of the Lamb. Oh, who can tell the rapture of a soul, that
could give a voice for nations to such a mighty burst of praise to God
in this world, when its powers, uplifted in eternity, and dilated with
absorbing, unmingled, unutterable love, shall pour themselves forth in
the anthem of redemption, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain!”


                      THE GLACIERS, OR ICE MASSES.

The three great glaciers, or ice-mountains, which descend from the
flanks of Mont Blanc, add their ice to that of the Miage, and present a
majestic spectacle, amid the astonishing succession of icy summits, of
deep valleys, and of wide chasms, which have become channels for the
innumerable torrents and cataracts with which these mountains abound.
The view which the glacier of Talafre affords from its center, looking
toward the north, is as extraordinary as beautiful. It rises gradually
to the base of a semicircular girdle, formed of peaks of granite of a
great hight, and terminating in sharp summits, extremely varied in their
forms; while the intervals between these peaks are filled up by ice,
which falls into this mass, and this mass of ice is crowned by masses of
snow, rising in festoons between the black and vertical tables of
granite, the steepness of which does not allow them to remain. A ridge
of shattered wrecks divides this glacier lengthwise, and forms its most
elevated part, being eight thousand, five hundred and thirty-eight feet,
or upward of a mile and a half above the level of the sea. This prospect
has nothing in common with what is seen in other parts of the world. The
immense masses of ice, surrounded and surmounted by pyramidal rocks,
still more enormous in magnitude; the contrast between the whiteness of
the snow and the obscure colors of the stones, moistened by the water
which trickles down their sides; the purity of the air; the dazzling
light of the sun, which gives to these objects extraordinary brilliancy;
the majestic and awful silence which reigns in these vast solitudes, a
silence which is only interrupted at intervals by the noise of some
great mass of granite, or of ice, tumbling from the top of the mountain;
and the nakedness of these elevated rocks themselves, on which neither
animals, shrubs, nor verdure are to be seen, combined with the
recollection of the fertile country and rich vegetation which the
adjacent valleys at so small a distance present; all tend to produce a
mixed impression of admiration and terror, which tempts the spectator to
believe, that he has been suddenly transported into a world forgotten by
the great Author of nature. One of these glaciers, that of Triolet, is
covered with the wrecks of another ice-mountain, which fell some years
ago, and buried many huts, flocks, and shepherds beneath its ruins.


                           THE MER DE GLACE.

These glaciers have their foundation in the wonderful =Mer de Glace=, or
=Sea of Ice=; shooting up from it their sharp peaks into the frozen air.
“To get the best view of it as a whole,” says a modern Alpine tourist,
“you cross the meadows in the vale of Chamouny, step over the furious
Arve, and climb the mountain precipices to the hight of two thousand
feet, by a rough, craggy path, sometimes winding amidst a wood of firs,
and sometimes wandering over green grasses. At Montanvert you find
yourself on the extremity of a plateau, so situated, that on one side
you may look down into the dread frozen sea, and on the other, by a few
steps, into the lovely green vale of Chamouny! What astonishing variety
and contrast in the spectacle! Far beneath, a smiling and verdant
valley, watered by the Arve, with hamlets, fields and gardens, the abode
of life, sweet children and flowers; far above, savage and inaccessible
crags of ice and granite, and a cataract of stiffened billows,
stretching away beyond sight—the throne of death and winter.

“From the bosom of the tumbling sea of ice, huge granite needles shoot
into the sky, objects of singular sublimity, one of them rising to the
great hight of thirteen thousand feet, seven thousand above the point
where you are standing. This is more than double the hight of Mount
Washington in our country, and this amazing pinnacle of rock looks like
the spire of an interminable colossal cathedral, with other pinnacles
around it. No snow can cling to the summits of these jagged spires; the
lightning does not splinter them; the tempests rave round them; and at
their base, those eternal drifting ranges of snow are formed, that sweep
down into the frozen sea, and feed the perpetual, immeasurable masses of
the glacier. Meanwhile, the laughing verdure, sprinkled with flowers,
plays upon the edges of the enormous masses of ice, so near, that you
may almost touch the ice with one hand, and with the other pluck the
violet. So, oftentimes, the ice and the verdure are mingled in our
earthly pilgrimage; so, sometimes, in one and the same family, you may
see the exquisite refinements and the coarse repugnancies of human
nature. So, in the same house of God, on the same bench, may sit an
angel and a murderer; a villain, like a glacier, and a man with a heart
like a sweet running brook in the sunshine.

“The impetuous arrested cataract seems as if it were plowing the rocky
gorge with its turbulent surges. Indeed, the ridges of rocky fragments
along the edges of the glacier, called _moraines_, do look precisely as
if a colossal iron plow had torn them from the mountain, and laid them
along in one continuous furrow on the frozen verge. It is a scene of
stupendous sublimity. These mighty granite peaks, hewn and pinnacled
into Gothic towers, and these rugged mountain-walls and buttresses—what
a cathedral! with this cloudless sky, by starlight, for its fretted
roof; the chanting wail of the tempest, and the rushing of the avalanche
for its organ. How grand the thundering sound of the vast masses of ice
tumbling from the roof of the Arve-cavern at the foot of the glacier!
Does it not seem, as it sullenly and heavily echoes, and rolls up from
so immense a distance below, even more sublime than the thunder of the
avalanche above us? We could tell better if we could have a genuine
upper avalanche to compare with it. But what a stupendous scene! ‘I
begin now,’ said my companion, ‘to understand the origin of the Gothic
architecture.’ This was a very natural feeling; but, after all, it could
not have been such a scene, that gave birth to the great idea of that
‘frozen poetry’ of the middle ages. Far more likely it was the sounding
aisles of the dim woods, with their checkered green light, and
festooned, pointing arches.

“The colossal furrows of rocks and gravel along the edges of the ice at
the shores of the sea, are produced by the action of the frost and the
avalanches, with the march of the glacier against the sides of the
mountains. Nothing can be more singular than these ridges of mountain
=debris=, apparently plowed up and worked off by the moving of the whole
bed of ice down the valley. Near the shore, the sea is turbid with these
rocks and gravel; but as you go out into the channel, the ice becomes
clearer and more glittering, the crevices and fissures deeper and more
dangerous, and all the phenomena more astonishing. Deep, blue, pellucid
founts of ice-cold water lie in the opening gulfs; and sometimes,
putting your ear to the yawning fissures, you may hear the rippling of
the rills below, that from the bosom of the glacier are hurrying down to
constitute the Arve, bursting furiously forth from the great ice-cavern
in the valley.

“This Mer de Glace is an easy and excellent residence for the scientific
study of the glaciers, a subject of very great interest, formerly filled
with mysteries, which the bold and persevering investigations and
theories of some modern naturalists have quite cleared up. The strange
movements of the glaciers, their apparent willful rejection of
extraneous bodies and substances to the surface and the margin, their
increase and decrease, long remained invested with something of the
supernatural: they seemed to have a soul and a life of their own. They
look motionless and silent, yet they are always moving and sounding on,
and they have great voices that give prophetic warning of the weather to
the shepherds of the Alps. Scientific men have set up huts upon the sea,
and landmarks on the mountains opposite, to test the progress of the icy
masses, and in this way it was found that a cabin constructed by
Professor Hugi on the glacier of the Aar, had traveled, between the
years 1827 and 1840, a distance of forty-six hundred feet. It is
supposed that the Mer de Glace moves down between four and five hundred
feet annually.

“It is impossible to form a grander image of the rigidity and
barrenness, the coldness and death of winter, than when you stand among
the billows of one of these frozen seas; and yet it is here that Nature
locks up in her careful bosom the treasures of the Alpine valleys, the
sources of rich summer verdure and vegetable life. They are hoarded up
in winter, to be poured forth beneath the sun, and with the sun in
summer. Some of the largest rivers in Europe take their rise from the
glaciers, and give to the Swiss valleys their most abundant supply of
water, in the season when ordinary streams are dried up. This is a most
interesting provision in the economy of nature, for if the glaciers did
not exist, those verdant valleys into which the summer sun pours with
such fervor, would be parched with drought. So the mountains are parents
of perpetual streams, and the glaciers are reservoirs of plenty.

“The derivation of the German name for glacier, =gletscher=, is
suggested as coming not from their icy material, but their perpetual
motion, from =glitschen=, to glide; more probably, however, from the
idea of gliding upon their surface. These glaciers come down from the
air, down out of heaven, a perpetual frozen motion, ever changing and
gliding, from the first fall of snow in the atmosphere, through the
state of consolidated grinding blocks of ice, and then into musical
streams that water the valleys. First it is a powdery, feathery snow,
then granulated like hail, and denominated _firn_, forming vast beds and
sheets around the highest mountain summits, then frozen into masses, by
which time it has traveled down to within seven thousand feet above the
level of the sea, where commences the great ice-ocean that fills the
uninhabitable Alpine valleys, unceasingly freezing, melting and moving
down. It has been estimated by Saussure and others, that these seas of
ice, at their greatest thickness, are six or eight hundred feet deep.
They are traversed by deep fissures, and as they approach the great
precipices, over which they plunge like a cataract into the vales, they
are split in all directions, and heaved up into waves, reefs, peaks,
pinnacles and minarets. Underneath they are traversed by as many
galleries and caverns, through which run the rills and torrents
constantly gathering from the melting masses above. These innumerable
streams, gathering in one as they approach the termination of the
glacier, rush out from beneath it, under a great vault of ice, and thus
are born into the breathing world, full-grown roaring rivers, from
night, frost and chaos.

“A peasant has been known to have fallen into an ice-gulf in one of
these seas, near one of the flowing sub-glacial torrents, and following
the course of the stream to the foot of the glacier, he came out alive!
The German naturalist, Hugi, set out to explore the recesses of one of
the glaciers through the bed of a former torrent, and wandered on in its
ice-caverns the distance of a mile. ‘The ice was everywhere eaten away
into dome-shaped hollows, varying from two to twelve feet in hight, so
that the whole mass of the glacier rested at intervals on pillars, or
feet of ice, irregular in size and shape, which had been left standing.
As soon as any of these props gave way, a portion of the glacier would
of course fall in and move on. A dim twilight, scantily transmitted
through the mass of ice above, prevailed in these caverns of ice, not
sufficient to allow one to read, except close to the fissures, which
directly admitted the daylight. The intense blue of the mass of the ice
contrasted remarkably with the pure white of the icy stalactites, or
pendents descending from the roof. The water streamed down upon him from
all sides, so that, after wandering about for two hours, at times
bending and creeping, to get along under the low vault, he returned to
the open air, quite drenched and half-frozen.’

“This sea of ice, which embosoms in its farthest recesses a little
living flower-garden, whither the humble-bees from Chamouny resort for
honey, is also bordered by steep lonely beds of the fragrant
rhododendron, or rose of the Alps. This hardy and beautiful flower grows
from a bush larger than our sweet-fern, with foliage like the leaves of
the ivory-plum. It continues blooming late in the season, and sometimes
covers vast declivities on the mountains at a great hight, where one
would hardly suppose it possible for a handful of earth to cling to the
rocky surface. There, amid the snows and ice of a thousand winters, it
pours forth its perfume on the air, though there be none to inhale the
fragrance, or praise the sweetness, save only ‘the little busy bees,’
that seem dizzy with delight, as they throw themselves into the bosom of
these beds of roses.

“Higher still on the opposite side of this great ice-sea, there are
mountain-slopes of grass at the base of stupendous rocky pinnacles,
whither the shepherds of the Alps drive their herds from Chamouny, for
three months’ pasturage. They have no way of getting them there but
across the dangerous glacier; and it is said that the passage is a sort
of annual celebration, when men, women and children go up to Montanvert,
to witness and assist the difficult transportation. When the herds have
crossed, one peasant stays with them for the whole three months of their
summer excursion, living upon bread and cheese, with one cow among the
herd to supply him with milk. When he is not sleeping, he knits
stockings, and ruminates as contentedly as the browsing cattle, his only
care being to increase his store.”

                          VIEW FROM THE BUET.

Before we take our leave of Mont Blanc and of the Alps, the peculiarly
brilliant view from the summit of the Buet ought to be noticed. Never,
says M. Bourrit, did prospect appear so vast. Toward the west, the Rhone
is seen, winding for the space of thirty-six leagues through the rich
plains of the Valais; the parts of the river which the mountains cover
with their shade seeming like threads of silver, and those which the sun
illumines like threads of gold. Beyond the river and its rich plains,
the view extends to the highest mountains of Switzerland, St. Gothard,
and the Grisons, all covered with ice; while on the east, the hights
sink suddenly, from some of the loftiest elevations on the globe, to
level plains washed by the sea. Geneva seems like a spot at one end of
the lake, and the lake itself like a sinuous band, dividing the fields
which it waters. Beyond it are discovered the vast plains of Franche
Comte and Burgundy, the mountains of which diminish by almost
imperceptible gradations. Here the eye has neither power nor extent of
sight to embrace the whole of the objects presented to its view. Amid
the fearful aspect of the precipices which descend on every side, what a
contrast between the country decorated with all that is smiling and gay,
and the sublime spectacle of the Alps, their gloomy and aspiring
summits, and, above all, the prodigious hight of Mont Blanc, that
enormous colossus of snow and ice, which parts the clouds, and pierces
to the very heavens! Below this mountain, which bids defiance to time,
and whose eternal ice disregards the dissolving power of the sun, a band
of pyramidical rocks appear, the intervals between them being so many
valleys of ice, the immensity of which appalls the imagination. Their
deep chasms may be distinguished, and the noise of the frequent
avalanches (falls of immense masses of snow) presents to the mind the
gloomy ideas of horror, devastation and ruin. Farther on, other summits
of ice prolong this majestic picture. Among these are the high mountains
of the St. Bernard, and those which border on the Boromean islands.

Perhaps there is not in the old world a theater more instructive, or
more adapted for reflection, than the summit of this mountain. Where,
beside, can be seen such variety and contrast of forms; such results of
the efforts of time; such effects of all the climates, and of all the
seasons? At one glance may be embraced frosts equally intense with those
of Lapland, and the rich and delightful frontiers of Italy; eternal ice,
and waving harvests; all the chilling horrors of winter, and the
luxuriant vegetation of summer; eighty leagues of fertile plains,
covered with towns, with vineyards, with fields and herds, and adjoining
to these, a depth of twenty thousand feet of everlasting ice.

                              MONTSERRAT.

  “Here, ’midst the changeful scenery, ever new,
  Fancy a thousand wond’rous forms descries,
  More wildly great than ever pencil drew;
  Rocks, torrents, gulfs, and shapes of giant size,
  And glittering cliffs on cliffs, and fiery ramparts rise.”—BEATTIE.

This Spanish mountain, which has been so long celebrated on account of
the singularity of its shape, but chiefly for its convent and its
numerous hermitages, is nine leagues north-west of Barcelona, in the
province of Catalonia. It is in hight only three thousand, three hundred
feet above the level of the sea, but it commands an enchanting prospect
of the fine plain of Barcelona, extending to the sea, as well as of the
islands of Majorca and Minorca, distant one hundred and fifty miles.

Toward Barcelona this mountain presents a bold and rugged front; but on
the west, toward Vacarisas, it is almost perpendicular, notwithstanding
which, a carriage-road winds round to the convent, which is placed in a
sheltered recess among the rocks, at about half the hight of the
mountain. The Llobregat roars at the bottom; and the rock presents
perpendicular walls from the edge of the water: but above the convent,
the mountain divides into two crowns or cones, which form the most
prominent features; while smaller pinnacles, blanched and bare, and
split into pillars, pipes, and other singular shapes, give a most
picturesque effect. Here are seen fourteen or fifteen hermitages, which
are scattered over different points of the mountain, some of them on the
very pinnacles of the cones, to which they seem to grow, while others
are placed in cavities hewn out of the loftiest pyramids. The highest
accessible part of the mountain is above the hermitage of St. Maddelena,
the descent from which is between two cones, by a flight of steps,
called Jacob’s ladder, leading into a valley which runs along the summit
of the mountain. The cones are here in the most grotesque shapes, the
southern one being named the Organ, from its resemblance to a number of
pipes.

At the extremity of this valley, which is a perfect shrubbery, and on an
eminence, stands the hermitage of St. Jerome, the highest and most
remote of all; and near it is the loftiest station of the whole
mountain, on which is a little chapel dedicated to the Virgin. From this
elevated pinnacle the prospect is vast and splendid.

Although the elements have wreaked all their fury on these shattered
peaks, yet Nature has not been sparing in her gifts; the spaces between
the rocks being filled up with close woods, while numerous evergreens,
and other plants, serve to adorn the various chasms, rendering them
valuable depositories of the vegetable kingdom. Few, indeed, are the
evergreens of Europe which may not be found here; and when the mountain
was visited by Mr. Swinburne, the apothecary of the convent had a list
of four hundred and thirty-seven species of plants, and forty of trees,
which shoot up spontaneously, and grace this hoary and venerable pile.
There being two springs only on the mountain, there is a scarcity of
water, which is chiefly collected in cisterns; an inconvenience,
however, which is in a great measure counterbalanced by the absence of
wolves, bears, and other wild beasts.

Captain Carlton, an Englishman, who visited Montserrat some years ago,
ascended to the loftiest hermitage, that of St. Jerome, by the means of
spiral steps hewn out in the rock on account of the steep acclivity.
This, he observes, could not, in his time, be well accomplished by a
stranger, without following the footsteps of an old ass, who carried
from the convent a daily supply of food to the hermits. This animal
having his two panniers stored with the provisions divided into
portions, climbed without a guide, and having stopped at each of the
cells, where the hermit took the portion allotted to him, returned back
to the convent. He found that one of these hermits, to beguile the
wearisomeness of his solitude, had contrived so effectually to tame the
birds which frequented the groves surrounding his hermitage, that he
could draw them together with a whistle, when they perched on his head,
breast, and shoulders, taking the food from his mouth.

The convent is situated on the eastern side of the mountain, which seems
to have been split by vast torrents of water, or by some violent
convulsion of nature: in this way a platform has been formed in the
cleft, sufficiently ample for the purpose of its construction. It is one
of the forty-five religious houses of the Spanish congregation of the
order of St. Benedict. The monks are bound to supply food and lodging
for three days to all pilgrims who come up to pay their homage to the
Virgin; besides which, they entertain the hermits on Sundays. The
latter, who make a vow never to quit the mountain, take their stations
by seniority, the junior hermit being placed at the greatest distance
from the convent, and descending progressively as the vacancies happen.
They are not altogether idle, taking pains to rival each other in making
basket-work and other fanciful productions, which they display with
great affability to their visitors. They assemble every morning to hear
mass and perform divine service, in the parish church of St. Cecilia,
which lies considerably above the convent; and twice a week they confess
and communicate. They wear their beards long, and are clad in brown.

The church of St. Cecilia is a gloomy edifice, the gilding of which is
much sullied by the smoke of eighty-five silver lamps, of various forms
and sizes, suspended round the cornice of the sanctuary. For the supply
of these with oil, funds have been bequeathed by devotees. The choir is
decorated with wood carvings, curiously wrought, representing the most
prominent passages in the life of Christ.

                         THE PEAK OF TENERIFFE.

                            [See cut below.]

[Illustration: THE PEAK OF TENERIFFE.]

The island of Teneriffe has received its present name from the
inhabitants of the adjacent island Palma, in whose language =tener=
signifies snow, and _iffe_, a hill. In extent, wealth, and fertility it
exceeds all the other Canary islands. It continues to rise on all sides
from the sea, until it terminates in the celebrated peak represented in
the cut, which is, however, situated rather in the southern part than in
the center of the island. The ascent on the north side is more gradual
than at the other parts, there being a space along the shore about three
leagues in breadth, bounded on the sides by high mountains, or rather
cliffs; but more inland it rises like a hanging garden all the way,
without any considerable interruption of hills or valleys. The form of
this island is triangular, extending itself into three capes, the
nearest of which is about eighty leagues from the coast of Africa. In
the middle it is divided by a ridge of mountains, which have been
compared to the roof of a church, the peak forming the spire or steeple
in the center.

The elevation of the peak of Teneriffe, according to the most accurate
measurement, made by Cordier, is twelve thousand, one hundred and
sixty-six feet, or nearly two miles and one-third above the level of the
sea. In the ascent, the first eminence is called Monte Verde, or the
green mountain, from the high fern with which it is covered, and
presents a level plain of considerable extent. Beyond this is the
mountain of pines, which are said to have formerly grown there in great
abundance; but its steep sides are now craggy and barren, and its whole
appearance very different from that of the eminence described above.
After passing this summit, the traveler reaches a plain, on which the
natives have bestowed the name of Mouton de Trigo, and upon which the
peak in reality stands. It is a mountainous platform, rising more than
seven thousand feet, or nearly a mile and a half, above the level of the
sea; and here the currents of lava, hitherto concealed by the
vegetation, begin to appear in all their aridity and confusion, a few
lowly shrubs and creeping plants alone diversifying the surface of a
desert, the most arid and rugged that can be imagined.

A small sandy platform of pumice-stones, bordered by two enormous
currents of vitreous lava, and blocks of the same nature, ranged in a
semicircle, forms what is called the station of the English, on account
of the peak having been so often visited by British travelers. This
platform is ninety-seven hundred and eighty-six feet, or upward of a
mile and three-quarters above the level of the sea; and beyond it the
acclivity is very steep, great masses of scoriæ, extremely rough and
sharp, covering the currents of lava. Toward the summit, nothing but
pumice-stone is to be seen. In fact the peak can only be ascended on the
east and south-east sides. As it is impossible to get round the crater,
the traveler’s progress is arrested at the spot at which he reaches it.
Here the two orders of volcanic substances are to be seen, the modern
lavas being thrown up amid the ruins of ejections much more ancient, the
immense masses of which constitute the platform on which the peak is
placed. The shattered sides present a series of thick beds, almost all
plunging toward the sea, composed alternately of ashes, volcanic sand,
pumice-stones, lavas, either compact or porous, and scoriæ.

An incalculable number of currents, comparatively recent, which have
descended from the peak, or have issued from its flanks, form irregular
furrows, which run along the more ancient masses, and lose themselves in
the sea to the west and north. Among these currents more than eighty
craters are scattered, and augment with their ruins the confusion which
prevails throughout.

The crater can alone be reached by descending down three chasms. Its
sides are absolutely precipitous within, and are most elevated toward
the north. Its form is elliptical; its circumference about twelve
hundred feet; and its depth according to Cordier, one hundred and ten
feet. Humboldt, however, estimates it at not more than from forty to
sixty feet. The sides are, agreeably to the former of these observers,
formed of an earth of snowy whiteness, resulting from the decomposition
of the blackest and hardest vitreous porphyritic lava. All the rest is
solid, and the lowest part occupied by blocks, which have fallen down
from the sides. These solid parts are covered with shining crystals of
sulphur, of a rhomboidal and octahedral figure, some of which are nearly
an inch high, and are, perhaps, the finest specimens of native volcanic
sulphur yet known. Vapors issue in abundance from among these blocks,
and from an infinity of fissures which preserve a very intense heat.
These vapors consist solely of sulphur and water, perfectly insipid.
Beside the incrustations of sulphur, opal, in thin plates, is formed
with great celerity. Humboldt regards the peak of Teneriffe as an
enormous basaltic mountain, resting upon a dense secondary calcareous
stone.

Various travelers have asserted, that the cold is intensely keen on the
summit of the peak; that respiration is difficult; and that,
particularly, spirituous liquors lose all their strength; which latter
circumstance they ascribe to the spirit being more or less exposed to
the sulphureous fumes exhaled from the crater. Cordier, and several
other accurate observers, declare, however, that neither the smell nor
the strength of liquids appeared, at this elevation, to be in the least
degree impaired; and that volatile alkali, ether, and spirit of wine,
possessed their usual pungency. They add, that the cold is very
supportable; and that neither the aqueous sulphureous vapors, nor the
rarity of the air, render breathing difficult.

We extract the following interesting particulars from Humboldt’s account
of his visit to Teneriffe.

“Toward three in the morning, by the sombrous light of a few fir
torches, we began our expedition for the summit of the Piton. We scaled
the volcano on the north-east, where the declivities are extremely
steep; and came, after two hours’ toil, to a small plain, which on
account of its isolated situation, bears the name of Alta Vista. It is
the station also of the Neveros, those natives whose occupation it is to
collect ice and snow, which they sell in the neighboring towns. Their
mules, better practiced in climbing mountains than those hired by
travelers, reach Alta Vista, and the Neveros are obliged to transport
the snow to this place on their backs. Above this point the Malpays
begins; a term by which is designated here, as well as in Mexico, Peru,
and every other country subject to volcanoes, a ground destitute of
vegetable mold, and covered with fragments of lavas.

“We observed, during the twilight, a phenomenon which is not unusual on
high mountains, but which the position of the volcano we were scaling
rendered very striking. A layer of white and fleecy clouds concealed
from us the sight of the ocean, and the lower region of the island. This
layer did not appear above sixteen hundred yards high; the clouds were
so uniformly spread, and kept so perfect a level, that they wore the
appearance of a vast plain covered with snow. The colossal pyramid of
the peak, the volcanic summits of Lanzerota, of Fortaventura, and the
isle of Palma, were like rocks amidst this vast sea of vapors, and their
black tints were in fine contrast with the whiteness of the clouds.”

By an astronomical observation, made at the above elevation at sunrise,
it was ascertained that the true horizon, that is, a part of the sea,
was distant one hundred and thirty miles. Our traveler proceeds thus:

“We had yet to scale the steepest part of the mountain, the Piton, which
forms the summit. The slope of this small cone, covered with volcanic
ashes, and fragments of pumice-stone, is so steep, that it would have
been almost impossible to reach the top, had we not ascended by an old
current of lava, the wrecks of which have resisted the ravages of time.
These wrecks form a wall of scorious rocks, which stretches itself into
the midst of the loose ashes. We ascended the Piton by grasping these
half-decomposed scoriæ, the sharp edges of which remained often in our
hands. We employed nearly half an hour to scale a hill, the
perpendicular hight of which does not exceed five hundred feet.

“When we gained the summit of the Piton, we were surprised to find
scarcely room enough to seat ourselves conveniently. The west wind blew
with such violence that we could scarcely stand. It was eight in the
morning, and we were frozen with cold, though the thermometer kept a
little above the freezing point.

“The wall, which surrounds the crater like a parapet, is so high, that
it would be impossible to reach the Caldera, if on the eastern side
there was not a breach, which seems to have been the effect of a flowing
of very old lava. We descended through this breach toward the bottom of
the tunnel, the figure of which is elliptical. The greatest breadth of
the mouth appeared to us to be three hundred feet, the smallest two
hundred feet.

“We descended to the bottom of the crater on a train of broken lava,
from the eastern breach of the inclosure. The heat was perceptible only
in a few crevices, which gave vent to aqueous vapors, with a peculiar
buzzing noise. Some of these funnels or Crevices are on the outside of
the inclosure, on the external brink of the parapet that surrounds the
crater. We plunged the thermometer into them, and saw it rise rapidly to
sixty-eight and seventy-five degrees.

“We prolonged in vain our stay on the summit of the peak, to wait the
moment when we might enjoy the view of the whole of the archipelago of
the Fortunate islands. We discovered Palma, Gomera, and the Great
Canary, at our feet. The mountains of Lanzerota, free from vapors at
sunrise, were soon enveloped in thick clouds. On a supposition only of
an ordinary refraction, the eye takes in, in calm weather, from the
summit of the volcano, a surface of the globe of fifty-seven hundred
square leagues, equal to a fourth of the surface of Spain.

“Notwithstanding the heat we felt in our feet on the edge of the crater,
the cone of ashes remains covered with snow during several months in the
winter. It is probable, that under the cap of snow considerable hollows
are found, like those we find under the glaciers of Switzerland, the
temperature of which is constantly less elevated than that of the soil
on which they repose. The cold and violent wind which blew from the time
of sunrise, engaged us to seek shelter at the foot of the Piton. Our
hands and faces were frozen, while our boots were burnt by the soil on
which we walked. We descended in the space of a few minutes the
sugar-loaf, which we had scaled with so much toil; and this rapidity was
in part involuntary, for we often rolled down on the ashes. It was with
regret that we quitted this solitary place, this domain where Nature
towers in all her majesty.”

To the above we subjoin the following extract from the account published
in the first volume of the Transactions of the Geological Society, by
the Hon. Mr. Bennet.

At the distance of thirty-four leagues from the island, Mr. Bennet had a
very distinct view of the peak, rising like a cone from the bed of the
ocean. The rocks and strata of Teneriffe, he observes, are wholly
volcanic, the long chain of mountains, which may be termed the central
chain, traversing the island from the foot of the second region of the
peak, and sloping down on the eastern, western and northern sides, to
the sea. Toward the south, or more properly the south-south-west, the
mountains are nearly perpendicular, and though broken into ridges, and
occasionally separated by deep ravines, that are cut transversely as
well as longitudinally, there are none of those plains, nor that gradual
declination of strata, which the south-eastern and north-western sides
of the island exhibit.

Mr. Bennet ascended the peak in the month of September, 1810. We give
the abridged details of this expedition in his own words.

“The road to the city of Orotava, is a gradual and easy slope for three
or four miles, through a highly cultivated country. Leaving the town,
after a steep ascent of about an hour, through a deep ravine, we quitted
the cultivated part, and entered into forests of chestnuts, the trees of
which are of a large size. The form of this forest is oblong; the soil
is deep, and formed of decomposed lava, small ash and pumice. I examined
several channels in the strata, or ravines worn by the rains, and there
was no appearance of any other rock. Leaving this forest, the track
passes over a series of green hills, which we traversed in about two
hours, and at last halted to water our mules at a spot where there is a
small spring of bad and brackish water issuing from a lava rock. The
ravine is of considerable depth. The range of green hills extends a mile
or two further, the soil shallowing by degrees, until at length the
trees and shrubs gradually dwindling in size, the Spanish broom alone
covers the ground. Leaving behind us this range of green hills, the
track, still ascending, leads for several hours across a steep and
difficult mass of lava-rock, broken here and there into strange and
fantastic forms, worn into deep ravines, and scantly covered in places
by a thin layer of yellow pumice. As we proceeded on our road, the hills
on our left gradually rose in hight, till the summits were lost in those
of the central chain; while, on our right, we were rapidly gaining an
elevation above the lower range of the peak. We met with several small
conical hills, or mouths of extinct volcanoes, the decomposed lava on
the edges of the craters having a strong red ochreous tint. At length,
an immense undulated plain spreads itself like a fan, on all sides,
nearly as far as the eye can reach. This plain is bounded on the
west-south-west and south-south-west, by the regions of the peak; and on
the east and north-east, by a range of steep perpendicular precipices
and mountains, many leagues in circumference, called by the Spaniards
=Las Faldas=. On this plain, or desert, for we had long left all show of
vegetation, except a few stunted plants of Spanish broom, a sensible
change was felt in the atmosphere; the wind was keen and sharp, and the
climate like that of England in the months of autumn. All here was sad,
silent and solitary. We saw at a distance the fertile plains on the
coast, lying as it were under our feet, and affording a cheerful
contrast to the scenes of desolation with which we were surrounded. We
were already seven or eight thousand feet above the level of the sea,
and had reached the bottom of the second region of the peak.

“Having reached the end of the plain, we found ourselves at the bottom
of a steep hill, at the foot of which is a mass or current of lava.
After a laborious, not to say hazardous ascent of about an hour, the
pumice and ash gave way, and the mules sinking knee-deep at every step,
we arrived at about five in the afternoon at the other extremity of the
stream of lava, which, descending from the summit of the second region
of the peak, divides at the foot of the cone into two branches, the one
running to the north-east, and the other to the north-west. It was here
we were to pass the night; so, lighting a fire made of dry branches of
the Spanish broom, and stretching a part of a sail over a portion of the
rock, we ate our dinner and laid ourselves down to sleep. I, however,
passed the best part of the night by the fire, the weather being
piercingly cold. As I stood by the fire, the view all around me was wild
and terrific; the moon rose about ten at night, and, though in her third
quarter, gave sufficient light to show the waste and wilderness by which
we were surrounded. The peak and the upper regions which we had yet to
ascend, towered awfully above our heads, while below, the mountains that
had appeared of such a hight in the morning, and had cost us a day’s
labor to climb, lay stretched as plains at our feet. From the uncommon
rarity of the atmosphere, the whole vault of heaven appeared studded
with innumerable stars, while the valleys of Orotava were hidden from
our view by a thin vail of light fleecy clouds, that floated far beneath
the elevated spot we had chosen for our resting-place; the solemn
stillness of the night was only interrupted by the crackling of the fire
round which we stood, and by the whistling of the wind, which coming in
hollow gusts from the mountain, resembled the roar of distant cannon.

“Between two and three in the morning, we resumed, on foot, our ascent
of the mountain, the lower part of which we had climbed on horseback the
preceding evening; the ascent, however, became much more rapid and
difficult, our feet sinking deep in the ashes at every step. From the
uncommon sharpness of the acclivity, we were obliged to stop often to
take breath: after several halts, we at last reached the head of the
pumice hill. After resting some short time here, we began to climb the
stream of lava, stepping from mass to mass. The ascent is steep, painful
and hazardous; in some places the stream of lava is heaped up in dykes
or embankments; and we were obliged to clamber over them as one ascends
a steep wall.

“We halted several times during the ascent, and at last reached a spot
called La Cueva, one of the numerous caves that are found on the sides
of the mountain; this is the largest of them, and is filled with snow
and the most delicious water, which was just at the point of
congelation. The descent into it is difficult, it being thirty or forty
feet deep. One of our party let himself down by a rope: he could not see
the extent of the cave, but the guides declared it to be three hundred
feet in length, and to contain thirty or forty feet of water in depth.
The roof and sides are composed of a fine stalactitic lava, similar to
that found on Vesuvius, and it is of the same nature as that which
flowed on the surface. We rested here about half an hour, during which
we had an opportunity of observing the rising of the sun, and that
singular and rapid change of night into day, which is the consequence of
an almost entire absence of twilight. As we ascended the north-east side
of the mountain, this view was strikingly beautiful: at first there
appeared a bright streak of red on the horizon, which gradually spread
itself, lighting up the heavens by degrees, and growing brighter and
brighter, till at last the sun burst forth from the bed of the ocean,
gilding as it rose the mountains of Teneriffe, and those of the Great
Canary; in a short time the whole country to the eastward lay spread out
as a map. The Great Canary was easily to be distinguished; and its
rugged and mountainous character, similar to that of the other islands,
became visible to the naked eye. The cold at this time was intense, the
wind keen and strong, and the thermometer sunk to thirty-two degrees.
After a short though rapid ascent, we reached the summit of the second
stage of the mountain, passing over a small plain of white pumice, on
which were spread masses of lava, and at length arrived at the foot of
the cone. This division of the mountain forms what is generally termed
the peak of Teneriffe: it represents the present crater of Vesuvius,
with this difference, however, that while the surface of that mountain
is composed of a black cinder or ash, the superfices of this appear to
be a deposit of pumice of a white color, of scoriæ and lava, with here
and there considerable masses that were probably thrown out when the
volcano was in action. Numerous small cavities on the side of the
mountain emitted vapor, with considerable heat. Here begins the only
fatiguing part of the ascent; the steepness of the cone is excessive; at
each step our feet sunk into the ash, and large masses of pumice and
lava rolled down from above; we were all bruised, and our feet and legs
were cut, but not materially hurt: at last we surmounted all
difficulties, and seated ourselves on the highest ridge of the mountain.
This uppermost region does not appear to contain in superficies more
than an acre and a half, and is itself a small crater, the walls of
which are the different points on which we sat, and are plainly visible
from below. Within, the lava is in the most rapid state of
decomposition. The surface is hot to the feet, and the guides said it
was dangerous to remain long in one spot: as it was, some of us sunk to
our knees in the hot deposit of sulphur. Upon striking the ground with
the feet, the sound is hollow, similar to what is produced by the same
impulsion on the craters of Vesuvius and Solfaterra. I estimate the
depth of the crater to be, from the highest ridge to the bottom, about
two hundred feet, forming an easy and gradual descent.

“The view from the summit is stupendous: we could plainly discover the
whole form of the island, and we made out distinctly three or four of
the islands, which, collectively, are called the Canaries; we could not,
however, see Lancerotte or Fuerteventura, though we were told that other
travelers had distinguished them all.

“From this spot, the central chain of mountains that run from south-west
to north-east, is easily to be distinguished. These, with the succession
of fertile and woody valleys, commencing from San Ursula, and ending at
Las Horcas, with the long line of precipitous lava rocks that lay on the
right of our ascent, and which traverse that part of the island running
from east to west, from their point of departure at the Canales, to
where they end in an abrupt headland on the coast, with their forests,
and villages, and vineyards, the port with the shipping in the roads,
the town of Orotava, with its spires glittering as the morning sun burst
upon them, afford a cheerful contrast to the streams of lava, the mounds
of ash and pumice, and the sulphurated rock on which we had taken our
seat. The sensation of extreme hight was in fact one of the most
extraordinary I ever felt; and though I did not find the pain in my
chest arising from the rarity of the atmosphere, by any means so acute
as on the mountains of Switzerland, yet there was a keenness in the air,
independent of the cold, that created no small uneasiness in the lungs.
The respiration became short and quick, and repeated halts were found
necessary. The idea also of extreme hight was to me more determinate and
precise than on the mountains of Switzerland; and though the immediate
objects of vision were not so numerous, yet as the ascent is more rapid,
the declivity sharper, and there is here no mountain like Mont Blanc
towering above you, the twelve thousand feet above the level of the sea
appeared considerably more than a similar elevation above the lake of
Geneva. We remained at the summit about three-quarters of an hour, our
ascent having cost us the labor of four hours, as we left La Estancia at
ten minutes before three, and reached the top of the peak before seven.
Our thermometer, which was graduated to the scale of Fahrenheit, was,
during our ascent, as follows: at Orotava, at eight in the morning,
seventy-four degrees; at six in the evening, at La Estancia, fifty
degrees; at one, in the following morning, forty-two degrees; at La
Cueva, at half past four, thirty-two degrees; at the bottom of the cone,
thirty-six degrees; at the top of the peak, one hour and a half after
sunrise, thirty-three degrees. The descent down the cone is difficult,
from its extreme rapidity, and from the fall of large stones, which
loosen themselves from the beds of pumice. Having at last scrambled to
the bottom, we pursued our march down the other course of the lava, that
is to say, down its westerly side, having ascended its eastern. The
ravines and rents in this stream of lava are deep and formidable; the
descent into them is always painful and troublesome, often dangerous: in
some places we let ourselves down from rock to rock. I can form no
opinion why there should be these strange irregularities in the surface
of this lava; in places it resembles what sailors term the trough of the
sea, and I can compare it to nothing but as if the sea in a storm, had
by some force become on a sudden stationary, the waves retaining their
swell. As we again approached La Cueva, we came to a singular steep
valley, the depth of which, from its two sides, can not be less than one
hundred to one hundred and fifty feet, the lava lying in broken ridges
one upon the other, similar to the masses of granite rock that time and
decay have tumbled down from the top of the Alps; and, except from the
scoriæ, or what Milton calls ‘the fiery surge,’ they in no degree bear
the marks of having rolled as a stream of liquid matter.

“We descended the pumice hill with great rapidity, almost at a run, and
arrived at La Estancia in little more than two hours. We then mounted
our mules, and following the track by which we had ascended the
preceding day, we reached, about four o’clock, the country-house from
which we had started.”

The first eruption of which there is any distinct account, occurred on
the twenty-fourth of December, 1704, when twenty-nine shocks of an
earthquake were distinctly felt. On the thirty-first a great light was
observed on Manja, toward the White mountains. Here the earth opened,
and two volcanoes were formed, which threw up such heaps of stones as to
raise two considerable mountains: the combustible matter, which still
continued to be thrown up, kindled above fifty fires in the vicinity.
The whole country for three leagues round was in flames, which were
increased by another volcano opening by at least thirty different vents
within the circumference of half a mile. On the second of February
following, another volcano broke out in the town of Guimar, swallowing
up a large church.

A subsequent eruption in 1706 filled up the port of Guarachico. The
lava, in its descent, ran five leagues in six hours; and on this lava,
houses are now built where ships formerly rode at anchor. Neither of
these eruptions was from the crater on the summit of the peak, for that
has not ejected lava for centuries, and it now issues from the flanks
only. The last eruption was on the ninth of June, 1798, and was very
terrible. Three new mouths opened at the hight of eighty-one hundred and
thirty feet, or upward of a mile and a half above the level of the sea,
upon the inclined slope of the base of the peak toward the south-west.
Above this, at the hight of ten thousand, two hundred and forty feet, or
nearly two miles, M. Cordier found a vast crater nearly four miles and a
half in circumference, which lie ascertained to be very ancient. Its
sides are extremely steep, and it still presents the most frightful
picture of the violence of subterraneous fire. The peak rises from the
sides of this monstrous aperture. To the south-west is the mountain of
Cahora, which is said to have become a volcano in 1797. The other
mountains of Teneriffe, which tradition reports to have been formerly
volcanoes, are Monte Roxo, or the red mountain; several mountains,
called the Malpasses, lying to the eastward; and one (Rejada) in a
southern direction. Throughout the whole of the distance between Monte
Roxo and the bay of Adexe, according to Mr. Glass, the shore is about
twenty-five hundred feet, or nearly half a mile in hight, and
perpendicular as a wall. The southern coast has a much superior
elevation, the chain of mountains by which it is bounded being,
agreeably to St. Vincent, eighty-three hundred and twenty feet, or more
than a mile and a half, above the level of the sea.

                        THE SOUFFRIERE MOUNTAIN.

This volcanic mountain, the dreadful eruption of which we are about to
describe, is the most elevated and most northerly of the lofty chain
running through the West India island of St. Vincent. From the
extraordinary frequency and violence of the earthquakes, which in 1811,
are calculated to have exceeded two hundred, some great movement or
eruption was looked for. In the interim the mountain indicated much
disquietude; but the apprehension was not so immediate as to restrain
curiosity, or to prevent repeated visits to the crater, which had
latterly been more numerous than ever. Even on the twenty-sixth of
April, 1812, the day preceding the eruption, several gentlemen ascended
and remained there for some time. Nothing unusual was then remarked, nor
any external difference observed, except rather a stronger emission of
smoke from the interstices of the conical hill, at the bottom of the
crater. To those who have not visited this romantic and wonderful spot,
a slight description of it, as it lately stood, is previously necessary.

“About two thousand feet from the level of the sea, on the south side of
the mountain, and at rather more than two-thirds of its hight, opens a
circular chasm, somewhat exceeding half a mile in diameter, and between
four hundred and five hundred feet in depth. Exactly in the center of
this capacious bowl, rose a conical hill about two hundred and sixty or
three hundred feet in hight, and about two hundred in diameter, richly
covered and variegated with shrubs, brushwood and vines, above half-way
up, and the remainder covered over with virgin sulphur to the top. From
the fissures of the cone and interstices of the rocks, a thin white
smoke was constantly emitted, occasionally tinged with a slight bluish
flame. The precipitous sides of this magnificent amphitheater were
fringed with various evergreens and aromatic shrubs, flowers, and many
alpine plants. On the north and south sides of the base of the cone were
two pieces of water, one perfectly pure and tasteless, the other
strongly impregnated with sulphur and alum. This lonely and beautiful
spot was rendered more enchanting by the singularly melodious notes of a
bird, an inhabitant of these upper solitudes, and altogether unknown to
the other parts of the island, hence principally called or supposed to
be invisible, though it certainly has been seen, and is a species of
blackbird.

“A century had now elapsed since the last convulsion of the mountain, or
since any other elements had disturbed the serenity of this wilderness,
besides those which are common to the tropical tempest. It apparently
slumbered in primeval solitude and tranquillity, and from the luxuriant
vegetation and growth of the forest, which covered its side from the
base nearly to the summit, seemed to discountenance the fact, and
falsify the records of the ancient volcano. Such was the majestic,
peaceful Souffriere, on April the twenty-seventh; but our imaginary
safety was soon to be confounded by the sudden danger of devastation.
Just as the plantation bell rang at noon on that day, an abrupt and
dreadful crash from the mountain, with a severe concussion of the earth,
and tremulous noise in the air, alarmed all around it. The resurrection
of this fiery furnace was proclaimed in a moment by a vast column of
thick, black, ropy smoke, like that of an immense glass-house, bursting
forth at once, and mounting to the sky; showering down sand, gritty
calcined particles of earth and ashes mixed, on all below. This, driven
before the wind toward Wallibou and Morne Ronde, darkened the air like a
cataract of rain, and covered the ridges, woods and cane-pieces with
light gray-colored ashes, resembling snow when slightly covered by dust.
As the eruption increased, this continual shower expanded, destroying
every appearance of vegetation. At night a very considerable degree of
ignition was observed on the lips of the crater; but it is not asserted
that there was as yet any visible ascension of flame. The same awful
scene presented itself on the following day; the fall of ashes and
calcined pebbles still increasing, and the compact, pitchy column from
the crater rising perpendicularly to an immense hight, with a noise at
intervals like the muttering of distant thunder.

“On Wednesday, the twenty-ninth, all these menacing symptoms of horror
and combustion still gathered more thick and terrific for miles around
the dismal and half-obscured mountain. The prodigious column shot up
with quicker motion, dilating as it rose like a balloon. The sun
appeared in total eclipse, and shed a meridian of twilight over us, that
aggravated the wintry gloom of the scene, now completely powdered over
with falling particles. It was evident that the crisis was yet to come,
that the burning fluid was struggling for a vent, and laboring to throw
off the superincumbent strata and obstructions, which suppressed its
torrent. At night, it was manifest that it had greatly disengaged itself
from its burden, by the appearance of fire flashing above the mouth of
the crater.

“On the memorable thirtieth of April, the reflection of the rising sun
on this majestic body of curling vapor was sublime beyond imagination:
any comparison of the Glaciers, or of the Andes, can but feebly convey
an idea of the fleecy whiteness and brilliancy of this awful column of
intermingled and wreathed smoke and clouds. It afterward assumed a more
sulphureous cast, like what are called thunder-clouds, and in the course
of the day had a ferruginous and sanguine appearance, with a much
livelier action in the ascent, and a more extensive dilatation, as if
almost freed from every obstruction. In the afternoon, the noise was
incessant, and resembled the approach of thunder still nearer and
nearer, with a vibration that affected the feelings and hearing: as yet
there was no convulsive motion, or sensible earthquake. The Charaibs
settled at Morne Ronde, at the foot of the Souffriere, abandoned their
houses, with their live stock, and everything they possessed, and fled
precipitately toward town. The negroes became confused, forsook their
work, looked up to the mountain, and, as it shook, trembled, with the
dread of what they could neither understand or describe: the birds fell
to the ground, overpowered with showers of ashes, unable to keep
themselves on the wing; the cattle were starving for want of food, as
not a blade of grass or a leaf was now to be found; the sea was much
discolored, but not uncommonly agitated; and it is remarkable, that
throughout the whole of this violent disturbance of the earth, it
continued quite passive, and did not at any time sympathize with the
agitation of the land. About four o’clock in the afternoon, the noise
became more alarming, and just before sunset the clouds reflected a
bright copper color, suffused with fire. Scarcely had the day closed,
when the flames burst at length pyramidically from the crater, through
the mass of smoke; the rolling of the thunder became more awful and
deafening; electric flashes quickly succeeded, attended with loud claps;
and now, indeed, the tumult began. Those only who have witnessed such a
sight, can form any idea of the magnificence and variety of the
lightning and electric flashes; some forked and zigzag, playing across
the perpendicular column from the crater; others shooting upward from
the mouth like rockets of the most dazzling luster; others like shells,
with their trailing fuses, flying in different parabolas, with the most
vivid scintillations, from the dark sanguine column, which now seemed
inflexible, and immovable by the wind. Shortly after seven in the
afternoon, the mighty caldron was seen to simmer, and the ebullition of
lava to break out on the north-west side. This, immediately after
boiling over the orifice, and flowing a short way, was opposed by the
acclivity of a higher point of land, over which it was impelled by the
immense tide of liquefied fire which drove it on, forming the figure V
in grand illumination. Sometimes, when the ebullition slackened, or was
insufficient to urge it over the obstructing hill, it recoiled like a
refluent billow, from the rock, and then again rushed forward, impelled
by fresh supplies, and, surmounting every obstacle, carried rocks and
woods together, in its course down the slope of the mountain, until it
precipitated itself down some vast ravine, concealed from our sight by
the intervening ridges of Morne Ronde. Vast globular bodies of fire were
seen projected from the fiery furnace, and, bursting, fell back into it,
or over it upon the surrounding bushes, which were instantly set in
flames. About four hours from the time of the lava’s boiling over the
crater, it reached the sea, as we could observe from the reflection of
the fire and electric flashes attending it. About half past one, the
following morning, another stream of lava was seen descending to the
eastward toward Rabacca. The thundering noise of the mountain, and the
vibration of sound that had been so formidable hitherto, now mingled in
the sudden monotonous roar of the rolling lava, became so terrible, that
dismay was almost turned into despair. At this time the first earthquake
was felt; this was followed by showers of cinders, which fell with the
hissing noise of hail, during two hours.

“At three o’clock, a rolling on the roofs of the houses indicated a fall
of stones, which soon thickened, and at length descended in a rain of
intermingled fire, which threatened at once the fate of Pompeii or
Herculaneum. The crackling coruscations from the crater at this period
exceeded all that had yet passed. The eyes were struck with a momentary
blindness, and the ears stunned with a confusion of sounds. People
sought shelter in the cellars, under rocks, or anywhere, for every place
was nearly the same; and the miserable negroes, flying from their huts,
were knocked down, or wounded, and many killed in the open air. Several
houses were set on fire. The estates situated in the immediate vicinity,
seemed doomed to destruction. Had the stones which fell been heavy in
proportion to their size, not a living creature could have escaped
death: these, having undergone a thorough fusion, were divested of their
natural gravity, and fell almost as light as pumice, though in some
places as large as a man’s head. This dreadful rain of stones and fire
lasted upward of an hour, and was again succeeded by cinders from three
till six o’clock in the morning. Earthquake followed earthquake, almost
momentarily; or rather the whole of this part of the island was in a
state of continued oscillation; not agitated by shocks vertical or
horizontal; but undulated like water shaken in a bowl.

“The break of day, if such it could be called, was truly terrific. Utter
darkness prevailed till eight o’clock, and the birth of May dawned like
the day of judgment: a chaotic gloom enveloped the mountain, and an
impenetrable haze hung over the sea, with black sluggish clouds of a
sulphureous cast. The whole island was covered with cinders, scoriæ, and
broken masses of volcanic matter. It was not until the afternoon, that
the muttering noise of the mountain sunk gradually into a solemn yet
suspicious silence. Such are the particulars of this sublime and
tremendous scene, from its commencement to its catastrophe.”


                        PETER BOTTE’S MOUNTAIN.

                          [See cut, page 74.]

The singular peak represented in the cut, is in the island of Mauritius,
which lies in the Indian ocean, east of Madagascar. The island is about
one hundred and forty miles in circuit, and produces rice, sugar,
cloves, indigo, and various tropical fruits. It was first settled by the
Dutch; but the French gained possession of it in 1715. In 1810, the
English took it, and it is still held by them. The island seems to have
been thrown up from the sea by volcanic eruptions, as it everywhere
bears marks of convulsions by inward fires. In its central parts are
wild craggy mountains, the summits of which are always covered with
snow. And among these is the peak represented in the cut, which is
eighteen hundred feet in hight, and surrounded by dismal ravines. It is
called Peter Botte’s mountain, from a legend that a man of that name
once ascended to the top. The general belief, however, is, that it was
never ascended till the year 1832, when the top of it was reached by a
party under Capt. Lloyd, an English engineer. The exploit was one of the
most hazardous, and the account of it is almost painful to the reader,
from the evident peril of the adventurers.

[Illustration: PETER BOTTE’S MOUNTAIN.]

                                KILAUEA.

While on the subject of wonderful volcanoes, we must not omit to notice
one that has been called the “Niagara of volcanoes,” and the “king of
volcanoes,” =viz.=, Kilauea, the great volcano of the Sandwich islands,
which is on the island of Hawaii, about thirty miles from Hilo bay. One
of the missionaries, from whom we have the account, started to visit it
on horseback; but the way being rough and the animal unshod, he severely
felt the inconvenience of the lava, became discouraged, and moved so
slowly, that he was given up, and the missionary and his associate
proceeded on foot.

“Toward evening,” he continues, “we reached Olaa, an inland settlement;
and the next day, before noon, had arrived at an elevation of some four
thousand feet, at a distance of twenty miles from Hilo bay.

“Approaching the great crater of Kilauea, we had a fine view of the
magnificent dome of Mauna Loa, stretching on some twenty miles beyond
it, and rising above it to the lofty hight of ten thousand feet.
Evidences of existing volcanic agency multiplied around us; steam, gas
and smoke, issued from the sulphur banks on the north-east and
south-east sides of the crater, and here and there, from deep and
extended fissures connected with the fiery subterranean agency; and as
we passed circumspectly along the apparently depressed plain that
surrounds the crater, we observed an immense volume of smoke and vapor
ascending from the midst of it. At the same time, and from the same
source, various unusual sounds, not easily described or explained, fell
with increasing intensity on the ear. Then the angry abyss, the fabled
habitation and throne of _Pele_, the great idol goddess whom the
Hawaiians formerly worshiped, opened before us.

“Coming near to the rim, I fell upon my hands and knees, awe-struck, and
crept cautiously to the rocky brink; for with all my natural and
acquired courage, I was unwilling at once to walk up to the giddy verge,
and look down upon the noisy, fiery gulf beneath my feet. Shortly,
however, I was able to stand very near, and gaze upon this wonder of the
world, which I wish I could set before my readers, in all its mystery,
magnitude and grandeur. It is not a lofty cone, or mountain-top pointing
to the heavens, but a vast chasm in the earth, five or six times the
depth of Niagara falls, and seven or eight miles in circumference. It is
situated on the flank of a vast mountain, which has been gradually piled
up by a similar agency during the course of ages. Such is the immense
extent and depth of Kilauea, that it would take in, entire, the city of
Philadelphia or New York, and make their loftiest spires, viewed from
the rim, appear small and low. But neither cities nor meadows, nor water
nor vegetation, can be found in this chief of the deep places of the
earth, but a lake of lava, some black and indurated, some fiery and
flowing, some cooling as a floating bridge over the fathomless molten
abyss, seven times hotter than Nebuchadnezzar’s hottest furnace, and
some bursting up through this temporary incrustation, rending it here
and there, and forming mounds and cones upon it. The immense mass,
laboring to escape, pressed against the great crater’s sides, which
consist not of a frail ‘Chinese wall,’ built by human hands to resist
human strength, but an irregularly elliptical wall of basaltic rocks,
extending a thousand feet above the surface of the lava lake, and to
unknown depths below. Six hundred feet below, the verge stretches around
horizontally, a vast amphitheater gallery of black indurated lava, once
fluid but now solid, and on which an army of a hundred thousand men
might stand to view the sublime spectacle beneath, around, and above
them.

“While through the eye, the impressions of grandeur, strong at first,
increased till the daylight was gone, the impressions received through
the ear, were peculiar, and by no means inconsiderable. The fiercely
whizzing sound of gas and steam, rushing with varying force through
obstructed apertures in blowing cones, or cooling crusts of lava, and
the laboring, wheezing, struggling, as of a living mountain, breathing
fire and smoke and sulphurous gas from his lurid nostrils, tossing up
molten rocks or detached portions of fluid lava, and breaking up vast
indurated masses with varied detonations, all impressively bade us stand
in awe. When we reached the verge, or whenever we came from a little
distance to look over, these strange sounds increased, as if some
intelligent power, with threatening tones and gestures, indignant at our
obtrusiveness, were forbidding us to approach. The effect of all this on
aboriginal visitors, before the true God was made known to them, may
have been to induce or confirm the superstition, that a deity or family
of deities dwelt there, and recognized the movements of men, and in
various ways expressed anger against them. If my native fellow-travelers
had not been cured of their superstition, or had not known me to be
opposed to all idolatry, and particularly to the worship of Pele, the
goddess whom they once supposed dwelt there, they might naturally have
mistaken my almost involuntary prostration, as an act of religious
homage to this discarded Hawaiian deity. But the missionaries had set at
naught the _tabus_ of this deity, and Kapiolani had openly invaded the
same, and descending into this crater had, in a fearless and Christian
manner, there acknowledged Jehovah as the only true God, and proclaimed
to her countrymen that this was but one of the fires which he has
kindled and controls. So that the natives now with me were ready
devoutly to acknowledge all this.

“When seven years before our visit, Messrs. Ellis, Thurston, Bishop and
Goodrich, accompanied by Mr. Harwood, visited this yawning gulf, they
said of it: ‘The bottom was filled with lava, and the south-west and
northern parts of it were one vast flood of liquid fire, in a state of
terrific ebullition, rolling to and fro its fiery surge and flaming
billows. Fifty-one craters of various forms and sizes, rose, like so
many conical islands from the surface of the burning lake. Twenty-two
constantly emitted columns of gray smoke and pyramids of brilliant
flame, and many of them at the same time vomited from their ignited
mouths, streams of fluid lava, which rolled in blazing torrents down
their black, indented sides, into the boiling mass of fire below.’ The
surface of this body of lava is subject to unceasing changes from year
to year; for ‘deep calleth unto deep’ continually, and the fiery billows
of this troubled ocean never rest.

“As night came on we took our station on the north side of the very
brink, where we supposed we should be able most securely and
satisfactorily to watch the action of this awful laboratory during the
absence of the light of the sun. Though the spot where we spread our
blanket for a lodgment had been considered as the safest in the
neighborhood, there was room for the feeling of insecurity which some
who had preceded us have thus described. ‘The detachment of one small
stone beneath, or a slight agitation of the earth, would have
precipitated us, amid the horrid crash of falling rocks, into the
burning lake.’ Had I thought the danger so imminent, I should have
deemed it prudent to take a position somewhat further off. The mass
which supported us had doubtless been shaken a thousand times, and was
liable every hour to be shaken again; but being in the short curvature
of the crater, like the key-stone of an arch, it could not easily be
thrown from its position by any agitation that would naturally occur
while this great safety-valve is kept open, or the numerous fissures
round it, reaching to the very bowels of the mountain, convey harmlessly
from unknown depths, gases and volumes of steam, generated where water
comes in contact with intense volcanic heat. Our position was about four
thousand feet above the level of the sea, and one thousand above the
surface of the lake below us.

“The great extent of the surface of this lava lake; the numerous places
in it where the fiery element was displaying itself; the conical mouths
here and there discharging glowing lava overflowing and spreading its
waves around, or belched out in detached and molten masses that were
shot forth with detonations, perhaps by the force of gases struggling
through from below the surface, while the vast column of vapor and smoke
ascended up toward heaven, and the coruscations of the emitted brilliant
lava, illuminating the clouds that passed over the terrific gulf, all
presented by night a splendid and sublime panorama of volcanic action,
probably nowhere surpassed, if ever equaled, and which to be imagined
must be seen. Had Vulcan employed ten thousand giant Cyclops, each with
a steam-engine of a thousand horse-power, blowing anthracite coal for
smelting mountain minerals, or heaving up and hammering to pieces the
everlasting rocks and hills, their united efforts would but begin to
compare with the work of Pele here.

“There was enough of mystery connected with the wonderful experiments
going on before our eyes, to give ample employment to fancy and
philosophy, and materially to enhance the sublimity of the fearful
scene. For it might be asked, how can such an immense mass of rocks and
earth be kept incessantly in a state of fusion without fuel or
combustion? Or by what process could such solid masses be fused at all,
in accordance with any mode of generating heat with which we are
acquainted? If there be combustion in the crater adequate to the melting
of such vast masses of substances so hard, rocky and earthy, why is
there an accumulation and increase of the general mass, so that millions
of cubic fathoms are, from time to time, added to the solid contents of
the mountain? But if the bowels of the mountain are supposed to be
melted by intense heat in some way generated, could they be heaved up by
the expansion of steam or gas, while an orifice equal to three or four
square miles, like that of Kilauea, or the terminal crater on the same
mountain, is kept open; for steam and gas might be supposed to pass
through the fluid masses and escape, instead of raising them from a
depth, just as steam issues from the bottom of a boiling caldron,
without materially elevating the surface of its contents.

“But if with one class of geologists, we suppose the interior of the
earth to be in a molten and fluid state, as perhaps originally created,
and that Kilauea and other volcanoes are but the openings and
safety-valves of that subterranean, fiery, central ocean of red or
white-hot matter, then we have here no faint illustration of the bold
imagery used by the sacred writers, and of their phraseology, which to
some seems hyperbolical and even paradoxical, as when they speak of the
‘bottomless pit,’ the ‘fire that is not quenched,’ ‘the lake that
burneth with fire and brimstone,’ ‘the smoke of their torment which
ascendeth up forever and ever.’ If such a vast mass of fiery fluid
constitutes the main portion of the interior of the earth, it is
literally ‘bottomless;’ and the opened surface, like that of Kilauea,
may be strictly called a ‘lake of fire;’ and as sulphur and particles of
the sulphuret of iron are present, it may well be called ‘a lake that
burns with fire and brimstone.’

“After gazing at the wonderful and wonderfully sublime scene for some
twenty hours, taking but a little time for repose, we found the sense of
fear subsiding, and curiosity prompting to a closer intercourse with
Pele, and a more familiar acquaintance with her doings and habits. Many
who try the experiment, though at first appalled, are ready after a few
hours, to wend their way down the steep sides of the crater. Thus we
descended into the immense pit from the north-east side, where it was
practicable, first to the black ledge or amphitheater gallery, and
thence to the surface of the lava lake. This we found extremely
irregular, presenting cones, mounds, plains, vast bridges of lava
recently cooled, pits and caverns, and portions of considerable extent
in a movable and agitated state. We walked over lava which, by some
process, had been fractured into immensely large slabs, as though it had
been contracted by cooling, or been heaved up irregularly by the
semi-fluid mass below. In the fissures of this fractured lava, the slabs
or blocks two feet below the surface, were red-hot. A walking-stick
thrust down would be set on fire and flame instantly.

“Passing over many masses of such lava, we ventured toward the more
central part of the lake, and came near to a recent mound which had
probably been raised on the cooling surface, after our arrival the day
before. From the top of it flowed melted lava, which spread itself in
waves to a considerable distance, one side or the other, all around. The
masses thrown out in succession moved sluggishly, and as they flowed
down the inclined plane, a crust was formed over them, which darkened
and hardened, and became stationary, while the stream still moved on
below it. The front of the mass, red-hot, passed along down, widening
and expanding itself, and forcing its way through a net-work, as it
were, of irregular filaments of iron, which the cooling process freely
supplied. This motion of a flowing mass, whether smaller or larger, seen
from the rim of the crater by night, gives the appearance of a fiery
surf, or a rolling wave of fire, or the dancing along of an extended
semicircular flame on the surface of the lake. When one wave has
expended itself, or found its level, or otherwise become stationary,
another succeeds and passes over it in like manner, and then another,
sent out as it were, by the pulsations of the earth’s open artery, at
the top of the mound. This shows how a mound, cone, pyramid, or
mountain, can be gradually built of lava, and wide plains covered at its
base with the same material.

“We approached near the border of some of these waves, and reached the
melted lava with a stick two yards long; and thus obtained several
specimens red-hot from the flowing mass. I have since had occasion to be
surprised at the absence of fear in this close contiguity with the
terrible element, where the heat under our feet was as great as our
shoes would bear, and the radiating heat from the moving mass was so
intense that I could face it only a few seconds at a time at a distance
of two or three yards. Yet having carefully observed its movements
awhile, I threw a stick of wood upon the thin crust of a moving wave
where I believed it would bear me, even if it should bend a little, and
stood upon it a few moments. In that position, thrusting my cane down
through the cooling, tough crust, about half an inch thick, I withdrew
it, and forthwith there gushed up of the melted, flowing lava under my
feet, enough to form a globular mass two and a half or three inches in
diameter, which, as it cooled, I broke off and bore away as spoils from
the ancient domain and favorite seat of the great idol goddess of the
Hawaiians. Parts that were in violent action we dared not approach.

“There is a remarkable variety in the volcanic productions of Hawaii; a
variety as to texture, form and size, from the vast mountain and
extended plain, to the fine-drawn and most delicate vitreous fiber, the
rough clinker, the smooth stream, the basaltic rock, and masses compact
and hard as granite or flint, and the pumice or porous scoriæ, or
cinders, which, when hot, probably formed a scum or foam on the surface
of the denser molten mass. Considerable quantities of capillary glass
are produced at Kilauea, though I am not aware that the article is found
elsewhere on the islands. Its production has been deemed mysterious. In
its appearance it resembles human hair, and among the natives is
familiarly called ‘=Lauoho o Pele=,’ the hair of Pele. It is formed, I
presume, by the tossing off of small detached portions of lava of the
consistence of melted glass, from the mouths of cones, when a fine
vitreous thread is drawn out between the moving portion, and that from
which it is detached. The fine-spun product is then blown about by the
wind, both within and around the crater, and is collected in little
locks or tufts.

“Sulphur is seen, but in small quantities, in and around the crater; and
at a little distance from the rim there are yellow banks, on which
beautiful crystals of sulphur may be found. In one place, a pool of pure
distilled water, condensed from the steam that rises from a deep
fissure, affords the thirsty traveler a beverage far better than that of
the ordinary distiller. There is, however, a kind of sulphurous gas
produced by the volcano, which is highly deleterious if breathed often
or freely. This is one source of danger to the visitor, which, while I
was down a thousand feet below the rim, produced a temporary coughing.

“I was, perhaps, too venturesome, but other visitors have been far more
so. As one instance of this, Dr. Judd, having become familiar with the
volcanic power, in his ardor to secure valuable and recent specimens for
the United States exploring expedition, on the visit of Commodore Wilkes
and his company to this crater, descended to the surface of the lake,
and then into a _sub-crater_ in the midst of the larger. While he was
busily engaged there in collecting specimens, a sudden bursting up of a
huge volume of fluid lava from the bottom of the sub-crater, alarmed
him, and threatened speedily to overwhelm and destroy him. He sprang to
escape, but finding the rim overhanging, he could not scale it where he
was; and the flowing mass was now too near to allow him to return to the
place where he had descended; and its radiating heat was too intense to
be faced. Escape without assistance was utterly hopeless; and the
natives of the company who were about the brink, and from whom such help
might have been expected, alarmed for themselves, were flying for their
lives. Dr. Judd, giving himself up for lost, offered a prayer to heaven,
and was about to resign himself to his fate, when a friendly and
resolute Hawaiian, who had been a pupil at the mission seminary,
compassionating the exposed sufferer, faced the approaching fiery
volume, and braving its intense heat, exposed his own life, reached down
his strong hand, and firmly grasped the doctor’s, who thus, at the last
available moment, through their united exertions and the blessing of
heaven, escaped with his life from the horrible pit and a fiery grave! A
mighty current instantly overflowed the place where they had just been
standing, and they were obliged to run for their lives before the molten
flood; and being able to outstrip it, they ascended from the surface of
the abyss to the lofty rim, with heartfelt thanksgivings to their great
deliverer.[1] This proves the real danger of descending too far into the
crater of the volcano; and had it occurred in the days of unbroken
superstition, it would doubtless have been ascribed to the anger of
Pele, and tended to increase the number of her deluded worshipers. But
now such a deliverance was justly ascribed to the kind providence of
Jehovah, the knowledge of whose character, as displayed in the gospel,
has introduced the Hawaiian race into a new life.

-----

Footnote 1:

  See United States Exploring Expedition, vol. iv., p. 173.

-----

“Kilauea may be regarded as one of the safety-valves of a bottomless
reservoir of melted earth, below the cooled and cooling crust on which
mountains rise, rivers flow, oceans roll, and cities are multiplied as
the habitations of men. It has been kept open from time immemorial,
always displaying more or less of its active power. The circumambient
air which carries off the caloric, sometimes aided by rain, is
incessantly endeavoring to shut up this valve, or bridge over this
orifice of three or four square miles of the fiery abyss. Sometimes the
imperfect bridge of cooling lava is pierced with fifty or sixty large,
rough, conical chimneys, emitting gas, smoke, flame, and lava; and
sometimes the vast bridge is broken up, and all these cones submerged
and probably fused again by the intense heat of the vast fluid mass
supplied fresh from the interior. The mass rises gradually higher and
higher, hundreds of feet, till by its immense pressure against the sides
of the crater, aided, perhaps, by the power of gas or steam, it forces a
passage for miles through the massive walls, and inundates with its
fiery deluge some portion of the country below, or passing through it,
as a river of fire, pours itself into the sea at the distance of
twenty-five miles, thus disturbing with awful uproar the domains of old
Neptune, and enlarging the dominions of the Hawaiian sovereign.

“The whole island, with its ample and towering mountains, is often
shaken with awful throes, and creation here ‘groaneth and travaileth in
pain.’ In July, 1840, a river of lava flowed out from Kilauea, and
passing some miles under ground, burst out in the district of Puna, and
inundated a portion of the country, sweeping down forests, carrying
everything in its way before it, and as a river a mile wide, falling
into the sea, and heating the waters of the ocean, making war upon its
inhabitants, and by the united action of this volcanic flood and the
sea, formed several huge, rough hills of sand and lava along the shore.
And still later than the above date, a similar flood has been poured
from the summit of Mauna Loa, flowing with terrific force for weeks, and
thus elevating a portion of the region between Mauna Loa and Mauna Kea;
and so extensive and splendid was this exhibition, that it could be seen
from the missionary station at Hilo, a distance of about forty miles.

“After having spent some thirty hours on this king of all the volcanoes,
we set out to return. And on our journey we passed over several large
tracts of lava of different kinds, some smooth, vitreous and shining,
some twisted and coiled like huge ropes, and some consisting of sharp,
irregular, loose, rugged volcanic masses, of every form and size, from
an ounce in weight to several tuns, thrown, I could not conceive how,
into a chaos or field of the roughest surface, presenting a forbidding
area of from one to forty square miles in extent; and though not
precipitous, yet so horrid as to forbid a path, and to defy the approach
of horses and cattle. In the crevices of the more solid lava are found
the _ohelo_, which somewhat resembles the whortleberry, nourished by
frequent showers and dew. At ten o’clock we halted for breakfast, and by
the time the sun was setting had reached Waimea, thus completing our
excursion to this vast volcano, which is truly _one of the wonders of
the world_!”

                        THE PEAK OF DERBYSHIRE.

This peak consists of a chain of high mountains in the county of Derby,
in England, and has been long celebrated, as well on account of its
mineral productions, and natural curiosities in general, as of what are
called its seven wonders. Six of these are natural, namely, Poole’s
Hole, Elden Hole, the Peak Cavern, or the Devil’s Hole, Mam Tor, St.
Ann’s Well, and the Ebbing and Flowing Well. Having described these, we
shall add a more recent discovery, that of the Crystallized Cavern,
which possesses an equal interest.

Poole’s Hole, lying about a mile to the westward of Buxton, is a vast
cavern formed by nature in the limestone rock, and was, according to
tradition, the residence of an outlaw, named Poole. The entrance is low
and contracted, and the passage narrow; but this widening, at length,
leads to a lofty and spacious cavern, from the roof of which stalactites
or transparent crystals, formed by the constant dropping of water laden
with calcareous matter, hang in spiral masses. Other portions of these
petrifactions drop and attach themselves to the floor, rising in cones,
and become what are termed stalagmites.

One of the dropping stalactites, of an immense size, called the Flitch
of Bacon, occurs about the middle of the cavern, which here becomes very
narrow, but soon spreads to a greater width, and continues large and
lofty until the visitor reaches another surprisingly large mass of
stalactite, to which the name of Mary Queen of Scots’ Pillar is given,
from the tradition that this unfortunate queen once paid a visit to the
cavern, and proceeded thus far into its recesses. As this pillar can not
be passed without some difficulty, few persons venture beyond it; nor
does it seem desirable, as, by proceeding thus far, a very competent
idea of the cavern may be formed. The path hitherto is along the side,
and at some hight from the bottom of the cavern; but to visit and
examine the interior extremity, it becomes necessary to descend a few
yards by very slippery and ill-formed steps. The path at the bottom is
tolerably even and level for about sixty feet, when an almost
perpendicular ascent commences, which leads to the extremity of the
fissure, through the eye of St. Anthony’s Needle, a narrow strait,
beyond which the steepness of the way is only to be surmounted by
clambering over irregular masses of rock. The cavern terminates nearly
three hundred feet beyond the Queen of Scots’ pillar. Toward the end is
an aperture through a projecting rock, behind which a candle is
generally placed, when any person has reached the extremity: when seen
at that distance, it appears like a dim star. The visitor returns along
the bottom of the cavern, beneath a considerable portion of the road by
which he entered; and, by thus changing the path, has an opportunity
better to ascertain the hight and width of the cavern in every part, and
to view other accumulated petrifactions, some of which are of a
prodigious size, and of an extraordinary form. In one part of this
passage is a fine spring of transparent water; and a small stream, which
becomes more considerable in rainy seasons, runs through the whole
length of the cavern. Its sound, in passing through this spacious and
lofty concavity, which resembles the interior of a Gothic cathedral, has
a fine effect. To the right, in a small cavern called Poole’s chamber,
is a curious echo.

The various masses of stalactical matter which are everywhere met with
in this natural excavation, and which reflect innumerable rays from the
lights carried by guides, are distinguished by the names of the objects
they are fancied most to resemble. Thus we have Poole’s saddle, his
turtle, and his woolsack; the lion, the lady’s toilet, the pillion, the
bee-hive, &c. It should be noticed, however, that the forms are
constantly varied by the percolation of the water through the roof and
sides of the rock. The subterraneous passage is nearly a half a mile in
length.

                              ELDEN HOLE.

Elden Hole is situated on the side of a gentle hill about a mile to the
north-west of the village of Peak Forest. It is a deep chasm in the
ground, surrounded by a wall, of uncemented stones, to prevent
accidents. This fissure or cleft in the rock has been the subject of
many exaggerated descriptions and superstitious reports, having been
represented not only as unfathomable, but as teeming, at a certain
depth, with so impure an air, that it could not be respired without
immediate destruction. Mr. Lloyd, however, who descended it about
seventy years ago, has proved the absurdity of these relations, in a
paper, of which the following is a brief abstract, published in the
Philosophical Transactions.

For the first sixty feet, he observes, he descended somewhat obliquely,
the passage then becoming difficult from projecting crags. At the
further depth of thirty feet, the inflection of his rope varied at least
eighteen feet from the perpendicular. The breadth of the chink was here
about nine feet, and the length eighteen; the sides being irregular,
moss-grown, and wet. Within forty-two feet of the bottom, the rock
opened on the east, and he swung till he reached the floor of a cave,
one hundred and eighty-six feet only from the mouth, the light from
which was sufficiently strong to permit the reading of any book. The
interior of the chasm he describes as consisting of two parts, which
communicate with each other by a small arched passage, the one
resembling an oven, the other the dome of a glass-house. On the south
side of the latter, was a small opening, about twelve feet in length,
and four feet in hight, lined throughout with a kind of sparkling
stalactite, of a fine deep yellow color, with petrifying drops hanging
from the roof. Tracing the entrance he found a noble column, above
ninety feet high, of the same kind of incrustation. As he proceeded to
the north, he came to a large stone which was covered with the same
substance; and beneath it he found a hole six feet in depth, uniformly
lined with it. From the edge of this hole sprung up a rocky ascent,
sloping, like a buttress, against the side of the cavern, and consisting
of vast, solid, round masses of the same substance and color. Having
climbed this ascent to the hight of about sixty feet, he obtained some
fine pieces of stalactite, which hung from the craggy sides of the
cavern. Descending with some difficulty and danger, he proceeded in the
same direction, and soon came to another pile of incrustations of a
brown color, above which he found a small cavern, opening into the side
of the vault, which he now entered. Here he saw vast masses of
stalactite, hanging like icicles from every part of the roof: several of
these were four and five feet long, and thick as a man’s body. The sides
of the largest cavern were chiefly lined with incrustations of three
kinds, the first of which was a deep yellow stalactite; the second, a
thin coating which resembled a pale stone-color varnish, and reflected
the light of the candle with great splendor; and the third, a rough
efflorescence, the shoot of which resembled a rose flower.

Some more recent visitors have thus stated the result of their
observations and inquiries relative to Elden Hole. They describe the
mouth of this chasm as opening horizontally, in a direction from north
to south; its shape being nearly that of an irregular ellipse, about
ninety feet in length, and twenty-seven in breadth at the widest part.
The northern end is fringed with small trees; and moss and underwood
grow out of the crevices on each side, to the depth of forty or fifty
feet. As the fissure recedes from the surface, it gradually contracts;
and at the depth of about seventy feet inclines considerably to the
west, so as to prevent its course from being further traced.
Notwithstanding the obstacles of the bushes and projecting masses of
stone, it was sounded, and its depth found not to exceed two hundred and
two feet, an estimate which corresponds with the assertion of three
miners, who had descended in search of the bodies of individuals who
were missing, and were supposed to have been robbed, murdered, and
thrown into this frightful abyss.

                              PEAK CAVERN.

Peak cavern, also called the Devil’s Hole, is one of those magnificent,
sublime, and extraordinary productions of nature, which constantly
excite the wonder and admiration of their beholders. It has accordingly
been considered one of the principal wonders of Derbyshire, and has been
celebrated by several poets. It lies in the vicinity of Castleton, and
is approached by a path at the side of a clear rivulet, leading to the
fissure, or separation of the rock, at the extremity of which the cavern
is situated. It would be difficult to imagine a scene more august than
that which presents itself to the visitor at its entrance: on each side,
the huge gray rocks rise almost perpendicularly, to the hight of nearly
three hundred feet, or about seven times the hight of a modern house,
and meeting each other at right or cross angles, form a deep gloomy
recess. In front, it is overhung by a vast canopy of rock, assuming the
appearance of a depressed arch, and extending, in width, one hundred and
twenty feet, in hight forty-two, and in receding depth about ninety.
After penetrating about ninety feet into the cavern, the roof becomes
lower, and a gentle descent leads, by a detached rock, to the interior
entrance of this tremendous hollow. Here the light of day, having
gradually diminished, wholly disappears; and the visitor is provided
with a torch to illumine his further progress.

The progress now becoming extremely confined, he is obliged to proceed,
in a stooping posture, about twenty yards, when he reaches a spacious
opening, named the Bellhouse, and is thence led to a small lake, called
the First Water, about forty feet in length, but not more than two or
three feet in depth. Over this he is conveyed in a boat to the interior
of the cavern, beneath a massive vault of rock, which in some parts
descends to within eighteen or twenty inches of the water. “We stood
some time,” says M. de St. Fond, “on the brink of this lake; and the
light of our dismal torches, which emitted a black smoke, reflecting our
pale images from its bottom, we almost conceived we saw a troop of
specters starting from an abyss to welcome us. The illusion was
extremely striking.”

On landing, the visitor enters a spacious vacuity, two hundred and
twenty feet in length, two hundred feet in breadth, and in some parts
one hundred and twenty feet in hight, opening into the bosom of the
rock; but, from the want of light, neither the distant sides nor the
roof of this abyss, can be seen. In a passage at the inner extremity of
this vast cave, the stream which flows through the whole length of the
cavern, spreads into what is called the Second Water, and near its
termination is a projecting pile of rocks, known by the appellation of
Roger Rain’s House, from the incessant fall of water in large drops
through the crevices of the roofs. Beyond this, opens another tremendous
hollow, called the Chancel, where the rocks are much broken, and the
sides covered with stalactical or petrified incrustations. Here the
visitor is surprised by a vocal concert which bursts in discordant tones
from the upper regions of the chasm. “Still,” observes a tourist, “this
being unexpected, and issuing from a quarter where no object can be
seen, in a place where all else is still as death, is calculated to
impress the imagination with solemn ideas, and can seldom be heard
without that emotion of awe and pleasure, astonishment and delight,
which is one of the most interesting feelings of the mind.” At the
conclusion of the strain, the choristers, who consist of eight or ten
women and children, are seen ranged in the hollow of the rock, about
fifty feet above the floor.

The path now leads to a place whimsically called the Devil’s Cellar and
Half-way House, and thence, by three natural and regular arches, to a
vast concavity, which, from its uniform bell-like appearance, is called
Great Tom of Lincoln. When illuminated by a strong light, this concavity
has a very pleasing effect; the symmetrical disposition of the rocks,
the stream flowing beneath, and the spiracles in the roof, forming a
very interesting picture. From this point the vault gradually descends,
the passage contracts, and at length does not leave more than sufficient
room for the current of the stream, which continues to flow through a
subterraneous channel of several miles in extent, as is proved by the
small stones brought into it after great rains, from the distant mines
of the Peak Forest.

The entire length of this wonderful cavern is twenty-two hundred and
fifty feet, or nearly half a mile; and its depth, from the surface of
the Peak mountain, about six hundred and twenty feet. A curious effect
is produced by the explosion of a small quantity of gunpowder, wedged
into the rock in the interior of the cavern; for the sound appears to
roll along the roof and sides, like a tremendous and continued peal of
thunder. The effect of the light, on returning from these dark recesses,
is particularly impressive; and the gradual illumination of the rocks,
which becomes brighter as the entrance is approached, is said to exhibit
one of the most interesting scenes that ever employed the pencil of an
artist, or fixed the admiration of a spectator.

                                MAM TOR.

Mam Tor or the Shivering Mountain, is a huge precipice facing the east
or south-east, chiefly composed of a peculiar kind of slate, which,
although very hard before it is exposed to the air, very easily crumbles
to dust on such exposure. Hence it is perpetually wasted by the action
of the rain and snow; while the harder and larger masses of stone being
thus loosened and disengaged, necessarily fall from their positions, and
this with a rushing noise which is occasionally so loud as to be heard
at Castleton, a distance of two miles. The valley beneath is overwhelmed
with their fragments to the extent of half a mile. In many parts of the
precipice, they produce, before their descent, a cavernous appearance,
and even a romantic overhanging scenery, highly dangerous to be
approached. It is affirmed by the most intelligent of the neighboring
inhabitants, that this mountain chiefly wastes during violent storms of
snow and rain; and Mr. Martin, who published an account of Mam Tor, in
the Philosophical Transactions for 1729, affirms that the decay is not
constantly the same. He not only surveyed it closely, but ascended the
steepest part of the precipice, without tracing any other shivering in
the mountain, beside that which was occasioned by the treading of his
feet in the loose crumbled earth.

                      THE EBBING AND FLOWING WELL.

In the vicinity of Chapel-en-le-Frith is a steep hill, rising to the
hight of more than a hundred feet, immediately beneath which this
natural phenomenon lies. It is of an irregular form, but nearly
approaching to a square, from two or three feet in depth, and about
twenty feet in width.

Its ebbings and flowings are irregular, and dependent on the quantity of
rain which falls in the different seasons of the year; when it begins to
rise, the current can only be perceived by the slow movement of the
blades of grass, or other light bodies floating on the surface;
notwithstanding which, before the expiration of a minute, the water
issues with a gurgling noise, in considerable quantities, from several
small apertures on the south and west sides. The interval of time
between the ebbing and flowing is not always alike: consequently the
proportion of water it discharges at different periods, also varies. In
the space of five minutes flowing, the water occasionally rises to the
hight of six inches; and, after remaining a few seconds stationary, the
well assumes its former quiescent state.

The cause of the intermittent flowing of this well may be satisfactorily
explained, on the principle of the action of the siphon, and on the
supposition of a natural one communicating with a cavity in the hill,
where the water may be supposed to accumulate; but for the phenomenon of
its ebbing, no satisfactory reason has been assigned. The opinion of a
second siphon, (which is ingeniously advanced by one tourist,) that
begins to act when the water rises, is inconsistent with the appearance
of the well, and therefore can not be just.


                            ST. ANNE’S WELL.

This well, the usual resort of the company who frequent Buxton to drink
the waters, has been classed among the wonders of the peak, on account
of this singularity, that within five feet of the hot spring by which it
is supplied, a cold one arises. This is not, however, the only well of
the kind, since hot and cold springs rise near each other in many parts
of England, and in other countries. The water is conveyed to the well,
which is an elegant classical building, in the Grecian style, from the
original spring, by a narrow passage, so close and well contrived as to
prevent it from losing any considerable portion of its heat, and is
received in a white marble bason. It is not so warm as the Bath water,
its temperature being about eighty degrees of Fahrenheit.

                        THE CRYSTALLIZED CAVERN.

The crystallized cavern, the new wonder of the Derbyshire Peak, was
discovered some years ago in the vicinity of the village of Bradwell. We
extract the following particulars of this singular and beautiful natural
excavation, from Hutchinson’s tour in the High Peak.

The entrance is rather terrific than grand; and the descent, for about
thirty paces, very abrupt. The visitor has then to pass along the
inclined way for nearly a quarter of a mile, the opening being so low
that it is impossible to proceed, in particular parts, in an erect
posture. The different crystallizations which now attract his attention
on every side, soon make him forget the irksomeness of the road, and
banish every idea of fatigue. New objects of curiosity crowd one on the
other. In a place called the Music Chamber, the petrifactions take the
semblance of the pipes of an organ; while in other parts, these
stalactites are formed into elegant small colonnades, with as exact a
symmetry as if they had been chiseled by the most skillful artist.
Candles judiciously disposed within them, give an idea of the imaginary
palaces of fairies, or of sylphs and genii, who have chosen this for
their magnificent abode.

Still he has seen nothing comparable to what he is now to expect; for,
at the distance of about a hundred paces further, by a rugged descent,
he enters what is called the Grotto of Paradise. This heavenly spot, for
it can not be compared to anything terrestrial, is, of itself, a
beautiful crystallized cavern, about twelve feet high, and in length
twenty feet, pointed at the top, similar to a Gothic arch, with a
countless number of large stalactites hanging from the roof. Candles
placed among them give some idea of its being lighted up with elegant
glass chandeliers; while the sides are entirely incrusted, and brilliant
in the extreme. The floor is checkered with black and white spar. It
has, altogether, a most novel and elegant appearance. This glittering
apartment would be left by the visitor with a certain degree of regret,
did he not expect to see it again on his return.

Still continuing a route similar to the one he has passed, in the course
of which his attention is occasionally arrested by the curiosities of
the place, and by the gentle droppings of the water, which scarcely
break the solemn silence of the scene, he at length reaches the Grotto
of Calypso, and the extremity of the cavern, upward of two thousand feet
from the entrance. To see this grotto to advantage, he has to ascend
about six feet, into a recess. There, the beautiful appearance of the
different crystallizations, some of them of an azure cast, and the
echoes reverberating from side to side, make him fancy he has reached
the secluded retreat of some mythological deity.

Returning by the same path for a considerable distance, another cavern,
which branches in a south-west direction from the one already explored,
presents itself. The roads here are still more difficult of access, but
the stalactites are certainly most beautiful. Many of them, more than a
yard in length, are pendent from the roof, and the greater part do not
exceed the dimension of the smallest reed. The top and sides of this
cavern are remarkably smooth, particularly at the part called the
Amphitheater. In general, the stone is of a very dark color, to which
the transparent appearances before mentioned, with each a drop of water
hanging at its extremity, form a fine contrast.

                            SPEEDWELL LEVEL.

In the Speedwell Level, or Navigation Mine, in the vicinity of
Castleton, art has been combined with the subterraneous wonders of
nature. Being provided with lights, the guide leads the visitor beneath
an arched vault, by a flight of one hundred and six steps, to the sough
or level, where a boat is ready for his reception, and is put in motion
by pushing against pegs driven into the wall for that purpose. After
proceeding about one-third of a mile through various caverns, the level
bursts into a tremendous gulf, the roof and bottom of which are
invisible, but across which the navigation has been carried, by throwing
a strong arch over a part of the fissure where the rocks are least
separated. Here, leaving the boat, and ascending a stage erected above
the level, the attention of the visitor is directed to the dark recess
of the abyss beneath his feet; and firm indeed must be his resolution,
if he can contemplate the scene unmoved, and without an involuntary
shudder. To the depth of ninety feet all is vacuity and gloom; but
beyond that commences a pool of Stygian waters, not unaptly named the
Bottomless Pit, the prodigious range of which may in some measure be
conceived, by the circumstance of its having swallowed up more than
forty thousand tuns of rubbish, made in blasting the rock, without any
apparent diminution either of its depth or extent. The guides assert
that the former has not been ascertained; but there is reason to believe
that its actual depth in standing water is about three hundred and
twenty feet. There can not, however, be a doubt but that this abyss has
communications with others still more deeply situated in the bowels of
the mountain, and into which the precipitated rubbish has found a
passage. The superfluous water of the level falls through a water-gate
into this profound caldron, with a noise like a rushing torrent.

This fissure is calculated to be about eight hundred feet beneath the
surface of the mountain; and so great is its reach upward, that rockets
of sufficient strength to ascend four hundred and fifty feet, have been
fired without rendering the roof visible. The effect of a Bengal light
discharged in this stupendous cavity, is extremely magnificent and
interesting.

                             THE HIGH TOR.

This is one of the many sublime objects presented by Matlock dale, the
beauties of which will be cursorily described, in proportion as these
objects pass under our review.

In approaching the bath, which is nearly a mile to the south-west of the
village of Matlock, a specimen of the scenery by which this charming
vale is distinguished, presents itself. The entrance is through a rock,
which has been blasted for the purpose of opening a convenient passage;
and here a scene which blends the constituent principles of the
picturesque, the beautiful and the sublime, opens suddenly on the view.
Through the middle of a narrow plain flows the Derwent, overhung by a
profusion of luxuriant beeches and other drooping trees. Toward the east
are gently rising grounds, and on the west the huge mural banks of the
vale stretch along, the white face of the rock of which they are
composed occasionally displaying itself through the woody clothing of
their sides and summits. This magnificent scenery is singularly
contrasted by the manufactories and lodging-houses at the bottom of the
vale.

To see this magic spot to the greatest advantage, it should be entered
at its northern extremity, its beauties then succeeding each other in a
proper gradation, and their grandeur and effect being rendered more
impressive. The chief attention is now attracted to the High Tor, a
grand and stupendous rock, which appears like a vast abrupt wall of
limestone, and rises almost perpendicularly from the river, to the hight
of upward of three hundred and fifty feet. The lower part of this
majestic feature is shaded by yew-trees, elms, limes, and underwood of
various foliage; but the upper part, for fifty or sixty yards, presents
a rugged front of one broad mass of perpendicular rock. From its summit
the vale is seen in all its grandeur, diversified by woods of various
hues and species. The windings of the Derwent, the grayish-colored
rocks, and the white fronts of the houses, embosomed amid groves of
trees which sprout from every crevice of the precipices, give variety
and animation to a scene of wonderful beauty.

[Illustration: BRIDGE OVER THE WYE.]

                               CHEE TOR.

In a romantic and deep hollow, near the little village of Wormhill, the
river Wye flows beneath this stupendous mass of rock, which rises
perpendicularly more than three hundred and sixty feet above its level.
The channel of the river, which meanders at the base, is confined
between huge rocks of limestone, having such a general correspondence of
situation and form, as to render it probable that they were once united.
In some parts they are partially covered with brushwood, nut-trees and
mountain-ash; while in others, they are totally naked, precipitous and
impending. The chasm runs in a direction so nearly circular, that the
sublime Chee Tor, and its dependent masses of rock, are almost insulated
by the river which rolls at their feet. Its length, as far as it
possesses any considerable beauty, is between five and six hundred
yards; a distance which presents several picturesque and interesting
views, the general effect of the fine scenery being enhanced by the
plantations on the neighboring hights, and by a spring which flows into
the river near the bottom of a deep descent, as well as by a romantic
bridge over the river itself, a representation of which may be seen in
the cut above. Not far from here is the well known Masson hill,
celebrated in Darwin’s “Loves of the Plants,” which is so high as to
overlook the country to a vast extent, and compared with which even the
High Tor seems considerably diminished in grandeur and sublimity; but
this effect is partly compensated by the extent of the prospect, and the
variety of objects it comprehends. The hight of this eminence is about
seven hundred and fifty feet, the path to its summit having been
carried, in a winding direction, through a grove. About half-way in the
ascent is an alcove, from which an extensive view of a great part of
Matlock dale may be seen, through a fine avenue formed for that purpose.

                         THE CUMBERLAND CAVERN.

To the west and north-west of the village of Matlock, are three
apertures in the rock, respectively named the Cumberland, Smedley, and
Rutland caverns. The former of these is well deserving of a short
notice.

The entrance is partly artificial, to afford a greater facility to the
visitor, who has to descend fifty-four steps. The cavern now opens on
him in solitary grandeur. Huge masses of stone are piled on each other
with a tremendous kind of carelessness, evidently produced by some
violent concussion, though at an unknown period. He is conducted to a
long and wide passage, the roof of which has all the regularity of a
finished ceiling, and is bespangled by spars of various descriptions.
From above, from beneath, and from the sides, the rays of the lights are
reflected in every direction. In an adjacent compartment, rocks are
heaped on rocks in terrible array, and assume a threatening aspect. Next
is an apartment decorated with what, in the language of the country, is
called the snow-fossil, a petrifaction which, both in figure and color,
resembles snow, as it is drifted by the winter storm into the cavities
of a rock. Near the extremity of the cavern are to be seen fishes
petrified and fixed in the several strata which form the surrounding
recess. One of these has its back jutting out of the side of the earth,
as if it had been petrified in the act of swimming. In another branch of
the cavern a well has been found of a considerable depth.


                            REYNARD’S HOLE.

After having proceeded about a mile in Dove dale, the romantic and
sublime beauties of which will be hereafter noticed, by a route
constantly diversified by new fantastic forms, and uncouth combinations
of rock, the visitor is led to a mass of mural rock, bearing the above
name, and perforated by nature into a grand arch, nearly approaching to
the shape of the sharply pointed Gothic style of architecture, about
forty-five feet in hight, and in width twenty. Having passed through
this arch, a steep ascent leads to a natural cavern, called Reynard’s
Hall, forty-five feet in length, fifteen in breadth, and in hight
thirty. From the mouth of this cavern the scenery is singular, beautiful
and impressive. The face of the rock which contains the arch, rises
immediately in front, and would effectually prevent the eye from ranging
beyond its mighty barrier, did not its center open into the
above-mentioned arch, through which is seen a small part of the opposite
side of the dale, consisting of a mass of gloomy wood, from the shade of
which a huge detached rock, solitary, cragged, and pointed, starts out
to a great hight, and forms an object truly sublime. This rock, which
has received the name of Dove Dale Church, is pleasingly contrasted by
the little pastoral river, Dove, and by its verdant turfy banks. A
narrow opening at the extremity of the cavern is supposed to lead to
other similar cavities in the rock; and on the left is a cavern, about
forty feet in length, in breadth fourteen, and in hight twenty-six,
called Reynard’s Kitchen, from the interior of which a pleasing view is
presented of the upper part of the dale, its river and rocks.

After passing Reynard’s Hole, already described, the rocks rise more
abruptly on either side, and appear in shapes more wild and irregular,
but diversified and softened by shrubs.

Dove dale is nearly three miles in length; but from the sinuosity of its
course, and its projecting precipices, the views are limited. Throughout
the whole of this majestic feature of country, the river Dove flows, in
the halcyon days of summer, with soft murmurs, innocently and
transparently over its pebbly bed; but swells into rage during the
winter months. Little tufts of shrubs and underwood form islands in
miniature within its bed, which enlarge and swell the other objects. The
scenery of this dale is distinguished from almost every other in the
united kingdoms, by the rugged, dissimilar, and frequently grotesque and
fanciful appearance of the rocks. To employ the words of a tourist here,
“It is, perhaps, on the whole one of the most pleasing sceneries of the
kind anywhere to be met with. It has something peculiarly
characteristic. Its detached, perpendicular rocks stamp it with an image
entirely its own, and for that reason it affords the greater pleasure.
For it is in scenery as in life. We are most struck with the peculiarity
of an original character, provided there be nothing offensive

                             THOR’S HOUSE.

         “Where Hamps and Manifold, their cliffs among,
         Each in his flinty channel winds along,
         With lucid lines the dusky moor divides,
         Hurrying to intermix their sister tides,
         Where still their silver-bosom’d nymphs abhor
         The blood-smear’d mansion of gigantic Thor—
         Erst fires volcanic in the marble womb
         Of cloud-wrapp’d Whetton rais’d the massy dome;
         Rocks rear’d on rocks, in huge disjointed piles,
         Form the tall turrets, and the lengthen’d aisles;
         Broad pond’rous piers sustain the roof, and wide
         Branch the vast rainbow ribs from side to side.
         While from above, descends, in milky streams,
         One scanty pencil of illusive beams,
         Suspended crags, and gaping gulfs illumes,
         And gilds the horrors of the deepen’d glooms.
         Here oft the Naiads, as they chanc’d to stray
         Near the dread Fane, on Thor’s returning day,
         Saw from red altars streams of guiltless blood,
         Stain their green reed-beds, and pollute their flood;
         Heard dying babes in wicker prisons wail,
         And shrieks of matrons thrill the affrighted gale;
         While from dark caves infernal echoes mock,
         And fiends triumphant shout from every rock!”—DARWIN.

This spacious cavern is situated about two miles above Dove dale, near
the village of Whetton; and tradition says the Druids here offered human
sacrifices, inclosed in wicker idols, to Thor, the principal deity of
the Saxons and Danes, in the ages of their idolatrous worship. Beneath
is an extensive and romantic common, where the rivers Hamps and Manifold
sink into the earth, and rise again in Islam gardens. These rivers merit
a brief description. A wooden bridge has been thrown over an abyss in
the rock, out of which the river Manifold bursts with surprising force,
after having pursued a subterraneous course of five miles, from the
point where it had engulfed itself in the earth, called Weston hill. At
the further distance of twenty yards a similar phenomenon occurs; for
here another fissure of a rock presents itself, whence the river Hamps
throws its water into day. This river disappears at Leek-water Houses, a
place between Leek and Ashbourn; thus pursuing a subterraneous course of
seven miles, before it again emerges into light. On their emersion, the
temperatures of the two rivers differ two degrees and a half, the Hamps
being the coldest.

                           THE LOVERS’ LEAP.

The environs of Buxton abound in romantic sites, among the most striking
of which is the dale named the Lovers’ Leap, on account of a vast
precipice which forms one side of a narrow chasm, and from the summit of
which a love-lorn female is said to have precipitated herself into the
rocky gulf below. Each side of this beautiful dell is bounded by
elevated rocks, the proximity of which is such, that for a considerable
space there is scarcely room for the passage of the bubbling current of
the Wye. Several of these rocks are perpendicular, and bare of
vegetation; while others are covered with ivy, yew and ash-wood, with a
craggy steep occasionally starting through the verdure. A circular road,
extending in circumference about three miles, passes in view of the most
romantic part of this dale, and forms a very agreeable walk or ride from
Buxton. At the southern extremity the scenery assumes a milder
character, the hollow taking the name of Mill dale, from a mill which is
turned by the stream. In conjunction with a rude bridge, a mountainous
path, and other rural objects, this forms a very picturesque view.
Another fine scene is presented by a lofty rock, called Swallow Tor,
which soars over a mass of wood, the river at its base foaming and
roaring over broken masses of limestone.

                               THE MOORS.

Derbyshire is everywhere fruitful in natural curiosities, among the most
striking of which may be reckoned the moors of Hope parish, inasmuch as
they afford an extraordinary instance of the preservation of human
bodies interred in them. In the year 1674, a grazier and his female
servant, in crossing these moors on their way to Ireland, were lost in
the snow, with which they were covered from January to May, and being
then discovered, the bodies were so offensive that the coroner ordered
them to be buried on the spot. After a lapse of twenty-nine years, when
the ground was opened, they were in no way changed, the color of the
skin being fair and natural, and the flesh as soft as that of persons
newly dead. For twenty succeeding years they were occasionally exposed
as a spectacle, but carefully covered after being viewed. They lay at
the depth of about three feet, in a moist soil or moss. The minister of
Hope parish was present in 1716, forty-two years after the accident, at
a particular inspection of these bodies. On the stockings being drawn
off, the man’s legs, which had not been uncovered before, were quite
fair: the flesh, when pressed by the finger, pitted a little; and the
joints played freely, without the least stiffness. Such parts of the
clothing as the avidity of the country people, to possess so great a
curiosity, had spared, were firm and good; and a piece of new serge,
worn by the woman, did not appear to have undergone any sensible change.

                       OTHER ENGLISH CURIOSITIES.

Having thus brought to a conclusion our details relative to the wonders
of the peak, and the various and interesting natural curiosities there
to be found, we subjoin a brief notice of several others, which have, in
England, attracted the notice of travelers.

Among the extraordinary caverns to be found in the mountains of the
north of England, may be reckoned Yordas cave, in the vale of Kingsland,
in Yorkshire, which contains a subterraneous cascade. Whethercot cave,
not far from Ingleton, is divided by an arch of limestones, passing
under which is seen a large cascade falling from a hight of more than
sixty feet. The length of this cave is about one hundred and eighty
feet, and the breadth ninety.

There are also in various parts of England many remarkable springs, of
which some are impregnated either with salt, (as that of Droitwich, in
Worcestershire,) or sulphur, (as the famous well of Wigan, in
Lancashire,) or bituminous matter, (as that at Pitchford, in
Shropshire.) Others have a petrifying quality, as that near Lutterworth,
in Leicestershire, and a dropping well in the West Riding of Yorkshire.
And, finally, some ebb and flow, as that of the peak described above,
and Laywell near Torbay, whose waters rise and fall several times in an
hour. To these we may add that remarkable fountain near Richard’s
Castle, in Herefordshire, commonly called Bone Well, which is generally
full of small bones, like those of frogs or fishes, though often cleared
out. At a cliff near Wigan, in Lancashire, is the famous burning well:
the water is cold, neither has it any smell; yet so strong a vapor of
sulphur issues out with the stream, that upon applying a light to it,
the top of the water is covered with a flame, like that of burning
spirits, which lasts several hours, and emits such a heat that meat may
be boiled over it.

                      MOUNTAINS OF GREAT BRITAIN.

The British isles present many mountains of a bold and imposing
character: when contrasted, however, with those which have been already
described, they must be considered as comparatively diminutive.


                               BEN NEVIS.

The loftiest of these mountains is Ben Nevis, in Scotland, its elevation
above the level of the sea being forty-three hundred and eighty feet, or
somewhat more than four-fifths of a mile. It terminates in a point, and
elevates its rugged front far above all the neighboring mountains. It is
of easy ascent; and at the perpendicular hight of fifteen hundred feet,
the vale beneath presents a very agreeable prospect, the vista being
beautified by a diversity of bushes, shrubs, and birch woods, besides
many little verdant spots. The sea and the shore are also seen.

At the summit, the view extends at once across the island, eastward
toward the German sea, and westward to the Atlantic ocean. Nature here
appears on a majestic scale and the vastness of the prospect engages the
whole attention, at the same time the objects in view are of no common
dimensions. Just over the opening of the sound, at the south-west corner
of Mull, Colonsay rises out of the sea like a shade of mist, at the
distance of more than ninety miles. Shuna and Lismore appear like small
spots of rich verdure, and, though nearly thirty miles distant, seem
quite under the spectator. The low parts of Jura can not be discerned,
nor any part of Isla; far less the coast of Ireland, as has been
asserted. Such is, however, the wide extent of view, that it extends one
hundred and seventy miles from the horizon of the sea at the Murray
frith, on the north-east, to the island of Colonsay, on the south-west.

On the north-east side of Ben Nevis is an almost perpendicular
precipice, certainly not less than fourteen hundred feet in depth;
probably more, as it appears to exceed the third part of the entire
hight of the mountain. A stranger is astonished at the sight of this
dreadful rock, which has a quantity of snow lodged in its bosom
throughout the whole year. The sound of a stone thrown over the cliff to
the bottom, can not be heard when it falls, so that it is impossible to
ascertain in that way the hight of the precipice.


                                SNOWDON.

This is the loftiest of the Welch mountains, its elevation above the
level of the sea being thirty-seven hundred and twenty feet, or nearly
three-quarters of a mile. It is accessible on one side only, its flanks
being in every other quarter precipitous. Its aspect soon convinces the
spectator that he is not to look to the Alps alone, or to the rocky
regions of Altai, bordering on Siberia, for romantic scenes of wildness,
confusion and disorder. Snowdon presents them in all their rude and
native majesty.

In the ascent, a narrow path not more than nine feet in width, leads
along the margin of a frightful precipice of nearly fifteen hundred feet
in extent, so perpendicular that it can not be approached without
terror; while to the north of the summit nearest to the one the most
elevated, a semi-amphitheater of precipitous rocks, also of a great
hight, is seen; and, behind this summit, another semicircle of equal
depth and extent. The loftiest summit here appears to descend in the
form of a sharp ridge, and beneath it another appears, which, on account
of its color, is called the Black Rock. From the upper part of the
valley, one of these summits presents a grand, vertical, and very
elevated point.

The bottom of each of the amphitheaters of rocks, thirteen in number, is
occupied by a small lake of a circular form, and very deep. The one
known by the name of Llyn Glass is remarkable for its green hue, derived
from its being impregnated with copper, several mines of which line its
borders. Than this mountain, nothing in the Alps can be more arid and
desert, those regions alone excepted which are too lofty to admit of
vegetation. Here there is not a tree, not even a shrub; small patches of
verdure, which sheep can scarcely reach, are alone to be seen. Its
summit, or highest peak, is a flat of about eighteen feet only in
circumference. Thence may be seen a part of Ireland, a part of Scotland,
Cumberland, Lancashire, Cheshire, all North Wales, the isle of Man, and
the Irish and British seas, with innumerable lakes; while the whole
island of Anglesea is displayed so distinctly, that, its flat
uncultivated plains, bounded by the rich Parys mountain in the vicinity
of Holyhead, may be descried as on a map.


                              CADER IDRIS.

To the south of Dolgellau, Cader Idris towers above the subject
mountains, which seem to retire, to allow its base more room to stand,
and to afford to their sovereign a better display. It stands on a broad
rocky base, with a gradual ascent to its brow, when the peaks elevate
themselves in a manner at once abrupt, picturesque and distinct. The
point emphatically named Cader, appears to the eye below to be little
superior in hight to the saddle; but the third point, or apex, which has
a name expressive of its sterility, is neither equal in hight, nor in
beauty, to the other two. On its loftiest peak a stone pillar has lately
been erected, for the purpose of a trigonometrical survey.

Cader Idris is the commencement of a chain of primitive mountains, and
is computed to be twenty-eight hundred and fifty feet above the green of
Dolgellau, and thirty-five hundred and fifty feet, or nearly
three-fourths of a mile above the level of the sea. It has been
conjectured that at some remote period it was a volcano of immense
magnitude.

The tract to the south of Cader Idris, as far as Talylyn and Malwydd, is
peculiarly grand. High and rugged mountains of every possible form,
close in on all sides, while huge masses of rock hang over, or lie
scattered in misshapen fragments by the side of the road. To add to the
effect of this scene, the river Difi forms one continued cataract for
five or six miles, overflowing with the innumerable tributary torrents
which precipitate themselves from the highest summits of the surrounding
rocks; while, to crown the whole, the shady head of Cader Idris towers,
the majestic sentinel of the group.


                              PENMAN-MAWR.

The county of Caernarvon, in which this mountain is situated, claims
precedency over every other in Wales, for the loftiness of its
mountains, and the multitude of the eminences, which in a curved and
indented chain, occupy nearly the whole of its extent.

In proceeding from Conway to Bangor, by a route at once picturesque and
romantic, and amid a scenery which varies at every step, Penman-mawr
discloses to the traveler its bulky head. It protrudes itself into the
sea, and exhibits a fine contrast to the fertility which it interrupts,
by a rude view of gray weather-beaten stones and precipices. The passage
over the mountain was formerly terrific; but the road has been latterly
widened and secured, near the verge of the precipice, by a small wall
about five feet in hight. It forms the most sublime terrace in the
British isles, winding round the mountain on the edge of the abrupt
cliff; while the vast impending rocks above, the roaring of the waves at
a great distance below, and the frequent howling of the wind, all unite
to fill the mind with solemnity and awe.




                                SKIDDAW.

This English mountain, which has an elevation of thirty-five hundred and
thirty feet, or nearly three-fourths of a mile above the level of the
sea, is situated in Cumberland. It is more remarkable on account of the
scenery over which it presides, and which exceeds in beauty whatever the
imagination can paint, than for those bold projections and that rugged
majesty which might be expected, but which will be here sought in vain.
Except at such a distance as smooths the embossed work of all these rich
fabrics, and where its double summit makes it a distinguished object to
mark and characterize a scene, it may be considered as a tame and
inanimate object.


                               WHARNSIDE.

In some of the maps of Yorkshire, the hight of this mountain is greatly
exaggerated, its elevation above the sea not being more than twenty-five
hundred feet, or nearly half a mile. As it is situated in the midst of a
vast amphitheater of hills, the prospect it affords is diversified with
pleasing objects. On its summit are four or five small lakes, two of
which are about nine hundred feet in length, and nearly the same in
breadth. A thin seam of coal also occurs near the top, and another is
said to correspond with it on the summit of the lofty Colm hill, on the
opposite side of Dent dale. Numerous caves and other natural curiosities
abound here, as well as on Pennigent, about six miles to the eastward of
Ingleborough. These latter mountains do not possess any particular
interest.


                               STROMBOLI.

Stromboli is the principal of the cluster of small islands, lying to the
north of Sicily, named the Lipari isles, the whole of which contain
volcanoes. At a distance, its form appears to be that of an exact cone,
but on a closer examination it is found to be a mountain having two
summits of different hights, the sides of which have been torn and
shattered by craters. The most elevated summit, inclining to the
south-west, is, agreeably to Spallanzani, about a mile in hight.

In this volcanic mountain, the effects of a constantly active fire are
everywhere visible, heaping up, destroying, changing, and overturning
every instant what itself has produced, and incessantly varying in its
operations. At the distance of one hundred miles, the flames it emits
are visible, whence it has been aptly denominated the light-house of
that part of the Mediterranean sea.

From the more elevated summit, all the inner part of the burning crater,
and the mode of its eruption, may be seen. It is placed about half-way
up, on the north-west side of the mountain, and has a diameter not
exceeding two hundred and fifty feet. Burning stones are thrown up at
regular intervals of seven or eight minutes, ascending in somewhat
diverging rays. While a portion of them roll down toward the sea, the
greater part fall back into the crater; and these being again cast out
by a subsequent eruption, are thus tossed about until they are broken
and reduced to ashes. The volcano, however, constantly supplies others,
and seems inexhaustible in this species of productions. Spallanzani
affirms that, in the more violent eruptions, the ejected matter rises to
the hight of half a mile, or even higher, many of the ignited stones
being thrown above the highest summit of the mountain.

The erupted stones, which appear black in the day-time, have at night a
deep red color, and sparkle like fire-works. Each explosion is
accompanied by flames or smoke, the latter resembling clouds, in the
lower part black, in the upper white and shining, and separating into
globular and irregular forms. In particularly high winds from the south
or south-east, the smoke spreads over every part of the island.
Spallanzani observed this volcano on a particular night, when the latter
of these winds blew with great violence. The clear sky exhibited the
appearance of a beautiful aurora borealis over that part of the mountain
on which the volcano is situated, and which from time to time became
more red and brilliant, in proportion as the ignited stones were thrown
to a greater hight. The violence of the convulsions depends on that of
the wind.

The present crater has burned for more than a century, without any
apparent change having taken place in its situation. The side from which
the showers of ignited matter fall into the sea, is almost
perpendicular, about half a mile broad at the bottom, and a mile in
length, terminating above in a point. In rolling down, the lava raises
the fine sand like a cloud of dust. While this was observed by
Spallanzani, the volcano suddenly made an eruption. Numerous pieces of
lava of a dark red color, and enveloped in smoke, were ejected from the
top of the precipice, and thrown high into the air. A part of them fell
on the declivity, and rolled down, the smaller preceded by the greater;
after a few bounds, dashing into the sea, giving out a sharp hissing
sound. The more minute fragments, from their lightness, and the
hindrance of the sand, rolled slowly down, and striking against each
other, produced nearly the same sound as hail-stones falling on a roof.
In a few minutes another explosion followed, without any sensible noise;
and two minutes after a third eruption took place, with a much louder
explosion than the first, and a far more copious ejection of lava. The
eruptions, which were almost innumerable during the time Spallanzani
remained there, all exhibited the same appearances.

On the night following the one above described, the volcano raged with
still greater violence, and rapidly hurled to a great hight, thousands
of red-hot stones, forming diverging rays in the air. Those which rolled
down the precipice, produced a hail of streaming fire, which illuminated
the steep descent. Independently of these ignited stones, there was in
the air which hovered over the volcano, a vivid light, which was not
extinguished when that was at rest. It was not properly flame, but real
light reverberated by the atmosphere, impregnated by extraneous
particles, and more especially by the ascending smoke. Besides varying
in intensity, it appeared constantly in motion, ascending, descending,
dilating and contracting, but always remaining perpendicular over the
mouth of the volcano, which showed that it was occasioned by the
conflagration within the crater. The detonations in the greater
eruptions resembled the roaring of distant thunder, and in the lesser
ones, the explosions of a mine. In the smallest they were scarcely
audible. Each was some seconds later than the ejection.

Near the mouth of the volcano is a small cavern, a projection above
which secures it from the entrance of the ignited stones. From this
cavern Spallanzani was enabled to look down into the very bowels of the
volcano. He describes the edges of the crater as of a circular form, and
not more than three hundred and forty feet in circumference, the
internal sides contracting as they descend, and assuming the shape of a
truncated inverted cone. The crater itself, to a certain hight, is
filled with a liquid red-hot matter, resembling melted brass. This is
the fluid lava, which appears to be agitated by two distinct motions,
the one intestine, whirling and tumultuous, and the other that by which
it is impelled upward. This liquid matter is raised, sometimes with
more, and sometimes with less rapidity, within the crater; and when it
has reached within twenty-five or thirty feet of the upper edge, a sound
is heard not unlike a short clap of thunder, while at the same moment a
portion of the lava, separated into a thousand pieces, is thrown up with
indescribable swiftness, accompanied by a copious eruption of smoke,
ashes and sand. A few moments before the report, the superficies of the
lava is inflated and covered with large bubbles, some of which are
several feet in diameter; on the bursting of these the detonation and
fiery shower take place. After the explosion, the lava within the crater
sinks, but soon rises again as before, and new bubbles appear, which
again burst and produce new explosions. When the lava sinks, it gives
little or no sound; but when it rises, and particularly when it begins
to be inflated with bubbles, it is accompanied by a noise similar, in
proportion to the difference of magnitude, to that of liquor boiling
vehemently in a caldron.


                                LIPARI.

This island, which has given name to the whole cluster, is deserving of
notice on account of its celebrated “_stoves_.” They are the only
vestiges of subterraneous conflagration now remaining, and lie to the
west of the city, on the summit of a mountain of considerable elevation,
called Monte della Stufe, the Mountain of Stoves. They consist of five
excavations, in the form of grottos; but two of them have been abandoned
on account of the great heat, an exposure to which might cause
suffocation. Even the stones are so hot that they can not be touched;
but still the heat varies, and experiences all the vicissitudes of
volcanoes. The ground is not penetrated with hot vapors issuing from
several apertures, as has been asserted. Spallanzani, however, found one
from which a thin stream of smoke issued from time to time, with a
strong sulphureous smell, indicating the remains of conflagration
existing beneath.

It is impossible to fix the exact epoch at which the fires of Lipari
were extinguished, or rather the period at which the eruptions ceased,
for the existence of the former may be deduced from the hot springs and
stoves. Dolomieu thinks the last eruptions are as old as the sixth
century of the Christian era, and conjectures that they may have ceased
since the fires found a new vent in Vulcano, since he does not entertain
any doubt but that the two islands have a subterraneous communication.
Of this the inhabitants of Lipari are so well convinced, that they are
in the greatest agitation when Vulcano does not smoke, and when its
passages are obstructed. They fear shocks and violent eruptions,
suspecting even that the fires may again break out in their island. It
is a fact that the earthquakes, which are very frequent, generally cease
when the eruptions of Vulcano commence.


                                VULCANO.

This, which is the last of the Lipari isles, bears in every part the
stamp of fire. It was the superstitious belief of the ancient
inhabitants that Vulcan had here established his forges, there being
constant fires during the night, and a thick smoke throughout the day.
It consists of a mountain in the form of a truncated cone, which is,
however, merely a case opening and exposing to view a second cone
within, more exact than the other, and in which the mouth of the volcano
is placed. The latter is thus enveloped on three sides by the ancient
cone, and is open only on that side which is immediately washed by the
sea.

The base of the interior cone is separated from the steep sides of the
ancient crater by a circular valley, which terminates on one side at the
junction of the two mountains, and on the other sinks into the sea. In
this valley, light pumice-stones are blended with fragments of black,
vitreous lava, and buried in ashes perfectly white. The blow of a hammer
on these stones produces a loud hollow sound, which reëchoes in the
neighboring caverns, and proves that the surface is nothing more than
the arch of a vault covering an immense abyss. The sound varies
according to the thickness of the crust, which must have considerable
solidity to support the weight of the new mountain. This, according to
Dolomieu, is higher and steeper than the cone which contains the crater
of Etna, and its access still more difficult; its perpendicular hight,
however, is not more than twenty-six hundred and forty feet, or half a
mile. He represents the crater of Vulcano as the most magnificent he
ever saw; and Spallanzani observes that, with the exception of that of
Etna, he does not know of any more capacious and majestic. It exceeds a
mile in circuit, has an oval mouth, and its greatest diameter is from
the south-east to the west, while its depth is not more than a quarter
of a mile. The bottom is flat, and from many places streams of smoke
exhale, emitting a strong sulphureous vapor. This vast cavity is very
regular, and as its entire contents are displayed to the eye, presents
one of the grandest and most imposing spectacles in nature. On large
stones being rolled down, the mountain reëchoes; and on their reaching
the bottom, they appear to sink in fluid. Indeed, with the aid of a
glass, two small lakes, supposed to be filled with melted sulphur, have
been discovered. The declivity of the interior walls is so great, that,
even when there is not any danger from fire, the descent is next to
impossible. After considerable difficulty, however, this was
accomplished by Spallanzani on the south-east side, the only one
accessible. He found the bottom to be somewhat more than one-third of a
mile in circumference, and of an oval form. The subterraneous noise was
here much louder than on the summit, sounding like an impetuous river
foaming beneath, or, rather, like a conflict of agitated waves meeting
and clashing furiously together. The ground was likewise in some places
perforated with apertures, from which hissing sounds issued, resembling
those produced by the bellows of a furnace. It shook when pressed by the
feet; and a large piece of lava, let fall five or six feet, produced a
subterraneous echoing sound, which continued some time, and was loudest
in the center. These circumstances, combined with its burning heat, and
the strong stench of sulphur it emits, prove that the fires of the
volcano are still active.

Its eruptions have been most considerable during the earthquakes which
have desolated Sicily and a greater part of Italy. In the month of
March, 1786, after subterraneous thunders and roarings, which were heard
over all the islands, to the great terror of the inhabitants, and were
accompanied by frequent concussions, the crater threw out a prodigious
quantity of sand, mixed with immense volumes of smoke and fire. This
eruption continued fifteen days, and so great was the quantity of sand
ejected that the circumjacent places were entirely covered with it to a
considerable hight. The lava did not flow at the time, at least over the
edges of the crater; and indeed, such a current is not remembered by any
living person.


                        THE HIMALAYA MOUNTAINS.
                       BETWEEN INDIA AND THIBET.

“The great Himalayan snowy range,” says Mr. Fraser, “is only the high
elevated crest of the mountainous tract that divides the plains of
Hindoostan from those of Thibet, or Lesser Tartary. Far as they
predominate over, and precipitously as they rear themselves above the
rest, all the hills that appear in distant ranges, when viewed from the
plains, are indeed only the roots and branches of this great stem; and,
however difficult to trace, the connection can always be detected
between each inferior mountain and some particular member of its great
origin.

“The horizontal depth of this mountainous tract, on that side which
overlooks Hindoostan, is no doubt various; but, from the difficulty of
the country, a traveler performs a journey of many days before he
reaches the foot of the immediate snowy cliffs. The best observations
and surveys do not authorize the allowance of more than an average depth
of about sixty miles from the plains to the commencement of these, in
that part of the country that forms the subject of this narrative. The
breadth of the snowy zone itself in all probability varies still more;
for huge masses advance in some places into the lower districts, and in
others the crest recedes in long ravines, that are the beds of torrents,
while behind they are clothed by a succession of the loftier cliffs.
Every account we receive of a passage through them, (and this is no
doubt found most commonly where the belt is narrowest,) gives a detail
of many days’ journey through the deserts of snow and rocks; and it is
to be inferred, that on the north-east side they advance to, and retreat
from the low ground in an equally irregular manner. Indeed, some
accounts would induce the belief, that long ranges, crowned with
snow-clad peaks, project in various places from the great spine, and
include habitable and milder districts; for, in all the routes of which
we have accounts, that proceed, in various directions toward the
Trans-Himalayan countries, hills covered with snow are occasionally
mentioned as occurring, even after the great deserts are passed, and the
grazing country entered. The breadth, then, of this crest of snow-clad
rock itself, can not fairly be estimated at less than from seventy to
eighty miles.

“The great snowy belt, although its loftiest crest is broken into
numberless cliffs and ravines, nevertheless presents a barrier perfectly
impracticable, except in those places where hollows that become the beds
of rivers have in some degree intersected it, and facilitated approach
to its more remote recesses, or courageous and attentive perseverance
has here and there, discovered a dangerous and difficult path, by which
a possibility exists of penetrating across the range. Few rivers hold
their course wholly through it: indeed, in the upper part the Sutlej
alone has been traced beyond this rocky barrier; and there is a path
along its stream, from different parts of which roads diverge, that lead
in various directions through the mountain. No reasonable doubt can now
exist of the very long and extraordinary course which this river takes.

“Captain Webb of the Bengal establishment, was at one time employed on a
survey of a province of Kumaoon. On the twenty-first day of June, his
camp was eleven thousand, six hundred and eighty feet above Calcutta.
The surface was covered with very rich vegetation as high as the knee;
there were very extensive beds of strawberries in full flower; and
plenty of currant-bushes in blossom all around, in a clear spot of rich
black mold soil, surrounded by a noble forest of pine, oak and
rhododendron. On the twenty-second of June he reached the top of
Pilgoenta-Churhaee, (or ascent,) twelve thousand, six hundred and
forty-two feet above Calcutta. He was prevented from distinguishing very
distant objects by a dense fog; but there was not the smallest patch of
snow near him; and the surface, a fat black mold through which the rock
peeped, was covered with strawberry plants, (not yet in flower,)
butter-cups, dandelions, and a profusion of other flowers. The shoulders
of the hill above him, about four hundred and fifty feet more elevated,
were covered with the same to the top; and above five hundred feet below
was a forest of pine, rhododendron and birch. There was some snow seen
below in deep hollows, but it dissolves in the course of the season.
These facts led Captain Webb to infer, that the inferior limit of
perpetual congelation on the Himalaya mountains is beyond thirteen
thousand, five hundred feet, at least, above the level of Calcutta: and
that the level of the table-land of Tartary, immediately bordering on
their range, is very far elevated beyond eight thousand feet, the hight
at which it has been estimated.

“On the night of the sixteenth of July, we slept at Bheemkeudar, near
the source of the Coonoo and Bheem streams. There is no wood near this
place, even in the very bottom of the valley, and we had left even the
stunted birch at a considerable distance below; but there was a
profusion of flowers, ferns, thistles, &c., and luxuriant pasturage.
Captain Webb’s limit of wood is at least as high as twelve thousand to
twelve thousand, three hundred feet. I would, therefore, presume the
site of Bheemkeudar to be considerably above that level; say thirteen
thousand to thirteen thousand, three hundred feet, above the level of
Calcutta. From thence we ascended at first rather gradually, and then
very rapidly, till we left all luxuriant vegetation, and entered the
region of stripped and scattered and partially melting snow. From
calculating the distance passed, and adverting to the elevation we had
attained, I would presume that this was at least fifteen hundred feet
above Bheemkeudar, or from fourteen thousand, five hundred, to fifteen
thousand feet above Calcutta.

“We proceeded onward, ascending very rapidly, while vegetation decreased
gradually to a mere green moss, with here and there a few snow-flowers
starting through it; snow fast increasing, till at length we entered on
what I presume was the perennial and unmelting snow, entirely beyond the
line of vegetation, where the rock was bare even of lichens: and in this
we ascended, as I think, about eight hundred feet; for, though Bamsooroo
Ghat may not be so far above this line, we continued ascending, even
after crossing that point, and I would incline to estimate this utmost
extent of ascent at two thousand feet more, or nearly seventeen thousand
feet above the level of Calcutta.

“Whilst proposing to consider the point of sixteen thousand to sixteen
thousand, five hundred feet, as that of inferior congelation, I must
observe that there was no feeling of _frost_ in the air, and the snow
was moist, though hard, chiefly through the influence of a thick mist,
which, in fact, amounted to a very small drizzling rain, which fell
around: all which would seem to indicate, that the true line of
congelation had not there been attained; but we were surrounded by snow
which evidently never melted. To a great depth below it extended all
over the hills, very little broken, while on the valleys from whence the
Coonoo and Bheem streams issue, at full two thousand feet below, it lay
covering them and the surrounding mountains in an unbroken mass, many
hundred feet thick. Thus, though it may seem contradictory, the line of
perpetual congelation, in fact seems fixable at even below the point I
have ventured to indicate, and, I presume, might, on these grounds, be
placed somewhere between fifteen and sixteen thousand feet above the
level of Calcutta.

“The result of all the considerations that arise out of the foregoing
remarks is a belief, that the loftiest peaks of the Himalaya range will
be found to fall considerably short of the hight attributed to them by
Mr. Colebrooke; and that their loftiest peaks do not more than range
from eighteen thousand to twenty-two or twenty-three thousand feet above
the level of the sea.

“Having reached the top of an ascent, we looked down upon a very deep
and dark glen, called Palia Gadh, which is the outlet to the waters of
one of the most terrific and gloomy valleys I have ever seen. But it
would not be easy to convey by any description a just idea of the
peculiarly rugged and gloomy wildness of this glen: it looks like the
ruins of nature, and appears, as it is said to be, completely
impracticable and impenetrable. Little is to be seen except dark rock:
wood only fringes the lower parts and the waters’ edge: perhaps the
spots and streaks of snow, contrasting with the general blackness of the
scene, highten the appearance of desolation. No living thing is seen; no
motion is visible but that of the waters; no sound is heard but their
roar. Such a spot is suited to engender superstition, and here it is
accordingly found in full growth. Many wild traditions are preserved,
and many extravagant stories related of it.

“The glen above described, is by far the most gloomy, savage scene we
have yet met with. I regret that the weather did not permit a sketch of
it to be attempted. Beyond this we could see nothing in the course of
the river but rocky banks. The opposite side is particularly
precipitous; yet along its face a road is carried, which is frequented
as much as this, and leads to villages still farther up. By the time we
had reached the village, the clouds which had lowered around and sunk
down on the hills, began to burst with loud thunder and heavy rain. The
noise was fearfully reverberated among the hills; and during the night
more than once the sound was heard of fragments from the brows of the
mountains, crashing down to the depths below with a terrific din. Our
quarters were good. I slept in a temple, neat, clean and secure from the
weather.”

[Illustration: SOURCE OF THE JUMNA.]


          GUNGOTREE, THE SOURCE OF THE JUMNA, A BRANCH OF THE
                   GANGES, IN THE HIMALAYA MOUNTAINS.

Gungotree, the source of the Jumna, represented in the cut below, the
most sacred branch of the Ganges, ought to hold, and does hold the first
rank among its holy places. Here all is mythological ground. Here
Mahadeo sits enthroned in clouds and mist, amid rocks that defy the
approach of living thing, and snows that make desolation more awful.
Gods, goddesses and saints here continually adore him at mysterious
distance, and you traverse their familiar haunts. But, although
Gungotree be the most sacred, it is not the most frequented shrine,
access to it being far more difficult than to Buddrinauth; and
consequently to this latter, pilgrims flock in crowds, appalled at the
remoteness and danger of the former place of worship. This may pretty
fully account for the superior riches and splendor of Buddrinauth. Here
are temples of considerable extent, priests and officials in abundance,
who preserve an imposing exterior, and an appearance venerable from
power and comparative magnificence, and consequently procure rich and
ample offerings to keep up their comfortable dignity.

The temple of Bhadrinath, is situated on the west bank of the Alackunda,
in a valley four miles long, and one mile in its greatest breadth. The
east bank rises considerably higher than the west bank, and is on a
level with the top of the temple. The position of the sanctuary is
considered equidistant from two lofty mountains, which are designated by
the names of the Nar and the Narayena Purvatas. The former is to the
east, the latter to the west, and completely covered with snow from the
summit to the base.

The temple of Bhadri-Nath has more beneficed lands attached to it than
any sacred Hindoo establishment in this part of India. It is said to
possess seven hundred villages in different parts of Gurwhal and
Kumaoon: many of them have been conferred by the government; others have
been given in pledge for loans; and some few, purchased by individuals,
have been presented as religious offerings.

The annual ceremony of carrying the images of their gods to wash in the
sacred stream of the Jumna, is, it appears, one of much solemnity among
the inhabitants of the neighborhood; and the concourse of people that
here assemble, are busily engaged, and continue to be fully occupied in
doing honor to it. They dance to the sound of strange music, and
intoxicate themselves with a sort of vile spirit, brewed from grain and
particular roots, sometimes, it is said, sharpened by pepper. The dance
is most grotesque and savage; a multitude of men taking hands sometimes
in a circle, sometimes in a line, beating time with their feet, bend
with one accord, first nearly to the earth with their faces, then
backward, and then sidewise, with various wild contortions. These, and
their uncouth dress of black and gray blankets, give a peculiar air of
brutal ferocity to the assemblage. The men dance all day, and in the
evening they are joined by the women, who mix indiscriminately with
them, and keep up dancing and intoxication till the night is far
advanced. They continue this frantic kind of worship for several days;
and, in truth, it is much in unison with their general manners and
habits, savage and inconsistent. At a place so sacred, the residence of
so many Brahmins, and the resort of so many pilgrims, we might expect to
find a strict attention to the forms of religion, and a scrupulous
observance of the privations and austerities enjoined by it. So far,
however, is this from the truth, that much is met with, shocking even to
those Hindoos who are less bigoted.

“There were several points to be arranged,” says Mr. Fraser, “before we
could set off for Gungotree, the source of the Jumna. I did not deem it
proper to go unarmed; but agreed that only five men should be accoutered
to attend us, and that I should myself carry my gun. But all these
weapons of war were to be put aside before we got within sight of the
holy spot, and deposited in a cave near it, under a guard. I also
pledged myself that no use should be made of these instruments, nor any
life sacrificed for the purpose of food, either by myself or by any of
my people, after leaving the village, until we returned; moreover, that
I would not even carry meat of any sort, dead or alive, along with me,
but eat only rice and bread. As to the putting off my shoes, they did
not even propose it to me, and it could not have been done; but I
volunteered to put them off, when entering into the precincts of the
temple and holier places, which pleased them greatly. All the Hindoos,
including the Ghoorkhas, went from the village barefoot.

“Just at the end of the bridge there is an overhanging rock, under which
worship is performed to Bhyram, and a black stone partly painted red, is
the image of the god; and here not only were prayers and worship
performed, but every one was obliged to bathe and eat bread baked by the
Brahmins, as preparatory to the great and effectual ablutions at the
holier Gungotree. This occupied a considerable time, as the party was
numerous: in the mean time I took a very imperfect sketch of the scene,
after which I bathed myself at the proper place, which is the junction
of the two streams, while the Brahmin prayed over me. Among the
ceremonies performed, he made me hold a tuft of grass while he prayed,
which at the conclusion he directed me to throw into the eddy occasioned
by the meeting of the two waters.

“By an unpleasant path we reached a step, or level spot on the first
stage of the mountain, where, in a thick grove of fir-trees, is placed a
small temple to Bhyram, a plain white building, built by order of Umur
Sing T’happa, who gave a sum of money to repair the road, and erect
places of worship here, and at Gungotree. Having paid our respects to
Byramjee, we proceeded along the side of the hill on the right bank,
north of the river, gradually ascending by a path equally difficult and
dangerous as the first part of our ascent, but more fearful, as the
precipice to the river, which rolls below us, increases in hight, and
exceedingly toilsome from the nature of the ground over which it passes,
and which consists wholly of sharp fragments from the cliffs above, with
fallen trunks and broken branches of trees.

“The path increases in difficulty from the very irregular nature of the
ground, as well as the steepness of the hill face across which it leads,
ascending and descending as the small, though deep water-courses furrow
the mountain side, in loose soil, formed of small fragments fallen from
above, and which slip down, threatening to carry the traveler to the
gulf below. The shapeless blocks of rock now more completely obstruct
the way, and for hundreds of yards, at times, the passenger must clamber
over these masses, heaped as they are one upon another, in monstrous
confusion, and so uncertain and unsteady, that, huge though they are,
they shake and move even under the burden of a man’s weight. So painful
indeed is this track, that it might be conceived as meant to serve as a
penance to the unfortunate pilgrims with bare feet, thus to prepare them
for the special and conclusive act of piety they have in view, as the
object of their journey to these extreme wilds.

“The spot which bears the name of Gungotree, is concealed by the
roughness of the ground, and the masses of fallen rock, so as not to be
seen till the traveler comes close upon it. The temple is situated
precisely on the sacred stone on which Bhagirutte used to worship
Mahadeo, and is a small building of a square shape for about twelve feet
high, and rounding in, in the usual form of pagodas, to the top. It is
quite plain, painted white, with red moldings, and surmounted with the
usual melon-shaped ornaments of these buildings. From the eastern face
of the square, which is turned nearly to the sacred source, there is a
small projection covered with a stone roof, in which is the entrance
facing the east, and just opposite this there is a small pagoda-shaped
temple to Bhyramjee. The whole is surrounded by a wall of unhewn stone
and lime, and the space this contains is paved with flat stones. In this
space too, there is a comfortable but small house for the residence of
the Brahmins who come to officiate. Without the inclosure there are two
or three sheds constructed of wood, called _dhurum sallahs_, built for
the accommodation of pilgrims who resort here; and there are many caves
around formed by overhanging stones, which yield a shelter to those who
can not find accommodation in the sheds.

“The scene in which this holy place is situated, is worthy of the
mysterious sanctity attributed to it, and the reverence with which it is
regarded. We have not here the confined gloominess of Bhyram Gattee: the
actual dread which can not but be inspired by the precipices and
torrents, and perils of the place, here gives way to a sensation of awe,
imposing but not embarrassing, that might be compared to the dark and
dangerous pass to the center of the ruins of a former world; for, most
truly, there is little here that recalls the recollection of that which
we seem to have quitted. The bare and peaked cliffs which shoot to the
skies, yield not in ruggedness or elevation to any we have seen; their
ruins lie in wild chaotic masses at their feet, and scantier wood
imperfectly relieves their nakedness: even the dark pine more rarely
roots itself in the deep chasms which time has worn. Thus on all sides
is the prospect closed, except in front to the eastward; where, from
behind a mass of bare spires, four huge, lofty, snowy peaks arise: these
are the peaks of Roodroo-Himala. There could be no finer finishing, no
grander close to such a scene, as is visible in the engraving.

“We approach it through a labyrinth of enormous shapeless masses of
granite, which during ages have fallen from the cliffs above, that frown
over the very temple, and in all probability will some day themselves
descend in ruins and crush it. Around the inclosure, and among these
masses, for some distance up the mountain, a few fine old pine-trees
throw a dark shade and form a magnificent foreground; while the river
runs impetuously in its shingly bed, and the stifled but fearful sound
of the stones which it rolls along with it, crushing together, mixes
with the roar of its waters.

“It is easy to write of rocks and wilds, of torrents and precipices; it
is easy to tell of the awe such scenes inspire: this style and these
descriptions are common and hackneyed. But it is not so simple, to many
surely not very possible, to convey an adequate idea of the stern and
rugged majesty of some scenes; to paint their lonely desertness, or
describe the undefinable sensation of reverence and dread that steals
over the mind while contemplating the death-like, ghastly calm that is
shed over them: and when at such a moment we remember our homes, our
friends, our firesides, and all social intercourse with our fellows, and
feel our present solitude, and far distance from all these dear ties,
how vain it is to strive at description! Surely such a scene is
Gungotree. [See cut, page 109.] Nor is it, independently of the nature
of the surrounding scenery, a spot which lightly calls forth powerful
feelings. We were now in the center of the stupendous Himalaya, the
loftiest and perhaps most rugged range of mountains in the world. We
were at the acknowledged source of that noble river, which is equally an
object of veneration and a source of fertility, plenty and opulence to
Hindoostan; and we had now reached the holiest shrine of Hindoo worship
which these holy hills contain. These are surely striking
considerations, combining with the solemn grandeur of the place, to move
the feelings strongly.

“The fortuitous circumstance of being the first European that ever
penetrated to this spot, was no matter of boast, for no great danger had
been braved, no extraordinary fatigues undergone; the road is now open
to any other who chooses to attempt it; but it was a matter of
satisfaction to myself. The first object of inquiry that naturally
occurs to the traveler, after casting a glance over the general
landscape, is the source of the river. Here, as at Jumnotree, you are
told that no mortal has gone, or can go further toward its extreme
origin than this spot; and the difficulty is indeed very apparent. I
made a trial to gain a point about two furlongs beyond the temple, both
for the purpose of observing the course of the river, and of seeing
Gungotree in another point of view. But having with considerable
difficulty made my way over the unsteady fragments for some hundred
yards, at the risk of being precipitated into the stream, I was forced
to turn back.

“The source is not more than five miles’ horizontal distance from the
temple, and in a direction south-east, eighty-five degrees nearly; and
beyond this place it is in all probability chiefly supplied by the
melting of the great bosom of snow which terminates the valley, and
which lies between the peaks of the great mountain above mentioned.

“This mountain, which is considered to be the loftiest and greatest of
the snowy range in this quarter, and probably yields to none in the
whole Himalaya, obtains the name of Roodroo Himala, and is held to be
the throne or residence of Mahadeo himself. It is also indiscriminately
called Pauch Purbut, from its five peaks, and Soomeroo Purbot, which is
not to be confounded with the mountain so called near Bunderbouch; and
sometimes the general appellation of Kylas is given, which literally
signifies any snowy hill, but is applied to this mountain by way of
preëminence. It has five principal peaks, called Roodroo Himala,
Burrumpooree, Bissenpooree, Oodgurre Kanta and Soorga Rounee. These form
a sort of semicircular hollow of very considerable extent, filled with
eternal snow, from the gradual dissolution of the lower parts of which
the principal part of the stream is generated: probably there may be
smaller hollows beyond the point to the right above Gungotree, which
also supply a portion.

“Within the temple there are three images; one, that of Kali; and the
elevated stone shelf on which they were placed was wet and soiled with
the offerings made; there was a peculiar smell, but I know not whence it
proceeded. The place, as usual, was lighted by a small lamp: no daylight
had admittance. Just below the temple, on the river side, grew three
poplar trees, and a few small larches; above there are the remains of a
fine old silver fir-tree, which overshadows some of the caves and sheds.
The whole people also bathed, and contributed something to the
priesthood; and it was a matter of serious importance, as well as of
great joy to every one, that we had thus happily reached a place of such
supereminent sanctity: such, indeed, that the act of bathing here is
supposed to cleanse from every sin heretofore committed, and the
difficulty of which is so great, that few, except professional devotees,
ever attempt reaching the holy place.

“It is customary that those who have lost their father and mother, or
either of these, shall be shaved at this spot; and it was curious to
observe the whimsical changes produced by the operation, which numbers
underwent. It appears also, that one chief ordinance was the going
frequently round the holy temple; and we particularly observed that
those who were noted as the greatest rogues were most forward in this
pious exercise: one man, in particular, who had been a notorious thief,
was unwearied in his perseverance.

“Well, indeed, do they say, that Seeva has made these recesses which he
inhabits, inaccessible to all but those whom true devotion leads to his
shrine. That man must have been indeed strongly impelled by devotion,
ambition, or curiosity, who first explored the way to Gungotree. It were
unavailing to inquire, and perhaps of little use, if known, to which of
these motives we owe the enterprise; but patience, perseverance, and
courage, must have been strongly united with it to lead him safely and
successfully through those awful cliffs, that would bar the way to most
men. Another omen of favor pointed out was, the increase of the river
after bathing, as at Jumnotree; and it is singular enough, that during
the time we remained here, I remarked several increases and decreases of
the water, without any obvious causes; but these may fairly be referred
to the effects of sudden changes of temperature occurring frequently
among the hills, and acting on the body of snow that feeds the river.”


                           ASIATIC VOLCANOES.

Among the Asiatic burning mountains, a brief account of which we
introduce after the above interesting notice of the grand Himalaya
chain, those of Japan are both remarkable and numerous. On the summit of
a mountain in the province of Figo, is a large cavern, formerly the
mouth of a volcano, but the flame of which has ceased, probably for want
of combustible matter. In the same province, near a religious structure
called the Temple of the Jealous God of Aso, a perpetual flame issues
from the top of a mountain. In the province of Tsickusen is another
burning mountain, where was formerly a coal-pit, which having been set
on fire by the carelessness of the workmen, has been burning ever since.
Sometimes a black smoke, accompanied by a very disagreeable stench, is
observed to issue from the summit of a famous mountain called Fesi, in
the province of Seruga. This mountain is said to be nearly as high as
the peak of Teneriffe, but in shape and beauty is supposed not to have
an equal. Its top is covered with perpetual snow. Belonging to the
Japanese cluster, and not far from Piranda, is a small rocky island,
which has been burning and trembling for many centuries; and in another
small island, opposite to Santzuma, is a volcano which has been burning
at different intervals for many ages.

Captain Gore, when leaving Japan, passed by great quantities of
pumice-stone, several pieces of which were taken up, and found to weigh
from one ounce to three pounds. It was conjectured that these stones had
been thrown into the sea by eruptions at various times, as many of them
were covered by barnacles (small shells) and others were quite bare.


                   VOLCANIC MOUNTAINS OF KAMTSCHATKA.

There are three burning mountains of Kamtschatka, which for many years
have thrown out a considerable smoke, but do not often burst into a
flame. One of these is situated in the vicinity of Awatska; and another,
named the volcano of Tolbatchiek, on a neck of land between the river
Kamtschatka and the Tolbatchiek. In the beginning of the year 1739, the
flames issued with such violence from the crater, as to reduce to ashes
the forests on the neighboring mountains. This was succeeded by a cloud
of smoke, which overspread and darkened the whole country, until it was
dissipated by a shower of cinders, which covered the ground to the
distance of thirty miles. The third volcano is on the top of the
particular mountain of Kamtschatka, which is described as by far the
highest in the peninsula. It rises from two rows of hills, somewhat in
the form of a sugar-loaf, to a very great hight. It usually throws out
ashes twice or thrice a year, sometimes in such quantities, that for
three hundred versts, (one hundred and sixty-five English miles,) the
earth is covered with them. In the year 1737, at the latter end of
September, a conflagration, which lasted for a week, was so violent and
terrific, that the mountain appeared, to those who were fishing at sea,
like one red-hot rock; and the flames which burst through several
openings, with a dreadful noise, resembled rivers of fire. From the
inside of the mountains were heard thunderings, crackings, and blasts
like those of the strongest bellows, shaking all the neighboring
territory. During the night it was most terrible; but at length the
conflagration ended by the mountain’s casting forth a prodigious
quantity of cinders and ashes, among which were porous stones, and glass
of various colors. When Captain Clarke sailed out of the harbor of St.
Peter and St. Paul, in June, 1778, to the northward, an eruption of the
first of these volcanoes was observed. A rumbling noise, resembling
distant hollow thunder, was heard before daylight; and when the day
broke, the decks and sides of the ships were covered with a fine dust,
resembling emery, nearly an inch thick, the air at the same time being
charged with this substance to such a degree, that toward the mountain,
which is situated to the north of the harbor, the surrounding objects
were not to be distinguished. About twelve o’clock, and during the
afternoon, the explosions became louder, and were followed by showers of
cinders, which were in general about the size of peas, though many were
picked up on the deck larger than a hazel-nut. Along with the cinders
fell several small stones which had not undergone any change from the
action of fire.


                      VOLCANIC MOUNTAIN OF ALBAY.

The following details of the dreadful eruption of the volcano of Albay,
in the island of Luconia, one of the Philippines, on the first of
February, 1814, are from an eye-witness of the dreadful scenes it
presented.

“During thirteen years the volcano of Albay had preserved a profound
silence. It was no longer viewed with that distrust and horror with
which volcanoes usually inspire those who inhabit the vicinity. Its
extensive and spacious brow had been converted into highly cultivated
and beautiful gardens. On the first day of January last, no person
reflected, in the slightest degree, upon the damages and losses which so
bad a neighbor had once occasioned. Previously to the former eruptions
there had been heard certain subterraneous sounds, which were presages
of them. But upon the present occasion we remarked nothing, except that
on the last day of January we perceived some slight shocks. In the night
the shocks increased. At two in the morning one was felt more violent
than those hitherto experienced. It was repeated at four, and from that
time they were almost continual until the eruption commenced.

“The day broke, and I scarcely ever remarked in Camarines a more serene
and pleasant morning. I observed, however, that the ridges nearest to
the volcano were covered with mist, which I supposed to be the smoke of
some house that might have been on fire in the night. But at eight
o’clock the volcano began suddenly to emit a thick column of stones,
sand, and ashes, which with the greatest velocity, was elevated into the
highest regions of the atmosphere. At this sight we were filled with the
utmost dread, especially when we observed that in an instant the brow of
the volcano was quite covered. We had never seen a similar eruption, but
were convinced that a river of fire was flowing toward us, and was about
to consume us. The first thing which was done in my village was to
secure some things esteemed sacred, and then we betook ourselves to
flight. The swiftness with which the dreadful tide rolled toward us, did
not give us time either for reflection or consultation. The frightful
noise of the volcano caused great terror even in the stoutest hearts. We
all ran, filled with dismay and consternation, endeavoring to reach the
highest and most distant places, to preserve ourselves from so imminent
a danger. The horizon began to darken, and our anxieties redoubled. The
noise of the volcano continually increased, the darkness augmented, and
we continued our flight. But, notwithstanding our swiftness, we were
overtaken by a heavy shower of huge stones, by the violence of which
many unfortunate persons were in a moment killed. This cruel
circumstance obliged us to make a pause in our career, and to shelter
ourselves under the houses; but the flames and burnt stones which fell
from above, in a short time reduced them to ashes.

“The sky was now completely overcast, and we remained enveloped and
immersed in a thick and palpable darkness. From that moment reflection
was at an end. The mother abandoned her children, the husband his wife,
and the children forgot their parents.

“In the houses we had no longer any shelter. It was necessary to
abandon, or perish with them; yet, to go out uncovered, was to expose
one’s self to a danger not less imminent, because many of the stones
were of an enormous size; and they fell as thick as drops of rain. It
was necessary to defend ourselves as well as we could. Some covered
themselves with hides, others with tables and chairs, and others with
boards and tea-trays. Many took refuge in the trunks of trees, others
among the canes and hedges, and some hid themselves in a cave, where the
brow of a mountain protected them.

“About ten o’clock the heavy stones ceased to fall, and a rain of thick
sand succeeded. At half past one the noise of the volcano began to
diminish, and the horizon to clear a little; and at two it became quite
tranquil; and we now began to perceive the dreadful ravages which the
darkness had hitherto concealed from us. The ground was covered with
dead bodies, part of whom had been killed by the stones, and the others
consumed by the fire. Two hundred perished in the church of Budiao, and
thirty-five in a single house in that village. The joy the living felt
at having preserved themselves, was in many converted into the extremity
of sorrow at finding themselves deprived of their relations and friends.
Fathers found their children dead, husbands their wives, and wives their
husbands, in the village of Budiao, where there were very few who had
not lost some of their nearest connections. In other places we found
many persons extended upon the ground, wounded or bruised in a thousand
ways. Some with their legs broken, some without arms, some with their
skulls fractured, and others covered with wounds. Many died immediately,
others on the following days, and the rest were abandoned to the most
melancholy fate, without physicians, without medicines, and in want even
of necessary food.

“Five populous towns were entirely destroyed by the eruption; more than
twelve hundred of the inhabitants perished amidst the ruins; and twenty
thousand who survived the awful catastrophe, were stripped of their
possessions and reduced to beggary.

“The subsequent appearance of the volcanic mountain was most melancholy
and terrific. Its side, formerly so well cultivated, and which afforded
a prospect the most picturesque, is now become a barren sand. The
stones, sand and ashes, which cover it, in some places exceed the depth
of ten and twelve yards; and on the ground where lately stood the
village of Budiao, there are spots in which the cocoa-trees are almost
covered. In the ruined villages, and through the whole extent of the
eruption, the ground remains buried in the sand to the depth of half a
yard, and scarcely a single tree is left alive. The crater of the
volcano has lowered more than one hundred and twenty feet; and the south
side discovers a spacious and horrid mouth, which is frightful to the
view. Three new ones have opened at a considerable distance from the
principal crater, through which also smoke and ashes are incessantly
emitted. In short, the most beautiful villages of Camarines, and the
principal part of that fine province, are deeply covered with barren
sand.”

                 ISLANDS WHICH HAVE RISEN FROM THE SEA.

Besides the convulsions of nature displayed in volcanoes, the most
remarkable particulars of which we have given in our history of
mountains, other operations are carried on below the fathomless depths
of the sea, the nature of which can only be conjectured by the effects
produced. Nor is it more astonishing that inflammable substances should
be found beneath the bottom of the sea, than at similar depths on land,
and that there also the impetuous force of fire should cause the
imprisoned air and elastic gases to expand, and, by its mighty force,
should drive the earth at the bottom of the sea above its surface. These
marine volcanoes are perhaps more frequent, though they do not so often
come within the reach of human observation, as those on land; and
stupendous must be the operations carried on, when matter is thrown up
to an extent which the ingenuity of man does not enable him to reach by
fathoming.

Many instances have occurred, as well in ancient as in modern times, of
islands having been formed in the midst of the sea; and their sudden
appearance has constantly been preceded by violent agitations of the
surrounding waters, accompanied by dreadful noises, and in some
instances by fiery eruptions from the newly formed isles, which are
composed of various substances, frequently intermixed with a
considerable quantity of volcanic lava. Such islands remain for ages
barren, but in a long course of time become abundantly fruitful. It is a
matter of curious inquiry, whether springs are found on such newly
created spots, when the convulsions which gave them birth have subsided;
but on this point it would seem that we are not possessed of any certain
information, as it does not appear that they have been visited by any
naturalist with the express view of recording their properties.

Among the writers of antiquity who have transmitted accounts of islands
which have thus started up to the view of the astonished spectator,
Seneca asserts that, in his time, the island of Therasea, in the Egean
sea, was seen to rise in this manner by several mariners, who were
sailing near the point of its ascent. Pliny’s relation is still more
extraordinary; for he says that in the Mediterranean, thirteen islands
emerged at once from the sea, the cause of which he ascribes rather to
the retiring of the waters, than to any subterraneous operation of
nature: but he speaks at the same time of the island of Hiera, in the
vicinity of Therasea, as having been formed by subterraneous explosions,
and enumerates several others said to have been derived from a similar
origin, in one of which he says, a great abundance of fishes were found,
of which, however, all who ate, perished soon afterward.

It is to the Grecian archipelago, and the Azores, or Western isles, that
we are to look for the grandest and most surprising instances of this
phenomenon. We will select an example from each of these groups of
islands, beginning with the latter.

In December, 1720, a violent earthquake was felt on the island of
Tercera, one of the Azores. And on the following morning, a new island,
which had sprung up in the night, made its appearance, and a huge column
of smoke was seen rising from it. The pilot of a ship which attempted to
approach it, sounded on one of these newly formed islands, with a line
of sixty fathoms, but could not find a bottom. On the opposite side, the
sea was deeply tinged with various colors, white, blue and green; and
was very shallow. This island was larger on its first appearance than at
some distance of time afterward; it at length sunk beneath the level of
the sea, and is now no longer visible.

What can be more surprising than to see fire, not only force its way out
of the bowels of the earth, but likewise make for itself a passage
through the waters of the sea! What can be more extraordinary, or
foreign to our common notions of things, than to observe the bottom of
the sea rise up in a mountain above its surface, and become so firm an
island as to be able to resist the violence of the greatest storms! We
know that subterraneous fires, when pent up in a narrow passage, are
able to elevate a mass of earth as large as an island; but that this
should be done in so regular and precise a manner, that the water of the
sea should not be able to penetrate and extinguish those fires; and
that, after they should have exhausted themselves, the mass of earth
should not fall down, or sink again with its own weight, but still
remain in a manner suspended over the great arch below; this seems more
surprising than any of the facts which have been related of Mount Etna,
Vesuvius, or any other volcano.

In the first part of the Transactions of the Royal Society for the year
1812, Captain Tillard, of the British navy, has published a very
interesting narrative of a similar phenomenon, which occurred in the
same sea near the Azores. We give this narrative in his own words.

“Approaching the island of St. Michael’s, on Sunday, the twelfth of
June, 1811, in his majesty’s sloop Sabrina, under my command, we
occasionally observed, rising in the horizon, two or three columns of
smoke, such as would have been occasioned by an action between two
ships, to which cause we universally attributed its origin. This opinion
was, however, in a very short time changed, from the smoke increasing
and ascending in much larger bodies than could possibly have been
produced by such an event; and having heard an account, prior to our
sailing from Lisbon, that in the preceding January or February, a
volcano had burst out within the sea near St. Michael’s, we immediately
concluded that the smoke we saw proceeded from that cause, and, on our
anchoring the next morning in the road of Ponta del Gada, we found this
conjecture correct as to the cause, but not as to the time; the eruption
of January having totally subsided, and the present one having only
burst forth two days prior to our approach, and about three miles
distant from the one before alluded to.

“Desirous of examining as minutely as possible a contention so
extraordinary between two such powerful elements, I set off from the
city of Ponta del Gada on the morning of the fourteenth, in company with
Mr. Read, the consul-general of the Azores, and two other gentlemen.
After riding about twenty miles across the north-west end of the island
of St. Michael’s, we came to the edge of the cliff, whence the volcano
burst suddenly upon our view in the most terrific and awful grandeur.
[See cut, page 122.] It was only a short mile from the base of the
cliff, which was nearly perpendicular, and formed the margin of the sea;
this cliff being, as nearly as I could judge, from three to four hundred
feet high. To give you an adequate idea of the scene by description, is
far beyond my powers; but for your satisfaction, I shall attempt it.

[Illustration: ST. MICHAEL’S VOLCANO.]

“Imagine an immense body of smoke rising from the sea, the surface of
which was marked by the slippery rippling of the waves, occasioned by
the light and steady breezes incidental to these climates in summer. In
a quiescent state, it had the appearance of a circular cloud revolving
on the water like a horizontal wheel, in various and irregular
involutions, expanding itself gradually on the lee side, when suddenly a
column of the blackest cinders, ashes and stones would shoot up in the
form of a spire, at an angle of from ten to twenty degrees from a
perpendicular line, the angle of inclination being universally to
windward; this was rapidly succeeded by a second, third and fourth
shower, each acquiring greater velocity, and overtopping the other till
they had attained an altitude as much above the level of our eye, as the
sea was below it.

“As the impetus with which the columns were severally propelled
diminished, and their ascending motion had nearly ceased, they broke
into various branches resembling a group of pines; these again forming
themselves into festoons of white feathery smoke, in the most fanciful
manner imaginable, intermixed with the finest particles of falling
ashes, which at one time assumed the appearance of innumerable plumes of
black and white ostrich feathers, surmounting each other, and another,
that of the light wavy branches of a weeping-willow.

“During these bursts, the most vivid flashes of lightning continually
issued from the densest part of the volcano; and the cloud of smoke, now
ascending to an altitude much above the highest point to which the ashes
were projected, rolled off in large masses of fleecy clouds, gradually
expanding themselves before the wind in a direction nearly horizontal,
and drawing up to them a quantity of water-spouts, which formed a most
beautiful and striking addition to the general appearance of the scene.

“That part of the sea where the volcano was situated, was upward of
thirty fathoms deep, and at the time of our viewing it the volcano was
only four days old. Soon after our arrival on the cliff, a peasant
observed he could discern a peak above the water: we looked but could
not see it; however, in less than half an hour it was plainly visible,
and before we quitted the place, which was about three hours from the
time of our arrival, a complete crater was formed above the water, not
less than twenty feet high on the side where the greatest quantity of
ashes fell; the diameter of the crater being apparently about four or
five hundred feet.

“The great eruptions were generally attended with a noise like the
continued firing of cannon and musketry intermixed, as also with slight
shocks of earthquakes; several of which having been felt by my
companions, but none by myself, I had become half skeptical, and thought
their opinion arose merely from the force of imagination; but while we
were sitting within five or six yards of the edge of the cliff,
partaking of a slight repast which had been brought with us, and were
all busily engaged, one of the most magnificent bursts took place which
we had yet witnessed, accompanied by a very severe shock of an
earthquake. The instantaneous and involuntary movement of each was to
spring upon his feet; and I said, ‘This admits of no doubt.’ The words
had scarcely passed my lips, before we observed a large portion of the
face of the cliff, about fifty yards on our left, falling, which it did
with a violent crash. So soon as our first consternation had a little
subsided, we removed about ten or a dozen yards further from the edge of
the cliff, and finished our dinner.

“On the succeeding day, June fifteenth, having the consul and some other
friends on board, I weighed, and proceeded with the ship toward the
volcano, with the intention of witnessing a night view; but in this
expectation we were greatly disappointed, from the wind freshening, and
the weather becoming thick and hazy, and also from the volcano itself
being more quiescent than it was the preceding day. It seldom emitted
any lightning, but occasionally as much flame as may be seen to issue
from the top of a glass-house or foundry chimney. On passing directly
under the great cloud of smoke, about three or four miles distant from
the volcano, the decks of the ship were covered with fine black ashes,
which fell intermixed with small rain. We returned the next morning, and
late on the evening of the same day I took leave of St. Michael’s, to
complete my cruise.

“On the opening of the volcano clear of the north-west part of the
island, after dark on the sixteenth, we witnessed one or two eruptions
that, had the ship been near enough, would have been awfully grand. It
appeared one continued blaze of lightning; but its distance from the
ship, upward of twenty miles, prevented our seeing it with effect.
Returning again toward St. Michael’s, on the fourth of July, I was
obliged, by the state of the wind, to pass with the ship very close to
the island, which was now completely formed by the volcano, being nearly
the hight of Matlock High Tor, about eighty yards above the sea. At this
time it was perfectly tranquil; which circumstance determined me to
land, and explore it more narrowly. I left the ship in one of the boats,
accompanied by some of the officers. As we approached we perceived that
it was still smoking in many parts, and, upon our reaching the island,
found the surf on the beach very high. Rowing round to the lee-side,
with some little difficulty, by the aid of an oar as a pole, I jumped on
shore, and was followed by the other officers. We found a narrow beach
of black ashes, from which the side of the island rose in general too
steep to admit of our ascending; and where we could have clambered up,
the mass of matter was much too hot to allow our proceeding more than a
few yards in the ascent.

“The declivity below the surface of the sea was equally steep, having
seven fathoms of water at scarcely the boat’s length from the shore, and
at the distance of twenty or thirty yards we sounded twenty-five
fathoms. From walking round it in about twelve minutes, I should judge
that it was something less than a mile in circumference; but the most
extraordinary part was the crater, the mouth of which, on the side
facing St. Michael’s, was nearly level with the sea. It was filled with
water, at that time boiling, and was emptying itself into the sea by a
small stream about six yards over, and by which I should suppose it was
continually filled again at high water. This stream, close to the edge
of the sea, was so hot, as only to admit the finger to be dipped
suddenly in, and taken out again immediately.

“It appeared evident, by the formation of this part of the island, that
the sea had, during the eruptions, broken into the crater in two places,
as the east side of the small stream was bounded by a precipice; a cliff
between twenty and thirty feet high, forming a peninsula of about the
same dimension in width, and from fifty to sixty feet long, connected
with the other part of the island by a narrow ridge of cinders and lava,
as an isthmus, of from forty to fifty feet in length, from which the
crater rose in the form of an amphitheater.

“This cliff, at two or three miles’ distance from the island, had the
appearance of a work of art, resembling a small fort or block-house. The
top of this we were determined, if possible, to attain; but the
difficulty we had to encounter in doing so, was considerable: the only
way to attempt it was up the side of the isthmus, which was so steep
that the only mode by which we could effect it, was by fixing the end of
an oar at the base, with the assistance of which we forced ourselves up
in nearly a backward direction.

[Illustration: SABRINA ISLAND.]

“Having reached the summit of the isthmus, we found another difficulty:
for it was impossible to walk upon it, as the descent on the other side
was immediate, and as steep as the one we had ascended; but by throwing
our legs across it, as would be done on the ridge of a house, and moving
ourselves forward by our hands, we at length reached that part of it
where it gradually widened itself, and formed the summit of the cliff,
which we found to have a perfectly flat surface, of the dimensions
before stated. Judging this to be the most conspicuous situation, we
here planted the union, and left a bottle sealed up, containing a short
account of the origin of the island, and of our having landed upon it,
and naming it Sabrina island.

“Within the crater I found the complete skeleton of a guard-fish, the
bones of which, being perfectly burnt, fell to pieces upon attempting to
take them up; and, by the account of the inhabitants on the coast of St.
Michael’s, great numbers of fish had been destroyed during the early
part of the eruption, as large quantities, probably suffocated or
poisoned, were occasionally found drifted into the small inlets or bays.
The island, like other volcanic productions, is composed principally of
porous substances, generally burnt to complete cinders, with occasional
masses of a stone, which I should suppose to be a mixture of iron and
limestone.”

Sabrina island has gradually disappeared, since the month of October,
1811, leaving an extensive shoal. Smoke was discovered still issuing out
of the sea in the month of February, 1812, near the spot where this
wonderful phenomenon appeared.

Having thus spoken of the Azores, we now pass to some similar phenomena
in the Grecian archipelago. Before entering, however, on the details
which are here furnished on this curious and most interesting subject,
it may not be improper to observe, that the island of Acroteri, of great
celebrity in ancient history, appears to have its surface composed of
pumice-stone, incrusted by a surface of fertile earth; and that it is
represented by the ancients as having risen, during a violent
earthquake, from the sea. Four neighboring islands are described as
having a similar origin, notwithstanding the sea is in that part of the
archipelago of such a depth as to be unfathomable by any sounding line.
These arose at different times: the first long before the commencement
of the Christian era; the second in the first century; the third in the
eighth; and the fourth in 1573.

We now proceed to a phenomenon of a similar nature, belonging to the
same cluster of islands, which being of a more recent date, we are
enabled to enter into all its particulars. They are such as can not fail
to interest and surprise.

On the twenty-second of May, 1707, a severe earthquake was felt at
Stanchio, an island of the archipelago; and on the ensuing morning a
party of seamen, discovering not far off what they believed to be a
wreck, rapidly rowed toward it; but finding rocks and earth instead of
the remains of a ship, hastened back, and spread the news of what they
had seen, in Santorini, another of these islands. However great the
apprehensions of the inhabitants were at the first sight, their surprise
soon abated, and in a few days, seeing no appearance of fire or smoke,
some of them ventured to land on the new island. Their curiosity led
them from rock to rock, where they found a kind of white stone, which
yielded to the knife like bread, and nearly resembled that substance in
color and consistence. They also found many oysters sticking to the
rocks: but while they were employed in collecting them, the island moved
and shook under their feet, on which they ran with precipitation to
their boats. Amid these motions and tremblings the island increased, not
only in hight, but in length and breadth: still occasionally, while it
was raised and extended on the one side, it sunk and diminished on the
other. One person observed a rock to rise out of the sea, forty or fifty
paces from the island, which, having been thus visible for four days,
sunk, and appeared no more: several others appeared and disappeared
alternately, till at length they remained fixed and unmoved. In the mean
time the color of the surrounding sea was changed: at first it was of a
light green, then reddish, and afterward of a pale yellow, accompanied
by a noisome stench, which spread itself over a part of the island of
Santorini.

On the sixteenth of July, smoke first appeared, not indeed on the
island, but issuing from a ridge of black stones which suddenly rose
about sixty paces from it, where the depth of the sea was unfathomable.
Thus there were two separate islands, one called the White, and the
other the Black island, from the different appearances they exhibited.
This thick smoke was of a whitish color, like that of a lime-kiln, and
was carried by the wind to Santorini, where it penetrated the houses of
the inhabitants.

In the night between the nineteenth and twentieth of July, flames began
to issue with the smoke, to the great terror of the inhabitants of
Santorini, especially of those occupying the castle of Scaro, who were
distant about a mile and a half only from the burning island, which now
increased very fast, large rocks daily springing up, which sometimes
added to its length, and sometimes to its breadth. The smoke, also
increased, and there not being any wind, ascended so high as to be seen
at Candia, and other distant islands. During the night, it resembled a
column of five, fifteen, or twenty feet in hight; and the sea was then
covered with a scurf or froth, in some places reddish, and in others
yellowish, from which proceeded such a stench, that the inhabitants
throughout the whole island of Santorini burnt perfumes in their houses,
and made fires in the streets, to prevent infection. This, indeed, did
not last above a day or two; for a strong gale of wind dispersed the
froth, but drove the smoke on the vineyards of Santorini, by which the
grapes were, in one night, parched up and destroyed. This smoke also
caused violent head-aches, attended with retchings.

On the thirty-first of July, the sea smoked and bubbled in two different
places near the island, where the water formed a perfect circle, and
looked like oil when beginning to simmer. This continued above a month,
during which time many fishes were found dead on the shore of Santorini.
On the following night a dull hollow noise was heard, like the distant
report of several cannon, which was instantly followed by flames of
fire, shooting up to a great hight in the air, where they suddenly
disappeared. The next day the same hollow sound was several times heard,
and succeeded by a blackish smoke, which, notwithstanding a fresh gale
blew at the time, rose up to a prodigious hight, in the form of a
column, and would probably in the night have appeared as if on fire.

On the seventh of August, a different noise was heard, resembling that
of large stones thrown, at very short intervals, into a deep well. This
noise, having lasted for some days, was succeeded by another much
louder, so nearly resembling thunder, as scarcely to be distinguished
from three or four real claps, which were heard at the same time.

On the twenty-first, the fire and smoke were very considerably
diminished; but the next morning they broke out with still greater fury
than before. The smoke was red, and very thick, the heat at the same
time being so intense, that all around the island the sea smoked and
bubbled surprisingly. At night, by the means of a telescope, sixty small
openings or funnels, all emitting a very bright flame, were discovered
on the highest part of the island, conjointly resembling a large
furnace; and on the other side of the great volcano there appeared to be
as many.

On the morning of the twenty-third, the island was much higher than on
the preceding day, and its breadth increased by a chain of rocks which
had sprung up in the night nearly fifty feet above the water. The sea
was also again covered with reddish froth, which always appeared when
the island seemed to have received any considerable additions, and
occasioned an intolerable stench, until it was dispersed by the wind and
the motion of the waves.

On the fifth of September, the fire opened another vent at the extremity
of the Black island, from which it issued for several days. During that
time little was discharged from the large furnace; but from this new
passage the astonished spectator beheld the fire dart up three several
times to a vast hight, resembling so many prodigious sky-rockets of a
glowing, lively red. The following night the sub-aqueous fire made a
terrible noise, and immediately, after a thousand sheaves of fire darted
into the air, where breaking and dispersing, they fell like a shower of
stars on the island, which appeared in a blaze, presenting to the amazed
spectator at once a most dreadful and beautiful illumination. To these
natural fire-works, succeeded a kind of meteor, which for some time hung
over the castle of Scaro, and which, having a resemblance to a flaming
sword, served to increase the consternation of the inhabitants of
Santorini.

On the ninth of September, the White and Black islands united; after
which the western end of the island grew daily in bulk. There were now
four openings only which emitted flames; these issued forth with great
impetuosity, sometimes attended with a noise like that of a large
organ-pipe, and sometimes like the howling of wild beasts.

On the twelfth, the subterraneous noise was much augmented, having never
been so frequent or so dreadful as on that and the following day. The
bursts of this subterraneous thunder, like a general discharge of the
artillery of an army, were repeated ten or twelve times within
twenty-four hours, and, immediately after each clap, the large furnace
threw up huge red-hot stones, which fell into the sea at a great
distance. These claps were always followed by a thick smoke, which
spread clouds of ashes over the sea and the neighboring islands.

On the eighteenth of September, an earthquake was felt at Santorini. It
did but little damage, although it considerably enlarged the burning
island, and in several places gave vent to the fire and smoke. The claps
were also more terrible than ever; and, in the midst of a thick smoke,
which appeared like a mountain, large pieces of rock, which afterward
fell on the island, or into the sea, were thrown up with as much noise
and force as balls from the mouth of a cannon. One of the small
neighboring islands was covered with these fiery stones, which being
thinly crusted over with sulphur, gave a bright light, and continued
burning until that was consumed.

On the twenty-first, a dreadful clap of subterraneous thunder was
followed by very powerful lightnings, and at the same instant the new
island was so violently shaken, that part of the great furnace fell
down, and huge burning rocks were thrown to the distance of two miles
and upward. This seemed to be the last effort of the volcano, and
appeared to have exhausted the combustible matter, as all was quiet for
several days after: but on the twenty-fifth, the fire broke out again
with still greater fury, and among the claps one was so terrible, that
the churches of Santorini were soon filled with crowds of people,
expecting every moment to be their last; and the castle and town of
Scaro suffered such a shock, that the doors and windows of the houses
flew open. The volcano continued to rage during the remaining part of
the year; and in the month of January, 1708, the large furnace, without
one day’s intermission, threw out stones and flames, at least once or
twice, but generally five or six times a day.

On the tenth of February, in the morning, a pretty strong earthquake was
felt at Santorini, which the inhabitants considered as a prelude to
greater commotions in the burning island; nor were they deceived, for
soon after the fire and smoke issued in prodigious quantities. The
thunder-like claps were redoubled, and all was horror and confusion:
rocks of an amazing size were raised up to a great hight above the
water; and the sea raged and boiled to such a degree as to occasion
great consternation. The subterraneous bellowings were heard without
intermission, and sometimes in less than a quarter of an hour, there
were six or seven eruptions from the large furnace. The noise of
repeated claps, the quantity of huge stones which flew about on every
side, the houses at Santorini tottering to their very foundations, and
the fire, which now appeared in open day, surpassed all that had
hitherto happened, and formed a scene terrific and astonishing beyond
description.

The fifteenth of April was rendered memorable by the number and violence
of the bellowings and eruptions, by one of which nearly a hundred stones
were thrown at the same instant into the air, and fell again into the
sea at about two miles distant. From that day until the twenty-second of
May, which may be considered as the anniversary of the birth of the new
island, things continued much in the same state, but afterward the fire
and smoke subsided by degrees, and the subterraneous thunders became
less terrible.

On the fifteenth of July, 1709, the Bishop of Santorini, accompanied by
several friars, hired a boat to take a near view of the island. They
made directly toward it on that side where the sea did not bubble, but
where it smoked very much. Being within the range of this vapor, they
felt a close, suffocating heat, and found the water very hot; on which
they directed their course toward a part of the island at the furthest
distance from the large furnace. The fires, which still continued to
burn, and the boiling of the sea, obliged them to make a great circuit,
notwithstanding which they felt the air about them to be very hot and
sultry. Having encompassed the island, and surveyed it carefully from an
adjacent one, they judged it to be two hundred feet above the sea, about
a mile broad, and five miles in circumference; but, not being thoroughly
satisfied, they resolved to make an attempt at landing, and accordingly
rowed toward that part of the island where they perceived neither fire
nor smoke. When, however, they had proceeded to within the distance of a
hundred yards, the great furnace discharged itself with its usual fury,
and the wind blew upon them so dense a smoke, and so heavy a shower of
ashes, that they were obliged to abandon their design. Having retired
somewhat further, they let down their sounding lead, with a line
ninety-five fathoms in length, but it was too short to reach the bottom.
On their return to Santorini, they observed that the heat of the water
had melted the greater part of the pitch employed in calking their boat,
which had now become very leaky.

From that time until the fifteenth of August, the fire, smoke and noises
continued, but not in so great a degree; and it appears that for several
years after, the island still increased, but that the fire and
subterraneous noises were much abated. The most recent account we have
been enabled to collect, is that of a traveler, who, in 1811, passed
this island at some distance. It appeared to him like a stupendous mass
of rock, but was not inhabited or cultivated. It had then long ceased to
burn.


              -------------------------------------------


                         SUBTERRANEAN WONDERS.

                  ------------------------------------

                          THE GROTTA DEL CANE.

           “Give me, ye powers, the wondrous scenes to show,
           Concealed in darkness in the caves below.”

Among the various subterranean wonders of the world, which are worthy of
special notice, we would first mention the “Grotta del Cane.” This name
has been given to a small cavern between Naples and Pozzuoli, on this
account, that if a dog be brought into it, and his nose held to the
ground, a difficulty of respiration instantly ensues, and he loses all
sensation and even life, if he be not speedily removed into purer air.
There are other grottos endowed with the same deleterious quality,
especially in volcanic countries; and the pestiferous vapors they
exhale, are quickly fatal both to animals and man, though they do not
offer to the eye the slightest indication of their presence. These
vapors are, however, for the greater part temporary; while that of the
Grotta del Cane is perpetual, and seems to have produced its deadly
effects even in the time of Pliny. A man standing erect within, does not
suffer from it, the mephitic vapor rising to a small hight only from the
ground. It may, therefore, be entered without danger.

The smoke of a torch extinguished in this vapor, or gas, sinks downward,
assumes a whitish color, and passes out at the bottom of the door. The
reason of this is, that the fumes which proceed from the torch mix more
readily with the gas than with the atmospherical air. It has been
supposed, that the mischievous effects of the vapor were the result of
the air being deprived of its elasticity; but it has been clearly
demonstrated by M. Adolphus Murray, that they are solely to be
attributed to the existence of carbonic acid gas.

The person who is the keeper, or guide, at the grotto, and who shows to
strangers the experiment of the dog for a gratuity, takes the animal,
when he is half dead and panting, into the open air, and then proceeds
to throw him into the neighboring lake of Agnano, thus insinuating that
this short immersion in the water is necessary to his complete
restoration. This, however, is a mere trick, to render the experiment
more specious, and to obtain a handsome present from the credulous, the
atmospherical air alone sufficing for that purpose.

The celebrated naturalist, the Abbe Spallanzani, projected a regular
series of experiments on the mephitic vapor of this grotto, from a
persuasion that they would tend to throw a new light on physiology and
natural philosophy. Being, however, prevented from undertaking this, by
his duties as a professor, his friend, the Abbe Breislak, who resided
near the spot, engaged in the task; and the following is an abstract of
his learned memoir on this subject.

It is well known, the abbe observes, that the mephitic vapor occupies
the floor of a small grotto near the lake Agnano, a place highly
interesting to naturalists from the phenomena its environs present, and
the hills within which it is included. This grotto is situated on the
south-east side of the lake, at a little distance from it. Its length is
about twelve feet, and its breadth from four to five. It appears to have
been originally a small excavation, made for the purpose of obtaining
pozzuolana, an earth which, being applied as mortar, becomes a powerful
cement. In the sides of the grotto, among the earthy volcanic matters,
are found pieces of lava, of the same kind with those which are met with
scattered near the lake.

The abbe is persuaded that, if new excavations were to be made in the
vicinity of the grotto, at a level with its floor, or a little lower,
the same mephitic vapor would be found; and thinks it would be curious
to ascertain the limits of its extent. It would also be advantageous to
physical observations, if the grotto were to be somewhat enlarged, and
its floor reduced to a level horizontal plane, by sinking it two or
three feet, and surrounding it by a low wall, with steps at the
entrance. In its present state it is extremely inconvenient for
experiments, and the inclination of the ground toward the door causes a
great part of the vapor, from the effect of its specific gravity, to
make its way out close to the ground.

When the narrow limits of this place are considered, and the small
quantity of the vapor which has rendered it so celebrated, there can not
be any doubt but that it has undergone considerable changes; since it
does not appear probable that Pliny refers to the present confined vapor
only, when, in enumerating many places from which a deadly air exhaled,
he mentions the territory of Pozzuoli. The internal fermentations by
which it is caused, are certainly much diminished in the vicinity of the
lake Agnano. The water near its banks is no longer seen to bubble up,
from the disengagement of a gas, as it appears from accounts, not of
very remote antiquity, to have done. The borders of the lake were
attentively examined by the abbe, when its waters were at the highest,
and after heavy rains; but he could never discover a single bubble of
air. A number of aquatic insects which sport on the surface, may at
first sight occasion some deception; but a slight observation soon
detects the error. If, therefore, we do not suppose those authors who
have described the ebullition of the water near the banks of the lake
Agnano to have been deceived, it must at least be confessed, that this
phenomenon has now ceased. The quantity of the sulphureous vapors which
rise in the contiguous stoves, called the stoves of St. Germano, must
likewise be greatly diminished from what it anciently was: for,
adjoining to the present stoves, we still find the remains of a spacious
ancient fabric, with tubes of _terra cotta_ inserted in the walls,
which, by their direction, show for what purpose they were intended. It
appears certain, that this was a building in which, by the means of
pipes properly disposed, the vapors of the place were introduced into
different rooms for the use of patients. To these ruins, however, the
vapors no longer extend; so that, if this edifice had remained entire,
it could not have been employed for the purpose for which it was
intended. The veins of pyrites which produced the more ancient
conflagrations of the Phlegrean fields, between Naples and Cuma, and
which, in some places, are entirely consumed, approach their total
extinction. We will now proceed to the experiments within the grotto.

The object of the first was to determine the hight of the mephitic vapor
at the center of the grotto, that is, at the intersection of the line of
its greatest length with that of its greatest breadth. The hight varies
according to the different dispositions and temperatures of the
atmosphere, the diversity of winds, and the accidental variations which
take place in the internal fermentations by which the vapor is produced.
It may, however, be estimated at a mean, at nearly nine English inches.

The second set of experiments regarded the degree of heat on entering
into the mephitis: it was slightly sensible in the feet and lower part
of the legs; notwithstanding which, on taking out of the vapor several
substances which had remained in it for a long time, such as stones,
leaves, the carcasses of animals, &c., the abbe found that these were of
the same temperature with the atmospheric air. Feeling in his body a
slight degree of heat, which he could not perceive in the substances
removed from the mephitic vapor, he was led by comparison to conclude,
that the temperature of the latter was the same with the atmospherical
air, agreeably to the principles of Dr. Crauford. He was, however,
mistaken; for in subsequent experiments, he found a very distinct degree
of heat. He was now provided with a thermometer, his former one having
been broken, and, having suspended it at the aperture of the grotto,
three feet above the surface of the vapor, found the mercury to stand at
from sixty-two to sixty-four degrees of Fahrenheit; but, on placing the
ball on the ground so as to immerse it in the vapor, the mercury rose to
eighty, and even eighty-two degrees. That the substances taken out of
the mephitis did not exhibit this diversity of temperature, was, he
thinks, owing to the quantity of humidity with which they are always
loaded, and which produces on their surface a constant evaporation. He
was the more particular in repeating these experiments, because the
naturalists who had, before him, made similar ones in the Grotta del
Cane, had not observed the vapor to produce any effect on the mercury in
the thermometer.

Thirdly. He repeated for his own satisfaction, the usual experiments
made by naturalists, with the tincture of turnsole, lime-water, the
crystallizations of alkalies, the absorption of water, and the acidulous
taste communicated to it; which prove, beyond all doubt, the existence
of fixed air, or carbonic acid gas, in the vapor of the grotto. He
ascertained that it was not formed of fixed air alone, as might have
been conjectured; but that the relative quantities of the different
gases which compose its mephitic air, are as follows: in one hundred
parts there are ten of vital air, or oxygen gas; forty of fixed air, or
carbonic acid gas; and fifty of phlogisticated air, or azotic gas.

Fourthly. The phenomena of magnetism and electricity were investigated
by the abbe in this grotto. With respect to the former, there was not
any new appearance: the magnetic needle, being placed on the ground, and
consequently immersed in the mephitis, rested in the direction of its
meridian, and, at the approach of a magnetized bar, exhibited the usual
effects of attraction and repulsion, in proportion as either pole was
presented. As to the latter, electricity, it was impossible to make the
experiments within the mephitis, not because this kind of air is a
conductor of the electric fluid, as has been imagined, but because the
humidity by which it is constantly accompanied, disperses the electric
matter; and this, not being collected in a conductor, can not be
rendered sensible. He attempted several times to fire inflammable gas,
with electric sparks, in the mephitic vapor, by means of the conductor
of the electrophus; but, notwithstanding his utmost endeavors to animate
the electricity, he could never obtain a single spark, the non-conductor
becoming a conductor the moment it entered into the mephitis, on account
of the humidity which adhered to its surface.

Fifthly. His latest experiments were directed to the theory of the
combustion of bodies. He first endeavored to ascertain whether those
spontaneous inflammations that result from the mixture of concentrated
acids with essential oils, could be obtained within the grotto. He
placed on the ground a small vessel, in such a situation that the
mephitis rose six inches above its edges, employing oil of turpentine,
and the vitriolic and nitrous acids: the same inflammation, accompanied
by a lively flame, followed, as would have taken place in the open
atmospheric air. The dense smoke which always accompanies these
inflammations, being attracted by the humidity of the mephitis,
presented its undulations to the eye, and formed a very pleasing object.
As he had put a considerable quantity of acid in the vessel, he
repeatedly poured in a little of the oil, and the flame appeared in the
mouth of the vessel fifteen times successively. The oxygenous principle
contained in the acids, and with which the nitrous acid principally
abounds, undoubtedly contributed to the production and duration of this
flame, though enveloped in an atmosphere inimical to inflammation.

The abbe had, in the district of Latera, observed that in a mephitis of
hydrogenous sulphurated or hepatic gas a slow combustion of phosphorus
took place, with the same resplendence as in the atmospheric air. On the
present occasion, his first experiment, in the mephitis of Agnano, was
made with common phosphoric matches, five of which he broke, holding
them to the ground, and consequently immersed in the mephitis. They
produced a short and transient flame, which became extinguished the
moment it was communicated to the wick of a candle. His second
experiment was as follows: he placed on the ground, within the grotto, a
long table, in such a manner that one extremity was without the
mephitis, while the other, and four-fifths of its length, were immersed
in it. Along this table he laid a train of gunpowder, beginning from the
end without the mephitis; and, at the other end, which was immersed in
it to the depth of seven inches, he placed, adjoining to the gunpowder,
a cylinder of phosphorus, eight lines in length. The gunpowder, without
the mephitis, being fired, the combustion was soon communicated to the
other extremity of the train, and to the phosphorus, which took fire
with decrepitation, burned rapidly with a bright flame, slightly colored
with yellow and green, and left on the wood a black mark, as of
charcoal. The combustion lasted nearly two minutes, when the whole
phosphoric matter was consumed.

In succeeding experiments not any alteration was perceptible in the
flame, or manner of burning, of the lighted phosphorus, either at the
moment of its entrance into the mephitis, or during its continuance in
it. When suddenly withdrawn, it ignited gunpowder equally well. Hence
the abbe deduces, that the mephitic gas of Grotta del Cane, however it
may be utterly unfit for the respiration of animals, and for the
inflammation of common combustible substances, readily allows that of
phosphorus, which not only burns in it, but emits, as usual, luminous
sparks.

[Illustration: GROTTO OF ANTIPAROS.]


                          GROTTO OF ANTIPAROS.

Antiparos, one of the Cyclades, is situated in the Egean sea, or Grecian
archipelago. It is a small island, about sixteen miles in circumference,
and lies two miles to the west of the celebrated Paros, from which
circumstance it derives its name, _anti_ in the Greek language
signifying _opposite to_. Its singular and most interesting grotto,
though so inferior in size to the cavern in Kentucky of which we shall
soon speak, has attracted the attention of an infinite number of
travelers. The entrance to this superb grotto is on the side of a rock,
and is a large arch, formed of craggy stones, overhung with brambles and
creeping plants, which bestow on it a gloominess at once awful and
agreeable. Having proceeded about thirty paces within it, the traveler
enters a low, narrow alley, surrounded on every side by stones, which,
by the light of torches, glitter like diamonds; the whole being covered
and lined throughout with small crystals, which give by their different
reflections, a variety of colors. At the end of this alley or passage,
having a rope tied round his waist, he is led to the brink of an awful
precipice, and is thence lowered into a deep abyss, the gloom pervading
which makes him regret the “alley of diamonds” he has just quitted. He
has not yet, however, reached the grotto, but is led forward about forty
paces, beneath a roof of rugged rocks, amid a scene of terrible
darkness, and at a vast depth from the surface of the earth, to the
brink of another precipice, much deeper and more awful than the former.

Having descended this precipice, which is not accomplished without
considerable difficulty, the traveler enters a passage, the grandeur and
beauty of which can be but imperfectly described. It is one hundred and
twenty feet in length, about nine feet high, and in width seven, with a
bottom of a fine green glossy marble. The walls and arched roof are as
smooth and polished as if they had been wrought by art, and are composed
of a fine glittering red and white granite, supported at intervals by
columns of a deep blood-red shining porphyry, which, by the reflection
of the lights, presents an appearance inconceivably grand. At the
extremity of this passage is a sloping wall, formed of a single mass of
purple marble, studded with sprigs of rock crystal, which, from the glow
of the purple behind, appear like a continued range of amethysts.

Another slanting passage, filled with petrifactions, representing the
figures of snakes and other animals, and having toward its extremity two
pillars of beautiful yellow marble, which seem to support the roof,
leads to the last precipice, which is descended by means of a ladder.
The traveler, who has descended to the depth of nearly fifteen hundred
feet beneath the surface, now enters the magnificent grotto, to procure
a sight of which he has endured so much fatigue. It is in width three
hundred and sixty feet; in length three hundred and forty; and in most
places one hundred and eighty in hight. By the aid of torch-light, he
finds himself beneath an immense and finely vaulted arch, overspread
with icicles of white shining marble, many of them ten feet in length,
and of a proportionate thickness. Among these are suspended a thousand
festoons of leaves and flowers, of the same substance, but so glittering
as to dazzle the sight. The sides are planted with petrifactions, also
of white marble, representing trees; these rise in rows one above the
other, and often inclose the points of the icicles. From them also hang
festoons, tied as it were one to another, in great abundance; and in
some places rivers of marble seem to wind through them. In short, these
petrifactions, the result of the dripping of water for a long series of
ages, nicely resemble trees and brooks turned to marble. The floor is
paved with crystals of different colors, such as red, blue, green and
yellow, projecting from it, and rendering it rugged and uneven. These
are again interspersed with icicles of white marble, which have
apparently fallen from the roof, and are there fixed. To these the
guides fasten their torches; and the glare of splendor and beauty which
results from such an illumination, may be better conceived than
described.

To the above description we subjoin an extract from the one given by Dr.
Clarke, a learned traveler, who visited this celebrated grotto.

“The mode of descent is by ropes, which, on the different declivities,
are either held by the guides, or are joined to a cable which is
fastened at the entrance around a stalactite pillar. In this manner, we
were conducted, first down one declivity, and then down another, until
we entered the spacious chambers of this truly enchanted grotto. The
roof, the floor, the sides, of a whole series of magnificent caverns,
were entirely invested with a dazzling incrustation as white as snow.
Columns, some of which were five and twenty feet in length, pended in
fine icicle forms above our heads: fortunately some of them are so far
above the reach of the numerous travelers, who during many ages, have
visited this place, that no one has been able to injure or remove them.
Others extended from the roof to the floor, with diameters equal to that
of the mast of a first-rate ship of the line. The incrustations of the
floor, caused by falling drops from the stalactites above, had grown up
into dendritic and vegetable forms, which first suggested to Tournefort
the strange notion of his having here discovered the vegetation of
stones. Vegetation itself has been considered as a species of
crystallization; and as the process of crystallization is so
surprisingly manifested by several phenomena in this grotto, some
analogy may perhaps be allowed to exist between the plant and the stone;
but it can not be said, that a principle of life existing in the former
has been imparted to the latter. The last chamber into which we
descended surprised us more by the grandeur of its exhibition than any
other. Probably there are many other chambers below this, yet
unexplored, for no attempt has been made to penetrate further: and, if
this be true, the new caverns, when opened, would appear in perfect
splendor, unsullied, in any part of them, by the smoke of torches, or by
the hands of intruders.”


                    CAVERNS IN GERMANY AND HUNGARY,

                        CONTAINING FOSSIL BONES.

Among the most remarkable of these caverns are those of Gaylenreuth, on
the confines of Bayreuth. The opening to these, which is about seven
feet and a half high, is at the foot of a rock of limestone of
considerable magnitude, and in its eastern side. Immediately beyond the
opening is a magnificent grotto, of about three hundred feet in
circumference, which has been naturally divided by the form of the roof
into four caves. The first is about twenty-five feet long and wide, and
varies in hight from nine to eighteen feet, the roof being formed into
irregular arches. Beyond this is the second cave, about twenty-eight
feet long, and of nearly the same width and hight with the former.

A low and very rugged passage, the roof of which is formed of projecting
pieces of rocks, leads to the third grotto, the opening into which is a
hole three feet high, and four feet wide. This grotto is more regular in
its form, and is about thirty feet in diameter, and nearly round; its
hight is from five to six feet. It is very richly and fantastically
adorned by the varying forms of its stalactitic hangings. The floor is
also covered with a wet and slippery glazing, in which several teeth and
jaws appear to have been fixed.

From this grotto commences the descent to the inferior caverns. Within
only about five or six feet an opening in the floor is seen, which is
partly vaulted over by a projecting piece of rock. The descent is about
twenty feet. This cavern is about thirty feet in hight, about fifteen
feet in width, and nearly circular; the sides, roof and floor,
displaying the remains of animals. The rock itself is thickly beset with
teeth and bones, and the floor is covered with a loose earth, the
evident result of animal decomposition, and in which numerous bones are
imbedded.

A gradual descent leads to another grotto, which, with its passage, is
forty feet in length, and twenty feet in hight. Its sides and top are
beautifully adorned with stalactites. Nearly twenty feet further is a
frightful gulf, the opening of which is about fifteen feet in diameter;
and, upon descending about twenty feet, another grotto, about the same
diameter with the former, but forty feet in hight, is seen. Here the
bones are dispersed about; and the floor, which is formed of animal
earth, has great numbers of them imbedded in it. The bones which are
here found, seem to be of different animals; but in this, as well as in
the former caverns, perfect and unbroken bones are very seldom found.
Sometimes a tooth is seen projecting from the solid rock, through the
stalactitic covering, showing that many of these wonderful remains may
here be concealed. A specimen of this kind has been preserved, and is
rendered particularly interesting, by the first molar tooth of the lower
jaw, with its enamel quite perfect, rising through the stalactitic mass
which invests the bone. In this cavern the stalactites begin to be of a
larger size, and of a more columnar form.

Passing on through a narrow opening in the rock, a small cave, seven
feet long, and five feet high, is discovered; another narrow opening
leads to another small cave; from which a sloping descent leads to a
cave twenty-five feet in hight, and about half as much in its diameter,
in which is a truncated columnar stalactite, eight feet in
circumference.

A narrow and most difficult passage, twenty feet in length, leads from
this cavern to another, twenty-five feet in hight, which is everywhere
beset with teeth, bones and stalactitic projections. This cavern is
suddenly contracted, so as to form a vestibule of six feet wide, ten
long, and nine high, terminating in an opening close to the floor, only
three feet wide and two high, through which it is necessary to writhe,
with the body on the ground. This leads into a small cave, eight feet
high and wide, which is the passage into a grotto, twenty-eight feet
high, and about forty-three feet long and wide. Here the prodigious
quantity of animal earth, the vast number of teeth, jaws and other
bones, and the heavy grouping of the stalactites, produce so dismal an
appearance, as to become a perfect model of a temple for a god of the
dead. Here hundreds of cart-loads of bony remains might be removed,
pockets might be filled with fossil teeth, and animal earth was found to
reach to the utmost depth to which the workmen dug. A piece of
stalactite, being here broken down, was found to contain pieces of bones
within it, the remnants of which were left imbedded in the rock. From
this principal cave is a very narrow passage, terminating in the last
cave, which is about six feet in width, fifteen in hight, and the same
in length. In this cave were no animal remains, and the floor was the
naked rock.

Thus far only can these natural sepulchers be traced; but there is every
reason to suppose, that these animal remains are disposed through a
greater part of this rock. Whence this immense quantity of the remains
of carnivorous animals could have been collected, is a question which
naturally arises; but the difficulty of answering it appears to be
almost insurmountable.

[Illustration: THE MAMMOTH CAVE.]


                           THE MAMMOTH CAVE.

For one of the earliest accounts of this stupendous cavern, which is
unparalleled in the entire history of subterranean wonders, we are
indebted to Dr. Nahum Ward, who published it in a monthly magazine, in
October, 1816. It is in what was formerly Warren, but now Edmonson
county, in the state of Kentucky, about ten miles from the great
Louisville and Nashville turnpike. The territory is not mountainous but
broken, differing in this respect from the vicinity of most other
caverns of the same general kind. Not far from the entrance, a hotel is
now kept for the accommodation of visitors, as the cave is quite a
fashionable resort for travelers during the summer season. Perhaps we
shall best gain correct ideas of this wonderful cavern, which is almost
a world in itself, having its own seas, mountains, lakes, rivers, &c.,
by reading first the account given by Dr. Ward, and then that of a
visitor who explored it in 1854.

Dr. Ward, provided with guides, two large lamps, a compass and
refreshments, descended a pit forty feet in depth, and one hundred and
twenty in circumference; having a spring of fine water at the bottom,
and conducting to the entrance of the cavern. The opening, which is to
the north, is from forty to fifty feet high, and about thirty in width.
It narrows shortly after, but again expands to a width of thirty or
forty feet, and a hight of twenty, continuing these dimensions for about
a mile, to the first _hoppers_,[2] where a manufactory of saltpeter had
recently been established. Thence to the second of these hoppers, two
miles from the entrance, it is forty feet in width, and sixty in hight.
Throughout nearly the whole of the distance handsome walls had been made
by the manufacturers, of the loose limestone. The road was hard, and as
smooth as a flag pavement. In every passage which the doctor traversed,
the sides of the cavern were perpendicular, and the arches, which have
bid defiance even to earthquakes, were regular. In 1802, when the heavy
shocks of earthquakes came on which were so severely felt in this part
of Kentucky, the workmen stationed at the second hoppers, heard about
five minutes before each shock, a heavy rumbling noise issue from the
cave, like a strong wind. When that ceased, the rocks cracked, and the
whole appeared to be going in a moment to final destruction. However, no
one was injured, although large portions of rock fell in different parts
of the cavern.

-----

Footnote 2:

  A hopper is an inverted cone, into which corn is put at a mill before
  it runs between the stones.

-----

In advancing into the cavern, the avenue leads from the second hoppers,
west, one mile; and thence, south-west, to the chief area or city, which
is six miles from the entrance. This avenue, throughout its whole extent
from the above station to the cross-roads, or chief area, is from sixty
to one hundred feet in hight, of a similar width, and nearly on a level,
the floor or bottom being covered with loose limestone and saltpeter
earth. “When,” observes the doctor, “I reached this immense area (called
the chief city) which contains upward of eight acres, without a single
pillar to support the arch, which is entire over the whole, I was struck
dumb with astonishment. Nothing can be more sublime and grand than this
place, of which but a faint idea can be conveyed, covered with one solid
arch at least one hundred feet high, and to all appearance entire.”

Having entered the area, the doctor perceived five large avenues leading
from it, from sixty to one hundred feet in width, and about forty in
hight. The stone walls are arched, and were from forty to eighty feet
perpendicular in hight before the commencement of the arch.

In exploring these avenues, the precaution was taken to cut arrows,
pointing to the mouth of the cave, on the stones beneath the feet, to
prevent any difficulty in the return. The first which was traversed,
took a southerly direction for more than two miles; when a second was
taken, which led first east, and then north, for more than two miles
further. These windings at length brought the party, by another avenue,
to the chief city again, after having traversed different avenues for
more than five miles. Having reposed for a few moments on slabs of
limestone near the center of this gloomy area, and refreshed themselves
and trimmed their lamps, they departed a second time, through an avenue
almost north, parallel with the one leading from the chief city to the
mouth of the cavern; and, having proceeded upward of two miles, came to
the second city. This is covered with a single arch, nearly two hundred
feet high in the center, and is very similar to the chief city, except
in the number of its avenues, which are two only. They crossed it, over
a very considerable rise in the center, and descended through an avenue
which bore to the east, to the distance of nearly a mile, when they came
to a third area, or city, about one hundred feet square, and fifty in
hight, which had a pure and delightful stream of water issuing from the
side of a wall about thirty feet high, and which fell on a broken
surface of stone, and was afterward entirely lost to view.

Having passed a few yards beyond this beautiful sheet of water, so as to
reach the end of the avenue, the party returned about one hundred yards,
and passing over a considerable mass of stone, entered another, but
smaller avenue to the right, which carried them south, through a third,
of an uncommonly black hue, somewhat more than a mile; when they
ascended a very steep hill about sixty yards, which conducted them to
within the walls of the fourth city. It is not inferior to the second,
having an arch which covers at least six acres. In this last avenue, the
extremity of which can not be less than four miles from the chief city,
and ten from the mouth of the cavern, are upward of twenty large piles
of saltpeter earth on the one side, and broken limestone heaped up on
the other, evidently the work of human hands.

From the course of his needle, the doctor expected that this avenue
would have led circuitously to the chief city; but was much disappointed
when he reached the extremity, a few hundred yards’ distance from the
fourth city. In retracing his steps, not having paid a due attention to
mark the entrances of the different avenues, he was greatly bewildered,
and once completely lost himself for nearly fifteen or twenty minutes.
Thus, faint and wearied, he did not reach the chief area till ten at
night; but was still determined to explore the cavern so long as his
light should last. Having entered the fifth and last avenue from the
chief area, and proceeded south-east about nine hundred yards, he came
to the fifth area, the arch of which covers upward of four acres of
level ground, strewed with limestone, and having fire-beds of an
uncommon size, surrounded with brands of cane, interspersed. Another
avenue on the opposite side, led to one of still greater capacity, the
walls or sides of which were more perfect than any that had been
noticed, running almost due south for nearly a mile and a half, and
being very level and straight, with an elegant arch. While the doctor
was employed, at the extremity of this avenue, in sketching a plan of
the cave, one of his guides, who had strayed to a distance, called on
him to follow. Leaving the other guide, he was led to a vertical
passage, which opened into a chamber at least eighteen hundred feet in
circumference, and the center of the arch of which was one hundred and
fifty feet in hight.

It was past midnight when he entered this chamber of eternal darkness;
and when he reflected on the different avenues through which he had
passed since he had penetrated the cave at eight in the morning, and now
found himself buried several miles in the dark recesses of this awful
cavern—the grave, perhaps, of thousands of human beings—he felt a
shivering horror. The avenue, or passage, which led from it was as large
as any he had entered; and it is uncertain how far he might have
traveled had his lights not failed him. All those who have any knowledge
of this cave, he observes, conjecture that Green river, a stream
navigable several hundred miles, passes over three of its branches.

After a lapse of nearly an hour, he descended by what is called the
“passage of the chimney,” and joined the other guide. Thence returning
to the chief area or city, where the lamps were trimmed for the last
time, he entered the spacious avenue which led to the second hoppers.
Here he met with various curiosities, such as spars, petrifactions, &c.;
and these he brought away, together with _a mummy_ which was found at
the second hoppers. He reached the mouth of the cave about three in the
morning, nearly exhausted with nineteen hours of constant fatigue. He
nearly fainted on leaving it, and on inhaling the vapid air of the
atmosphere, after having so long breathed the pure air occasioned by the
niter of the cave. His pulse beat stronger when in the cave, but not so
quick as when on the surface.

Here the doctor observes that he has hardly described half the cave, not
having named the avenues between its mouth and the second hoppers. This
part of his narrative is of equal interest with what has been already
given. He states that there is a passage in the main avenue, upward of
nine hundred feet from the entrance, like that of a trap-door. By
sliding aside a large flat stone, you can descend sixteen or eighteen
feet in a very narrow defile, where the passage comes on a level, and
winds about in such a manner, as to pass under the main passage without
having any communication with it, at length opening into the main cave
by two large passages just beyond the second hoppers. This is called the
“glauber-salt room,” from salts of that kind being found there. Next
come the sick room, the bat-room, and the flint-room, together with a
winding avenue, which, branching off at the second hoppers, runs west
and south-west for more than two miles. It is called the “haunted
chamber,” from the echo within: its arch is very beautifully incrusted
with limestone spar; and in many places the columns of spar are truly
elegant, extending from the ceiling to the floor. Near the center of
this arch is a dome, apparently fifty feet high, hung in rich drapery,
festooned in the most fanciful manner for six or eight feet from the
hangings, and in colors the most rich and brilliant. By the reflection
of one or two lights, the columns of spar and the stalactites have a
very romantic appearance. Of this spar, a large elevation, called
“Wilkin’s arm-chair,” has been formed in the center of the avenue and
encircled with many smaller ones. The columns of the spar, fluted and
studded with knobs of spar and stalactites; the drapery of the various
colors superbly festooned and hung in the most graceful manner, these
are shown with the greatest brilliancy by the reflection of the lamps.

In the vicinity of the haunted chamber, the sound of a cataract was
heard; and at the extremity of the avenue was a reservoir of water, very
clear and grateful to the taste, having, apparently, neither inlet nor
outlet. Here the air, as in many other parts of the cave, was pure and
delightful. Not far from the reservoir, an avenue presented itself,
within which were several columns of the most brilliant spar, sixty or
seventy feet in hight, and almost perpendicular, standing in basins of
water; which, as well as the columns, were of surpassing splendor and
beauty.

So far we have followed the brief and general account of Dr. Ward.
Turning now to other accounts, we find that the cave extends for miles
under the earth, and that the end of it has never yet been reached by
any explorer. The air is not only pure, but delightful and exhilarating,
and has been highly recommended for diseases of the lungs, so much so,
that quite a number of small houses have been built within to
accommodate consumptive persons, who at times have resided there with
benefit. The temperature there is uniformly the same, being in both
winter and summer, from fifty-five degrees to fifty-nine degrees
Fahrenheit. Combustion is perfect in all parts of the cave, and
decomposition is nowhere observable. No reptiles, of any description,
have ever been seen within it. The loudest thunder can not be heard a
quarter of a mile within, and the only sound is the roar of the
waterfalls, of which there are some seven or eight.

The entire cave, so far as explored, contains two hundred and fifty or
more avenues, nearly fifty domes, twenty-two pits and three rivers. Many
of the avenues contain large and magnificent stalagmite columns,
extending from the floor to the ceiling, and some of very grotesque and
fanciful shape. Graceful stalactites may likewise be seen pendant from
the ceilings, as uniform and regular as if they were cut by the hand of
man. The engraving gives a view of one of those avenues where the
stalagmites and stalactites abound in great profusion. In another part
of this avenue, in what is called the Gothic Chapel, these stalactic
formations are still more striking, very much resembling a monkish
cathedral. In the Fairy Grotto, the formations likewise assume a great
many fanciful shapes.

Passing now to the second account of a visit to the cave, to which we
have already alluded, we find the visitor saying, that the cave is every
way so wonderful, that it is impossible to give more than a faint idea
of its magnificence and splendor. “As in exploring the cave,” he
continues, “there are three rivers to cross and a great deal of climbing
over rocks and crawling through narrow places, ladies adopt the Bloomer
costume from necessity, and gentlemen are provided with dresses
according to their fancy, so that a party starting out for a trip
through the cave, present a most grotesque and comical appearance. On
arriving at the mouth, the visitor is provided with a lamp, and makes an
abrupt, though comparatively easy descent of some seventy or eighty
feet. Here he enters a dark avenue, about five rods wide, called the
Narrows, and soon finds himself far beyond where daylight ever shone. At
the distance of about six hundred yards from the mouth, this avenue
expands and forms a large circular room, called the Rotunda, or Great
Vestibule. The guide stops here, and ignites a light, a compound of
sulphur, saltpeter and antimony, prepared for illuminating the various
points of special interest through the cave. This forms a most brilliant
light, and reveals a room some two or three hundred feet wide, and
forty-seven feet high. The view revealed by this first illumination is
most imposing and sublime. I told my guide that he was certainly right
in his ideas about describing the cave. As he saw me getting my paper
and pencil ready at the mouth, he began laughing very significantly, and
said, ‘Writin ’bout the cave aint no use, sir. Most everybody that goes
in writes, but they gin’ally throws it away when they comes out. Writin
don’t do no good. If anybody wants to know ’bout the cave, they must
come and see it.’ Although I had barely commenced my journey through it,
I told my guide that I could heartily subscribe to the whole of his
speech on this subject.

“And right here, in the great vestibule, I will stop to say a few words
about my guide. There are four guides to the cave, all of whom are said
to be entirely familiar with it, and to give the most perfect
satisfaction to visitors. At all events, I was entirely satisfied with
‘Alfred,’ with whom I made four different journeys through the cave,
traveling under ground through various avenues more than fifty miles.
Alfred formerly belonged to Miss Mary Croghan, whose elopement from a
boarding-school on Staten Island about a dozen years ago, with Captain
Shinley, created so great a sensation in New York and elsewhere. After
she went to England, she gave Alfred to some of her relatives, and he
belonged to Dr. Croghan at the time of his death, who was the owner of
the cave. By the terms of Dr. Croghan’s will, Alfred and his wife and
children will be free in about eighteen months. He is now drawing wages
for his services, which, with the liberal presents he receives from
visitors, will enable him to make a very fine start in the world. Alfred
has evidently been a great pet, as he learned to read when very small;
and he astonishes visitors by his use of scientific terms, and his
knowledge of chemistry and geology. He has now been a guide to the cave
about sixteen years; has visited it with a great many scientific men;
has most of the standard works on geology, and is altogether an
interesting character. He sees persons from all parts of the union, and
understands all the excitements at the north, from that created by Uncle
Tom’s Cabin, down to the Forrest divorce trial. He was anxious to buy
Uncle Tom’s Cabin, and was told that he had better buy a Bible. So he
paid four dollars and a half for a Bible, and bought Uncle Tom too. I
can not do less than recommend all my friends who may visit the cave, to
try and secure Alfred for a guide.

“Leaving the vestibule and passing the Kentucky cliffs, so called from
their likeness to the cliffs in Kentucky river, we come to what is very
appropriately named the Church and Galleries. At various points upon the
route thus far, we have seen the leaching vats and other remains of the
saltpeter works that were erected in the cave nearly fifty years ago.
The manufacture of saltpeter was carried on quite extensively in the
cave for several years, and the guide says the saltpeter was
manufactured here with which the powder was made which was used in the
battle of New Orleans. There is a very plain cart-path through this part
of the cave, and we saw the tracks of oxen which were made forty-seven
years ago. The church is the point in the cave where the miners
assembled for worship. The rude pulpit or stand from which the preacher
addressed his congregation, still remains. But besides this there is a
natural pulpit and galleries which are easily ascended by steps in the
wall, from which sermons are now frequently preached to visitors, for
whom seats are provided. When illuminated, this church is more awfully
imposing and solemn, than any temple built by human hands. The cave is
more than one hundred feet wide, its massive rocky walls about fifteen
feet high, and stretching away in each direction until lost in the most
impenetrable darkness. For myself, I could not understand how any man
would consent to lift his puny voice where God speaks so impressively.
But there is a difference in tastes, and many, I doubt not, are
persuaded against their own will to gratify the strong desire of the
visitors to hear preaching in the cave. Going on from this point we pass
the Grand Arch, a natural arch sixty-six feet high, and about seventy
yards wide, and one hundred and fifty yards long; and some distance
beyond are shown the Giant’s Coffin. This is a huge rock, so formed that
the top of it is a fine representation of a coffin. The shape is almost
precisely that of a modern metallic coffin. This rock lies exactly east
and west, by the compass, and is fifty-seven and a half feet long.

“Here we left the broad main cave in which we had thus far been
traveling, and which stretched on indefinitely before us, and turned off
into a narrow, circuitous, irregular avenue, and wandered indefinitely.
Clambering over rocks, going down precipitous steeps, passing a great
variety of rooms, lofty domes, intricate labyrinths, pits from
seventy-five to one hundred and seventy-five feet deep, and a great many
other points, all appropriately and often very significantly named, we
at length came to Gorin’s Dome, so called from the name of its
discoverer, by far the most imposing I had yet seen. Coming to the end
of a narrow avenue, the guide directed me to look through an opening in
the wall, a kind of window, and our lamps revealed hights above and
depths below, that seemed interminable! He then kindled one of the
lights that I have already described, and placing it upon a board,
thrust it through the opening and told me to look, first below and then
above. The view was utterly indescribable and almost overpowering. The
opening was not more than thirty feet in circumference, and I have
already forgotten the hight and depth as given me by the guide. But I
felt for hours and still feel the tremblings of those emotions that
thrilled through my whole frame as I peered into those abysmal depths,
and looked up into those giddy hights. None but Jehovah could build such
a dome.

“I can not undertake to give the details of our route from avenue to
avenue, nor mention the various points of interest that we passed. We
were at length in a vast open space; the guide took our lamps, and going
a short distance from us, told us to look up, and we at once discovered
that we were in the far-famed Star Chamber. The cave here is some twenty
or thirty yards wide, and about sixty or seventy feet high, and in a dim
light the arch above presents the appearance of the sky in a very starry
night. On looking up you see innumerable stars, and as you gaze for a
long time the sky seems to be very distant, the stars increase in
number, and it seems quite as if you were really looking through an
opening in the cave into the heavens. Our guide Alfred was with
Professor Silliman when he examined this arch by the aid of a Drummond
light, to discover the cause of this appearance, and found that it was
crystals embedded in the wall. After we had satisfied ourselves with
viewing this artificial sky, Alfred took all our lamps and going into a
cave below us, by the shadows from his lamps gave us a representation of
clouds passing over the sky, obscuring the stars, thunder-clouds rolling
over and the stars appearing again, and other interesting illusions.
After this he went still deeper in the cave below us, leaving us in the
most pitchy darkness. We were so deep in the bowels of the earth that
the loudest thunder has never been heard there, and the silence and
darkness were awfully impressive. Suddenly we saw in the direction in
which our guide had disappeared, a light like the rising of the moon,
which grew larger and larger, until Alfred emerged through some opening
from the regions below, and appeared in the distance in the same cave in
which we were standing.

“After leaving this chamber, which was more beautiful than any we had
entered, we made our way to the Gothic Gallery. This avenue was unlike
anything we had yet seen. It is some four or five rods wide and
three-quarters of a mile long, the path over which we walked being much
more level than the most of those we had walked over, and much of the
wall over our heads looking almost as smooth as if it had been
plastered. In this avenue we visited the Haunted Chamber, so called from
the fact that two mummies were discovered here many years ago; Vulcan’s
Forge, so called from being very dark, and a formation resembling
cinders; and near its end the Gothic Gallery. This room has a great
variety of stalactite and stalagmite formations, many of which have
formed solid massive pillars. As we approached the Chapel, our guide
made us all stay behind, while he went ahead, taking all our lamps with
him; and when we went forward at his call, we found each of our lamps
hung upon some one of these pillars, and illuminating a room, compared
with which Taylor’s saloon on Broadway, or the most gorgeous saloon New
York can boast, is simplicity itself. These formations are a wonderful
curiosity. They are of a very light color, are nearly as hard as
granite, and are said to be formed by the drippings of lime water. They
are in a great variety of shapes, to which a great many fanciful names
have been given, such as the Pulpit, the Devil’s Arm-Chair, the Pillars
of Hercules, &c.

“I had intended in this letter to speak of the chief points of interest
in what is called the short route through the cave; that is, the portion
of the cave that is visited without crossing either of the rivers. I
made two visits on this side of the rivers, the first time traveling
about six miles, and the second time traveling ten miles and a half. But
I am the more willing to pass by the Bandit’s Hall, Mammoth Dome,
Persico Avenue, Crockett’s Dome, Snowball Arch, Bunyan’s Way, and other
places of special interest, with a mere mention of their names, from the
fact that it is so entirely impossible to describe them. Some of these
are but rarely visited, and it costs no little effort to reach them. But
however narrow the fissures in the rocks through which we squeezed,
however steep and slippery the ascent, however long the distance we had
to crawl on our hands and knees, we were always more than paid for our
pains.

“Omitting, then, any detailed account of what is called the short route,
I pass to a notice of the long route, to which most of our time was
given. In taking this we entered the cave as before, passed through the
great vestibule, and on for a mile or two through the main branch, over
the same route we had already traveled. It seems impossible to realize
that this is a cave, it is so high, so wide, so vast. Several of our
company remarked this fact. We seemed rather to be in some deep, dark
ravine or mountain gorge, wandering by the light of our dim lamps, in
some night that was utterly rayless and starless. We at length reached
the Bottomless Pit, where we entered upon a path that was new to us.
This pit is a deep, dark, fearful chasm, and received its name before
anything like bottom had been found. It has now been measured to the
depth of one hundred and seventy-five feet, and there may be fissures in
the rock descending indefinitely below. Near this pit, we passed over an
artificial bridge, and entered the Valley of Humility, through which we
made our way, stooping and crawling, until we reached what is the most
comical and laughable point in the cave, which is most appropriately
named the Winding Way, or Fat Man’s Misery. This is an exceedingly
circuitous opening in the rock, about eighteen inches wide, and between
three and four hundred feet long. At the entrance of this way, the
fissure through which we pass is not more than about two feet deep, and
the ceiling above us is so high that we could stand erect without
difficulty; but in advancing, the fissure becomes deeper, the rocks on
either hand are higher and higher, and the ceiling above becomes lower
and lower, and it seems to be, indeed, not only fat, but tall men’s
misery. It is a most laughable sight to see a party edging their way
through this zigzag path; a path that gives every indication of having
been washed and worn by the action of the water for innumerable years.
Our party was a decidedly lean one, so that we did not, like many
others, have the amusement of seeing some one of aldermanic proportions
squeeze and worry his way through. Finally, however, we got through, and
came into a large open space, which our guide called Great Relief, and a
_relief_ it was, sure enough. Passing on, we entered a large, roomy
avenue called River Hall, where we were shown the high-water mark in the
cave; where, in times of freshets, the river rises fifty-seven feet,
perpendicularly, above low-water mark in the cave. We turned aside from
this hall into a large room, to witness a great curiosity called the
Bacon Chamber. Here the formations overhead are such as to make the room
look remarkably like a large smoke-house filled with hams; and near by
we were shown a smooth circular excavation in the wall above us, which
was pointed out as the _kettle_ for boiling these hams, now turned
bottom upward. Returning to the Hall, we went forward, passing several
points of interest, until we came to a pure and beautiful body of water
called Lake Lethe, upon which we embarked in a small boat provided for
the purpose. We were now all on the look-out for the eyeless fish that
are found in the waters of the cave, and were so fortunate as to catch
in a small net, first, what was called a clawfish, having legs like a
lobster, but eyeless and apparently bloodless, being almost precisely
the color of potato sprouts that have grown in the spring in a dark
cellar. Afterward we caught a very small fish of the same color, and
having no eyes. Where the eyes should grow, the flesh was smooth and
just like the rest of the body. Whatever our doubts might have been
before, we here had ocular demonstration that the fish in these waters,
which are never illumined except by lamplight, are entirely without
sight.

“Leaving Lake Lethe, we entered a most grand and imposing avenue, with
lofty rocky walls towering about two hundred and fifty feet high, called
the Great Walk. This leads to the Echo River, one of the greatest of
these subterranean wonders. We sailed down this river a distance of
_three-quarters of a mile_, and such a sail! Where on the earth or under
the earth, could another such a sail be taken? The water was cold, clear
and pure, and in color remarkably like the Niagara, as it plunges over
the falls. At many places we could see the bottom, and in others it
seemed of very great depth. It flowed in placid stillness, unrippled by
a single breeze, between, above and beneath walls of massive and eternal
rock. Now the channel was deep, narrow and tortuous, and now it spread
out into a broad, pellucid stream. Now the massive ceiling above us was
high, and smooth, and beautifully arched; and now it was so rough,
broken and low, that we had to stoop as we sat in our boat, in order to
pass under it. We did not pass rapidly down this stream. None of us were
in a hurry. We seemed scarcely to belong to this driving, go-ahead
world. Now a shout echoed wildly and magnificently through the rocky
chambers; and now we sat entranced while one of our company, a splendid
musician, sang some beautiful song, never as beautiful as now, when it
echoed and reëchoed along these walls, and died away in the darkness
that our dim lamps could not penetrate. This river, too, is most
appropriately named. The echoes are most perfect and beautiful. We
experimented in a great variety of ways, singing alone and in concert,
shouting, whistling, clapping our hands, and finally, the whole company
sung Ortonville. But there was one thing more impressive than all these,
and that was silence! We sat in our boat as quietly as possible, no one
speaking or moving for some time; and the stillness and the darkness by
which we were surrounded, were solemn and awful beyond all description.
We were deep in the bowels of the earth, I know not how many feet below
its surface, but so low that no ray of light from the sun had ever
penetrated its depths, and no voice of loudest thunder had ever waked an
echo there. The silence was perfect, save the sound of breathing which
each one tried to suppress, and the throbbing of our hearts that

                ‘Still like muffled drums were beating,
                Funeral marches to the grave.’

“God spoke in that stillness with a voice such as I had never heard
before. I had never before so realized how awfully impressive were
darkness and silence. I had entirely new ideas of the awful solitude of
that period when the ‘earth was without form and void, and darkness was
upon the face of the deep.’

“On getting beyond this river, we entered a region of avenues of
incredible if not of interminable length, which have been discovered
within the last twelve or fifteen years. One of the first of these is
called Silliman Avenue, in honor of Professor Silliman, who has made
very thorough explorations of the cave. This avenue is a mile and a half
long, about three rods wide, and has various interesting features which
I have not time to notice. At the termination of this avenue, the cave
widens into a large room, several rods wide, and some fifty or sixty
feet high, which is called Ole Bull’s concert-room, from the fact that
this musician gave a free concert there to the visitors who were at the
cave at the time of his visit.

“Beyond this room, we entered an avenue two miles long, called the Pass
of El Gor. This is an exceedingly rocky and uneven avenue, leading, by a
most circuitous path up and down great piles of rock, along a most
rugged and desolate way, near deep holes and fissures in the rocks,
until at length we come to a fine sulphur spring called Hebe’s Spring,
which we found very refreshing. Here, through a narrow opening in the
rocks, we climb a ladder eighteen feet high, and find a scene that
abundantly compensates for the rough walk we have taken to reach it. On
reaching the top of this ladder, we find ourselves in Martha’s Vineyard.
Here is a vast room, the sides of which are covered over with a
formation resembling grapes. They hang on the wall above, plump, round
and perfect in form, and in the greatest profusion. They are so solid
and hard that it is difficult to break off any of the clusters, and are
said to be formed by the drippings of the water through the rocks. Near
the head of the ladder there is a fine representation of a vine, of
solid rock, running along the wall; and apparently connected with this
vine, there are seemingly cart-loads of these rocky grapes. Our guide
illumined the vineyard with one of his Bengal lights, and the view was
magnificent.

“Going on from this point through Elindo’s Avenue and Washington’s Hall,
we reached another of the remarkable rooms of the cave, called the
Snowball Room. The cave is here about a hundred feet wide, ten or
fifteen feet high, and the ceiling quite even and beautifully arched.
Nature has here played most fantastic tricks. I know of no way so good
to describe this room, as to say that its walls and ceiling overhead
look like the end of some building that a score of school-boys have
completely covered over with snowballs. We examined these formations for
some time with our lamps, and then Alfred gave us the benefit of an
illumination. But of its appearance when thus lighted up, I will attempt
no description.

“We were now about seven miles from the mouth of the cave; and with
appetites sharpened by our long walk, we sat down to the dinner which
our host had sent along for us. It was a magnificent dining-saloon in
which we were seated. Taylor’s saloon on Broadway is splendid, and has
dazzled and bewildered multitudes, when they first entered it; but
neither Taylor, nor prince, nor potentate, ever built a room so gorgeous
as that in which we were seated. None but the God who built the skies,
and bent and decorated the arch above us, could build another comparable
to it.

“The Snowball Room is at the entrance of an avenue more extensive and
beautiful than any other in the cave. This is called Cleveland’s
Cabinet, and is altogether indescribable. It is about five rods wide and
two miles long! Think of its dimensions a moment! About as long as
Broadway from the Battery to Union Square, and with walls, not of brick,
granite and marble, shaped and graven by art and man’s device, but with
walls and ceiling above covered all over with the exquisite and
beautiful workmanship of its divine builder.

“We passed slowly through this cabinet, two miles long, the guide
conducting us from point to point of remarkable interest, and all the
way along showing us new and strange developments. We went to Mary’s
Bower, Virginia’s Festoons, Saint Cecelia’s Grotto, Flora’s Garden,
where were roses and lilies, rosettes and wreaths, as perfect as though
they had been chiseled there by the most accomplished sculptor. The
formation on the wall in which these various flowers and other beautiful
things are developed, is gypsum of the most snowy whiteness; and our
guide said it was in three separate layers, and that the forming process
was constantly going on, the inner layers crowding off the outer. The
floor was covered with tuns of these layers, which had been crowded off,
and which visitors are at liberty to carry off as specimens, while they
are strictly prohibited from breaking anything from the walls. But still
it is with the utmost difficulty that the guides can preserve some of
the most beautiful views in the cave from the destruction of vandal
visitors. This part of the cave is less beautiful than formerly, having
become a good deal smoked by the lamps of the thousands of visitors who
have examined it. But our guide took us into an avenue immediately under
this, which is but rarely visited, and conducted us to a most enchanting
spot called Egeria’s Grotto. Here the formations were as pure, and
beautiful and white, as if fresh from the hand of their Maker. Here were
formations, not only of the purest white, but of other most exquisite
coloring. We remained a long time in this grotto, examining its various
wonders, and deemed ourselves very fortunate in seeing it, as from this
we could better understand how Cleveland’s Cabinet above us appeared
during the long ages that intervened before it was polluted by the
presence of man. Another beautiful grotto was perfectly brilliant and
gorgeous, and looked as though its rough walls were a solid mass of
diamonds. The most gorgeous and brilliant room ever built in the palace
of an earthly monarch, is tameness itself compared with this diamond
grotto.

“Emerging again into Cleveland’s Cabinet, we passed on to its
termination, where we ascended the Rocky Mountains, a vast pile of
loose, broken rocks, one hundred and sixty feet high, which have
apparently dropped down from the cave above, leaving a vast vaulted
opening in the cave above, to indicate the place from which they have
fallen. Beyond these mountains, the cave branches in three directions.
We took the branch leading to Croghan’s Hall, the remotest point in the
cave that has yet been visited, and _nine miles from its mouth_. On the
right of this room there is a deep, awful pit, into which we threw
stones, as we had into many others, and heard them roll and bound from
rock to rock, down a distance of one hundred and eighty-five feet. The
water from some point below us runs over these rocks, and flows off, no
mortal knows where. This hall contains large, massive pillars,
elaborately carved and ornamented by the Invisible Architect,
stalactites and stalagmites of various beautiful forms, and its walls
are festooned with that rich drapery which no art can imitate, and which
only decks the grottos, bowers and halls of this wonderful cave.

“After refreshing ourselves here from a pleasant spring, we started on
our nine-mile tramp for the mouth of the cave, taking only a hurried
glance of the varied objects of interest as we passed them. We, however,
sailed very leisurely down Echo River, or the Jordan, as it is also
called. We again had solos and choruses, and drank in rich delights from
this enchanting sail. When we reached Lethe, some of our party
determined to send their clothes across in our boat and swim over. They
accordingly plunged in very boldly, but hurried out in the quickest time
possible; and the chattering of teeth, shivering, leaping and running to
get warm again, seemed more befitting a bath in February, than in one of
the hottest days in August.

“I had now made four different visits to the cave, traveling, according
to the reckoning of my guide, about fifty-four miles. Very few visitors
explore it as thoroughly, and yet I had not gone over one-third of the
space that has already been explored. The guide says that two hundred
and fifty different avenues are already known, measuring the distance of
one hundred and sixty-five miles. The temperature of the cave is
uniformly about fifty-five degrees, and its bracing, invigorating
character may be judged from the fact that ladies, some of them quite
delicate, are constantly taking this ‘long route,’ traveling a greater
number of miles than most men would think of going on foot above ground.

“We felt but little fatigue from our rough, clambering walk of some
twenty miles, until we emerged from the cave, and came in contact with
outer air. After breathing the air of the cave from eight A. M. till
five P. M., the atmosphere seemed very impure. We could smell every
tree, and plant, and old log; and the air was so sultry and sickening,
that we had to rest awhile at the mouth before starting for the hotel,
some fifty rods distant.

“I have thus attempted to redeem my promise in regard to writing you
from the cave. I had no thought of writing at so great length. If the
cave were possessed of mind and sensibility, I would take off my hat to
it, and feelingly ask its pardon for the great injustice I have done it
in these letters. But as it is, I will only say that I have over and
over again assented to the truthfulness and justice of my guide Alfred’s
idea of all descriptions of the cave: ‘Writin don’t do no good. If
anybody wants to know how the cave looks, they must come and see it.’
And I can not conceive of any journey for this purpose so long and
toilsome, that those making it would not be abundantly compensated for
their pains, by a view of this wonderful work of a wonder-working God.”

Still another visitor, writing to a friend in Europe, says of this
wonderful cave, “I had heard and read descriptions of it, long since;
but the half, the quarter, was not told. Its vastness, its lofty arches,
its immense reach into the bosom of the solid earth, fill me with
astonishment. It is, like Mont Blanc, Chimborazo, and the falls of
Niagara, one of God’s mightiest works. Shall I compare it with anything
of a similar description, which you have seen on the other side of the
Atlantic? with the grotto of Neptune, or that of the Sibyl, at Tivoli,
or with any of Virgil’s poetic Italian machinery? No comparison can be
instituted. I speak, as you are aware, from personal knowledge. You,
seated on the opposite bank of the Arno, have seen me clamber up, from
the noisy waters below, to the entrance of the far-famed grotto of
Neptune, which I leisurely explored. In point of capaciousness, that
grotto has little more to boast of than the cellar of a large hotel,
and, like that, was, as I think, excavated by human hands. That of the
Tiburtine Sibyl is still more limited in its dimensions. Indeed, every
cavern which I have ever seen, if placed along side of this, would
dwindle into insignificance.”

The same writer says, “I can not refrain from giving you an account of
an incident that happened in this cave last spring. A wedding party went
to the cave to spend the honeymoon. While there, they went to visit
those beautiful portions of the cave which lie beyond the river
‘Jordan.’ In order to do this, a person has to sail down the river
nearly a mile before reaching the avenue which leads off from the river
on the opposite side, for there is no shore, or landing-place, between
the point above on this side, where you come to the river, and that
below on the other; for the river fills the whole width of one avenue of
the cave, and is several feet deep where the side walls descend into the
water. This party had descended the river, visited the cave beyond, and
had again embarked on the water for their return homeward. After they
had ascended the river about half-way, some of the party, who were in a
high glee, got into a romp and overturned the boat. Their lights were
all extinguished, their matches wet, the boat filled with water and sunk
immediately; and _there they were_, in ‘the blackness of darkness,’ up
to their chins in water. No doubt, they would all have been lost, had it
not been for the guide’s great presence of mind. He charged them to
remain perfectly still; for, if they moved a single step, they might get
out of their depth in water; and swimming would not avail them, for they
could not see where to swim to. He knew that, if they could bear the
coldness of the water any length of time, they would be safe; for
another guide would be sent from the cave house, to see what had become
of them. And in this perilous condition, up to their mouths in water, in
the midst of darkness ‘more than night,’ _four miles under ground_, they
remained for upward of five hours; at the end of which time, another
guide came to their relief. Matthew, or Mat, the guide who rescued them,
told me that, when he got to where they were, his fellow-guide, Stephen,
(the Columbus of the cave,) was swimming around the rest of the party,
cheering them, and directing his movements, while swimming, by the sound
of their voices, which were raised, one and all, in prayer and
supplication for deliverance!”

In conclusion it may be interesting to state, that Colonel Croghan, to
whose family the Mammoth cave belongs, was a resident of Louisville,
Kentucky. He went to Europe some twenty years ago, and found himself
frequently questioned of the wonders of the Mammoth cave, a place he had
never visited, and of which he had heard but little at home, though
living within ninety miles of it. He went there on his return, and the
idea struck him to purchase it, and make it a family inheritance. In
fifteen minutes’ bargaining he bought it for ten thousand dollars, and
shortly after he was offered one hundred thousand dollars for his
purchase. In his will he tied it up in such a way that it must remain in
his family for two generations, thus appending its celebrity to his
name. There are nineteen hundred acres in the estate, though the cave
probably runs under the property of a great number of other land owners.
For fear of those who might dig down and establish an entrance to the
cave on their own property, (a man’s farm extending up to the zenith and
down to the nadir,) great vigilance is exercised to prevent such
subterranean surveys and measurements as would enable one to sink a
shaft with any certainty. The cave extends ten or twelve miles in
several directions, and there is probably many a back-woodsman sitting
in his hut within ten miles of the cave, quite unconscious that the most
fashionable ladies and gentlemen of Europe and America are walking
without leave under his potatoes and corn.


                     THE GREAT CAVERN OF GUACHARO.

Passing from the Mammoth cave in North America, let us next notice the
great cavern of Guacharo in South America, as described in the narrative
of Humboldt, which is abridged in the account that follows.

“In a country where the people are fond of the marvelous, a cavern that
gives birth to a river, and which is inhabited by thousands of nocturnal
birds, the fat of which is used to dress the food of the inhabitants, is
a ceaseless topic of conversation and discussion. Scarcely has a
stranger arrived at Cumana, when he is told of the stone of Araya for
the eyes; of the laborer of Arenas who suckled his child; and of the
cavern of Guacharo, which is said to be several leagues in length; till
he is tired of hearing of them.

“The Cueva del Guacharo is pierced in the vertical profile of a rock.
The entrance is toward the south, and forms a vault eighty feet broad,
and seventy-two feet high. The rock, that surmounts the grotto, is
covered with trees of gigantic hight. The mammee-tree, and the genipa
with large and shining leaves, raise their branches vertically toward
the sky; while those of the courbaril and the erythrina form, as they
extend themselves, a thick vault of verdure. Plants of the family of
pothos with succulent stems, oxalises, and orchideæ of a singular
structure, rise in the driest cliffs of the rocks; while creeping
plants, waving in the winds, are interwoven in festoons before the
opening of the cavern. We distinguished in these festoons a bignonia of
a violet blue, the purple dolichos, and for the first time that
magnificent olandra, the orange flower of which has a fleshy tube more
than four inches long. The entrances of grottos, like the view of
cascades, derive their principal charm from the situation, more or less
majestic, in which they are placed, and which in some sort determines
the character of the landscape. What a contrast between the Cueva of
Caripe, and those caverns of the north crowned with oaks and gloomy
larch-trees!

“But this luxury of vegetation embellishes not only the outside of the
vault, it appears even in the vestibule of the grotto. One sees with
astonishment plantain-leaved heliconias eighteen feet high, the praga
palm-tree, and arborescent arums, follow the banks of the river even to
those subterranean places. The vegetation continues in the cave of
Caripe, as in the deep crevices of the Andes, half excluded from the
light of day; and does not disappear, till, advancing into the interior,
we reach thirty or forty paces from the entrance. We measured the way by
means of a cord; and we went on about four hundred and thirty feet,
without being obliged to light our torches.

“Daylight penetrates into this region, because the grotto forms but one
single channel, which keeps the same direction from south-east to
north-west. Where the light begins to fail, are heard from afar the
hoarse sounds of the nocturnal birds, sounds which the natives think
belong exclusively to those subterraneous places. The guacharo is of the
size of our fowls, has the mouth of the goatsuckers and procnias, and
the port of those vultures, the crooked beak of which is surrounded with
stiff silky hairs. It forms a new genus, very different from the
goatsucker by the force of its voice, by the considerable strength of
its beak, containing a double tooth, and by its feet without the
membranes that unite the anterior phalanxes of the claws. In its manners
it has analogies both to the goatsuckers and the alpine crow. The
plumage of the guacharo is of a dark bluish-gray, mixed with small
streaks and specks of black. It is difficult to form an idea of the
horrible noise occasioned by thousands of these birds in the dark part
of the cavern, and which can only be compared to the croaking of our
crows, which, in the pine forests of the north, live in society, and
construct their nests upon trees, the tops of which touch each other.
The shrill and piercing cries of the guacharoes strike upon the vaults
of the rocks, and are repeated by the echo in the depth of the cavern.
The Indians showed us the nests of these birds, by fixing torches to the
end of a long pole. These nests were fifty or sixty feet high above our
heads, in holes in the shape of funnels, with which the roof of the
grotto is pierced like a sieve. The noise increased as we advanced, and
the birds were affrighted by the light of the torches of copal. When
this noise ceased around us, we heard at a distance the plaintive cries
of the birds roosting in other ramifications of the cavern. It seemed as
if these bands answered each other alternately.

“The Indians enter into the Cueva del Guacharo once a year, near
midsummer, armed with poles, by means of which they destroy the greater
part of the nests. At this season several thousands of birds are killed;
and the old ones, to defend their brood, hover around the heads of the
savage Indians, uttering terrible cries, which would appall any heart
but that of man in an untutored state.

“We followed, as we continued our progress through the cavern, the banks
of the small river which issued from it, and is from twenty-eight to
thirty feet wide. We walked on the banks, as far as the hills formed of
calcareous incrustations permitted us. When the torrent wound among very
high masses of stalactites, we were often obliged to descend into its
bed, which is only two feet in depth. We learned with surprise, that
this subterraneous rivulet is the origin of the river Caripe, which, at
a few leagues’ distance, after having joined the small river of Santa
Maria, is navigable for canoes. It enters into the river Areo under the
name of Canno de Terezen. We found on the banks of the subterraneous
rivulet a great quantity of palm-tree wood, the remains of trunks, on
which the Indians climb to reach the nests hanging to the roofs of the
cavern. The rings, formed by the vestiges of the old footstalks of the
leaves, furnish as it were the footsteps of a ladder perpendicularly
placed.

“The grotto of Caripe preserves the same direction, the same breadth,
and its primitive hight of sixty or seventy feet, to the distance of
fourteen hundred and fifty-eight feet, accurately measured. I have never
seen a cavern in either continent, of so uniform and regular a
construction. We had great difficulty in persuading the Indians to pass
beyond the outer part of the grotto, the only part which they annually
visit to collect the fat. The whole authority of the priests was
necessary, to induce them to advance as far as the spot where the soil
rises abruptly at an inclination of sixty degrees, and where the torrent
forms a small subterraneous cascade.[3] The natives connect mystic ideas
with this cave, inhabited by nocturnal birds; they believe, that the
souls of their ancestors sojourn in the deep recesses of the cavern.
‘Man,’ say they, ‘should avoid places which are enlightened neither by
the sun nor by the moon.’ To go and join the guacharoes, is to rejoin
their fathers, is to die. The magicians and the poisoners perform their
nocturnal tricks at the entrance of the cavern, to conjure the chief of
the evil spirits.

-----

Footnote 3:

  We find this phenomenon of a subterranean cascade, but on a much
  larger scale, in England, at Yordas cave, near Kingsdale, in
  Yorkshire.

-----

“At the point where the river forms the subterraneous cascade, a hill
covered with vegetation, which is opposite the opening of the grotto,
presents itself in a very picturesque manner. It appears at the
extremity of a straight passage, two hundred and forty toises in length.
The stalactites, which descend from the vault, and which resemble
columns suspended in the air, display themselves on a back-ground of
verdure. The opening of the cavern appeared singularly contracted, when
we saw it about the middle of the day, illumined by the vivid light
reflected at once from the sky, the plants, and the rocks. The distant
light of day formed somewhat of a magical contrast with the darkness
that surrounded us in those vast caverns. We climbed, not without some
difficulty, the small hill, whence the subterraneous rivulet descends.
We saw that the grotto was perceptibly contracted, retaining only forty
feet in its hight; and that it continued stretching to the northeast,
without deviating from its primitive direction, which is parallel to
that of the great valley of Caripe.

“The missionaries, with all their authority, could not prevail on the
Indians to penetrate farther into the cavern. As the vault grew lower,
the cries of the guacharoes became more shrill. We were obliged to yield
to the pusillanimity of our guides, and trace back our steps. We
followed the course of the torrent to go out of the cavern. Before our
eyes were dazzled with the light of day, we saw without the grotto, the
water of the river sparkling amid the foliage of the trees that
concealed it. It was like a picture placed in the distance, and to which
the mouth of the cavern served as a frame. Having at length reached the
entrance, and seated ourselves on the bank of the rivulet, we rested
after our fatigues. We were glad to be beyond the hoarse cries of the
birds, and to leave a place where darkness does not offer even the
charms of silence and tranquillity.”


                             FINGAL’S CAVE,

                        OR GRAND STAFFA CAVERN.

Staffa, about seven miles north-north-east of Jona, and equidistant
westward from the shores of Mull, about one mile in length, and half a
mile in breadth, is noted for the basaltic pillars which support the
major part of the island, and for the magnificent spectacle afforded by
the cave of Fingal, one of the most splendid works of nature.

Notwithstanding the contiguity of this wonderful island to Mull and
Iona, and the numerous vessels which navigate these seas, it was unknown
to the world in general, and even to most of the neighboring islanders,
until near the close of the last century, when Sir Joseph Banks, then on
his voyage to Iceland, in consequence of information received in the
sound of Iona, from some gentlemen of Mull, was induced to sail thither.
It is, indeed, slightly mentioned by Buchanan; but assuredly it was not
equally dead to fame at the time the Norwegians had sway in these parts,
for from them it derives its name of Staffa.

The basaltic pillars stand in natural colonnades, mostly above fifty
feet high, in the south-western part, upon a firm basis of solid
unshapen rock: above these, the stratum, which reaches to the soil of
the island, varies in thickness, in proportion to the distribution of
the surface into hill and valley. The pillars are of three, four and
more sides; but the number of those with five and six exceeds that of
the others; one of seven sides measured by Sir Joseph, was four feet and
five inches in diameter.

On the west side of Staffa is a small bay, the spot where boats usually
land. In this neighborhood occurs the first group of pillars: they are
small, and instead of being placed upright, are recumbent on their
sides, and form a segment of a circle. Further on is a small cave, above
which pillars again are seen, of somewhat larger dimensions, which
incline in all directions; in one place in particular, a small mass of
them much resembles the ribs of a ship. Beyond the cave is the first
continued range of pillars, larger than the former, and opposite to them
is a small island called Bhuachaile, (pronounced Boo-sha-’lay,) or the
Herdsman’s isle, separated from the main by a channel not many fathoms
wide. The whole of this islet is composed of pillars without any strata
above them; they are small, but by much the neatest formed of any in
this quarter.

The first division of this islet, for at high tide it is divided into
two parts, makes a kind of cone, the pillars converging together toward
the center. On the other side the pillars are in general recumbent; and
in the front, next the main, the beautiful manner in which they are
joined is visible from their even extremities: all these have their
transverse sections exact, and their surfaces smooth; but with the
larger pillars the reverse is the case, and they are cracked in all
directions.

The main island opposite the Boo-sha-’lay, and thence toward the
north-west, is entirely supported by ranges of pillars, pretty erect,
which, although not apparently tall, from their not being uncovered to
the base, are of large diameter; at their feet is an irregular pavement,
made by the upper sides of such as have been broken off. This extends as
far under the water as the eye can reach.

In proceeding along the shore, the superb cavern of Fingal appears, for
such is the denomination given it by the Highlanders, to whom it is
known. It is supported on each side by ranges of columns, and is roofed
by the bottoms of such as have been broken away. From the interstices of
the roof a yellow stalactitic matter has exuded, which precisely defines
the different angles; and, varying the color, tends to augment the
elegance of its appearance. What adds to the grandeur of the scene, the
whole cave is lighted from without, in such a manner, that the furthest
extremity is plainly distinguished; while the air within, being
constantly in motion, owing to the flux and reflux of the tides, is
perfectly dry and wholesome, and entirely exempt from the damp vapors to
which natural caverns are generally subject. The following are its
dimensions:

                                                        Feet.    In.
    Length of the cave from the rock without,             371      6
    Length of the cave from the pitch of the arch,        250      0
    Breadth of the cave at the mouth,                      53      7
    Breadth of the cave at the further end,                20      0
    Hight of the arch at the mouth,                       117      6
    Hight of the arch at the end,                          70      0
    Hight of an outside pillar,                            39      6
    Hight of one at the north-west corner,                 54      0
    Depth of water at the mouth,                           18      0
    Depth of water at the extremity,                        9      0

The cave runs to the rock in the direction, by compass,
north-north-east.

The mind can hardly form an idea more magnificent than such a space.
And, indeed, speaking of the general aspect of Staffa, Sir Joseph is
led, by his enthusiasm, to make the following reflections: “Compared to
this, what are the cathedrals or the palaces built by man! mere models
or playthings, imitations as diminutive as his works will always be,
when compared to those of Nature. Where is now the boast of the
architect! regularity, the only part in which he fancied himself to
exceed his mistress, Nature, is here found in her possession, and here
it has been left undescribed for ages. Is not this the school where the
art was originally studied? And what has been added to this by the whole
Grecian school? A capital to ornament the column of Nature, of which
they could execute a model only; and for that very capital they were
obliged to a bush of acanthus. How amply does Nature repay those who
study her wonderful works.”

Such were his feelings, and in this way did he moralize, when proceeding
along shore, and treading as it were on another Giant’s Causeway, he
arrived at the mouth of the cave.

To the north-west are found the highest range of pillars. Here they are
bare to their base, and the stratum beneath is visible, as it rises
several feet above the water. The surface of it is rough, with frequent
large pieces of stone sticking in it, as if half immersed. The base,
when broken, appears to be composed of many heterogenous parts, and much
resembles lava. Many of the floating stones are of a similar substance
with the pillars, a coarse kind of basalt, less beautiful than that of
the Giant’s Causeway: the color is a dirty brown. The whole of this
stratum dips gradually to the south-east.

The thickness of the stratum of lava-like matter below the pillars, the
hight of the pillars, and the thickness of the superincumbent stratum,
at three different places westward of the mouth of the cave, beginning
with the corner pillar of the cave, are described as follows by Sir
Joseph Banks:

                           Feet.  In.    Feet.  In.    Feet.  In.
       Stratum below,         11    0       17    1       19    8
       Hight of pillars,      54    0       50    0       55    1
       Stratum above,         61    6       51    1       54    7

The stratum above the columns is uniformly the same, consisting of
numberless small pillars, bending and inclining in all directions,
sometimes so irregularly, that the stones can only be said to have an
inclination to assume a columnar form; in others more regularly; but
never breaking into, or disturbing the stratum of large pillars, whose
tops keep everywhere an uniform line. On the opposite side of the island
is a cavern, called Oua-na-scarve, or the Cormorant’s cave; here the
stratum under the pillars is lifted up very high, and the pillars are
considerably less than at the north-west side. Beyond, a bay cuts deep
into the island, rendering it not more than a quarter of a mile across.
On the sides of this bay, especially beyond a little valley, which
almost divides the island, are two stages of small pillars, with a
stratum between, exactly resembling that above, formed of innumerable
little pillars shaken out of their places, and leaning in all
directions. Beyond this, the pillars totally cease. The rock is of a
dark-brown stone, without regularity, from the bay along the south-east
end of the island; beyond which, a disposition to columnar formation is
again manifested, extending from the west side, but in an irregular
manner, to the bending pillars first described.


                       OTHER GROTTOS AND CAVERNS.

There are few countries which have not to boast of a variety of natural
excavations; and these have, from their extent, structure, and the
curious phenomena they exhibit, in the formation of petrifactions, &c.,
been at all times objects of popular attention. Among those particularly
deserving of notice are the following.

The volcanic country bordering on Rome, is peculiarly diversified by
natural cavities of great extent and coolness; on which last account it
is related by Seneca, that the Romans were accustomed to erect seats in
their vicinity, to enjoy their refreshing chillness in the summer
season. He gives a particular account of two such grottos belonging to
the villa of Vatia; and it was in a place of this kind that Tiberius was
nearly destroyed while at supper. Its roof suddenly gave way, and buried
several of his attendants in its ruins; which so alarmed the others,
that they fled and abandoned the emperor, with the exception of Sejanus,
who, stooping on his hands and knees, and covering the body of Tiberius
with his own, received all the stones which fell at that part from the
roof, insomuch that, although he himself sustained considerable injury,
the emperor escaped unhurt.

The grottos of the Cevennes mountains, in lower Languedoc, are both
numerous and extensive. The principal one is not to be explored without
much precaution, and without a safe guide. The entrance, which is low
and narrow, leads to a spacious amphitheater, the petrifactions hanging
from the roof of which have a most splendid effect by the light of
torches. Hence the visitor has to descend to several chambers, one of
which is named the Chamber of the Winds; another, of Echo; another, of
the Cascade; another, again, of the Statue, &c.; on account of their
exhibiting these different phenomena. In the grotto of Valori, at a
small distance, the different natural curiosities which are to be found
at every step, may be viewed at leisure, and without apprehension, as
the visitor never loses sight of the light at the entrance, and is,
therefore, not under any dread of not returning in safety. Here he is
gratified by a view of the most singular petrifactions, representing
flowers, fruits, bee-hives, and, in short, a variety of objects, in many
of which the resemblance is nearly as accurate as if they had been
sculptured.

In a wood, about five leagues from Besançon, in the province of France
called Franche Comte, an opening, formed by two masses of rock, leads to
a cavern more than nine hundred feet beneath the level of the country.
It is in width sixty feet, and eighty feet high at the entrance, and
exhibits inside an oval cavity of one hundred and thirty-five feet in
breadth, and one hundred and sixty-eight in length. To the right of the
entrance is a deep and narrow opening, bordered with festoons of ice,
which, distilling in successive drops on the bottom of the cavern, form
a mass of about thirty feet in diameter. A similar one, but somewhat
smaller, produced by the water which drips in less abundance from the
imperceptible fissures in the roof, is seen on the left. The ground of
the cavern is perfectly smooth, and covered with ice eighteen inches
thick; but the top, on the outside, is a dry and stony soil, covered
with trees, and on a level with the rest of the wood. The cold within
this cavern is so great, that, however warm the external atmosphere may
be when it is visited, it is impossible to remain in it for any length
of time.

These natural ice-houses are not unfrequent in France and Italy, and
supply this agreeable luxury at a very cheap rate. Thus, in the same
province, in the vicinity of Vesoul, is a cavern which, in the hot
season, when it is eagerly sought, produces more ice in one day, than
can be carried away in eight. It measures thirty-five feet in length,
and in width sixty. The large masses of ice which hang pendent from the
roof, have a very pleasing effect. When mists are observed in this
cavern, they are regarded by the neighboring peasantry as infallible
prognostics of rain; and it is worthy of observation, that although the
water in the interior is always frozen in the summer, it becomes liquid
in the winter season.

A grotto near Douse, also in Franche Comte, forms a similar ice-house,
and is remarkable on account of the various forms of its congelations,
which represent a series of columns, sustaining a curious vault, which
appears to be carved with figures of men, animals, trees, &c.

The caverns of Gibraltar are numerous, and several of them of great
extent. The one more particularly deserving attention is called St.
Michael’s cave, situated on the southern part of the mountain. Its
entrance is one thousand feet above the level of the sea, and is formed
by a rapid slope of earth, which has fallen in at various periods, and
which leads to a spacious hall, incrusted with spar, and apparently
supported in the center by a large stalactitical pillar. To this
succeeds a long series of caves, of difficult access. The passages
leading from the one to the other are over precipices, which can not be
passed without the aid of ropes and scaling-ladders. Several of these
caves are three hundred feet beneath the upper one; but at this depth
the smoke of the torches carried by the guides becomes so disagreeable,
that the visitor is obliged reluctantly to give up the pursuit, and
leave other caves unexplored. In these cavernous recesses, the process
and formation of the stalactites is to be traced, from the flimsy
quilt-like cone suspended from the roof, to the robust trunk of a
pillar, three feet in diameter, which rises from the floor, and seems
intended by nature to support the roof from which it originated.

The variety of forms which this matter takes in its different situations
and directions, renders this subterraneous scenery strikingly grotesque,
and in some places beautifully picturesque. The stalactites of these
caves, when near the surface of the mountain, are of a brownish yellow
color; but, in descending toward the lower caves, they lose the darkness
of their color, which is by degrees shaded off to a pale yellow.
Fragments are broken off, and, when wrought into different forms, and
polished, are beautifully streaked and marbled.

About seven English miles from Adlersberg, in Carniola, is a remarkable
cavern, named St. Magdalen’s cave. The road being covered with stones
and bushes, is very painful; but the great fatigue it occasions is
overbalanced by the satisfaction of seeing so uncommon a cavern. The
visitor first descends into a hole, where the earth appears to have
fallen in for ten paces, when he reaches the entrance, which resembles a
fissure caused by an earthquake, in a huge rock. The torches are here
lighted, the cave being extremely dark. This wonderful natural
excavation is divided into several large halls, and other apartments.
The vast number of pillars by which it is ornamented give it a superb
appearance, and are extremely beautiful: they are as white as snow, and
have a semi-transparent luster. The bottom is of the same materials;
insomuch that the visitor may fancy he is walking beneath the ruins of
some stately palace, amid noble pillars and columns, partly mutilated,
and partly entire. Sparry icicles are everywhere seen suspended from the
roof, in some places resembling wax tapers, which, from their radiant
whiteness, appear extremely beautiful. All the inconvenience here arises
from the inequality of the surface, which may make the spectator stumble
while he is contemplating the beauties above and around him.

In the neighborhood of the village of Szelitze, in Upper Hungary, there
is a very singular excavation. The adjacent country is hilly, and
abounds with woods, the air being cold and penetrating. The entrance
into this cavern, fronting the south, is upward of one hundred feet in
hight, and forty-eight in breadth, consequently sufficiently wide to
receive the south wind, which here generally blows with great violence;
but the subterraneous passages, which consist entirely of solid rock,
winding round, stretch still farther to the south. As far as they have
been explored, their hight has been found to be three hundred feet, and
their breadth about one hundred and fifty. The most inexplicable
singularity, however, is, that in the midst of winter the air in this
cavern is warm; and when the heat of the sun without is scarcely
supportable, the cold within is not only very piercing, but so intense,
that the roof is covered with icicles of the size of a large cask,
which, spreading into ramifications, form very grotesque figures. When
the snow melts in spring, the inside of the cave, where its surface is
exposed to the south sun, emits a pellucid water, which congeals
instantly as it drops, and thus forms the above icicles: even the water
which falls from them on the sandy ground, freezes in an instant. It is
observed, that the greater the heat is without, the more intense is the
cold within; so that, in the dog-days, every part of this cavern is
covered with ice. In autumn, when the nights become cold, the ice begins
to dissolve, insomuch that, when the winter sets in, it is no longer to
be seen; the cavern then is perfectly dry, and has a mild and gentle
warmth. It is, therefore, not surprising that swarms of flies, gnats,
bats, owls, and even great numbers of foxes and hares, resort thither,
as to their winter retreat, and remain there till the return of spring.


                        MINES, METALS, GEMS, &C.

         “Through dark retreats pursue the winding ore,
         Search nature’s depths, and view the boundless store;
         The secret cause in tuneful numbers sing,
         How metals first were framed, and whence they spring:
         Whether the active sun, with chymic flames,
         Through porous earth transmits his genial beams
         With heat impregnating the womb of night
         The offspring shines with his paternal light:
         Or whether, urged by subterraneous flames,
         The earth ferments and flows in liquid streams;
         Purged from their dross, the nobler parts refine,
         Receive new forms, and with new beauty shine:
         Or whether by creation first they sprung,
         When yet unpoised the world’s great fabric hung:
         Metals the bases of the earth were made,
         The bars on which its fixed foundation’s laid:
         All second causes they disdain to own,
         And from the Almighty’s fiat sprung alone.”

The transition from the caverns and caves of the earth, to its MINES,
and the various metals and gems they contain, is both natural and easy;
and having dwelt on the former, we propose next to advert to the latter.
By the word “_mines_” we understand those excavations, in which metals,
minerals and precious stones are sought and found; and according to the
substances which they yield they are variously spoken of as “gold
mines,” “silver mines,” “lead mines,” &c., &c. The richest and most
celebrated gold and silver mines are those of Mexico and Peru, in South
America, and those lately discovered in California and Australia. Iron
mines are more abundant, or at least more abundantly worked, in Europe
than elsewhere, though the rapid increase of iron mining in the United
States gives promise that our country may in this respect some day rival
the old world. Copper mines have been found chiefly in England, Sweden
and Denmark; and of late years copper has been found to be abundant in
the region of our northern lakes. Lead and tin mines are numerous in
England, the latter chiefly in the county of Cornwall; and lead is also
found in abundance in the United States. Quicksilver mines abound
principally in Hungary, Spain, Friuli, in the Venetian territories, and
in Peru. Diamond mines are mainly in Brazil, and some in the East
Indies; and salt mines are in Poland.

To explain the structure of mines, it should be observed that the
internal parts of the earth, as far as they have been investigated, do
not consist of any one uniform substance, but of various strata, or beds
of substances, extremely different in their appearances, specific
gravities and chemical qualities, one from another. Neither are these
strata similar to each other, either in their nature or appearance, in
different countries; insomuch that, even in the short extent of half a
mile, sometimes, the strata will be found quite different in one from
what they are in another place. As little are they the same either in
depth or solidity. Innumerable cracks and fissures are found in all of
them; and these again are so entirely different in size and shape, that
it is impossible to form any inference from what may have been met with,
relative to that which remains to be explored.

In Cornwall, the most common opinion entertained by the miners, is, that
crude and immature minerals nourish and feed the ores with which they
are intermixed in the mines; and that the minerals themselves will, in
process of time, be converted into ores productive of those metals to
which they have the nearest affinity, and with which they are most
closely intermingled. And a distinguished professor, who is familiar
alike with geology, chemistry and mineralogy, after visiting the mining
districts of California, has given it as his opinion, that gold is
constantly being formed there, by some powerful agency of nature which
is still and steadily at work. And as a somewhat kindred view, Mr.
Price, in his mineralogy of Cornwall, thinks it is most reasonable to
conclude, that metals were made and planted in veins, at, or very soon
after, the creation of the world; but that, in common with all other
matter, they are subject to a degree of fluctuation, approaching to, or
receding from, their ultimate degree of perfection, either quicker or
slower, as they are of greater or less solid and durable frame and
constitution. He supposes in every metal a peculiar magnetism, and an
approximation of particles of the same specific nature, by which its
component principles are drawn and united together; more particularly
the matters left by the decomposition of the waters passing through the
contiguous earths or strata, and deposited in their proper nidus or
receptacle, until, by the accretion of more or less of its homogeneous
particles, the metallic vein may be denominated either rich or barren.


                             DIAMOND MINES.

The word _diamond_, is supposed to be a corruption of the word
_adamant_, in allusion to the great hardness of this gem, which is the
most valuable of all the precious stones. Diamonds were originally
discovered in Bengal, and in the island of Borneo; and about the year
1720, were found in Brazil. They are found of all colors; and those
which are colorless, or of some decided tint, are most esteemed, though
the latter kind are very rare. Those which are slightly discolored are
the least valuable.

The specific gravity of the diamond, is, to that of water, in the
proportion of about three and a half to one. It is the hardest of all
known substances, and can only be cut and polished by its own dust or
powder. The art of splitting or cutting and polishing this gem, though
probably of remote antiquity in Asia, was first introduced into Europe
in 1486, by Louis Berghan, of Bruges, who accidentally discovered that
by rubbing two diamonds together, their surfaces might be rendered
smooth. And the fine powder which is rubbed off by such friction, serves
to grind and polish them. The diamond is of the nature of _charcoal_, or
pure carbon, and is combustible: under the blow-pipe it burns away in a
blue, lambent flame.

The high value attached to diamonds does not depend so much on their
beauty and hardness, as on their great scarcity, and the labor and
expense necessary in procuring them. Hitherto they have been observed
only in the torrid zone; and Brazil is the only part of America in which
they have been found. The historical account of their discovery in that
country is as follows. Near the capital of the territory of Serro do
Frio flows the river Milho Verde, where it was the custom to dig for
gold, or rather to extract it from the alluvial soil. The miners, during
their search for gold, found several diamonds, which they were induced
to lay aside in consequence of their particular shape and great beauty,
although they were ignorant of their intrinsic value.

The diamond works on the river Jigitonhonha are described by Mr. Mawe as
the most important in the Brazilian territory. The river, in depth from
three to nine feet, is intersected by a canal, beneath the head of which
it is stopped by an embankment of several thousand bags of sand, its
deeper parts being laid dry by chain-pumps. The mud is now washed away,
and the =cascalhao=, or earth which contains the diamonds, dug up, and
removed to a convenient place for washing. The process, which is as
follows, is seen in the cut on the next page. A shed, consisting of
upright posts which support a thatched roof, is erected in the form of a
parallelogram, in length about ninety feet, and in width forty-five.
Down the middle of its area a current of water is conveyed through a
canal covered with strong planks, on which the earth is laid to the
thickness of two or three feet. On the other side of the area is a
flooring of planks, from twelve to fifteen feet in length, imbedded in
clay, extending the whole length of the shed, and having a gentle slope
from the canal. This flooring is divided into about twenty compartments,
or troughs, each about three feet wide, by means of planks placed on
their edges; and the upper ends of these troughs communicate with the
canal, being so formed that water is admitted into them between two
planks about an inch separate from each other. Through this opening the
current falls about six inches into the trough, and may be directed to
any part of it, or stopped at pleasure, by means of a small quantity of
clay. Along the lower ends of the troughs a small channel is dug, to
carry off the water.

[Illustration: DIAMOND WASHING IN BRAZIL.]

On the heap of earth, at equal distances, three high chairs are placed
for the overseers, who are no sooner seated than the negroes enter the
troughs, each provided with a rake of a peculiar form, and having a
short handle, with which he rakes into the trough from fifty to eighty
pounds’ weight of the earth. The water being then allowed to pass in by
degrees, the earth is spread abroad, and continually raked up to the
head of the trough, so as to be kept in constant motion. This operation
is continued for a quarter of an hour, when the water begins to run
clearer; and, the earthy particles having been washed away, the
gravel-like matter is raked up to the end of the trough. At length the
current flowing quite clear, the largest stones are thrown out, and
afterward those of an inferior size; the whole is then examined with
great care for diamonds. When a negro finds one, he instantly stands
upright, and claps his hands; he then extends them, holding the gem
between the fore-finger and the thumb. An overseer receives it from him,
and deposits it in a bowl, suspended from the center of the structure,
and half filled with water. In this vessel all the diamonds found in the
course of the day are deposited, and at the close of the work are taken
out and delivered to the principal overseer, who, after they have been
weighed, registers the particulars in a book kept for that purpose.

When a negro is so fortunate as to find a diamond of the weight of
seventeen carats and a half, the following ceremony takes place: he is
crowned with a wreath of flowers, and carried in procession to the
administrator, who gives him his freedom by paying his owner for it. He
also receives a present of new clothes, and is permitted to work on his
own account. For small stones proportionate premiums are given; while
many precautions are taken to prevent the negroes from stealing the
diamonds, with which view they are frequently changed by the overseers,
lest these precious gems should be concealed in the corners of the
troughs. When a negro is suspected of swallowing a diamond, he is
confined in a solitary apartment, and means taken to bring the gem to
light.

In the East Indies, the kingdom of Golconda, extending two hundred and
sixty miles along the bay of Bengal, and having a breadth of two hundred
miles from east to west, abounds in diamond mines. They are chiefly in
the vicinity of the rocky hills and mountains which intersect the
country, and in the whole of which diamonds are supposed to be
contained. In several of the mines they are found scattered in the
earth, within two or three fathoms of the surface, and in others are met
with in a mineral substance in the body of the rocks, forty or fifty
fathoms deep. The laborers having dug five or six feet into the rock,
soften the stone by fire, and proceed till they find the vein, which
often runs two or three furlongs under the rock. The earth being brought
out and carefully searched, affords stones of various shapes, and of a
good water. This earth is of a yellowish, and sometimes of a reddish
color, frequently adhering to the diamond with so strong a crust that
the separation becomes difficult.

To find the diamonds, the workmen form a cistern of a kind of clay, with
a small vent on one side, a little above the bottom; in this vent they
place a plug, and throwing into the cistern the earth they have dug,
pour in water to dissolve it. They then break the clods, and stir the
wet earth in the cistern, allowing the lighter part to be carried off in
the form of mud, when the vent-hole is opened to let out the water. They
thus continue washing, until what remains in the cistern is pretty
clean; and then, in the middle of the day, when the sun shines bright,
carefully look over all the sand, at which practice they are so expert,
that the smallest stone can not escape them. The brightness of the sun
being reflected by the diamonds, aids them in their research, which
would be foiled if a cloud were to intervene.

The largest known diamond was found in Brazil, and belongs to the king
of Portugal. It weighs sixteen hundred and eighty carats; and, although
uncut, it is valued at the enormous sum of two hundred and twenty-four
millions sterling, which gives an estimate of nearly eighty pounds
sterling for each carat, the multiplicand of the square of its whole
weight being taken. The one next in magnitude and value, is probably
that mentioned by Tavernier, in possession of the Great Mogul. It was
found in Golconda in 1550; is of the size of half a hen’s egg, and is
said to weigh nine hundred carats. This diamond is the same as the
famous “_Koh-i-noor_,” or “Mountain of Light,” now belonging to the
queen of England, and which attracted so much attention in the great
exhibition at London, in 1851. The one supposed to be next in value, is
that belonging to the crown jewels of Russia, which weighs seven hundred
and seventy-nine carats, and has been estimated at five millions
sterling. But perhaps the most perfect and beautiful diamond hitherto
found, is the one known as the Pitt diamond, which was brought from
India by a gentleman of that name, who sold it to the Duke of Orleans
for one hundred thousand pounds sterling. It was worn by Bonaparte in
the hilt of his sword. It weighs about one hundred and thirty-six
carats, or five hundred and forty-four grains. It ought, however, to be
observed, that these estimates, founded on the magnitude and brilliancy
of the gems, are very different from the prices which the most princely
fortunes can afford to pay for them. The Russian diamond cost about one
hundred and thirty five thousand pounds sterling; and the one called the
Pitt or Regent, although it weighed one hundred and thirty-six carats
only, was, on account of its greater brilliancy, purchased of a Greek
merchant, for one hundred thousand pounds sterling. Several other large
diamonds are preserved in the cabinets of the sovereigns and princes of
Europe.

Why such immense value should be attached to diamonds, in all civilized
countries, and by a kind of common consent, is one of those singular
things that seem inexplicable. That a magnificent house, with a large
estate, and the means of living not only in comfort but splendor, should
be set in competition with, and even deemed inadequate to the purchase
of, a transparent crystallized stone, not half the size of a hen’s egg,
seems almost a kind of insanity! If for the mere consciousness of
possessing a diamond of less than the weight of an ounce, any private
gentleman were to pay four hundred and fifty thousand dollars in ready
money, and an annuity of twenty thousand dollars besides, he would
probably be thought beside himself. And yet not only was the above sum
given, but a patent of nobility into the bargain, by the empress
Catharine, of Russia, for the famous diamond “Nadir Shah.” In this case,
however, though the seller acquired much, the purchaser did not suffer
any personal privation; and in reality, notwithstanding the costliness
and high estimation of diamonds, they are not put in competition with
the substantial comforts and conveniences of life. Among ornaments and
luxuries, however, they unquestionably occupy, and have ever occupied,
the highest rank. Even Fashion, proverbially capricious as she is, has
remained steady in this, one of her earliest attachments, during
probably three or four thousand years. There must be, therefore, in the
nature of things, some adequate reason for this universal consent; which
becomes a curious object of inquiry.

The utility of the diamond, great as it is in some respects, enters for
little or nothing into the calculation of its price; at least all that
portion of its value which constitutes the difference between the cost
of an entire diamond and an equal weight of diamond powder, must be
attributed to other causes.

The beauty of this gem, depending on its unrivaled luster, is, no doubt,
the circumstance which originally brought it into notice, and still
continues to uphold it in the public estimation; and certainly,
notwithstanding the smallness of its bulk, there is not any substance,
natural or artificial, which can sustain any comparison with it in this
respect. The vivid and various refractions of the opal, the refreshing
tints of the emerald, the singular and beautiful light which streams
from the six-rayed star of the girasol, the various colors, combined
with high luster, which distinguish the ruby, the sapphire, and the
topaz, beautiful as they are on a near inspection, are almost entirely
lost to a distant beholder; whereas the diamond, without any essential
color of its own, imbibes the pure solar ray, and then reflects it,
either with undiminished intensity, too white and too vivid to be
sustained for more than an instant by the most insensible eye, or
decomposed by refraction into those prismatic colors, which paint the
rainbow, and the morning and evening clouds, combined with a brilliancy
which hardly yields to that of the meridian sun. Other gems, inserted
into rings and bracelets, are best seen by the wearer; and if they
attract the notice of the bystanders, divide their attention, and
withdraw those regards which ought to be concentered on the person, to
the merely accessory ornaments. The diamond, on the contrary, whether
blazing on the crown of state, or diffusing its starry radiance from the
breast of titled merit, or “in courts of feasts and high solemnities,”
wreathing itself with the hair, illustrating the shape and color of the
neck, and entering ambitiously into contest with the lively luster of
those eyes that “rain influence” on all beholders, blends harmoniously
with the general effect, and proclaims to the most distant ring of the
surrounding crowd, the person of the monarch, of the knight, or of the
beauty.

Another circumstance tending to enhance the value of the diamond is,
that although small stones are sufficiently abundant to be within the
reach of moderate expenditure, and therefore afford, to all those who
are in easy circumstances an opportunity to acquire a taste for
diamonds, yet those of a larger size are, and ever have been, rather
rare; and of those which are celebrated for their size and beauty, the
whole number, at least in Europe, scarcely amounts to half a dozen, all
of them being in possession of sovereign princes. Hence, the acquisition
even of a moderately large diamond, is what mere money can not always
command; and many are the favors, both political and of other kinds, for
which a diamond of a large size, or of uncommon beauty, may be offered
as a compensation, where its commercial price, in money, neither can be
tendered, nor would be received. In many circumstances also, it is a
matter of no small importance for a person to have a considerable part
of his property in the most portable form possible; and in this respect
what is there that can be compared to diamonds, which possess the
portability, without the risk of bills of exchange? It may further be
remarked, in favor of this species of property, that it is but little
liable to fluctuation, and has gone on pretty regularly increasing in
value, insomuch that the price of stones of good quality is considerably
higher than it was some years ago.

The art of cutting and polishing diamonds, has a twofold object; first,
to divide the natural surface of the stone in a symmetrical manner by
means of highly polished polygonal planes, and thus to bring out, to the
best advantage, the wonderful refulgence of this beautiful gem; and,
secondly, by cutting out such flaws as may happen to be near the
surface, to remove those blemishes which materially detract from its
beauty, and consequently from its value. The removal of such flaws is a
matter of great importance; for, owing to the form in which the diamond
is cut, and its high degree of refrangibility, the smallest fault is
magnified, and becomes obtrusively visible to all. For this reason,
also, it is by no means an easy matter, at all times, to ascertain
whether a flaw is or is not superficial; and a person with a correct and
well-practiced eye, may often purchase to great advantage, stones which
appear to be flawed quite through, but which are in fact only
superficially blemished.

Before leaving the subject of diamonds, it may be well to notice some
other valuable stones that are much sought and prized for ornament. One
of these is the _oriental ruby_. This, in its most esteemed color, is
pure carmine, or a blood-red of considerable intensity, forming, when
well polished, a blaze of the most exquisite and unrivaled tint. It is,
however, more or less pale, and mixed with blue in various proportions;
and hence it occurs rose-red, and reddish-white, crimson, peach-blossom
red, and lilac-blue, the latter variety being named the _oriental
amethyst_. It is a native of Pegu, and is said to be found in the sand
of certain streams near the capital of the country; and it also occurs,
with the sapphire, in the sands of the rivers of Ceylon. A ruby which is
perfect both in color and transparency, is much less common than a good
diamond; and when of the weight of three or four carats, is even more
valuable than a diamond of the same size. The king of Pegu, and the
monarchs of Asia and Siam, monopolize the finest rubies, in the same way
as the sovereigns of India make a monopoly of diamonds. The finest ruby
in the world is in possession of the first of these kings. Its purity
has passed into a proverb, and its worth, when compared with gold, is
inestimable. The dubah of Deccan, also, possesses a remarkably fine one,
which is a full inch in diameter. The princes of Europe can not boast of
any rubies of first-rate magnitude.

The _oriental sapphire_ ranks next in value to the ruby. When it is
perfect, its color is a clear and bright Prussian blue, united to a high
degree of transparency. The _astoria_ or _star-stone_, is a remarkable
variety of this beautiful gem: it is semi-transparent, with a reddish
purple tinge. And beside these, there are the _red_ sapphire, often
called the oriental ruby, and the _yellow_ sapphire, which is called the
oriental topaz. And in addition to these precious stones, or gems, there
are also the _emerald_, of a beautiful green color; the _topaz_, which
is of a yellow or light wine-color, and which by being heated, sometimes
becomes rose-red, so as to be passed off as a ruby; the _jasper_ and
_chalcedony_, which are of various colors; the _onyx_, which is a
regularly banded agate, much prized for cameos, especially where the
colors are very distinct and different; the _cornelian_, which is
properly a red or flesh-colored chalcedony, much valued for seal-stones,
&c.; and the _blood-stone_, or _heliotrope_, which is deep green, and
somewhat translucent, and variegated by blood-red spots: all of which
are much used in the various departments of jewelry.

We have reserved for this place, a notice of the hot-well at Clifton,
England, which would have been mentioned in connection with the Geysers
and other hot springs, but from its connection with the beautiful
crystals known as _Bristol stones_ or _diamonds_, some of which are so
hard as to cut glass, and are exceedingly clear, colorless and
brilliant. When set in rings, in their natural state, these stones often
appear of as high a polish and luster, as if they had been wrought by
the most skillful lapidary.

The warm spring, or fountain, in the vicinity of which they are found,
is called the _hot-well_. It is in the parish of Clifton, and is so
copious as to discharge sixty gallons of water in a minute. It rises
forcibly from an opening in the solid rock, at about twenty-six feet
below high-water mark. On its immediate influx from the rock, the water
is much warmer than when it is pumped up for drinking, for it is raised
by pumps some thirty feet. Its qualities in a medicinal point of view
are supposed to be valuable; but it is not on this point that we propose
to dwell, and therefore we pass on to the rocks in the neighborhood,
near which the _Bristol stones_ are found. Just below the hot-well,
there rises a noble range of hills, which are not more remarkable for
their hight, than for their being equally so on both sides the river,
the strata in some places answering on each side for about a mile and a
half in a serpentine course. These constitute one of the greatest
natural curiosities in England. The rock beyond the hot-well, and on the
same side, is named St. Vincent’s, a chapel dedicated to that saint
having been formerly built on its summit. It is in hight three hundred
feet, and has a majestic appearance. It supplies the naturalist with
many curious fossils, the botanist with a variety of scarce plants, the
antiquary with the remains of a Roman camp, and the less curious
inquirer with a view of a most dreadful and surprising precipice.

The rocks in general, when broken up, are of a dusky red, brown or
chocolate colored marble, very hard and close-grained, and which, on
being struck with a hammer, emit a strong sulphureous smell. It will
bear a polish equal to any foreign marble; and, when sawed into slabs
and polished, appears beautifully variegated with veins of white,
bluish-gray, or yellow. It is often employed for chimney-pieces; but it
is principally used for making lime, for which purpose there is no stone
in England so well calculated, nor is there any lime so strong, fine,
and white, which excellent qualities occasion great demand for foreign
consumption.

Here, and in the vicinity, laborers are daily employed in blowing up the
rocks with gunpowder, by which process vast fragments are frequently
thrown down, and repeatedly strike the precipice with a dreadful crash,
which, combined with the loud report of the explosion, reëchoed from
side to side by the lofty cliffs, makes a noise resembling thunder, for
which it is frequently mistaken by strangers. It is the opinion of the
greater part of those who have viewed these rocks, that they were once
united, and were separated by some terrible convulsion of nature. A
bridge of one arch, from rock to rock, over the Avon, has long been in
contemplation; but if the blowing up of these rocks should still be
persisted in, the design will be rendered impracticable. This is the
more to be regretted, because stone of the same quality is to be
procured lower down the river.

Now it is in the fissures and cavities of these rocks, that the
beautiful crystals called _Bristol stones_, or _diamonds_, already
mentioned, are found. They are clear and brilliant, and being without
color, so richly and brilliantly reflect the light, as to be almost next
to the diamond in appearance, and are often palmed off on the
unpracticed for the latter gem. They are extensively used in many of the
plainer kinds of jewelry, and when set over gold-leaf, or thin paper of
delicate tinges, are often made closely to resemble some of the richest
gems known.


                       GOLD AND SILVER MINES.[4]

The mines of La Plata, so denominated on account of the abundance of
silver they contain, are chiefly situated in the provinces which were
formerly attached to the Spanish viceroyalty of Rio de la Plata; but
which, since the South American states revolted from the mother country,
have been included in the republic of Bolivia, or Upper Peru as it is
sometimes called. With the exception of Mexico, Bolivia is the richest
country in silver which has yet been discovered, and contains
innumerable mines both of that metal and of gold. All its northern
provinces teem with mineral opulence; and those of Laricaja and
Carabaya, have been distinguished by the production of the latter, and
still nobler metal, in its virgin state. In consequence, however, of the
recent political convulsions, mining, once the richest source of
revenue, is in a depressed state; many of the mines being filled with
water and totally neglected.

Footnote 4:

  The account of the mines of South America and Mexico is mostly from
  Humboldt, and as will be obvious to the reader, has reference in many
  things to their past history and progress, rather than to their
  present condition.

The mountain of Potosi formerly produced weekly about five thousand
marks of silver, that is, from thirty to forty thousand dollars; a
surprising produce, when it is considered that it has been wrought since
1545, at which time it was accidentally discovered by an Indian, or
native, as represented in the cut. In hunting some goats, he slipped
from a slight elevation, and to save himself caught hold of a shrub,
which coming away from the ground, laid bare the silver at its root. At
the commencement it was still more abundant, and the metal was dug up in
a purer state.

[Illustration: DISCOVERY OF SILVER IN PERU.]

The silver was often found in shoots like roots, imbedded in the earth.
Six thousand Indians were sent every eighteen months, from the provinces
of the viceroyalty, to work this mine. The expedition was called _mita_;
and these Indians, having been enrolled and formed into parties, were
distributed by the governor of Potosi, and received a small daily
stipend, (equal to about thirty-four cents of our currency,) until the
period of their labor was completed. They were thus doomed to a forced
service, nothing less than slavery, so long as it lasted, which the
Spaniards have endeavored to justify by the plea that laborers could not
otherwise be procured.

Lumps of pure gold and silver, called =papas=, from their resemblance to
the potato, were often found in the sands. The poor likewise occupied
themselves in =lavaderos=, or in washing the sands of the rivers and
rivulets, in order to find particles of the precious metals.

To compensate for the mines rendered useless by the irruption of water,
or other accidents, rich and new ones were daily discovered. They were
all found in the chains of mountains, commonly in dry and barren spots,
and sometimes in the sides of the =quebredas=, or astonishing
precipitous breaks in the ridges. However certain this rule might be in
the region of Bolivia, it was contradicted in that of Peru, where, at
three leagues’ distance from the Pacific ocean, not far from Tagna, in
the province of Arica, there was discovered the famous mine of
Huantajaya, in a sandy plain at a distance from the mountains, of such
exuberant wealth that the pure metal was cut out with a chisel. From
this mine a large specimen of virgin silver is preserved in the royal
cabinet of natural history at Madrid. It attracted a considerable
population, although neither water nor the common conveniences for labor
could be found there, neither any pasturage for the cattle.

In the mint of Potosi, about six millions of dollars were annually
coined; and the mines of the old viceroyalty of La Plata, taken
collectively, are reckoned to have yielded about sixteen millions.

The mines of Mexico, or what was formerly called New Spain, have been
more celebrated for their riches than those of La Plata, notwithstanding
which they are remarkable for the poverty of the mineral they contain. A
quintal, or sixteen hundred ounces of silver ore, affords, at a medium,
not more than three or four ounces of pure silver, about one-third of
what is yielded by the same quantity of mineral in Saxony. It is not,
therefore, on account of the richness of the ore, but from its abundance
and the facility of working it, that these mines have been so much
superior to those of Europe.

The fact of the small number of persons employed in working them, is not
less contrary to the commonly received opinion on this subject. The
mines of Guanaxuato, infinitely richer than those of Potosi ever were,
afforded from 1706 to 1803, nearly forty millions of dollars in gold and
silver, or very nearly five millions of dollars annually, being somewhat
less than one-fourth of the whole quantity of gold and silver from New
Spain; notwithstanding which, these mines, productive as they were, did
not employ more than five thousand workmen of every description. In
Mexico, the labor of the mines was perfectly free, and better paid than
any other kind of industry, a miner earning from five to five dollars
and a half weekly, while the wages of the common laborer did not exceed
a dollar and a half. The =tenateros=, or persons who carried the ore on
their backs, from the spot where it was dug out of the mine, to that
where it was collected in heaps, had a sum equal to a dollar and ten
cents for a day’s work of six hours. Neither slaves, criminals, nor
forced laborers, were employed in the Mexican mines.

In consequence of the clumsy, imperfect and expensive mode of clearing
them from water, several of the richest of these mines have been
overflowed and abandoned; while the lack of method in the arrangement of
the galleries, and the absence of lateral communications, have added to
the risk, and greatly increased the expense of working them. Labor has
not been, as in the working of the European mines, abridged, nor the
transportation of materials facilitated. When new works were undertaken,
a due consideration was not bestowed on the preliminary arrangements;
and they were always conducted on too large and expensive a scale.

More than three-fourths of the silver obtained from America is
extricated from the ore by means of quicksilver, the loss of which, in
the process of amalgamation, is immense. The quantity that used to be
consumed annually in Mexico alone, was about sixteen thousand quintals;
and in the whole of South America, about twenty-five thousand quintals
were yearly expended, the cost of which there, has been estimated at
more than a million dollars. The greater part of this quicksilver, in
later years, was furnished by the mine of Almaden in Spain, and that of
Istria in Carniola, the celebrated quicksilver mine of Huancavelica in
Peru, having greatly fallen off in its produce since the sixteenth
century, when it was highly flourishing. The prosperity of the silver
mines, both in Mexico and Peru, therefore depended very much on the
supplies of quicksilver from Spain, Germany and Italy; for such was the
abundance of the ore in those provinces, that apparently the only limit
to the amount of silver obtained there, was the want of mercury for
amalgamation.

In taking a general view of the riches of the other portions of America,
Humboldt, who has supplied these details, remarks that, in Peru, silver
ore exists in as great abundance as in Mexico, the mines of Lauricocha
being capable of yielding as great a produce as those of Guanaxuato; but
that the art of mining, and the methods of separating the silver from
its ore, are still more defective than in Mexico. Notwithstanding this
imperfect system, the total amount of the precious metals annually
furnished by America, was at one time estimated at upward of forty-two
million dollars; the gold being in proportion to the silver as one to
forty-six. From 1492 to 1803, the quantity of gold and silver extracted
from the American mines, was equal in value to five billion, seven
hundred and six million, seven hundred thousand dollars; of which
immense sum, the portion carried to Europe, including the booty gathered
by the conquerors of America, is estimated at five billion, four hundred
and forty-five million dollars, averaging seventeen million and a half
of dollars yearly. The annual importation up to 1803, being divided into
six periods, appears to have constantly augmented, and in the following
progressive ratio. From 1492 to 1500, it did not exceed two hundred and
fifty thousand dollars. From 1500 to 1545, it amounted to three millions
of dollars. From 1545 to 1600, to eleven millions. From 1600 to 1700, to
sixteen millions. From 1700 to 1750, to twenty-two millions and a half.
And, lastly, from 1750 to 1803, to the prodigious sum of thirty-five
million, three hundred thousand dollars.

The first period was that of exchange with the natives, or of mere
rapine. The second was distinguished by the conquest and plunder of
Mexico, Peru and New Granada, and by the opening of the first mines. The
third began with the discovery of the rich mines of Potosi; and in the
course of it the conquest of Chili was completed, and various mines
opened in Mexico. At the commencement of the fourth period, the mines of
Potosi began to be exhausted; but those of Lauricocha were discovered,
and the produce of Mexico rose from two millions to five millions of
dollars annually. The fifth period began with the discovery of gold in
Brazil; and the sixth was distinguished by the prodigious increase of
the mines of Mexico, while those of every other part of America, with
the exception of Brazil, were then constantly improving.

The gold mines of Brazil have been very productive. Those called
general, were about seventy-five leagues from Rio Janeiro, the staple
and principal outlet of the riches of the Brazilian territory. They
formerly yielded to the king, annually, for his right of fifths, at
least one hundred and twelve arobas (weighing twenty-five pounds each)
of gold; so that their yearly produce might then have been estimated at
upward of three and a half millions of dollars, and that of the more
distant mines at about one-third the sum.

The gold drawn from them could not be carried to Rio Janeiro, without
being first brought to the smelting-houses established in each district,
where the right of the crown was received. What belonged to private
persons was remitted in bars, with their weight, number, and an
impression of the royal arms. The gold was then assayed, and its
standard imprinted on each bar. When these bars were carried to the
mint, their value was paid to the possessor in coin, commonly in
half-doubloons, each worth eight Spanish dollars. Upon each of these
half-doubloons the king gained a dollar, by the alloy and right of
coinage. The mint of Rio Janeiro was one of the most beautiful in
existence, and furnished with every convenience for working with the
greatest celerity. As the gold came from the mines at the same time that
the fleets came from Portugal, the operations of the mint and the
coinage proceeded with surprising quickness.

In Africa, the kingdom of Mozambique abounds in gold, which is washed
down by the rivers, and forms a chief part of the commerce of the
country. The kingdoms of Monomotara and Sofala likewise furnish
considerable quantities of gold; and the Portuguese residing in the
latter territory, half a century ago, reported that it yielded annually
two millions of =metigals=, equal to somewhat more than a million
sterling. The merchants exported from Mecca, and other parts, about the
same quantity of gold. The soldiers were paid in gold dust, in the state
in which it was collected; and this was so pure, and of so fine a
yellow, as not to be exceeded, when wrought, by any other gold beside
that of Japan. Gold is likewise found on the island of Madagascar. The
Gold Coast is so denominated from the abundance of gold found among the
sands: it is not, however, so productive as has been generally supposed,
owing to the intense heats, which, in a great measure, prevent the
natives from prosecuting their researches.

In Asia, the island of Japan is most productive of gold, which is found
in several of its provinces, and is, in by far the greater proportion,
melted from its ore. It is also procured by washing the sands, and a
small quantity is likewise found in the ore of copper. The emperor
claims a supreme jurisdiction, not only over the gold mines, but over
all the mines of the empire, which are not allowed to be worked without
a license from him. Two-thirds of their produce belong to him, and the
other third is left to the governor of the province in which the mines
are situated. But the richest gold ore, and that which yields the finest
gold, is dug in one of the northern provinces of the island of Niphon, a
dependency of Japan, where the gold mines have, in past times, been
highly productive, though now they have much fallen off. In the Japanese
province of Tsckungo, a rich gold mine, having been filled with water,
was no longer worked: as it was, however, so situated, that by cutting
the rock and making an opening beneath the mine, the water could be
easily drawn off, this was attempted. At the moment of beginning the
operation, so violent a storm of thunder and lightning arose, that the
workmen were obliged to seek shelter elsewhere; and these superstitious
people imagining that the tutelar god and protector of the spot,
unwilling to have the bowels of the earth thus rifled, had raised the
storm to make them sensible of his great displeasure at such an
undertaking, desisted from all further attempts, through the fear of
incurring his displeasure, and could not be induced to go on with it.

Thibet, a mountainous country of India, contains a great abundance of
gold, which is traced in the rivers flowing from that territory into the
Ganges. In Hindoostan there are not any mines of gold; but in the Irnada
district gold is collected in the river which passes Nelambur in the
Mangery Talui, a nair having the exclusive privilege of this collection,
for which he pays a small annual tribute. Silver is in general rare
throughout the oriental regions, and there is not any indication of this
metal in India; but in Japan there are several silver mines, more
particularly in the northern provinces, and the metal extracted from
them is very pure and fine.

Turning to Europe, Dalmatia is said in ancient times to have produced an
abundance of gold. Pliny reports that in the reign of the emperor Nero,
fifty pounds of this precious metal were daily taken from the mines of
that province; and that it was found on the surface of the ground. It is
added, that Vibius, who was sent by Augustus to subdue the Dalmatians,
obliged that hardy and warlike people to work in the mines, and to
separate the gold from the ore.

Bossina, in Sclavonia, contains many mineral mountains, and has rich
mines of gold and silver. The district in which the latter are found, is
named the =Srebrarniza=, being derived from the word =srebr=, which
signifies silver in all the Sclavonian dialects. Their produce resembles
the native silver of Potosi, and is found, combined with pure quartz, in
small, thin leaves, resembling moss.

The kingdom of Norway formerly produced gold; but the expense of working
the mines, and procuring the pure ore, being greater than the profit,
these have been neglected. There are, however, silver mines, which are
extremely valuable, and give employment to several thousands of persons.
The principal of these is at Königsberg, and was discovered in 1623,
when the town was immediately built, and peopled with German miners. In
1751, forty-one shafts and twelve veins, were wrought in this mine, and
gave employment to thirty-five hundred officers, artificers and
laborers. A view of one part of this mine is given in the cut on the
next page.

The silver ore is not, as was at first imagined, confined to the
mountain between Königsberg and the river Jordal, but extends its veins
for several miles throughout the adjacent districts, in consequence of
which new mines have been undertaken in several places, and prosperously
carried on. One of the richest and most ancient of the mines, named “Old
God’s blessing,” has sometimes, in the space of a week, yielded several
hundred pounds’ weight of rich ore. The astonishing depth of this mine,
which is not less than a hundred and eighty fathoms, perpendicularly,
fills the mind of the beholder with amazement; and the circumference at
the bottom forms a clear space of several hundreds of fathoms. Here the
sight of thirty or forty fires, burning on all sides in this gloomy
cavern, and continually fed to soften the stone in the prosecution of
the labors, seems, according to the notions commonly entertained, an apt
image of hell; and the swarms of miners, covered with soot, and bustling
about in habits according to their several employments, may well remind
one of so many evil spirits; more especially when, at a given signal
that the mine is to be sprung in this or that direction, they exclaim
aloud: “=Berg-livet, berg-livet=!” “Take care of your lives.”

[Illustration: SILVER MINE AT KÖNIGSBERG.]

The gold mines of Cremnitz, in Hungary, lie forty miles south of the
Carpathian hills; and twenty miles further to the south are the silver
mines of Shemnitz. These are called mining towns; and the former is the
principal, its rich ores being found in what is styled metallic rock.
Its mines also produce a certain proportion of silver. Hungary is beside
enriched by a mineral peculiar to itself, or one, at least, which has
not hitherto been discovered elsewhere, namely, the _opal_, a gem
preferred to all others by the oriental nations. The opal mines are
situated at Ozerwiniza, where they are found in a hill consisting of
decomposed porphyry, a few fathoms beneath the surface. Their produce is
of various qualities, from the opaque-white, or semi-opal, to the utmost
refulgence of the lively colors by which this noble gem is
distinguished.

Transylvania and the Bannet, contain numerous and valuable mines,
consisting chiefly of gray gold ore, and white gold ore. The finest gold
is found at Olapian, not far from Zalathna, intermixed with gravel and
sand. The sands of the Rhine, also, in various places contain traces of
gold.

The mountains of Spain were, according to ancient writers, very rich in
gold and silver; and accordingly Gibbon calls that kingdom, “the Peru
and Mexico of the old world.” He adds, that “the discovery of the rich
western continent of the Phenicians, and the oppression of the simple
natives, who were compelled to labor in their own mines for the benefit
of strangers, form an exact type of the more recent history of Spanish
America.” The Phenicians were acquainted only with the sea-coasts of
Spain; but avarice, as well as ambition, carried the arms of Rome and
Carthage into the heart of the country, and almost every part of the
soil was found pregnant with gold, silver and copper. A mine near
Carthagena, is said to have yielded daily twenty-five thousand drams of
silver, or over thirteen hundred thousand dollars a year. The provinces
of Asturia, Gallicia and Lusitania, yielded twenty thousand pounds’
weight of gold annually: but rich as these mines are, the modern
Spaniards have chosen rather to import the precious metals from America,
than to seek them at home.

Portugal is in many parts mountainous; and these mountains contain,
beside others, rich ores of silver. But the Portuguese, like the
Spaniards, having been supplied with metals from South America, and
particularly with an abundance of gold and silver from Brazil, have not
worked the mines in their own country. Gems of all kinds, as turkoises
and hyacinths, are also found in these mountains, together with
beautifully variegated marbles, and many curious fossils.

But the richest and most productive gold mines of Europe, at the present
time, are probably those of Russia. It had long been known that gold was
to be found in the Russian dominions; but in 1829, Baron Humboldt, with
two scientific associates, at the request of the emperor of Russia, made
a mineralogical tour to the Ural and Altai mountains. In this journey,
they not only discovered new localities of gold and silver, but from the
geological features of the country suggested that, at certain
localities, diamonds would also probably be found, which accordingly
happened. And as the result of the report they made to the Russian
government, mining operations were commenced on a large scale in these
mountains, which have now become one of the most prolific gold regions
in the world. The increase of these sources of gold, in extent and
amount, has been such, that from the value of about ten thousand dollars
in 1836, the amount received in 1843, was some eighteen millions of
dollars; and the supply has since increased annually, until at present,
1855, it amounts to about twenty million dollars a year. Most of this
large amount of gold is gathered from washing the sand and loose earth,
and not from deep mines; and as it is every year becoming greater and
greater, it must add immensely to the wealth and resources of the
Russian empire.

But by far the greatest gold-field in the world, has been opened by the
discoveries of the last few years in California. At the close of the
late war with Mexico, the United States acquired, by conquest and
purchase, a tract of country of some five hundred thousand square miles
in extent, known as the Mexican territory of upper California. And from
the western portion of this region, Congress, in 1850, created and
admitted into the American confederacy, the thirty-first state, under
the name of California. It is almost superfluous to say, that California
is one of the most important mineral regions in the world, particularly
in its deposits of gold. Vague notions of the existence of this gold,
had from time to time been spread abroad; but it was not till 1848, that
an accident discovered the marvelous fact of its abundance. In that
year, a Mr. Sutter, a native of Switzerland, was settled near the mouth
of the American fork of the Sacramento river, at the head of navigation,
one hundred and fifty miles from its mouth. Here he had founded New
Helvetia, and obtained a grant of thirty miles round. He had sent some
men to the upper part of the American fork, to clear out a mill-race.
The soil was washed down in the process, and some shining scales laid
bare. These proved to be gold, and on investigation, not only the valley
of this stream, but the beds of all the other streams running into the
Sacramento, were found to have a soil full of gold, in minute scales and
in bits, from a grain to many ounces in weight. New “placers,” as the
“washings,” or “dry diggings” are called, have constantly been
discovered, and people have rushed to these hills from all quarters,
with pans, tubs, pickaxes, shovels, hoes, filtering-machines, and
energetic sinews, till they have extracted, by digging, washing, &c.,
millions on millions of dollars’ worth of the yellow treasure. Gold is
now found over an extent of many hundred miles, and also on the Gila,
and throughout the great central plateau, north and north-east of it.

In a favorable locality, the lucky finder of a placer will sift out
hundreds of dollars’ worth in a day. Persons with not a shirt to their
backs, and scarcely a whole garment upon them, are seen with bags of
gold in their hands. Prices of everything went up at once to an enormous
rate: laborer’s wages became eight or ten dollars a day; cooks at the
diggings, ten dollars a day; clerks, fifteen hundred dollars to six
thousand dollars =per annum=, &c., &c. As all the productive industry of
the country is now turned to gold-digging, and as such vast numbers of
consumers are flocking in from all parts, prices continue to range high
for every article of necessity, although such large quantities of goods
have been sent.

[Illustration: GOLD WASHING IN CALIFORNIA.]

The gold first discovered was evidently not in its original place, but
had been washed down from higher regions; and when all that is thus
spread through the sands of California shall have been exhausted, if it
ever shall be, there are large bodies of auriferous quartz, which (with
greater labor and expense) will doubtless afford large supplies of gold
for generations to come. The amount of capital invested in
quartz-mining, according to the state census of 1852, was about six
millions, and in placer and other mining operations, about four millions
of dollars; and the sum total of these amounts has been greatly
increased since that date. Up to the close of 1851, there had been
deposited in the United States mint, $98,407,990 of California gold; and
the deposits of 1852 amounted to $46,528,076, making a total of
$145,000,000. But all this falls far short of the real amount produced;
as probably quite as much more has been sent to Europe in the shape of
dust or bullion, not to mention the unreported sums which have been
privately taken out of the state. An official estimate states the
production of American gold in 1853, at $109,156,748; and of this sum
nearly the whole is from the mines of California. And this vast amount
is steadily on the increase, in about the proportion of the increase of
the mining population, so that California not only is, but is likely to
continue to be _the great gold-field_ of the world.

Before leaving California, it may not be amiss to add, that the country
abounds in mines of almost every kind, as well as gold. Quicksilver,
plaster, lead, iron, silver, copper, asphaltum and marble, are found in
Butte, and also in Marion county; rich silver mines and coal, in San
Louis Obispo; copious salt springs, in Shasta; bituminous springs, in
many places along the coast; hot sulphur springs, in Santa Barbara; warm
soda springs, near Benicia; and platina is said to be widely distributed
in almost every section where gold has been found. Silver has been
discovered in several mines in the southern district; copper is widely
distributed in other sections beside those above-mentioned; chromium
occurs in large quantities in the serpentine rocks; and diamonds are
reported to have been recently found in several localities.

[Illustration: PLACE WHERE GOLD WAS FIRST DISCOVERED IN AUSTRALIA.]

At a date still later than the discovery of gold in California, the same
precious metal was discovered in Australia. The cut on the following
page gives a view of the place where it was first found, in the county
of Bathurst, not far from Sydney in New South Wales. It is worthy of
note that we owe the discovery of gold in Australia to the high state of
geological science. Sir R. Murchison, in his address to the London
Geographical Society in 1844, alluded to the possibly auriferous
character of the great eastern chain of Australia, being led thereto by
his knowledge of the auriferous chain of the Ural, and by his
examination of Count Strzelecki’s specimens, maps and sections. Some of
Sir R. Murchison’s observations having found their way to the Australian
papers, a Mr. Smith, at that time engaged in some iron works at Berrima,
was induced by them in the year 1849 to search for gold, and he found
it. He sent the gold to the colonial government, and offered to disclose
its locality on payment of five hundred pounds sterling. The government,
however, not putting full faith in the statement, and being, moreover,
unwilling to encourage a gold fever without sufficient reason, declined
to grant the sum, but offered, if Mr. Smith would mention the locality,
and the discovery was found to be valuable, to reward him accordingly.
Very unwisely, as it turned out, Mr. Smith did not accept this offer;
and it remained for Mr. Hargraves, who came with the prestige of his
California experience, to make the discovery anew, and get the reward
from the English government on their own conditions. The first discovery
was made in the banks of the Summer Hill creek and the Lewis Ponds
river, small streams which run from the northern flank of the Conobalas
down to the Macquarrie. The gold was found in the sand and gravel
accumulated, especially on the inside of the bends of the brook, and at
the junction of the two water-courses, where the stream of each would be
often checked by the other. It was coarse gold, showing its parent site
to be at no great distance, and probably in the quartz veins traversing
the metamorphic rocks of the Conobalas. Mr. Stutchbury, the government
geologist, reported on the truth of the discovery, and shortly afterward
found gold in several other localities, especially on the banks of the
Turon, some distance north-east of the Conobalas. This was a much wider
and more open valley than the Summer Hill creek, and the gold
accordingly was much finer, occurring in small scales and flakes. It
was, however, more regularly and equably distributed through the soil,
so that a man might reckon with the greatest certainty on the quantity
his daily labor would return him. At the head of the Turon river, among
the dark glens and gullies in which it collects its head-waters, in the
flanks of the Blue mountains, the gold got “coarser,” occurred in large
lumps or nuggets, but these were more sparingly scattered.

As already said, the discovery was made by Mr. Hargraves, in May, 1850;
and before the end of June, there were more than twenty thousand persons
at the mines. When it was known in the town of Bathurst, that the
discovery had been made, and that the country, from the mountain ranges,
back to an indefinite extent in the interior, was probably one immense
goldfield, the excitement was intense and universal. A complete phrensy
seemed to seize on the entire population; the business of the town was
paralyzed; and there was a universal rush to the diggings. People of all
trades, callings and pursuits were quickly transformed into miners; and
many a hand which had been trained to kid gloves, or accustomed only to
the quill, became nervous to clutch the pick or crowbar, or to “rock the
cradle” at the newly discovered mines. The roads were literally alive
with the crowds pressing on from every quarter, some armed with
pickaxes, others shouldering crowbars and shovels, and not a few strung
round with hand-basins, tin-pots and cullenders. Scores rushed from
their homes, with only a blanket, and a pick or grubbing-hoe, full of
hope that a few days would give them heaps of the precious metal.
Everything at once rose in price, and the whole face of society was
speedily changed in almost every aspect.

The first pieces found were in grains. Soon a piece was picked up
weighing some eleven ounces; and soon after, several lumps weighing
together about three pounds. Gold was speedily discovered in almost
every place where it was looked for; in the beds of the streams, and in
veins of quartz, in grains, in scales, and in lumps of various weights.
Some, as might be expected, were successful, and some comparatively
unsuccessful in seeking it; the great mass of the miners averaging not
more than four or five dollars a day, while in some rare cases a single
individual gathered to the value of a thousand dollars in the same time.
Gold was soon discovered in the Wellington district, and in various
other places. One piece was picked up weighing almost five pounds; and
from a single cleft in a rock, a miner took out eleven pounds’ weight of
gold, in separate pieces of various sizes. A Scotchman gathered fourteen
hundred dollars’ worth in four days, and eight of his associates
averaged from thirty to forty dollars’ worth a day. Apparently there is
no end to the supply, at least for years to come; and all this within
forty miles of a town where every comfort, not to say luxury, can be
obtained, with a good post-road all the way to Sydney, and in the midst
of tracts of the most fertile land, partly occupied, and where food may
be supplied for millions of inhabitants, if needed. An official
statement estimates the supply of Australian gold at sixty million
dollars a year; and in addition to the gold, diamonds and platinum have
also been found. Australia and California are likely to be the great
sources of the supply of gold, compared with which all others will be
relatively unimportant.

Before leaving the subject of gold, it may be interesting to the reader
to trace the process of its coinage, which may thus be briefly stated.
The metal, after being received in the deposit-room, is carefully
weighed, and a receipt given. Each deposit is then melted separately in
the melting-room, and molded into bars. These bars next pass through the
hands of the assayer, who with a chisel chips a small fragment from each
one. Each chip is then rolled into a thin ribbon, and filed down until
it weighs exactly ten grains. It is then melted into a little cup made
of calcined bone ashes, and all the base metals, copper, tin, &c., are
absorbed by the porous material of the cup or carried off by oxydation.
The gold is then boiled in nitric acid, which dissolves the silver which
it contains, and leaves the gold pure. It is then weighed, and the
amount which it has lost gives the exact proportion of impurity in the
original bar, and a certificate of the amount of coin due the depositor
is made out accordingly. After being assayed, the bars are melted with a
certain proportion of silver, and being poured into a dilution of nitric
acid and water, assume a granulated form. In this state the gold is
thoroughly boiled in nitric acid, and rendered perfectly free from
silver or any other baser metals which may happen to cling to it. It is
next melted with one-ninth its weight of copper, and, thus alloyed, is
run into bars, and delivered to the coiner for coinage. The bars are
rolled out in a rolling-mill until nearly as thin as the coin which is
to be made from them. By a process of annealing they are rendered
sufficiently ductile to be drawn through a longitudinal orifice in a
piece of steel, thus reducing the whole to a regular width and
thickness. A cutting-machine next punches small round pieces from the
bar, about the size of the coin. These pieces are weighed separately by
the “adjusters,” and if too heavy are filed down; if too light they are
melted again. The pieces which have been adjusted are run through a
milling-machine, which compresses them to the right diameter and raises
the edge. Two hundred and fifty are milled in a minute by the machine.
They are then again softened by the process of annealing, and after a
thorough cleaning are placed in a tube connecting with the stamping
instrument, and are taken thence one at a time by the machinery, and
stamped between the dies. They are now finished, and, being thrown into
a box, are delivered to the treasurer for circulation. The machinery, of
course, for all those processes, must be of the nicest kind. When in
full operation, a mint like that of England, or that of the United
States at Philadelphia, can coin millions on millions in a year.


                           QUICKSILVER MINES.

Quicksilver, or mercury, is the only metal which remains liquid at
ordinary temperatures. It is white and very brilliant, as may be seen in
common thermometers. It boils at six hundred and sixty degrees of heat;
and freezes, and assumes a crystalline texture, at forty degrees below
zero. It is extensively used in its various forms in the arts, and also
for medicinal purposes. The thermometer and barometer illustrate some of
its uses in its pure state; the backs of our common mirrors are covered
with it, which gives them their reflecting power; it is used extensively
in separating some of the purer metals from the mixtures with which they
are found; and in some of its forms or combinations, it is the basis of
calomel, corrosive sublimate, vermilion, &c.

Mercury is found in various parts of the world. Among its principal
mines are those of Almaden, near Cordova, in Spain, and of Idria, near
Carniola, in Austria; though it is also found in Peru, California, Italy
and China. Formerly most of the quicksilver came from Germany; but more
recently the largest production is probably in Spain. So extensively is
it used, that in 1831, over three hundred thousand pounds were brought
from the continent into England; and for the fourteen years ending in
1828, the imports of it into Canton, by the English and Americans,
averaged nearly six hundred and fifty thousand pounds a year, worth some
three hundred and fifty thousand dollars.

Of all the quicksilver mines, those of Idria, mentioned above, are some
of the most interesting, and demand a particular description, as they
have been celebrated in natural history, poetry and romance. The ban of
Idria, is a district of Austria, lying west of Carniola. The town, which
is small, is seated in a deep valley, amid high mountains, on the river
of the same name, and at the bottom of so steep a descent, that its
approach is a task of great difficulty, and sometimes of danger.

The mines were discovered in 1497, before which time that part of the
country was inhabited by a few coopers only, and other artificers in
wood, with which the territory abounds. One evening, a cooper having
placed a new tub under a dropping spring, to try if it would hold water,
on returning the next morning, found it so heavy that he could scarcely
move it. He at first was led by his superstition to suspect that the tub
was bewitched; but spying, at length, a shining fluid at the bottom,
with the nature of which he was unacquainted, he collected it, and
proceeded to an apothecary at Laubach, who, being an artful man,
dismissed him with a small recompense, requesting that he would not fail
to bring him further supplies. From this small beginning, the product of
these mines has steadily increased; and now might easily be made six
hundred tuns per year, though to uphold the price of the metal, the
Austrian government has restricted the annual production to one hundred
and fifty tuns. In 1803, a disastrous fire took place in these mines,
which was extinguished only by drowning all the underground workings.
The mercury, sublimed by the heat in this catastrophe, occasioned
diseases and nervous tremblings in more than nine hundred persons in the
neighborhood.

The subterraneous passages of the great mine are so extensive, that it
would require several hours to pass through them. The greatest
perpendicular depth, computing from the entrance of the shaft, is eight
hundred and forty feet; but as these passages advance horizontally,
under a high mountain, the depth would be much greater if the measure
were taken from the surface. One mode of descending the shaft is by a
bucket, but as the entrance is narrow, the bucket is liable to strike
against the sides, or to be stopped by some obstacle, so that it may be
readily overset. A second mode of descending, which is safer, is by
means of a great number of ladders, placed obliquely, in a kind of
zigzag: as the ladders, however, are wet and narrow, a person must be
very cautious how he steps, to prevent his falling. In the course of the
descent, there are several resting-places, which are extremely welcome
to the wearied traveler. In some of the subterraneous passages, the heat
is so intense as to occasion a profuse sweat; and in several of the
shafts the air was formerly so confined, that several miners were
suffocated by an igneous vapor, or gaseous exhalation, called the
fire-damp. This has been prevented by sinking the main shaft deeper.
Near to it is a large wheel, and a hydraulic machine, by which the mine
is cleared of water.

To these pernicious and deadly caverns, criminals are occasionally
banished by the Austrian government; and it has sometimes happened that
this punishment has been allotted to persons of considerable rank and
family. The case of Count Alberti is an interesting instance of this
kind.

The count, having fought a duel with an Austrian general, against the
emperor’s command, and having left him for dead, was obliged to seek
refuge in one of the forests of Istria, where he was apprehended, and
afterward rescued by a band of robbers who had long infested that
quarter. With these banditti he spent nine months, until, by a close
investment of the place in which they were concealed, and after a very
obstinate resistance, in which the greater part of them were killed, he
was taken and carried to Vienna, to be broken alive on the wheel. This
punishment was, by the intercession of his friends, changed into that of
perpetual confinement and labor in the mines of Idria; a sentence which,
to a noble mind, was worse than death. To these mines he was accompanied
by the countess, his lady, who belonged to one of the first families in
Germany, and who, having tried every means to procure her husband’s
pardon without effect, resolved at length to share his miseries, as she
could not relieve them. They were terminated, however, through the
mediation of the general with whom the duel had been fought, who as soon
as he recovered from his wounds, obtained a pardon for his unfortunate
opponent; and Alberti, on his return to Vienna, was again taken into
favor, and restored to his fortune and rank.


                              IRON MINES.

The metal which is called iron, is familiar to all, both for its value
and its various uses. It is capable of being cast in molds of any form;
of being drawn in wires, extended in plates or sheets, of being bent in
every direction, and of being sharpened, hardened, or softened at
pleasure. It accommodates itself to all our wants, desires, and even
caprices; it is equally serviceable to the arts, the sciences, to
agriculture, and to war; and the same ore furnishes the sword, the
plowshare, the scythe, the pruning-hook, the needle, the graver, the
spring of the watch or that of the carriage, the chisel, the chain, the
anchor, the compass, the cannon, the bomb, the edge of the finest knife
or razor, and the ponderous trip-hammer of enormous weight. It is a
medicine of much virtue, and the only metal which is always useful, and
tends to no injury to mankind.

The ores of iron are scattered over the entire crust of the globe in
beneficent profusion, and in proportion to the utility of the metal
itself: they are found in every latitude and zone, in every mineral
formation, and in every soil and clime. These ores are nineteen in
number, ten of which are worked to profit by the miner, either for the
sake of the iron they contain, for use in their native state, or for
extracting from them some principle or material, useful in manufactures
or the arts.

Native iron, the existence of which was formerly questioned, has been
found in several places: it is, however, far from being common, though
it occurs in several mines. A mass of this description of iron was
discovered in the district of Santiago del Estero, in South America, by
a party of Indians, in the midst of a widely extended plain. It
projected about a foot above the ground, nearly the whole of its upper
surface being visible; and the news of its having been found in a
country where there are not any mountains, nor even the smallest stone,
within the circumference of a hundred leagues, was considered as truly
surprising. Although the journey was attended with great danger, on
account of the want of water, and abundance of wild beasts in these
deserts, several individuals, in the hope of gain, undertook to visit
this mass; and, having accomplished their journey, sent a specimen of
the metal to Lima and Madrid, where it was found to be very pure soft
iron.

As it was reported that this mass was the extremity of an immense vein
of the metal, a metallurgist was sent to examine the spot, and by him it
was found buried in pure clay and ashes. Externally it had the
appearance of very compact iron, but was internally full of cavities, as
if the whole had been formerly in a liquid state. This idea was
confirmed by its having, on its surface, the impression of human feet
and hands of a large size, as well as that of the feet of a description
of large birds, very common in South America. Although these impressions
seemed very perfect, it was concluded either that they were =lusus
naturæ=, or that impressions of this kind were previously on the ground,
and that the liquid mass of iron, in falling on it, received them. It
had the greatest resemblance to a mass of dough; which, having been
stamped with impressions of hands and feet, and marked with a finger,
had afterward been converted into iron.

On digging round the mass, the under surface was found covered with a
coat of scoriæ from four to six inches thick, undoubtedly occasioned by
the moisture of the earth, the upper surface being clean. No appearance
of the formation of iron was observed in the earth, below or round it,
for a great distance. About two leagues to the eastward was a brackish
mineral spring, and a very gentle ascent of from four to six feet in
hight, running from north to south: with this exception, the adjacent
territory was a perfect level. About the spring, as well as near the
mass, the earth was very light, loose, and greatly resembling ashes,
even in color. The grass in the vicinity was very short, small, and
extremely unpalatable to the cattle; but that at a distance was long,
and extremely grateful to them. From these concurrent circumstances it
was concluded, that this mass of native iron, which was estimated to
weigh about three hundred quintals, was produced by a volcanic
explosion. It is stated as an undoubted fact, that in one of the forests
of the above district of Santiago del Estero, there exists a mass of
pure native iron, in the shape of a tree with its branches. At a little
depth in the earth are found stones of quartz, of a beautiful red color,
which the honey-gatherers, the only persons who frequent this rude
territory, employ as flints to light their fires. Several of these were
selected on account of their peculiar beauty, they being spotted and
studded, as it were, with gold: one of them, weighing about an ounce,
was ground by the governor of the district, who extracted from it a dram
of gold.

A fibrous kind of native iron has been found at Ebenstock, in Saxony,
and also in Siberia, where one particular mass weighed sixteen hundred
pounds. It resembled forged iron in its composition, and was malleable
when cold, but brittle when red-hot. In Senegal, where it is most
common, it is of a cubical form, and is employed by the natives in the
manufacture of different kinds of vessels. Native meteoric iron, called
also nickeliferous, from its containing nickel, and native steel iron,
which has many of the characters of cast steel, have also been found.

Iron, although one of the imperfect metals, is susceptible of a very
high polish, and more capable than any other metal of having its
hardness increased or diminished by certain chemical processes. It is
often manufactured in such a way as to be _one hundred and fifty times_,
and, as will now be seen, in some cases, to be even above _six hundred
and thirty times_ more valuable than gold. On weighing several common
watch-pendulum springs, such as are sold for ordinary work by the London
artists, at half a crown, ten of them were found to weigh but one single
grain. Hence one pound avoirdupois, equal to seven thousand grains,
contains ten times that number of these springs, which amount, at half a
crown each, to eight thousand, seven hundred and fifty pounds sterling.
Reckoning the troy ounce of gold at four pounds sterling, and the pound
equal to fifty-seven hundred and sixty grains, at forty-eight pounds
sterling, the value of an avoirdupois pound of gold is over fifty-eight
pounds sterling. The above amount of the value of the watch-springs
weighing an avoirdupois pound, being divided by that sum, will give a
ratio of somewhat more than one hundred and fifty to one. But the
pendulum-springs of the best kind of watches sell at half a guinea each;
and at this price the above-mentioned value is increased in the ratio of
four and one-fifth to one; which gives an amount of thirty-six thousand,
seven hundred and fifty pounds sterling. This sum being divided by the
value of the avoirdupois pound of gold, gives a quotient of more than
six hundred and thirty to one.

It is one of the valuable properties of iron, after it is reduced into
the state of steel, that, although it is sufficiently soft when hot, or
when gradually cooled, to be formed without difficulty into various
tools and utensils, still it may be afterward rendered more or less
hard, even to an extreme degree, by simply plunging it, when red-hot,
into cold water. This is called tempering, the hardness produced being
greater in proportion as the steel is hotter and the water cooler. Hence
arises the superiority of this metal for making mechanics’ instruments
or tools, by which all other metals, and even itself, are filed, drilled
and cut. The various degrees of hardness given to iron, depend on the
quantity of ignition it possesses at the moment of being tempered, which
is manifested by the succession of color exhibited on the surface of the
metal, in the progress of its receiving the increasing heat. These are,
the yellowish white, yellow, gold-color, purple, violet, and deep blue;
after the exhibition of which the complete ignition takes place. These
colors proceed from a kind of scorification on the surface of the heated
metal.

The largest iron-works in England are carried on in Colebrookdale, in
Shropshire. This spot, which is situated between two towering and
variegated hills, covered with wood, possesses peculiar advantages, the
ore being obtained from the adjacent hills, the coals from the vale, and
abundance of limestone from the quarries in the vicinity. The romantic
scenery which nature here exhibits, and the works which are carried on,
seem to realize the ancient fable of the Cyclops. The noise of the
forges, mills, &c., with all their vast machinery, the flames bursting
from the furnaces, with the burning coal, and the smoke of the
lime-kilns, are altogether horribly sublime. To complete the
peculiarities of the spot, a bridge, entirely constructed of iron, is
here thrown over the Severn. In one place it has parted, and a chasm is
formed; but such is its firm basis, that the fissure has neither injured
its strength nor utility.

The great superiority of Swedish iron over that of all other countries,
for the manufacture of steel, is well known, and is ascribed to the
great purity of the ore from which the iron is smelted. The British
steel-makers have found it difficult to employ British iron in their
processes, it being too brittle to bear cementation; but attempts have
been made at Sheffield, with some success. Wootz, a species of steel
from India, has been successfully used for nicer kinds of cutlery. One
of the most remarkable of the Swedish mines, if the name can with
propriety be applied to it, is Tabern, a mountain of a considerable
size, composed entirely of pure iron ore, and occurring in a large tract
of sand, over which it seems to have been deposited. This mountain has
been wrought for nearly three centuries, notwithstanding which its size
is scarcely diminished.

But the richest iron mine of Sweden is that of Danmora, in the province
of Upland. It is in depth eighty fathoms; occupies a considerable extent
of territory; and its ore is conveyed to the surface of the earth,
through several pits or openings made for that purpose, by means of
casks fixed to large cables, which are put in motion by horses. The
workmen standing on the edges of these casks, and having their arms
clasped round the cable, descend and ascend with the utmost composure.
The water is drawn from the bottom by a wheel sixty-six feet in
diameter, and is afterward conveyed along an aqueduct nearly a mile and
a half in length. At certain distances from Danmora, are several
furnaces, with large and populous villages exclusively inhabited by the
miners.

In Wraxall’s tour through the north of Europe, the mine of Danmora is
described as yielding the finest iron ore in Europe, its produce being
exported to every country, and constituting one of the most important
sources of national wealth and royal revenue. The ore is not dug, as is
usual in other mines, but is torn up by the force of gunpowder, an
operation which is performed every day at noon, and is one of the most
awful and tremendous that can possibly be conceived. “We arrived,”
observes the tourist, “at the mouth of the great mine, which is nearly
half an English mile in circumference, in time to be present at it. Soon
after twelve the first explosion took place, and could not be so aptly
compared to anything as to subterraneous thunder, or rather volleys of
artillery discharged under ground. The stones were thrown up, by the
violence of the gunpowder, to a vast hight above the surface of the
ground, and the concussion was so great as to shake the surrounding
earth or rock on every side.

“As soon as the explosion had ceased, I determined to descend into the
mine, to effect which I had to seat myself in a large, deep bucket,
capable of containing three persons, and fastened by chains to a rope.
When I found myself thus suspended between heaven and earth by a rope,
and looked down into the dark and deep abyss beneath me, to which I
could see no termination, I shuddered with apprehension, and half
repented my curiosity. This was, however, only a momentary sensation,
and before I had descended a hundred feet, I looked round on the scene
with very tolerable composure. It was nearly nine minutes before I
reached the bottom; and when I set my foot on the earth, the view of the
mine was awful and sublime in the highest degree. Whether, as I surveyed
it, terror or pleasure formed the predominant feeling, is hard to say.
The light of the day was very faintly admitted into these subterraneous
caverns: in many places it was absolutely lost, and flambeaux were
kindled in its stead. Beams of wood were laid across some parts, from
one side of the rock to the other; and on these the miners sat, employed
in boring holes for the admission of gunpowder, with the most perfect
unconcern, although the least dizziness, or even a failure in preserving
their equilibrium, must have made them lose their seat, and have dashed
them against the rugged surface of the rock beneath. The fragments torn
up by the explosion, previously to my descent, lay in vast heaps on all
sides, and the whole scene was calculated to inspire a gloomy
admiration.

“I remained three-quarters of an hour in these frightful and gloomy
caverns, which find employment for not less than thirteen hundred
workmen, and traversed every part of them which was accessible,
conducted by my guides. The weather above was very warm, but here the
ice covered the whole surface of the ground, and I found myself
surrounded with the colds of the most rigorous winter, amid darkness and
caves of iron. In one of these, which ran a considerable way beneath the
rock, were eight wretched beings warming themselves round a charcoal
fire, and eating the little scanty subsistence arising from their
miserable occupation. They rose with surprise at seeing so unexpected a
guest among them, and I was not a little pleased to dry my feet, which
were wet with treading on the melted ice, at their fire.

“Having gratified my curiosity with a view of these subterraneous
apartments, I made the signal for being drawn up, and felt so little
terror while reascending, compared with that of being let down, that I
am convinced, after five or six repetitions, I should have been
perfectly indifferent to the undertaking. So strong is the effect of
custom on the human mind, and so contemptible does danger or horror
become when familiarized by repeated trials!”

Throughout the whole extent of Sweden, the iron mines at present
wrought, employ thousands of persons, and yield annually upward of one
hundred thousand tuns of metal. There are said to be between five and
six hundred mines in the entire country, nearly half of which are
situated in the central provinces: this, however, includes mines of all
descriptions, though by far the most are of iron. The products of all
these mines would be vastly greater than they are, were it not for the
multiplied and unreasonable restrictions of the government.

The iron trade of the United States, and the domestic manufacture of
iron, were spoken of by Mr. Gallatin, in a report to Congress, in 1810,
as being firmly established. He was able to obtain very imperfect
information about it, but it was known that iron ore was plentiful; that
numerous forges and furnaces had been erected, supplying “a sufficient
quantity of hollow-ware, and of castings of every description.” From
Russia, about forty-five hundred tuns of bar iron were imported yearly,
and perhaps another forty-five hundred from Sweden and England. A vague
estimate gave fifty thousand tuns of bar iron as the annual consumption
of the union, of which he considered forty thousand as the product of
the republic. Some good iron was made in Virginia and Pennsylvania, but
much inferior iron, carelessly manufactured, was brought into market. Of
sheet, slit, and hoop iron, about five hundred and sixty-five tuns were
annually imported; about seven thousand tuns were rolled and slit in the
United States. Massachusetts had thirteen rolling and slitting mills,
and the value of cut nails and brads made within the republic in a year,
was estimated at twelve hundred thousand dollars. Nearly three hundred
tuns of cut nails were exported. Agricultural implements were made at
home, and much coarse ironmongery; but cutlery, fine hardware, and steel
work, were brought from Britain. About forty thousand muskets were
yearly made in New England and at Harper’s Ferry: also balls, shells,
and brass and iron cannon, in various places. There were several iron
founderies for machinery castings, and steam-engines had begun to be
made at Philadelphia. Mr. Gallatin valued the iron and manufactures of
iron then annually made at home, at from twelve to fifteen millions of
dollars, and the imports at near four millions, as prices went.

Adam Seybert enumerates the domestic products of 1810, at 53,908 tuns of
pig iron, from 153 furnaces; 24,541 tuns of bar iron from 330 forges;
15,727,914 pounds of nails (partly out of imported iron) from 410
naileries; and 6,500 tuns of iron were required at 316 trip-hammers and
thirty-four rolling and slitting mills. His estimate of the value of the
home manufacture is $14,364,526. In 1806 or 1807, Chancellor Livingston,
then our minister to France, had to apply repeatedly to the British
ministry for permission to buy in England, and export to New York, the
steam-engine which Fulton put on board his first steamboat on the
Hudson. Now, the manufacture of steam-engines is an important branch of
our home industry.

In 1827-8, it was given in evidence before a committee of Congress, that
Pennsylvania had made, during the past year, 21,800 tuns of bar iron,
and 47,075 tuns of cast iron; that 3,000 tuns of bar iron were made near
Lake Champlain; that three counties in New Jersey had made 2,050 tuns,
and that in a circle of thirty miles’ diameter, in New York, there were
one hundred and ten forge fires, each of them able to produce
twenty-five to thirty-five tuns yearly. In 1830, a committee of Congress
reported on the iron trade, and from their report and other later
sources, we learn that that year 112,866 tuns of bar, and 191,537 of pig
iron, worth $13,327,760, employing 29,254 men, who received $8,776,420
in wages, were made. Perhaps the quantity and number of workmen are
overstated. In 1840, with improved machinery, only 30,497 men produced
484,136 tuns.

Without coal and iron, the United States and Britain never could have
risen to the rank of first-rate powers. In fact, without iron,
civilization must have made very slow progress, as must be evident to
any one who will take the trouble to try seriously to enumerate the
various articles _essential_ to society, of which iron is an
indispensable part.

In 1839-40, according to the official returns, which are imperfect, the
United States produced, with 804 furnaces, 286,903 tuns of cast iron,
and with 795 blomaries, forges and rolling-mills, 187,233 tuns of bar
iron. The capital invested was nearly twenty and a half millions of
dollars; the men employed, miners included, were 30,497, and 1,528,110
tuns of fuel were employed in these operations. The value of iron and
steel, and their manufactures, imported in 1839-40, as per official
returns, was $7,241,407. The estimated value of the iron made in the
United States that year, was $22,778,635; of which sum $15,585,730 were
for labor, including mining, transportation, coaling, hauling, &c. The
persons employed in the iron manufacture, and their families, were
estimated at 213,505, which, at twelve and a half cents each, per day,
for agricultural products consumed, would give $9,741,166.

In 1845, the product of the union was estimated thus: 540 blast
furnaces, yielding 486,000 tuns of pig iron; 954 blomaries, forges,
rolling-mills, &c. yielding 291,600 tuns of bar, hoop, sheet, boiler,
and other wrought iron, 30,000 tuns of blooms and 121,500 tuns of
castings; value of the whole nearly forty-two millions of dollars.

The United States imported of iron, chiefly bar and bolt, rolled,
hammered, or otherwise manufactured, and pig, hoop and sheet, in 1838-9,
115,637 tuns; in 1839-40, 72,769; 1840-1, 112,111; in 1841-2, 107,392;
in 1842-3, 38,405.

In 1846-7, we find by the treasury report, that the United States
exported of domestic manufactures, 3,197,135 pounds of nails, worth
$168,817, of which Cuba took 2,317,550 pounds; also other articles of
iron and steel to the value of $998,667, of which $478,681 to Cuba, and
$162,020 to British North America. In that year, among the imports,
chiefly from England, were 549 tuns of steel, value $1,126,458; 55,599
tuns of bar iron; 28,083 tuns of pig; 1,893 tuns of scraps; 6,167,720
pounds of chain cables; 13,410,556 pounds of sheet and hoop; 1,412,332
pounds of anvils; 921,845 pounds of nails; 361,423 pounds of anchors;
975,256 pounds of castings; 170,909 pounds of cast-iron butts; 431,916
pounds of band; 660,133 pounds of round or square; 347,737 pounds of
nail or spike rods.

Official tables show that the imports of manufactures of steel and iron
in 1839, were worth $6,507,510; in 1843, $1,012,086; in 1844,
$3,313,796; in 1845, $5,077,788; and that in 1839, the value of pig and
bar iron and steel imported was $6,302,539; in 1842 and 1845, nearly
four millions each year; in 1843, $1,091,598; and in 1844, $2,380,027.

Some idea of the extent of the iron trade inland may be formed from the
quantities carried on the canals. In 1847, there came to the Hudson on
the New York canals, pig iron, 21,608,000 pounds; bloom and bar
26,348,000 pounds; iron ware, 3,014,000 pounds: 340 tuns of iron and
iron ware were cleared on the canals at Buffalo and Oswego; St. Lawrence
county, N. Y., shipped 515 tuns of pig, a surplus made there; 7,716 tuns
of pig iron reached Buffalo _via_ Lake Erie, and 1,256 kegs of nails;
15,103,565 pounds of iron and nails arrived at Cleveland _via_ the Ohio
canal, and 4,085 tuns of iron and 12,537 kegs of nails were shipped from
Cleveland coastwise. There were cleared at Portsmouth, Chilicothe,
Massillon, and Akron, in 1847, about 5,713 tuns of iron; 5,269,055
pounds of nails were shipped at Akron. The trade in coal and iron on the
western rivers and lakes is very large.

Iron canal-boats were in common use in Wales thirty years ago: they are
beginning to be made here; also war-steamers. Fences, and even porches
to houses, are often of iron. The pipes for the Croton water in New York
required many thousand tuns. The annual value of 150,000 tuns of iron
ore of Maryland is worth $600,000 at Baltimore. A single foundery in
Tennessee sold, in 1844, of sugar-kettles, $50,000 worth.

Child’s statistics show that in Pennsylvania, in 1847, there were made,
at 213 furnaces, 98,395 tuns of cast iron, and at 169 blomaries, forges,
&c., 87,244 tuns of bar iron, 11,522 men being employed, including
limestone miners, and a capital of $7,751,470 invested. In 1846, there
were 173,369 tuns manufactured, seven of the furnaces using anthracite
coal. Forty furnaces, in 1847, were in blast, using anthracite, and
producing 121,800 tuns of iron, at a reduced price, which price had
induced capitalists to put up extensive rolling-mills. The American
Quarterly Register has a list of nineteen anthracite rolling-mills in
Pennsylvania, which make iron rails and plate, bar and rod, nails, axle
and small iron.

The first bar of railroad iron ever manufactured in the United States,
was made in 1841, and now it is said, one hundred thousand tuns could be
made easily; while the annual product of iron from all the furnaces,
which are said to be some three hundred in number, is estimated at over
four hundred thousand tuns.

The yearly manufacture of iron in Great Britain, is now estimated at
nearly three millions of tuns. In 1828, there were in Russia, nineteen
founderies, forges and mines, and in 1804, that country exported to
America over nine million pounds of iron. In 1819, France produced
seventy-four million pounds of iron, and in 1845, this had increased to
three hundred and forty-two millions, or over one hundred and fifty
thousand tuns. Of iron and steel, and the various manufactures from
them, Great Britain exported in 1845, to the extent of thirty-three
millions.


                             COPPER MINES.

Copper (from =cuprum=, a corruption of =cuprium=, from the island of
Cyprus, whence it was formerly brought) was known at a very remote
period; and in the early ages of the world, before iron was extensively
in use, was the chief ingredient in domestic utensils and instruments of
war. It is abundant; and is found both native and in many ores, the most
important of which are the varieties of _pyrites_, which are sulphurets
of copper and iron. The genus copper includes some thirteen species, and
each of these contains several varieties.

The purest copper obtained in Europe, is the produce of the mines of the
Swedish province of Dalecarlia. The following is a brief description of
the principal of these immense and gloomy caverns, all of which boast a
high antiquity.

The traveler’s curiosity is first attracted by the hydraulic machines
which convey the water to the different quarters, and the power of which
is such, that one of the wheels has a diameter of not less than
forty-four feet. Another wheel, of proportionate magnitude, is employed
to raise the ore from the mine to the surface of the earth, and is
admirably constructed. Regular circles are placed on each side, and
round these the chain rises, taking a larger or smaller circumference,
in proportion to the necessary circle to be made, so as to
counterbalance the weight, and consequently the increased motion of the
bucket.

Exteriorly, a vast chasm of a tremendous depth presents itself to the
view. This being the part of the mine which was first opened, either
through the ignorance or neglect of those who had then the management of
the works, the excavations so weakened the foundations of the hill, that
the whole fell in, leaving a most chaotic scene of precipitated rocks,
and a gaping gulf resembling the mouth of a volcano. Great care has been
since taken that no such disaster should again occur. Plans and sections
are drawn of all the galleries, &c.; and where the prosecution of the
works in the same direction might be dangerous, orders are issued for
the miners to stop, and an iron crown is fixed on the spot, as a
prohibition ever to proceed further. The workmen then explore in a
different direction, while every subterraneous excavation is nicely
watched.

The traveler passes into the great chasm by a range of wooden steps,
which cross, in a variety of directions, the rough masses of fallen
rocks, of gravel, and of the ancient machinery. Ere he reaches the
entrance of the cavern, he has to descend nearly two hundred feet, and
this being accomplished, proceeds horizontally to a considerable
distance within. He now loses the pure air of day, and gradually
breathes an oppressive vapor, which rolls toward him, in volumes, from
the mouths of a hundred caves leading into the main passage. He now
feels as if he were inhaling the atmosphere of Tartarus. The Swedish
iron mines which have been described, are mere purgatories when compared
with this satanic dwelling. The descent is performed entirely by steps
laid in the winding rock; and, in following the subterraneous declivity,
the traveler reaches the tremendous depths of these truly Stygian
dominions.

The pestilential vapors which environ him with increasing clouds, and
the style of the entrance, remind him of Virgil’s description of the
descent of Eneas to the infernal regions. Here are to be seen the same
caverned portico, the rocky, rough descent, and the steaming sulphur,
with all the deadly stenches of Avernus. The wretched inmates of this
gloomy cavern, appear to him like so many specters, as poetic fiction
has described them: and he is induced by the length of the way, joined
to the excessive heat and its suffocating quality, to fancy that he will
be made to pay dearly for his curiosity. In one part the steam is so
excessively hot, as to scorch at the distance of twelve paces, at the
same time that the sulphureous smell is intolerable. Near this spot a
volcanic fire broke out some years ago, in consequence of which strong
walls were constructed, as barriers to its power, and several contiguous
passages, which, had it spread, would have proved dangerous to the mine,
closed up.

The visitor has now to traverse many long and winding galleries, as well
as large vaulted caverns, where the workmen are dispersed on all sides,
employed in hewing vast masses of the rock, and preparing other parts
for explosion. Others wheel the brazen ore toward the black abyss, where
the suspended buckets hang ready to draw it upward. From the effect of
such violent exercise, combined with the heat, they are obliged to work
almost naked. Their groups, occupations, and primitive appearance,
scantily lighted by the trembling rays of torches, form a curious and
interesting scene.

The depth of the mine being at least twelve hundred feet, a full hour is
required to reach to the bottom. The mass of copper lies in the form of
an inverted cone. Five hundred men are employed daily; but females are
not admitted, on account of the deleterious quality of the vapors. This
mine was anciently a state prison, in which criminals, slaves and
prisoners of war toiled out their wretched existence. Near the bottom is
a rocky saloon, furnished with benches. It is called the Hall of the
Senate, on account of its having been the resting-place of several
Swedish kings, who came, attended by the senators, to examine the works,
and here took refreshments. It was in this mine that the immortal
Gustavus Vasa, disguised as a peasant, labored for his bread, during a
long concealment, after having been robbed by his guide; and his first
adherents in the struggle which placed him on the throne, were from the
miners and peasants of Dalecarlia.

In the year 1751, a very rich copper mine was wrought in the county of
Wicklow, Ireland. From this mine ran a stream of blue-colored water, of
so deleterious a nature as to destroy all the fish in the river Arklow,
into which it flowed. One of the workmen, having left an iron shovel in
this stream, found it some days after incrusted with copper. This led
one of the proprietors of the mine to institute a set of experiments,
from which he concluded that the blue water contained an acid holding
copper in solution; that iron had a stronger affinity for the acid than
copper; and that the consequence of this affinity was the precipitation
of the copper, and the solution of the iron, when pieces of that metal
were thrown into the blue water. These ideas induced the miners to dig
several pits for the reception of this water, and to put bars of iron
into them. The result was, that they obtained an abundance of copper,
much purer and more valuable than that which they had procured from the
ore itself by smelting.

On the island of Anglesea, near Dulas bay, on the north coast, is Parys
mountain, which contains the most considerable quantity of copper ore
perhaps ever known. The external aspect of the hill is extremely rude,
and it is surrounded by enormous rocks of coarse white quartz. The ore
is lodged in a basin, or hollow, and has on one side a small lake, over
the waves of which, as over those of Avernus, fatal to the feathered
tribe, it is said that birds are never known to pass. The effect of the
mineral operations has been, that the whole of this tract has assumed a
wild and savage appearance. Suffocating fumes of the burning heaps of
copper arise in all parts, and extend their baneful influence for miles
around. That the ore was worked in a very remote period, appears by
vestiges of the ancient operations, which were carried on by trenching,
and by heating the rocks intensely, when water was suddenly poured on
them, so as to cause them to crack or scale. In the year 1768, after a
long search, which was so little profitable that it was on the eve of
being abandoned, a large body of copper ore was found; and this has ever
since been worked to great advantage, still promising a vast supply. The
water lodged in the bottom of the bed of ore, being strongly impregnated
with the metal, is drawn up and distributed in pits, where the same
process is employed as in the Wicklow mine. The copper thus procured
differs little from native copper, and is very highly prized.

In the Parys mine, eight tuns of gunpowder are annually expended in
blasting the rock. Nature has here been profuse in bestowing her mineral
favors; for, above the copper ore, and not more than two feet beneath
the soil, is a bed of yellowish greasy clay, from three to twelve feet
in thickness, containing lead ore, from a tun of which metal, upward of
fifty ounces of silver are generally obtained.

[Illustration: COPPER MINE IN CORNWALL.]

The copper mines of Cornwall, a view of one of which is given in the
cut, are very numerous, and several of them large and very rich in ore.
It is remarkable that in various parts of this country the earth has
produced such an exuberance of this metal, as to afford it in large
massy lumps of malleable copper, several pieces of which are shown in
very curious vegetable forms. The particular ore named _mundic_, found
in the tin mines, was for many ages considered of no other use but to
nourish that metal while in the mine. In the reign of Queen Elizabeth, a
laudable curiosity tempted several private individuals to examine into
its nature; but the design miscarried, and the mundic was thrown, as
useless, into the old pits in which the rubbish was collected. However,
about a century ago, this purpose was effected by degrees; and the
copper extracted from the ore now produces, on an average, upward of
twelve thousand tuns, valued at between four and five millions of
dollars, annually, equaling in goodness the best Swedish copper, while
the ore itself yields a proportionate quantity of =lapis calaminaris=,
for the making of brass.

At Ecton hill, near the river Dove, in Derbyshire, a valuable copper
mine was discovered some years ago, and has since been worked to great
advantage. In its position, situation and inclination, it differs from
any mine yet discovered in Europe, Asia, Africa or America; the
wonderful mass of copper ore not running in regular veins or courses,
but sinking perpendicularly down, widening and swelling out at the
bottom in the form of a bell. The works are four hundred and fifty feet
beneath the river Dove, it being the deepest mine in Great Britain. On
the opposite side of Ecton hill is a valuable lead mine, the veins of
which approach very nearly to the copper mine.

Copper is converted into brass by the agency of calamine, an oxyd of
zinc. It occurs frequently in beds, and in some places exists in great
abundance. The Mendip hills, in Somersetshire, were once celebrated for
their mines of calamine, which are now in a great measure exhausted. It
is dug out of the earth, and being broken into small pieces, is exposed
to the action of a current of water, which washes away the light earthy
matter, and leaves the calamine. The whole is then thrown into deep
wooden vessels filled with water, and agitated for a considerable time.
The galena sinks to the bottom, the calamine is deposited in the center,
and the earthy matter lies on the surface. The calamine, thus separated
from its impurities, is ground to powder, and becomes fit for use.

Hungary abounds in valuable ores and minerals, and is most celebrated
for its vast copper works, at a town called Herrengrund, built on the
summit of a mountain, and exclusively inhabited by miners. Here the
process, noticed above, of apparently converting iron into copper, is
pursued with great success, several hundred weight of iron being thus
transmuted every year. The vitriol, with which the blue water is
strongly impregnated, can not be strictly said to convert the iron into
copper, but insinuates into it the copper particles with which it is
saturated; and this seeming transmutation requires a fortnight or three
weeks only: but if the iron be suffered to lie too long in this
vitriolic solution, it becomes at length reduced to powder.

In Japan, copper is the most common of all the metals, and is considered
as the finest and most malleable anywhere to be found. Much of this
copper is not only of the purest quality, but is blended with a
considerable proportion of gold, which the Japanese separate and refine.
The whole is brought to Saccin, one of the five principal cities of
Japan; and it is there purified, and cast into small cylinders, about a
span and a half in length, and a finger’s breadth in thickness. Brass is
there very scarce, and much dearer than copper, the calamine employed in
making it being imported from Tonquin in flat cakes, and sold at a very
high price.

In addition to the copper mines thus described, copper has, within a few
years, been found in the richest abundance in the vicinity of Lake
Superior. The existence of copper there, was, indeed, known as early as
1636; and the trace of these early discoveries was never entirely lost.
But the first scientific researches were made in 1842, by Dr. Douglas
Houghton, who was acting as geological surveyor for the state of
Michigan. According to his report, native copper exists in two or three
different deposits about Lake Superior, where it is found in the richest
abundance, both in veins and in large masses in the native state. Dr.
Jackson also states, that he has seen one of these masses, twenty feet
long, nine feet wide, and from four to six inches in thickness, and
weighing about twenty tuns. He adds, that in a single year, thirty-three
men, of whom only twenty were properly miners, had taken out forty-three
tuns of ore, yielding thirty tuns of pure copper. Among the masses of
copper obtained from these mines as early as 1848, were four, the
weights of which, respectively, were seven thousand and eighteen, seven
thousand four hundred and eighty-four, seven thousand six hundred and
seventy-eight, and fourteen thousand pounds. Since that date new
openings have been made; new mining companies formed, and the products
of the mines very greatly increased: and it may yet be, that these mines
will prove some of the richest and most valuable of the world.


                               TIN MINES.

Tin, in its pure state, has nearly the color and luster of silver. In
hardness, it is midway between gold and lead. It was known to the
ancients, who procured it from Spain and Britain, and appears to have
been in use in the time of Moses. It is rather a scarce metal, being
found in but few parts of the world in any considerable quantity.
Cornwall is its most productive source; it also occurs in the mountains
between Gallicia and Portugal, and in those between Saxony and Bohemia.
It has, also, been brought from Malacca, in India, and from Chili and
Mexico. There are but two ores of tin; one of which, the native peroxyd,
is the chief source of all the supplies of this metal, as the other ore,
which is the double sulphuret of tin and copper, sometimes called
_bell-metal ore_, is extremely rare.

Cornwall has been in all ages, famous for its numerous mines of tin,
which are in general very large, and rich in ore. The tin-works are of
different kinds, dependent on the various forms in which the metal
appears. In many places its ore so nearly resembles common stones, that
it can only be distinguished from them by its superior weight. In other
parts, the ore is a compound of tin and earth, concreted into a
substance almost as hard as stone, of a bluish or grayish color, and to
which the mundic, impregnated with copper, frequently gives a yellowish
cast. This ore is always found in a continued stratum, which the miners
call lode; and this, for the greater part, is found running through the
solid substance of the hardest rocks, beginning in small veins near the
surface, perhaps not above half an inch or an inch wide, and increasing,
as they proceed, into large dimensions, branching out into several
ramifications, and bending downward in a direction which is, generally,
nearly east and west. These lodes, or veins, are sometimes white, very
wide, and so thick, that large lumps of the ore are frequently drawn up
of more than twenty pounds’ weight. The lodes of tin ore are not always
contiguous, but sometimes break off so entirely, that they seem to
terminate; but the sagacious miner knows by experience, that, by digging
at a small distance on one side, he will meet with a separated part of
the lode, apparently tallying with the other end, as nicely as if it had
been broken off by some sudden shock of the rock.

The miners of Cornwall follow the lode, or vein, in all its rich and
meandering curves through the bowels of the flinty earth. The waters are
sometimes drained from the mines, by subterraneous passages, formed from
the body of the mountain to the level country. These passages are called
_adits_, and are occasionally the labor of many years; but when
effected, they save the constant expense of large water-works and
fire-engines. From the surface of the earth the workmen sink a passage
to the mine, which they call a shaft, and place over it a large winch,
or, in works of greater magnitude, a wheel and axle, by which means they
draw up large quantities of ore at a time, in vessels called _kibbuls_.
This ore is thrown into heaps, which great numbers of poor people are
employed in breaking to pieces, and fitting the ore for the
stamping-mills.

A third form in which tin appears is that of crystals; for this metal
will, under proper circumstances, readily crystallize. Hence, in many
parts of the mineral rocks, are found the most perfectly transparent and
beautiful crystals of pure tin. Beside these crystals, in many of the
cavernous parts of the rocks, are found those transparent crystals,
called Cornish diamonds, they being extremely brilliant when well
polished. The form is that of a six-sided prism pointed on the top, and
they are sometimes four or five inches in length. The value of the tin
exported from Great Britain, in 1853, the greater part of which came
from the Cornwall mines, was nearly six million dollars.


                              LEAD MINES.

Lead is one of the metals most anciently known, being mentioned in the
books of Moses. It is found in some thirteen species of ore, only one of
which (_galena_) occurs in masses sufficiently large to make it valuable
as an object of mining and metallurgy. The uses of lead are so familiar
that they need not be mentioned: they are known to all.

Among the most remarkable lead mines of the world, may be mentioned
those of the state of Illinois, including also parts of Iowa and
Wisconsin, which have been, and still are immensely productive,
extending over thousands of acres, and furnishing the mineral in the
richest abundance. These mines were formerly known as the mines of
“Upper Louisiana.” They are now chiefly worked in the vicinity of
Galena, a city which has sprung up, and is almost entirely supported by
the trade in lead. So vast is the production of these mines, that forty
million pounds of lead, valued at sixteen hundred thousand dollars, were
shipped from Galena alone, in 1853. The mineral in one of the earliest
opened mines, is said to be of two kinds, the gravel and fossil. The
gravel mineral is found immediately under the soil, intermixed with
gravel, in pieces of solid mineral weighing from one to fifty pounds.
Beneath the gravel is a sand rock, which being broken, crumbles to a
fine sand, and contains mineral nearly of the same quality as that of
the gravel. But the mineral of the first quality is found in a bed of
red clay, under the sand rock, in pieces of from ten to five hundred
pounds’ weight, on the outside of which is a spar, or fossil, of a
bright, glittering appearance, resembling spangles of gold and silver,
as solid as the mineral itself, and of a greater specific gravity. This
being taken off, the mineral is solid, unconnected with any other
substance, of a broad grain, and what mineralogists call potters’ ore.
In other mines, in the vicinity of the above, the lead is found in
regular veins, from two to four feet in thickness, containing about
fifty ounces of silver in a tun.

In Great Britain, there are numerous and exceedingly valuable lead
mines, among which may be cited that of Arkingdale, in Yorkshire, and
those with which Shropshire abounds. In the south of Lanarkshire, and in
the vicinity of Wanlock-head, Scotland, are two celebrated lead mines,
which yield annually above two thousand tuns of metal. The Susannah-vein
lead-hills, have been worked for many years, and have been productive of
great wealth. The above are considered as the richest lead mines of
Europe.

Several of the Irish lead mines have yielded a considerable proportion
of silver; and mention is made of one, in the county of Antrim, which
afforded, in thirty pounds of lead, a pound of that metal. Another, less
productive of silver, was found at Ballysadare, near the harbor of
Sligo, in Connaught; and a third in the county of Tipperary, thirty
miles from Limerick. The ores of this last were of two kinds, most
usually of a reddish color, hard and glittering; the other, which was
the richest in silver, resembled a blue marl. The works were destroyed
in the Irish insurrections in the reign of Charles I. The mine, however,
is still wrought on account of the lead it contains.


                              COAL MINES.

Coal is one of the most valuable of all mineral treasures, and one that
is of the highest service in making the others available to the use and
comfort of man. And hence it has been searched after with unremitting
diligence, and worked with all the lights of science and the resources
of art. It is found in beds or strata, in that group of the secondary
rocks which includes the red sandstone and mountain limestone
formations, commonly called the _carboniferous group_, or the _coal
measures_. From the peculiarities of their position, they are often
spoken of as _coal-basins_, and _coal-fields_.

There are two or three points of some theoretical interest and
importance as to the origin of coal, on which geological authorities are
nearly unanimous. One is, that our present coal is exclusively of
vegetable origin, formed apparently from the destruction of vast forests
and immense quantities of leaves and shrubs; another, that it was formed
when the climate of the regions where it is found was not merely
tropical, but ultra-tropical, instead of being as now, temperate; and a
third, that its deposits, though originally regular, have evidently been
since elevated, and often singularly dislocated and contorted by forces
acting from below, and probably of a volcanic nature. Each of these
points will more or less appear in the progress of the following
remarks.

That the coal formations are of vegetable origin, is perfectly evident
from even a slight examination, especially with the microscope. Let a
piece of coal be cut in very thin slices, or plates, and its appearance
will be like that seen in the following cut. The vegetable fossils thus
shown are, indeed, very different from any existing species, unless it
be a few which are the productions only of torrid climates. And while
the cut gives the appearance of but a _single leaf_ in each specimen,
the masses of coal are generally more like one thick imbedded mass of
leaves, not so much _crushed together_, as _overlaying_ and _mixed with_
each other. According to Dr. Linley, the coal vegetation consisted of
ferns, in great abundance; of large coniferous trees, of a species
resembling =lycopodiacæ=, but of most gigantic dimensions; of a numerous
tribe apparently analogous to =cactæ=, but probably not identical with
them; of palm, and other _monocotyledones_; and finally, of numerous
vines, plants, &c., the exact nature of which is uncertain. Where
_leaves_ most abound, the coal is said to be of the best quality; though
as any one kind of coal hardens, the impressions of such leaves become
gradually less distinct, until finally they can hardly be traced, even
with a powerful magnifier. A hundred and twenty varieties of these
vegetable impressions have been found in the vicinity of Pottsville, in
the course of a few months, each as distinctly marked as the most
delicate tracings of an artist’s pencil; and in almost any coal
formation, there are so many hundreds of different plants, trees, and
flowers, that a single representative of each kind would form a vast
museum. Specimens which exhibit impressions of the bark, limbs, or
trunks of trees, are, of course, correspondingly large and heavy, and
could not easily be sketched in a small engraving, while the variety of
leaves and flowers is so great, that it would be tedious to mention and
describe them.

[Illustration: THIN PLATES OF COAL.]

With these few remarks, we proceed to notice first, some of the coal
mines of Great Britain, and then some of our own country. Perhaps there
is no country where coal mines are so rich, so frequent, and so
successfully worked thus far, as those of Great Britain; and it is to
this cause that the opulence of that country has often been chiefly
ascribed. It is, in truth, the coal of her mines, that is the very life
of her manufactures, and consequently of her commerce, every
manufacturing town being established in the midst of a coal country. Of
this striking instances are afforded by Bristol, Birmingham,
Wolverhampton, Sheffield, Newcastle, and Glasgow.

The coals of Whitehaven and Wigan are esteemed the purest; and the
cannel and peacock coals of Lancashire are so beautiful, that they are
suspected by some to have constituted the _gagates_, or jet, which the
ancients ascribed to Great Britain. In Somersetshire, the Mendip coal
mines are distinguished by their productiveness: they occur there, as
indeed in every other part, in the _low_ country, and are not to be
found in the hills. The beds of coal are not horizontal, but sloping,
dipping to the south-east at the rate of about twenty-two inches per
fathom. Hence they would speedily sink so deep that it would not be
possible to work them, were it not that they are intersected at
intervals by perpendicular dikes or veins, of a different kind of
mineral, on the other side of which these beds are found considerably
raised up. They are seven in number, lying at regular distances beneath
each other, and separated by beds of a different kind of substance, the
deepest being placed more than two hundred feet beneath the surface of
the earth.

The town of Newcastle, in Northumberland, has been celebrated during
several centuries for its very extensive trade in coal. It was first
made a borough by William the Conqueror, and the earliest charter for
digging coals, granted to the inhabitants, was in the reign of Henry
III., in 1239; but in 1306, the use of coal for fuel was prohibited in
London, by royal proclamation, chiefly because it injured the sale of
wood, with which the environs of the capital were then overspread. This
interdict did not, however, continue long in force; and coals may be
considered as having been dug for exportation at Newcastle for more than
four centuries. It has been estimated that there are twenty-four
considerable collieries lying at different distances from the river,
from five to eighteen miles; and that they produced, for an average of
six years, up to the close of 1776, an annual consumption of three
hundred and eighty thousand chaldrons, Newcastle measure, (equal to
seven hundred and seventeen thousand, six hundred and fifteen chaldrons,
London measure,) of which about thirty thousand chaldrons were exported
to foreign parts. The boats employed in the colliery are called _keels_,
and are described as strong, clumsy, and oval, each carrying about
twenty tuns; and of these four hundred and fifty are kept constantly
employed. In the year 1776 an estimate was made of the shipping employed
in the Newcastle coal trade; and from this estimate it appears, that
three thousand, five hundred and eighty-five ships, were during that
year engaged in the coasting trade, and three hundred and sixty-three in
the trade to foreign ports, their joint tunnage amounting to seven
hundred and thirty-eight thousand, two hundred and fourteen tuns.

As already said, it is a common opinion among geologists, that coal is
of vegetable origin, and that it has been brought to its present state
by the means of some chemical process, not at this time understood. This
opinion is abundantly supported by the existence of vast depositions of
matter, halfway, as it were, between perfect wood and perfect coal;
which, while it obviously betrays its vegetable nature, has in several
respects so near an approximation to coal, as to have been generally
distinguished by the name of coal. One of the most remarkable of these
depositions exists in Devonshire, about thirteen miles south-west of
Exeter, and is well known under the name of Bovey coal. Its vegetable
nature has been ascertained by Mr. Hatchet, in a set of experiments in
which he found both extractive matter and resin, substances which belong
to the vegetable kingdom.

The beds of this coal are seventy feet in thickness, and are
interspersed with beds of clay. On the north side they lie within a foot
of the surface, and dip south at the rate of about twenty inches per
fathom. The deepest beds are the blackest and heaviest, and have the
closest resemblance to coal, while the upper ones strongly resemble
wood, and are considered as such by those who dig them. They are brown,
and become extremely friable when dry, burning with a flame similar to
that of wood, and assuming the appearance of wood which has been
rendered soft by some unknown cause, and, while in that state, has been
crushed flat by the weight of the incumbent earth. This is the case, not
only with the Bovey coal, but also with all the beds of wood-coal which
have been hitherto examined in different parts of Europe.[5]

Footnote 5:

  We are informed by Liebig and other eminent chemists, that when wood
  and other vegetable matter are buried in the earth, exposed to
  moisture, and partially or entirely excluded from the air, they
  decompose slowly, and evolve carbonic acid gas; thus parting with a
  portion of their original oxygen. By this means they are gradually
  converted into lignite, or wood-coal, which contains a larger
  proportion of hydrogen than wood does. A continuance of decomposition
  changes this lignite into common or bituminous coal, chiefly by the
  discharge of carbureted hydrogen, or the gas by which we illuminate
  our streets and houses. According to Birchoff, the inflammable gases
  which are always escaping from mineral coal, and are so often the
  cause of fatal accidents in mines, always contain carbonic acid,
  carbureted hydrogen, nitrogen, and olefiant gas. The disengagement of
  all these gradually transforms ordinary or bituminous coal into
  anthracite, to which the various names of splint-coal, glance-coal,
  culm, and many others, have been given.

The coal mines of Whitehaven may be considered as among the most
extraordinary in the known world. They are excavations which have, in
their structure, a considerable resemblance to the gypsum quarries of
Paris, and are of such magnitude and extent, that in one of them alone,
a sum exceeding half a million sterling, was, in the course of a
century, expended by the proprietors. Their principal entrance is by an
opening at the bottom of a hill, through a long passage hewn in the
rock, leading to the lowest vein of coal. The greater part of this
descent is through spacious galleries, which continually intersect other
galleries, all the coal being cut away, with the exception of large
pillars, which, where the mine runs to a considerable depth, are nine
feet in hight, and about thirty-six feet square at the base. Such is the
strength there required to support the ponderous roof.

The mines are sunk to the depth of one hundred and thirty fathoms, and
are extended under the sea to places where there is, above them,
sufficient depth of water for ships of large burden. These are the
deepest coal mines which have hitherto been wrought; and perhaps the
miners have not, in any other part of the globe, penetrated to so great
a depth beneath the surface of the sea, the very deep mines in Hungary,
Peru and elsewhere, being situated in mountainous countries, where the
surface of the earth is elevated to a great hight above the level of the
ocean.

In these mines there are three strata of coal, which lie at a
considerable distance one above the other, and are made to communicate
by pits; but the vein is not always continued in the same regularly
inclined plane, the miners frequently meeting with hard rock, by which
their further progress is interrupted. At such places there seem to have
been breaks in the earth, from the surface downward, one portion
appearing to have sunk down, while the adjoining part has preserved its
ancient situation. In some of these places the earth has sunk ten,
twenty fathoms, and even more; while in others the depression has been
less than one fathom. These breaks the miners call _dikes_, and when
they reach one of them, their first care is to discover whether the
strata in the adjoining part are higher or lower than in the part where
they have been working; or, according to their own phrase, whether the
coal be _cast down_ or _cast up_. In the former case they sink a pit;
but if it be cast up to any considerable hight, they are frequently
obliged, with great labor and expense, to carry forward a level, or long
gallery, through the rock, until they again reach the stratum of coal.

Coal, the chief mineral of Scotland, has been there worked for a
succession of ages. Pope Pius II., in his description of Europe, written
about 1450, mentions that he beheld with wonder black stones given as
alms to the poor of Scotland. This mineral may, however, be traced to
the twelfth century; and a very early account of the Scottish coal
mines, explains with great precision, the manner of working the coal,
not neglecting to mention the subterraneous walls of _whin_ which
intersect the strata, particularly a remarkable one, visible from the
river Tyne, where it forms a cataract, and passes by Prestonpans, to the
shore of Fife. The Lothians and Fifeshire, particularly abound with this
useful mineral, which also extends into Ayrshire; and near Irwin is
found a curious variety, named ribbon-coal. A singular coal, in veins of
mineral, has been found at Castle Leod, in the east of Ross-shire; and
it is conjectured that the largest untouched field of coal in Europe,
exists in a barren tract of country in Lanarkshire.

The process of mining coal is a combination of boring and digging.
Shafts are sunk, levels are driven, and drains are carried off, by the
help of picks or pickaxes, wedges and hammers, the rocks being also
sometimes loosened by blasting with gunpowder. In searching for coal, a
shaft is sunk through the uppermost soft stratum, and the rock is then
bored, by striking it continually with an iron borer terminating in an
edge of steel, which is in the mean time turned partly round; and, at
proper intervals, a scoop is let down to draw up the loose fragments. In
this manner a perforation is sometimes made for more than an hundred
fathoms, the borer being lengthened by pieces screwed on; it is then
partly supported by a counterpoise, and worked by machinery. Should it
happen to break, the piece is raised by a rod furnished with a hollow
cone, as an extinguisher, which is driven down on it. The borer is
sometimes furnished with knives, which are made to act on any part at
pleasure, and to scrape off a portion of the surrounding substance,
which is collected in a proper receptacle.

Those who have the direction of deep and extensive coal mines, are
obliged, with great art and care, to keep them ventilated with perpetual
currents of fresh air, which afford the miners a constant supply of that
vital fluid, and expel from the mines damps and other noxious
exhalations, together with such other burnt and foul air, as has become
deleterious and unfit for respiration. In the deserted mines, which are
not thus ventilated with currents of fresh air, large quantities of
these damps are frequently collected; and in such works they often
remain for a long time without doing any mischief. But when, by some
accident, they are set on fire, they then produce dreadful explosions,
and, bursting out of the pits with great impetuosity, like the fiery
eruptions from burning mountains, force along with them ponderous bodies
to a great hight in the air.

Various instances have occurred in which the coal has been set on fire
by the fulminating damp, and has continued burning for several months,
until large streams of water were conducted into the mine, so as to
inundate the parts where the conflagration existed. By such fires
several collieries have been entirely destroyed, in the vicinity of
Newcastle, and in other parts of England, as well as in Fifeshire, in
Scotland. In some of these places the fire has continued to burn for
ages. To prevent, therefore, as much as possible, the collieries from
being filled with these pernicious damps, it has been found necessary
carefully to search for the crevices in the coal whence they issue, and,
at those places, to confine them within a narrow space, conducting them
through large pipes into the open air, where, being set on fire, they
consume in perpetual flame as they continually arise out of the earth.

Mr. Spelling, an engineer of the Whitehaven coal mines, having observed
that the fulminating damp could only be kindled by flame, and that it
was not liable to be set on fire by red-hot iron, nor by the sparks
produced by the collision of flint and steel, invented a machine called
a steel-mill, in which a wheel of that metal is turned round with a very
rapid motion, and, by the application of flints, great plenty of sparks
are emitted, which afford the miners such a light as enables them to
carry on their work in close places, where the flame of a candle, or a
lamp, would, as has already happened in various instances, occasion
violent explosions. In that dreadful catastrophe, the explosion of the
Felling colliery, the particulars of which will be hereafter detailed,
it will be seen that mills of this description were employed, in
searching for the remains of the victims of the sad disaster; but this
event happened before the invention of Sir Humphrey Davy’s safety-lamp,
a discovery which, while it affords a more certain light, holds out
every security to the miner against accidents which, without such a
resource, might still be superadded to those already recorded, as
arising from the flame of a candle or lamp.

A greater number of mines have, however, been ruined by inundations than
by fires; and here that noble invention, the fire-engine, displays its
beneficial effects. It appears from nice calculations, that it would
require about five hundred and fifty men, or a power equal to that of
one hundred and ten horses, to work the pumps of one of the largest
fire-engines, having a cylinder seventy inches in diameter, now in use,
and thrice that number of men to keep an engine of that size constantly
at work. It also appears that as much water may be raised by such an
engine, as can be drawn, within the same space of time, by twenty-five
hundred and twenty men with rollers and buckets, after the manner long
practiced in many mines; or as much as can be borne on the shoulders of
twice that number of men, as is said to be done in several of the mines
of Peru. So great is the power of the elastic steam of the boiling water
in those engines, and of the outward atmosphere, which, by their
alternate actions give force and motion to the beam, and through it to
the pump rods which elevate the water through tubes, and discharge it
from the mine!

Years since there were four fire-engines belonging to the Whitehaven
colliery, which when all at work, discharged from it about twelve
hundred and twenty-eight gallons of water every minute, at thirteen
strokes; and at the same rate, one million, seven hundred and
sixty-eight thousand, three hundred and twenty gallons, upward of seven
thousand tuns, every twenty-four hours. By these engines nearly twice
the above-mentioned quantity of water might be discharged from mines not
more than sixty or seventy fathoms deep, which depth is rarely exceeded
in the Newcastle collieries, or in any other English collieries, with
the exception of the above.

Coal pits have sometimes taken fire by accident, and have continued to
burn for a considerable length of time. About the year 1648, a coal mine
at Benwell, a village near Newcastle-upon-Tyne, was accidentally kindled
by a candle: at first the fire was so feeble, that a reward of half a
crown, which was asked by a person who offered to extinguish it, was
refused. It gradually increased, however, and had continued burning for
thirty years, when the account was drawn up and published in the
Philosophical Transactions: it was not finally extinguished until all
the fuel was consumed. Examples of a similar kind have happened in
Scotland and in Germany.

But of all the recorded accidents relative to coal mines, that of
Felling colliery, near Sunderland, a concise narrative of which here
follows, was the most disastrous.

Felling is a manor about a mile and a half east of Gateshead. It
contains several strata of coal, the uppermost of which were extensively
wrought in the beginning of the last century. The stratum called the
high-main, was begun in 1779, and continued to be wrought till the
nineteenth of January, 1811, when it was entirely excavated. The present
colliery was in the seam called the low-main. It commenced in October,
1810, and was at full work in May, 1812. This mine was considered by the
workmen as a model of perfection in the purity of its air, and orderly
arrangements; its inclined plane was saving the daily expense of at
least thirteen horses; the concern wore the features of the greatest
possible prosperity, and no accident, except a trifling explosion of
fire-damp, slightly burning two or three workmen, had occurred. Two
_shifts_, or sets of men, were constantly employed, except on Sundays.
Twenty-five acres of coal had been excavated. The first shift entered
the mine at four o’clock, A. M., and were relieved at their
working-posts by the next at eleven o’clock in the morning. The
establishment employed under ground, consisted of about one hundred and
twenty-eight persons, who, from the eleventh to the twenty-fifth of May,
1812, wrought six hundred and twenty-four scores of coal, equal to
thirteen hundred Newcastle, or twenty-four hundred and fifty-five London
chaldrons.

About half past eleven o’clock, on the morning of the twenty-fifth of
May, 1812, the neighboring villages were alarmed by a tremendous
explosion in this colliery. The subterraneous fire broke forth with two
heavy discharges from the low-main, which were almost instantaneously
followed by one from the high-main. A slight trembling, as from an
earthquake, was felt for about half a mile around the workings; and the
noise of the explosion, though dull, was heard to three or four miles’
distance, and much resembled an unsteady fire of infantry. Immense
quantities of dust and small coal accompanied these blasts, and rose
high into the air, in the form of an inverted cone. The heaviest part of
the ejected matter, such as corves, pieces of wood, and small coal, fell
near the pits; but the dust, borne away by a strong west wind, fell in a
continued shower from the pit to the distance of a mile and a half. As
soon as the explosion was heard, the wives and children of the workmen
ran to the pit; the scene was distressing beyond the power of
description.

Of one hundred and twenty-eight persons in the mine at the time of the
explosion, only thirty-two were brought to daylight: twenty-nine
survived the fatal combustion; the rest were destroyed. Nor from the
time of the explosion till the eighth of July, could any person descend.
But after many unsuccessful attempts to explore the burning mine, it was
reclosed, to prevent the atmospheric air from entering it: this being
done, no attempt was afterward made to explore it, till the morning of
the last-mentioned day; from which time to the nineteenth of September,
the heart-rending scene of mothers and widows examining the putrid
bodies of their sons and husbands, for marks by which to identify them,
was almost daily renewed; but very few of them were known by any
personal mark; they were too much mangled and scorched to retain any of
their features. Their clothes, tobacco-boxes, shoes, &c., were,
therefore, the only indexes by which they could be recognized.

At the crane twenty-one bodies lay in ghastly confusion: some like
mummies, scorched as dry as if they were baked. One wanted its head,
another an arm. The scene was truly frightful. The power of fire was
visible upon them all; but its effects were extremely variable: while
some were almost torn to pieces, there were others who appeared as if
they had sunk down overpowered with sleep. The ventilation concluded on
Saturday the nineteenth of September, when the ninety-first body was dug
from under a heap of stones. At six o’clock in the morning the pit was
visited by candle-light, which had not been used in it for the space of
one hundred and seventeen days; and at eleven o’clock in the morning the
tube furnace was lighted. From this time the colliery has been regularly
at work; but the ninety-second body has never yet been found. All these
persons, except four, who were buried in single graves, were interred in
Heworth chapel-yard, in a trench, side by side, two coffins deep, with a
partition of brick and lime between every four coffins.

Having thus glanced at some of the coal mines of Great Britain, we now
pass to some of those of the United States. In these coal is found in
_four_ different forms: _first_, the _genuine_ anthracite, or _glance_
coal, as near Worcester, Mass., and Newport, R. I.; _second_, coal
destitute of bitumen, commonly called anthracite, but which is more
properly anasphaltic, which is found at Pottsville, Mauch Chunk,
Lackawanna, Wilkesbarre, &c.; _third_, bituminous coal, usually found in
the slate rock, as at Tioga, Lycoming, etc.; and _fourth_, the lignite
coal, found along the south shore of the bay of South Amboy, New Jersey.
From the state of Alabama to Pictou, Nova Scotia, the coal beds can be
followed in a north-east direction, for fifteen hundred miles; and from
Richmond, in Virginia, to Rock River, in Illinois, they are continually
crossed at right angles, for about eight hundred miles. At Richmond, the
coal is bituminous; on the Alleghany belt, it is anthracite. Geologists
think that the anthracite was lifted out of its horizontal position when
the great Alleghany belt was upheaved, and that its non-bituminous
quality is owing to the influence of the intense heat that accompanied
its upheaval.

Taylor, in his book on coal, estimates the area of bituminous coal in
the United States, east of the Mississippi river, at one hundred and
twenty-four thousand, seven hundred and thirty-five square miles, and
west of the Mississippi, at eight thousand, three hundred and
ninety-seven square miles; British North America, eighteen thousand
square miles bituminous. More than one-third of the area of
Pennsylvania, is more or less marked by coal formations; one-third of
Kentucky, Ohio and Virginia, one-fifth of Indiana, and three-fourths of
Illinois, are occupied by carboniferous strata. Western Pennsylvania
abounds in bituminous coal, and it is found also in several counties of
New York. By the census of 1839-40, we find that the quantity of
bituminous coal produced that year in the United States, was
twenty-seven million, six hundred and three thousand, one hundred and
ninety-one bushels, employing about four thousand men, and a capital of
some two million dollars; and that about four million dollars of capital
were invested in raising anthracite coal, of which some nine hundred
thousand tuns (of about twenty-eight bushels each) were produced by the
labors of about three thousand men. Most of this was from Pennsylvania.

In 1819, the anthracite coal trade had no existence; in 1820, this kind
of coal was first used as fuel, and just three hundred and sixty-five
tuns were sent to market; in 1845, the amount was two million tuns; in
1850, about three million, five hundred thousand tuns, and the present
year (1854) the amount will probably be between six and seven million
tuns. The demand and supply so steadily and rapidly increase that it is
impossible to estimate the vast extent the business of coal mining is
yet to attain.

Glancing for a moment at other countries, we find that Belgium, in 1845,
had two hundred and twelve mines, employing thirty-eight thousand miners
and five hundred steam-engines, and producing five million tuns; France,
four hundred and forty-nine mines, employing thirty thousand miners, and
producing five million tuns; Prussia, in 1840, seven hundred and
fifty-two mines, employing twenty-four thousand miners, and raising
three million, five hundred thousand tuns; and that Great Britain, in
1846, produced thirty-five million tuns, valued at forty-five million
dollars at the mines. Austria and Spain, also, have excellent mines,
though less productive. And as a late and interesting discovery, it may
be added, that the recent Arctic expedition sent out from England, found
coal in those northern regions, on the island of Disco, outcropping near
the shore. They also, in another locality not far off, discovered some
curious specimens of petrified trees, and near them extensive quarries
of anthracite coal, of good quality. There appeared to be no limit to
the quantity that might be thrown into a boat with ease, and in the
space of three hours they conveyed not less than twelve tuns to the
steamer, three-quarters of a mile distant. It proved, on trial, to be of
good quality, the combustion was perfect, and the coal as economical as
the Welsh.

We will conclude the subject of coal mines, with the statement of a
recent tourist, as to some of the wonders of the Cornish mines in
England, as he saw them in 1854. He says: “Some of the mines are truly
grand undertakings. The ‘consolidated mines,’ the largest of the Cornish
group, employ upward of three thousand persons. One of the engines pumps
water from a direct depth of sixteen hundred feet, the weight of the
pumping apparatus alone being upward of five hundred tuns; the
pumping-rod is one thousand, seven hundred and forty feet long, and it
raises about two million gallons of water in a week, from a depth equal
to five times the hight of St. Paul’s. These are, indeed, wonders to
marvel at! The consolidated and united mines, both belonging to one
company, are stated to have used the following vast quantities of
materials in a year: coals, fifteen thousand, two hundred and seventy
tuns; candles, one hundred and thirty-two thousand, one hundred and
forty-four pounds; gunpowder, eighty-two thousand pounds; leather, for
straps, &c., thirteen thousand, four hundred and ninety-three pounds;
pick and shovel handles, sixteen thousand, six hundred and ninety-eight
dozens. Sir Charles Lemon has estimated, that in the whole of the
Cornish mines, thirteen thousand pounds’ worth of gunpowder is used
annually; that the timber employed in the underground works, equals the
growth of one hundred and forty square miles of Norwegian forest; and
that thirty-seven million tuns of water are raised annually from the
mines.”


                              SALT MINES.

         Hence with diffusive salt old Ocean steeps,
         His emerald shallows, and his sapphire deeps.
         Oft in wide lakes, around their warmer brim,
         In hollow pyramids the crystals swim;
         Or, fused by earth-born fires, in cubic blocks
         Shoot their wide forms, and harden into rocks.—DARWIN.

Culinary salt, or, as it is termed in chemistry, muriate of soda, exists
abundantly in a native state, both in a solid form, and dissolved in
water. It occurs, in solution, not only throughout the wide range of the
ocean, but in various springs, rivers and lakes; and is known, in its
solid form, as a peculiar mineral, under the names of _rock-salt_,
_fossil salt_, and _salt-gem_. Its beds are mostly beneath the surface
of the ground, but sometimes rise into hills of considerable elevation.
At Cordova, in Spain, a hill, between four and five hundred feet in
hight, is nearly composed of this mineral. But the most celebrated salt
mines are those of Wielicza, in Gallicia, commonly called the salt mines
of Cracow, those of Tyrol, of Castile, (in Spain,) and of Cheshire, in
England. In the province of Lahore, in Hindoostan, is a hill of
rock-salt, of equal magnitude with that near Cordova. The mines of
Iletski, in Russia, yield vast quantities of this substance. It is so
plentiful in the desert of Caramania, and the air so dry, that it is
there used as a material for building. It forms the surface of a large
part of the northern desert of Lybia; and is found in great abundance in
the mountains of Peru. It has a pure saline taste, without any mixture
of bitterness; and crystallizes in cubes when obtained by slow
evaporation from its solution. In Germany the mines of this kind are
numerous: one of the largest is that of Hallein, near Saltzburg, in
which the salt is hewn out from subterraneous caverns of a considerable
range, and exhibits almost every diversity of color, as yellow, red,
blue and white; in consequence of which it is dissolved in water, to be
liberated from its impurities, and afterward recrystallized. The salt
mines of Cracow, and those of Cheshire, merit a particular description.


                         SALT MINES OF CRACOW.

       Thus, cavern’d round, in Cracow’s mighty mines,
       With crystal walls a gorgeous city shines;
       Scoop’d in the briny rock long streets extend
       Their hoary course, and glittering domes ascend:
       Down their bright steeps, emerging into day,
       Impetuous fountains burst their headlong way,
       O’er milk-white vales in ivory channels spread,
       And wondering seek their subterraneous bed.
       Form’d in pellucid salt, with chisel nice,
       The pale lamp glittering through the sculptur’d ice,
       With wild reverted eyes fair Lotta stands,
       And spreads to heaven, in vain, her glassy hands;
       Cold dews condense upon her pearly breast,
       And the big tear rolls lucid down her vest.
       Far gleaming o’er the town, transparent fanes
       Rear their white towers, and wave their golden vanes:
       Long lines of lusters pour their trembling rays,
       And the bright vault resounds with mingled blaze.—DARWIN.

These celebrated excavations are about five miles distant from the city
of Cracow, in a small town named Wielicza, which is entirely undermined,
the cavities reaching to a considerable extent beyond its limits. The
length of the great mine, a view of which is seen on the next page, from
east to west, is six thousand feet; its breadth, from north to south,
two thousand; and its greatest depth eight hundred; but the veins of
salt are not limited to this extent, the depth and length of them, from
east to west, being yet unknown, and their breadth only, hitherto
determined. There are at present ten shafts; and not a single spring has
been discovered throughout the extent of the mine.

In descending to the bottom, the visitor is surprised to find a kind of
subterraneous commonwealth, consisting of many families, who have their
peculiar laws and polity. Here are likewise public roads and carriages,
horses being employed to draw the salt to the mouths of the mine, where
it is taken up by engines. These horses, when once arrived at their
destination, never more see the light of the sun; and many of the people
seem buried alive in this strange abyss, having been born there, and
never stirring out; while others are not denied frequent opportunities
of breathing the fresh air in the fields, and enjoying the surrounding
prospects. The subterraneous passages, or galleries, are very spacious,
and in many of them chapels are hewn out of the rock-salt. In these
passages crucifixes are set up, together with the images of saints,
before which a light is kept constantly burning. The places where the
salt is hewn out, and the empty cavities whence it has been removed, are
called chambers, in several of which, where the water has stagnated, the
bottoms and sides are covered with very thick incrustations of thousands
of salt crystals, lying one on the other, and many of them weighing half
a pound and upward. When candles are placed before them, the numerous
rays of light reflected by these crystals emit a surprising luster.

[Illustration: GREAT SALT MINE OF CRACOW.]

In several parts of the mine, huge columns of salt are left standing, to
support the rock; and these are very fancifully ornamented. But the most
curious object in the inhabited part, or subterraneous town, is a statue
which is considered by the immured inhabitants as the actual
transmutation of Lot’s wife into a pillar of salt; and in proportion as
this statue appears either dry or moist, the state of the weather above
ground is inferred. The windings in this mine are so numerous and
intricate, that the workmen have frequently lost their way; and several,
whose lights have been extinguished, have thus perished. The number of
miners to whom it gives employment, is computed at between four and five
hundred; but the whole amount of the men employed in it is about seven
hundred.

The salt lies near the surface, in large, shapeless masses, from which
blocks of sixty, eighty, or a hundred feet square, may be hewn; but at a
considerable depth it is found in smaller lumps. About six hundred
thousand quintals of salt are dug annually out of the mines of Cracow.
The worst and cheapest is called green salt, from its greenish color,
occasioned by a heterogenous mixture of a grayish mineral, or clay, and
entirely consists of salt crystals of different dimensions. A finer sort
is dug out in large blocks; and the third kind is the _sal gemmæ_, or
crystal salt, which is found in small pieces interspersed in the rock,
and, when detached from it, breaks into cubes of rectangular prisms.
This is usually sold unprepared. The color of the salt stone is a dark
gray mixed with yellow.


              SALT MINES AND SPRINGS OF CHESHIRE, ENGLAND.

The Cheshire rock-salt, with very few exceptions, has hitherto been
ascertained to exist only in the valleys bordering on the river Weaver
and its tributary streams; in some places manifesting its presence by
springs impregnated with salt, and in others being known by mines
actually carried down into the substance of the salt strata. Between the
source of the Weaver and Nantwich, many brine springs make their
appearance; and occur again at several places, in proceeding down the
stream. At Moulton, a mine has been sunk into the body of rock-salt, and
a similar mine is wrought near Middlewich. At Northwich, brine springs
are very abundant; and there also many mines have been sunk for the
purpose of working out the fossil salt. In that vicinity a body of
rock-salt has been met with in searching for coal.

The brines in this district are formed by the penetration of spring or
rain waters to the upper surface of the rock-salt, in passing over which
they acquire such a degree of strength, that one hundred parts have
yielded twenty-seven of pure salt, thus nearly approaching to the
perfect saturation of brine. Their strength is therefore much greater
than that of the salt springs met with in Hungary, Germany and France.
The brine having been pumped out of the pits, is first conveyed into
large reservoirs, and afterward drawn off as it is needed, into pans
made of wrought iron. Here heat is applied in a degree determined by the
nature of the salt to be manufactured, and various additions are made to
the brine, with a view either to assist the crystallization of the salt,
or to promote the separation of the earthy particles, which exist in a
very small proportion. The importance of the manufacture of Cheshire
salt will be sufficiently obvious from the statement, that, besides the
salt made for home consumption, the annual amount of which has exceeded
sixteen thousand tuns, the average of the quantity sent yearly to
Liverpool for exportation, has not been less than one hundred and forty
thousand tuns.

The mine of rock-salt first worked was discovered by accident at
Marbury, near Northwich about a century and a half ago; and this bed had
been wrought for more than a century, when, in the same neighborhood, a
second and inferior stratum was fallen in with, separated from the
former by a bed of indurated clay. This lower stratum was ascertained to
possess a very great degree of purity, and freedom from earthy
admixture; on which account, and from the local advantages of Northwich
for exportation, the fossil salt is worked in the vicinity of that place
only. It occurs in two great strata or beds, lying nearly horizontally,
and separated, the superincumbent from the subjacent stratum, by several
layers of indurated clay, or argillaceous stone. These intervening beds
possess, in conjunction, a very uniform thickness of from thirty to
thirty-five feet, and are irregularly penetrated by veins of fossil
salt. There is every reason to believe that the beds of rock-salt at
Northwich, are perfectly distinct from any others in the salt district,
and form what are termed by mineralogists _incumbent bodies_ or _masses
of mineral_.

These enormous masses stretch a mile and a half in a longitudinal
direction from north-east to south-west; but their transverse extent, as
measured by a line at right angles from the former, does not exceed
forty-two hundred feet, somewhat more than three-quarters of a mile.
Without this area, the brine which is met with, is of a very weak and
inferior quality, and at a short distance disappears altogether. The
thickness of the upper bed varies from sixty to ninety feet; and a
general estimate made from its level, shows that its upper surface,
which is ninety feet beneath that of the earth, is at least thirty-six
feet beneath the low-water mark of the sea at Liverpool; a fact not
unimportant in determining the nature of the formation of this mineral.
The thickness of the lower bed has not hitherto been ascertained; but
the workings are usually begun at the depth of from sixty to
seventy-five feet, and are carried down for the space of fifteen or
eighteen feet, through what forms the purest portion of the bed. In one
of the mines a shaft has been sunk to a level of forty-two feet still
lower, without passing through the body of rock-salt. There is thus an
ascertained thickness of this bed of about a hundred and twenty feet,
and without any direct evidence that it may not extend to a considerably
greater depth.

Although two distinct beds, only, of fossil salt have been met with at
Northwich, it has been ascertained that the same limitations do not
exist throughout the whole of the salt district. At Lawton, near the
source of the river Wheelock, three distinct beds have been found,
separated by strata of indurated clay: one at the depth of one hundred
and twenty-six feet, four feet in thickness; a second, thirty feet
lower, twelve feet in thickness; and a third, forty-five feet further
down, which was sunk into seventy-two feet, without passing through its
substance. The intervening clay, the structure of which is very
peculiar, is called the shaggy metal, and the fresh water which passes
through its pores has the expressive appellation of Roaring Meg. This
epithet will not appear too strong, when it is mentioned that in a mine
in which the section of strata was taken, and where the “shaggy metal”
was found at the depth of about eighty feet, the quantity of water
ascertained to issue from its pores in one minute, was not less than
three hundred and sixty gallons; a circumstance which greatly enhances
the difficulty of passing a shaft down to the body of rock-salt.

In many of these beds of argillaceous stone, a portion of salt,
sufficiently strong to affect the taste, is found to exist; and this
saltness increases, as might be expected, in proportion as the body of
rock-salt is approached. In the strata or layers immediately above the
rock, which in all the mines are perfectly uniform in their appearance
and structure, this is particularly remarkable, notwithstanding there
are not, in these strata, any veins of rock-salt connected with the
great mass below. On the contrary, the line between the clay and
rock-salt is drawn with great distinctness in every instance, without
presenting any of those inequalities which would arise from a mutual
penetration of the strata. Not any marine exuviæ, or organic remains,
are found in the strata above the rock-salt; and the almost universal
occurrence of gypsum, in connection with beds of fossil salt, is a fact
still more deserving of observation, because it appears, not only in
these mines, but also in the salt mines of Hungary, Poland and
Transylvania; on which account Werner, in his geognostic system, assigns
to the rock-salt and fletz gypsum a conjunct situation.

The fossil salt extracted from the Northwich mines is of different
degrees of purity, and more or less blended with earthy and metallic
substances. The purer portion of the lower bed yields a rock-salt,
which, being principally exported to the Baltic, obtains the name of
Prussian rock. The extent of the cavity formed by the workings, varies
in different mines, the average depth being about sixteen feet. In some
of the pits, where pillars from eighteen to twenty-four feet square form
the supports of the mine, the appearance of the cavity is singularly
striking, and the brilliancy of the effect is greatly increased when the
mine is illuminated by candles fixed to the sides of the rock. The scene
thus formed almost appears to realize the magic palaces of eastern
poets. Some of the pits are worked in aisles or streets, but the choice
here is wholly arbitrary. Among the methods employed in working out the
rock-salt, the operation of blasting is applied to the separation of
large masses from the body of the rock, and these are afterward broken
down by the mechanical implements in common use. The present number of
mines is eleven or twelve, from which there are raised, on an annual
average, fifty or sixty thousand tuns of rock-salt. The greater part of
this quantity is exported to Ireland and the Baltic, the remainder being
employed in the Cheshire district, in the manufacture of white salt, by
solution and subsequent evaporation.

The general situation occupied by the rock-salt in Cheshire is very
similar to that of the Transylvanian and Polish mines, the beds of this
mineral being disposed in small plains, bounded by hills of
inconsiderable hight, forming a kind of basin or hollow, from which
there is usually only a narrow egress for the waters. The situation of
the Austrian salt mines near Saltzburg is, however, very different. The
mineral there appears to be disposed in beds of great thickness, which
occur near the summits of limestone hills, at a great elevation above
the adjoining country. This is a singular fact; and if the hypothesis be
allowed that rock-salt is formed from the waters of the sea, it is
necessary to suppose the occurrence on this spot of the most vast and
surprising changes!

Though there are no salt _mines_ in the United States, there are salt
_springs_ in several places. By far the most important and valuable of
these, are in the neighborhood of Syracuse, in the state of New York.
The land containing these springs, is owned by the state, and is leased
free of rent, to be used only for the manufacture of salt. The wells are
dug, and the water pumped up at the expense of the state, and the
manufacturer pays a duty of one cent on each bushel he makes. Some of
the wells are sunk to the depth of four hundred feet. Fine salt is
prepared by boiling; and coarse by solar evaporation. In 1850, the
number of salt manufactories in this vicinity was one hundred and
ninety-two; and the quantity of salt produced in 1853, amounted to more
than five million bushels. The salt of this region has been thoroughly
tested, and found to be fully equal to any of foreign manufacture.


              -------------------------------------------


                        PHENOMENA OF THE OCEAN.


                  ------------------------------------


  “They that go down to the sea in ships, that do business in great
  waters; these see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the
  deep.”—PSALMS.

          “With wonder mark the moving wilderness of waves,
          From pole to pole through boundless space diffused,
          Magnificently dreadful! where, at large,
          Leviathan, with each inferior name
          Of sea-born kinds, ten thousand thousand tribes,
          Find endless range for pasture and for sport.
                                    Adoring own
          The Hand Almighty, who in channeled bed
          Immeasurable sunk, and poured abroad,
          Fenced with eternal mounds, the fluid sphere;
          With every wind to waft large commerce on.
          Join pole to pole, consociate severed worlds,
          And link in bonds of intercourse and love
          Earth’s universal family.”—MALLET.


That huge mass of waters impregnated with salt, which encompasses all
parts of the globe, and by the means of which, in the present improved
state of navigation, an easy intercourse subsists between the most
distant nations, is denominated the ocean, and has three grand divisions
assigned to it. First, that vast expanse of water which lies to the
westward of the northern and southern continents of America, and by
which those continents are divided from Asia. On account of the uniform
and temperate gales which sweep its surface within the tropics, it is
named the Pacific ocean; and has again been distinguished into the
northern and southern Pacific, (the equator being considered as the
dividing line,) and the Southern ocean, or South sea, being consequently
that part of the general assemblage of waters which is contained between
the fortieth degree of south latitude and the south pole. Its general
width is estimated at about ten thousand miles. Secondly, the Atlantic
ocean, which divides Europe and Africa from the two American continents,
and has a general width of about three thousand miles; while the waters
which occupy the polar regions are named the Northern sea. And, lastly,
the Indian ocean, which extends from the eastern shores of Africa along
the southern coasts of Asia, and has the same general width with the
preceding one.

Among the chief of those less expansive sheets of water, properly called
seas, may be mentioned the Baltic, the Mediterranean sea, and the Black
and Red seas. The Caspian sea, being entirely encompassed by land,
might, with more propriety, have been styled a lake; but as its water
possesses the quality of saltness, it is ranked among the seas. It is,
notwithstanding, certain that Lake Superior has a still greater
circumference, extending around its shores at least fourteen hundred
miles, while the extent of the Caspian does not exceed twelve hundred.

Of the origin of this division into different seas, and seas of
different depths, little is known; but it is highly probable that many
of the larger excavations and partitions now met with, have existed,
without much change as to their extent, from the creation. Others have
undoubtedly been the result of that conflict which is perpetually taking
place between the elements of land and water, and which has, for the
greater part, given rise to islands, isthmuses and peninsulas; while
subterraneous volcanoes, and the truly surprising and indefatigable
exertions of coral, madrepores, tubipores, and other restless and
multitudinous zoöphytes, have laid, and are daily laying, the foundation
of new islands and continents in the middle of the widest and deepest
seas.

The quantity of water in the ocean, not only remains constantly the
same, but, notwithstanding its most violent and incessant motion,
continues stable within certain limits. This, however, can not be
inferred from observation; for, although in the almost infinite variety
of disturbances to which the ocean is liable, from the action of
irregular causes, it may appear to return to its former state of
equilibrium, still it may be apprehended that some extraordinary cause
may communicate to it a shock, which, though inconsiderable at first,
may augment continually, and elevate it above the highest mountains. It
is, therefore, interesting to investigate the conditions which are
necessary for the absolute stability of the ocean. This has been
effected by the celebrated Laplace, who has demonstrated that the
equilibrium of the ocean _must_ be stable, if the density be _less_ than
the mean density of the earth, which is known to be the case. He has
likewise determined, by means of his refined analysis, that this
stability would cease to exist, if the mean density of the sea _were to
exceed_ that of the earth; so that the stability of the equilibrium of
the ocean, and the excess of the density of the terrestrial globe above
that of the waters which cover it, are reciprocally connected with each
other, and indicate infinite wisdom and contrivance in such an
adjustment.


                          SALTNESS OF THE SEA.

Of the various phenomena of the sea, that of its _saltness_ is one of
the most obvious. No questions concerning the natural history of our
globe have been discussed with more attention, or decided with less
satisfaction, than that concerning its primary cause, which had
perplexed the philosophers before the time of Aristotle, and surpassed
even the great genius of that profound inquirer into natural causes.
Kircher, after having consulted not less than thirty-three authors on
this subject, could not help remarking, that the fluctuations of the
ocean itself were scarcely more various than the opinions concerning the
origin of its saline impregnation.

This question does not seem capable of admitting an illustration from
experiment; at least, not from any experiments hitherto made for that
purpose: it is, therefore, not surprising, that it remains nearly as
problematical in the present age, as it has been in any of the
preceding. Had observations been made three or four centuries ago, to
ascertain the saltness of the sea, then, at any particular time and
place, we might now, by making similar observations at the same place,
in the same season, have been able to know, whether the saltness, at
that particular place, was increasing or decreasing, or an invariable
quantity. This kind and degree of knowledge would have served as a clue
to direct us to a full investigation of this matter in general. It is to
be regretted, however, that observations of this nature have not, in
former days, been made with any degree of precision.

One of the principal opinions maintained on this subject by modern
philosophers, and more particularly supported by Halley, is, that since
river-water, in almost every part of the globe, is impregnated in a
greater or less degree by sea-salt, the sea must have gradually acquired
its present quantity of salt from the long continued influx of rivers.
The water which is carried into the sea by these rivers, is again
separated from it by evaporation, and being dispersed over the
atmosphere by winds, soon descends in rain or vapor upon the surface of
the earth, whence it hastens to pour into the bosom of the ocean the
fresh tribute of salt it has collected in its inland progress. Thus the
salt conveyed into the sea not being a volatile substance, nor
performing an incessant circulation, must be a perpetually increasing
quantity; and sufficient time, it is contended, has elapsed since the
creation, for the sea to acquire, from this source, its present quantity
of salt.

This opinion has been successfully combated; and it is denied that
freshwater rivers could, in the course of thousands or even millions of
years, have produced saltness in the sea. If this were the case, every
sea, or great body of water, which receives rivers, must have been salt,
and have possessed a degree of saltness in proportion to the quantity of
water which these rivers discharge. But so far is this from being true,
that the Palus Mæotis, and our great American lakes, do not contain salt
water, but fresh. It may indeed be objected, that the quantity of salt
which rivers carry along with them, and deposit in the sea, must depend
on the nature of the soil through which they flow, which may in some
places not contain any salt; and that this is the reason why the great
lakes in America and the Palus Mæotis are fresh. But to this opinion,
which is merely hypothetical, there are insurmountable objections. It is
a curious fact, that the saltness of the sea is greatest under the
equator, and diminishes gradually toward the poles; but it can not
therefore be assumed that the earth contains more salt in the tropical
regions than in the temperate zones, and more in these again than in the
frigid zones. On the other hand, if it be allowed that the sea receives
its saltness from the rivers, it must be equally salt, or nearly so, in
every part of the earth; since, according to a simple and well-known
principle in chemistry, _when any substance is dissolved in water with
the assistance of agitation, at whatever part of the water it is
introduced, it will be equally diffused through the whole liquid_. Now,
though it were true that a greater quantity of salt should have been
introduced into the sea under the equator, than toward the poles, from
the constant agitation occasioned by the wind and tide, the salt must
have soon pervaded the whole mass of water. Neither is this greater
proportion of saltness owing to a superior degree of heat, since it is
an established principle in chemistry, that cold water and hot water
dissolve nearly the same proportion of salt.

The saltness of the sea has also been ascribed to the solution of
subterraneous mines of salt, that are supposed to abound in the bottom
of the sea, and along its shores. But this hypothesis can not be
supported. If the sea were constantly dissolving salt, it would soon
become saturated; for it can not be said that it is deprived of any
portion of its salt by evaporation, since rain-water is fresh. If the
sea were to become saturated, neither fishes nor vegetables could live
in it. It may hence be inferred that the saltness of the sea can not be
accounted for by secondary causes, and _that it has been salt since the
beginning of time_. It is indeed impossible to suppose that the waters
of the sea were at any time fresh since the formation of fishes and
sea-plants; neither will they live in water which is fresh. It may hence
be concluded that the saltness of the sea has, with some few exceptions,
perhaps arising from mines of rock-salt dispersed near its shores, been
nearly the same in all ages. This hypothesis, which is the simplest, and
is involved in the fewest difficulties, best explains the various
phenomena dependent on the saltness of the sea.

Although this saline property may be one of the causes by which the
waters of the sea are preserved from putridity, still it can not be
considered as the principal cause. The ocean has, like rivers, its
currents, by which its contents are circulated round the globe; and
these may be said to be the great agents which keep it sweet and
wholesome. A very enlightened navigator, Sir John Hawkins, speaks of a
calm, in which the sea, having continued for some time without motion,
assumed a very formidable aspect. “Were it not,” he observes, “for the
moving of the sea by the force of winds, tides and currents, it would
corrupt all the world. The experiment of this I saw in the year 1590,
lying with a fleet about the islands of the Azores, almost six months,
the greater part of which time we were becalmed. Upon which, all the sea
became so replenished with various sorts of gellies, and forms of
serpents, adders and snakes, as seemed wonderful; some green, some
black, some yellow, some white, some of divers colors, and many of them
had life; and some there were a yard and a half, and two yards long;
which, had I not seen, I could hardly have believed. And hereof are
witnesses all the companies of the ships which were then present; so
that hardly a man could draw a bucket of water clear of some corruption.
In which voyage, toward the end thereof, many of every ship fell sick,
and began to die apace. But the speedy passage into our country, was a
remedy to the diseased, and a preservative to those who were not
touched.”


                       CONGELATION OF SEA-WATER.

Although the assertion that salt water never freezes, has been
contradicted by repeated experience, it is still certain that it
requires a much greater degree of cold to produce its congelation, than
fresh water. It is, therefore, one of the greatest blessings which we
derive from this element, that when we find all the stores of nature
locked up to us on the land, the sea is, with few exceptions, ever open
to our necessities. It is well known that at particular seasons, the
mouth of the river St. Lawrence, the entrance into the Baltic sea, &c.,
are so much frozen over as to be impassable by ships; while the vast
mountains and fields of ice in the polar regions, have for ages past
been insurmountable obstructions to the daring researches of modern
navigators. These exceptions, however, will appear of comparatively
trifling importance to navigation, when the number of ports which are,
in almost every region, open at all seasons of the year, are considered;
and this facility of intercourse would certainly not have been afforded,
if sea-water had admitted of as easy a congelation as that of water not
impregnated with salt.

On the origin of ice in the frozen seas, different opinions have been
entertained. The authority of Capt. Cook and Lord Mulgrave, has been
cited by Bishop Watson, to show that good fresh water may be procured
from ice found in those seas; but he observes that, notwithstanding the
testimonies of these very able navigators, it may still be doubted
whether the ice from which the water was obtained, had been formed in
the sea, and, consequently, whether sea-water itself would, when frozen,
yield fresh water. He thinks it probable that the ice had either been
formed at the mouths of large fresh-water rivers, and had thence, by
tides or torrents been drifted into the sea, or that it had been broken
by its own weight, from the immense cliffs of ice and frozen snow which,
in countries where there are few rivers, are found in high latitudes to
project a great way into the sea. An early navigator, Fotherbye, in the
relation of his voyage toward the south pole, in 1614, considers snow to
be the original cause of the ice found at sea, he himself having
observed it to lie an inch thick on the surface; and Captain Cook, from
his own observation in the South sea, was disposed to think that the
vast floats of ice he met with in the spring, were formed from the
congelation of snow. It is certain that the snow which falls upon the
surface of the sea, being in a solid state, and, bulk for bulk, lighter
than sea-water, will not readily combine with it, but may, by a due
degree of cold in the atmosphere, be speedily converted into a layer of
ice. The upper layer of this first surface of ice being elevated above
the surface of the sea, will receive all the fresh water which falls
from the atmosphere in the form of snow, sleet, rain or dew, by the
successive congelation of which, the largest fields of ice may at length
be formed.

It is a matter of little consequence to a navigator, whence the ice
which supplies him with fresh water is produced. Leaving, therefore,
these hypotheses relative to the formation of ice in frozen seas, it
should be observed that the question, whether congealed sea-water will,
when thawed, yield fresh water, has been satisfactorily decided by
experiments made with every suitable attention. A quantity of sea-water
having been taken up off the English coast, was exposed to a freezing
atmosphere, and afforded an ice perfectly free from any taste of salt;
and it has likewise been found, that not only sea-water, but water
containing double the proportion of salt commonly found in our
sea-water, and more than is contained in the sea-water of any climate,
may be frozen by the cold prevailing in our atmosphere.

[Illustration: ICEBERGS, OR ICE-ISLANDS.]


                              ICE-ISLANDS.

Ice-islands, or icebergs, as they are commonly called, is the name given
by seamen to the huge, solid masses of ice which abound in the sea near
or within the polar circles, and which often float down nearer to the
equator, till they are gradually dissolved by the increasing warmth of
the air and water. The cut gives a view of them as seen by Dr. Scoresby,
who counted five hundred of them between latitude sixty-nine degrees and
seventy degrees north, which were from one hundred to two hundred feet
high, and from a few yards to a mile in circumference. Many of these
fluctuating islands are met with on the coasts of Spitzbergen, to the
great danger of the vessels employed in the Greenland fishery. In the
midst of these tremendous masses, navigators have been arrested and
frozen to death. In this manner the brave Sir Hugh Willoughby perished,
with all his crew, in 1553; and in the year 1773, Lord Mulgrave, after
every effort which the most accomplished seaman could make, to reach the
termination of his voyage, was caught in the ice, and nearly experienced
the same unhappy fate. The scene he describes, divested of the horrors
attendant on the eventful expectation of change, was most beautiful and
picturesque. Two large ships becalmed in a vast basin, surrounded on all
sides by ice-islands of various forms; the weather clear; the sun
gilding the circumambient ice, which was smooth, low, even, and covered
with snow, except where pools of water, on a portion of the surface,
shot forth new icy crystals, and on the smooth surface of the
comparatively small space of sea in which they were hemmed. Such is the
picture drawn by our navigator, amid the perils by which lie was
surrounded.

After fruitless attempts to force their way through the fields of ice,
the limits of these became at length so contracted, that the ships were
immovably fixed. The smooth extent of surface was soon lost; the
pressure of the pieces of ice, by the violence of the swell, caused them
to pack; and fragment rose upon fragment, until they were in many places
higher than the main-yard. The movements of the ships were tremendous
and involuntary, in conjunction with the surrounding ice, actuated by
the currents. The water having shoaled to fourteen fathoms, great
apprehensions were entertained, as the grounding of the ice, or of the
ships, would have been equally fatal: the force of the ice might have
crushed them to atoms, or have lifted them out of the water, and have
overset them; or, again, have left them suspended on the summits of the
pieces of ice, at a tremendous hight, exposed to the fury of the winds,
or to the risk of being dashed to pieces by the failure of their frozen
dock. An attempt was made to cut a passage through the ice; but after a
perseverance truly worthy of Britons, it proved ineffectual. The
commander, who was at all times master of himself, directed the boats to
be made ready to be hauled over the ice, till they should reach
navigable water, proposing in them to make the voyage to England; but
after they had thus been drawn over the ice, for three progressive days,
a wind having sprung up, the ice separated sufficiently to yield to the
pressure of the ships in full sail. After having labored against the
resisting fields of ice, they at length reached the harbor of
Smeerinberg, at the west end of Spitzbergen.

The vast islands of floating ice which abound in the high southern
latitudes, are a proof that they are visited by a much severer degree of
cold than equal latitudes toward the north pole. Captain Cook, in his
second voyage, fell in with one of these islands in latitude fifty
degrees, forty minutes, south. It was about fifty feet high, and half a
mile in circuit, being flat on the top, while its sides, against which
the sea broke exceedingly high, rose in a perpendicular direction. In
the afternoon of the same day, the tenth of December, 1773, he fell in
with another large cubical mass of ice, about two thousand feet in
length, four hundred feet in breadth, and in hight two hundred feet. Mr.
Foster, the naturalist of the voyage, remarks that, according to the
experiments of Boyle and Marian, the volume of ice is to that of
sea-water as ten to nine: consequently, by the known rules of
hydrostatics, the volume of ice which rises above the surface of the
water, is to that which sinks below it as one to nine. Supposing,
therefore, this mass of ice to have been of a regular figure, its depth
under water must have been eighteen hundred feet, and its whole hight,
twenty hundred feet: estimating its length, as above, at twenty hundred
feet, and its breadth at four hundred feet, the entire mass must have
contained sixteen hundred millions of cubic feet of ice.

Two days after, several other ice-islands were seen, some of them nearly
two miles in circuit, and six hundred feet high; and yet such was the
force of the waves, that the sea broke quite over them. They exhibited
for a few moments a view very pleasing to the eye; but a sense of danger
soon filled the mind with horror; for had the ship struck against the
weather-side of one of these islands, when the sea ran high, she must in
an instant have been dashed to pieces. The route to the southward was
afterward impeded by an immense field of low ice, the termination of
which could not be seen, either to the east, west or south. In different
parts of this field were islands, or hills of ice, like those which had
before been found floating in the sea.

At length these ice-islands became as familiar to those on board as the
clouds and the sea. Whenever a strong reflection of white was seen on
the skirts of the sky, near the horizon, then ice was sure to be
encountered; notwithstanding which, that substance itself was not
entirely white, but often tinged, especially near the surface of the
sea, with a most beautiful sapphirine, or rather berylline blue,
evidently reflected from the water. This blue color sometimes appeared
twenty or thirty feet above the surface, and was probably produced by
particles of sea-water which had been dashed against the mass in
tempestuous weather, and had penetrated into its interstices. In the
evening, the sun setting just behind one of these masses, tinged its
edges with gold, and reflected on the entire mass a beautiful suffusion
of purple. In the larger masses, were frequently observed shades or
casts of white, lying above each other in strata, sometimes of six
inches, and at other times of a foot in hight. This appearance seemed to
confirm the opinion entertained relative to the increase and
accumulation of such huge masses of ice, by heavy falls of snow at
different intervals; for snow being of various kinds, small-grained,
large-grained, in light feathery locks, &c., the various degrees of its
compactness may account for the different colors of the strata.

In his third attempt to proceed southward, in January, 1774, Capt. Cook
was led, by the mildest sunshine which was, perhaps, ever experienced in
the frigid zone, to entertain hopes of penetrating as far toward the
south pole as other navigators have done toward the north pole; but on
the twenty-sixth of that month, at four in the morning, his officers
discovered a solid ice-field of immense extent before them, bearing from
east to west. A bed of fragments floated around this field, which was
raised several feet above the surface of the water. While in this
situation, the southern part of the horizon was illuminated by the rays
of light reflected from the ice, to a considerable hight. Ninety-seven
ice-islands were distinctly seen within the field, besides those on the
outside; many of them very large, and looking like a ridge of mountains,
rising one above the other until they were lost in the clouds. The most
elevated and most ragged of these ice-islands, were surmounted by peaks,
and were from two to three hundred feet in hight, with perpendicular
cliffs or sides astonishing to behold. The largest of them terminated in
a peak not unlike the cupola of St. Paul’s.

The outer, or northern edge of this immense field of ice, was composed
of loose or broken ice, closely packed together, so that it was not
possible to find any entrance. Such mountains of ice, Captain Cook was
persuaded, were never seen in the Greenland seas, so that no comparison
could be drawn; and it was the opinion of most of the persons on board,
that this ice extended quite to the pole, from which they were then less
than nineteen degrees; or, perhaps, that it was joined to some land to
which it had been fixed from the earliest time. Our navigator was of
opinion that it is to the south of this parallel that all the ice is
formed which is found scattered up and down to the northward, and
afterward broken off by gales of wind, or other causes, and brought
forward by the currents which are always found to set in that direction
in high latitudes. “Should there,” he observes, “be land to the south
behind this ice, it can afford no better retreat for birds, or any other
animals, than the ice itself, with which it must be wholly covered. I,
who was ambitious, not only to go further than any one had been before,
but as far as it was possible for man to go, was not sorry at meeting
with this interruption; as it in some measure relieved us, or at least
shortened the dangers and hardships inseparable from the navigation of
the southern polar regions.”

The approximation of several fields of ice of different magnitudes,
produces a very singular phenomenon. The smaller of these masses are
forced out of the water, and thrown on the larger ones, until at length
an aggregate is formed of a tremendous hight. These accumulated bodies
of ice float in the sea like so many rugged mountains, and are
continually increased in hight by the freezing of the spray of the sea,
and the melting and then freezing of the snow which falls on them. While
their growth is thus augmented, the smaller fields, of a less elevation,
are the meadows of the seals, on which these animals at times frolic by
hundreds.

The collision of great fields of ice, in high latitudes, is often
attended by a noise, which, for a time, takes away the sense of hearing
anything beside; and that of the smaller fields, with a grinding of
unspeakable horror. The water which dashes against the mountainous ice,
freezes into an infinite variety of forms, and presents to the admiring
view of the voyager ideal towns, streets, churches, steeples, and almost
every form which imagination can picture to itself.

After such notices of the ice-islands from the earlier voyagers, it may
be interesting to know how they have appeared to later beholders; and
this may be seen in the following account from the journal of a seaman
who was in the well known “Arctic Expedition,” in 1850-51. Under the
date of the thirtieth of June, 1850, he writes: “Moored to an iceberg;
weather calm; sky cloudless, and ‘beautifully blue;’ surrounded by a
vast number of stupendous bergs, glittering and glistening beneath the
refulgent rays of a midday sun. A great portion of the crew had gone on
shore to gather the eggs of the wild sea-birds that frequent the lonely
ice-bound precipices of Baffin’s bay, while those on board had retired
to rest, wearied with the harassing toils of the preceding day. To me,
walking the deck and alone, all nature seemed hushed in universal
repose. Whilst thus contemplating the stillness of the monotonous scene
around me, I observed in the offing a large iceberg, completely
perforated, exhibiting in the distance an arch, or tunnel, apparently so
uniform in its conformation, that I was induced to call two of the
seamen to look at it, at the same time telling them, that I had never
read or heard of any of our arctic voyagers passing through one of these
arches, so frequently seen through large bergs, and that there would be
a novelty in doing so; and if they chose to accompany me, I would get
permission to take the small boat, and endeavor to accomplish the
unprecedented feat.

“They readily agreed, and away we went. On nearing the arch, and
ascertaining that there was a sufficiency of water for the boat to pass
through, we rowed slowly and silently under, when there burst upon our
view one of the most magnificent specimens of nature’s handiwork ever
exhibited to mortal eyes; the sublimity and grandeur of which no
language can describe, no imagination conceive. Fancy an immense arch of
eighty feet span, fifty feet high, and upward of one hundred feet in
breadth, as correct in its conformation as if it had been constructed by
the most scientific artist, formed of solid ice, of a beautiful emerald
green, its whole expanse of surface smoother than the most polished
alabaster, and you may form some slight conception of the architectural
beauties of this icy temple, the wonderful workmanship of time and the
elements. When we had got about half-way through the mighty structure,
on looking upward, I observed that the berg was rent the whole breadth
of the arch, and in a perpendicular direction to its summit, showing two
vertical sections of irregular surfaces, ‘darkly, deeply, beautifully
blue,’ here and there illuminated by an arctic sun, which darted its
golden rays between, presenting to the eye a picture of ethereal
grandeur, which no poet could describe, no painter portray. I was so
enraptured with the sight, that for a moment I fancied the ‘blue vault
of heaven’ had opened, and that I actually gazed upon the celestial
splendor of a world beyond this. But, alas! in an instant the scene
changed, and I awoke as it were from a delightful dream, to experience
all the horrors of a terrible reality. I observed the fracture rapidly
close, then again slowly open. This stupendous mass of ice, millions of
tuns in weight, was afloat, consequently in motion, and apparently about
to lose its equilibrium, capsize, or burst into fragments.

“Our position was truly awful. My feelings at the moment may be
conceived, but can not be described. I looked downward and around me;
the sight was equally appalling; the very sea seemed agitated. I at last
shut my eyes from a scene so terrible, the men at the oars, as if by
instinct, ‘gave way,’ and our little craft swiftly glided from beneath
the gigantic mass. We then rowed round the berg, keeping at a respectful
distance from it, in order to judge of its magnitude. I supposed it to
be about a mile in circumference, and its highest pinnacle two hundred
and fifty feet. Thus ended an excursion, the bare recollection of which,
at this moment, awakens in me a shudder; nevertheless, I would not have
lost the opportunity of witnessing a scene so awfully sublime, so
tragically grand, for thousands of pounds, but I would not again run
such a risk for a world. We passed through the berg about two P. M., and
at ten o’clock the same night, it burst, agitating the sea for miles
around. I may also observe, that the two men who were with me in the
boat, did not observe that the berg was rent until I told them, after we
were out of danger, we having agreed, previously to entering the arch,
not to speak a word to each other, lest echo itself should disturb the
fragile mass.”

As further describing the appearances of icebergs, we give the following
narrative by Mr. Abbott, who himself was a witness of the splendid
scenery he so graphically describes. He says: “The trip of the Baltic,
in March, 1854, is likely to be somewhat memorable. We left Sandy Hook,
on Sunday morning, the fifth, and had a propitious and rapid run, until
Friday the tenth, about three o’clock. When in latitude forty-six
degrees and longitude forty-eight degrees, our attention was arrested by
some small pieces of broken ice, floating in every direction around us.
The weather was thick and hazy, so that we could nowhere see the
horizon. In the course of an hour or two, the fog partly disappeared,
and we found ourselves nearly half-surrounded by an immense field of
drift-ice, and large numbers of icebergs, extending from north-east by
south to south-west.

“Our speed was immediately slackened, and the course of the ship changed
to the northward and westward. It soon appeared that we were completely
hemmed in on every side, by immense fields of floating drift, sometimes
in loose and broken masses, sometimes in a compact and immovable jam,
and everywhere studded with vast and towering icebergs, of almost every
conceivable form and size.

“The fog gradually lifted, now in one direction, and now in another,
just sufficient to discover to us, that we were fairly surrounded, and
that, to whatever point of the compass we could turn the eye or the
ship, interminable masses of drift-ice, of uplift, and icebergs, seemed
to cover the sea. So sudden and unexpected was this discovery, that it
seemed more like fairy work than reality. Surprise and astonishment, at
the novel and wonderful scene around us, seemed at first to make us all
unconscious of our own critical situation. Separating from it the idea
of danger, it would be difficult to imagine a scene combining and
blending more of the elements of beauty, grandeur and sublimity. Far as
the eye could reach, it was no longer sea and sky, but ice, ice, ice,
floating like an archipelago of a thousand isles, great and small, of
highland and lowland, mountain, peninsula, promontory, and Gibraltar
rock.

“Running in countless directions through these masses, the ocean waves
appeared in narrow but doubly dark currents, forming the most crooked
and irregular passages, of rivulet and river, and endless indentations
of inlet and bay. Through these labyrinthine passages, perpetually
opening and closing by the action of winds and waves, our escape was to
be made. Once, in attempting to force a passage through a long but
narrow neck of broken blocks of ice, which had drifted across our way,
the cutwater, bows and wheels of the ship, were pretty seriously
battered.

“All night long the ship was kept running slowly, threading her way
through these little passages of clear water, until four o’clock in the
morning, when she was so pressed on every side, with sheets of ice,
crowded and packed far above the surface of the water, and urged on by
the momentum of vast masses of iceberg, that prudence required to stop
the engine and wait for daylight. The morning brought little cheering
prospect. The man at mast-head reported no clear water, as far as the
eye could reach, excepting in narrow and scarcely navigable patches and
veins. The surface of the sea all around the horizon, seemed an almost
unbroken plain of field and mountain ice. As early as light allowed, the
ship was again under way for the largest space of clear water that could
be seen, and continued all day long to retrace her path to the westward,
veering her course, however, through every point of the compass, to find
the intricate passages toward the open sea. The wind, fresh from the
north-west, came with intense and piercing cold. The man at the
mast-head could not stand its severity more than half an hour. The
masts, shrouds and cordage of the ship, were completely incrusted, and
altogether what with field-ice, drift, and icebergs, snow, rain and
hail, gale and storm, these days in the ice will not soon be forgotten.

“The different aspects of these scenes by day and night furnished an
incessant source of interest. The vast fields of drift, in their varied
forms, by daylight and by moonlight, were picturesque and beautiful in
the highest degree. They ranged in extent from a quarter of a mile, to
perhaps ten miles square. In some cases, the entire field seemed to be
composed of small broken fragments, floating in close proximity to each
other, yet yielding readily to the play of the waves, rising and falling
with the swell of the sea. The superincumbent weight upon the surface of
the water, diminished the elevation of the waves, but the reflected
light from its uneven silver surface, revealed far more distinctly and
beautifully, the extent of motion and the action of the waves. The long
swells of the sea stretched away in graceful curves for miles,
resembling more than anything else I can suggest, some of the rolling
prairies of the west, as they must appear in snow, with this difference,
that the swells seemed ‘all alive,’ as if some mighty monsters of the
deep were working their way beneath, perpetually shifting their
position, and vainly endeavoring to lift the load that covers them, to
find a breathing in the open air. In other instances, these vast fields,
stretching as far as the eye could reach over half the visible horizon,
were one compact and apparently motionless mass of solid ice, as fixed
as a ‘rock-bound coast.’

“Another form of peculiar interest was that of a wide field, of many
miles in extent, apparently formed by a long succession of ‘uplifts.’
The action of the waves had gradually forced large blocks of ice beneath
one edge, and the long continuation of this process, had lifted as it
would seem, almost the entire mass, many feet out of water. The outer
edge of these uplifts presented an abrupt and perpendicular wall. In one
case, at night, the captain estimated that he had sailed for ten miles,
along such a wall, the hight of the wheel-house, about forty feet. A
very beautiful effect was once produced by a small mass of this kind. It
was several miles distant, and of very considerable length. As it rolled
and pitched, one side, apparently fifteen or twenty feet high, dipped in
the waves, and rising again, lifted an immense volume of water, which
then ran off, in a beautiful and magnificent torrent, over the rising
edge. I watched with my glass for an hour, the graceful evolutions of
this interesting cataract, which is probably still performing, by its
regular rise and fall, a very respectable, but intermittent Niagara, in
the middle of the Atlantic, with all the regularity of a pendulum.

“The icebergs, themselves, which we saw, were very numerous, and of
almost every conceivable form and size. During our passage through three
hundred miles, the number we observed was variously estimated from five
hundred to one thousand. I counted at one time thirty-six, and at
another forty-five, all of notable magnitude. They sometimes were of
most curious and fantastic shapes. Hill and mountain of every imaginable
outline, castle and tower, turret, and out-jutting and overhanging
crags, magnificent needle forms shooting to the sky, like the spire of
Trinity, crouching lions, and polar bears, trees of ice, and natural
bridges, in short, you can scarcely fancy anything odd, that snow and
ice can be made to resemble, that had not its type around us.

“But, perhaps, the most wonderful of all, was the great ‘plunging
iceberg.’ It was a round, oblong mass of ice, estimated by careful
comparison with our wheel-house, to be fifty by seventy-five feet. A
side view made it appear about as large as the front of a large, double,
four story dwelling. But it was as true and perfect an oval, as the most
exquisitely beautiful bald head you have ever seen. It looked exactly
like the upper part of a head of some gigantic being. This, as it
floated past us, gradually descended in the waves, until it sunk beneath
the surface. It then rose with a most majestic movement, lifting the
pure white crown, to the hight of fifty feet. It presented on the whole,
one of the grandest sights I ever beheld. It continued thus sinking and
rising till it was out of our sight. It seemed like a creature of life,
paying its respects to our noble ship.”


                               ICEBERGS.

Analogous to the ice-fields described above, are those large bodies of
ice, perhaps more properly named icebergs, which fill the valleys
between the high mountains in northern latitudes. Among the most
remarkable, are those of the east coast of Spitzbergen. They are seven
in number, and lie at considerable distances from each other, extending
through tracts unknown, in a region totally inaccessible in the internal
parts. The most distant of them exhibits over the sea a front three
hundred feet in hight, emulating the color of the emerald; cataracts of
melted snow fall down in various parts; and black, spiral mountains,
streaked with white, bound the sides, rising crag above crag, as far as
the eye can reach in the background. At times immense fragments break
off, and precipitate themselves into the water with a most alarming
dashing. A portion of this vivid green substance was seen by Lord
Mulgrave, in the voyage above referred to, to fall into the sea; and,
notwithstanding it grounded in twenty-four fathoms of water, it spired
above the surface fifty feet. Similar icebergs are frequent in all the
arctic regions; and to their fall is owing the solid mountainous ice
which infests those seas.

The frost sports wonderfully with these icebergs, and gives them
majestic, as well as other most singular forms. Masses have been seen to
assume the shape of a Gothic church, with arches, windows and doors, and
all the rich drapery of that style of architecture, composed of what the
writer of an Arabian tale would scarcely have ventured to introduce
among the marvelous suggestions of his fancy, _crystals of the richest
sapphirine blue_. Tables with one or more feet; and often immense
flat-roofed temples, like those of Luxor, on the bank of the Nile,
supported by round transparent columns of cerulean hue, float by the
astonished spectator. These icebergs are the creation of ages, and
acquire annually additional hight by falls of snow and rain, which
latter often freezes instantly, and more than repairs the loss
occasioned by the influence of the sun’s heat.


                      LUMINOUS POINTS IN THE SEA.

Among the phenomena which have long exercised the sagacity of
philosophers, that of the luminous appearance of the surface of the sea,
during the obscurity of the night, is highly curious. A variety of
experiments were made by a French naturalist at Cayenne, at different
seasons, to ascertain its true cause; and to him it appeared that these
luminous points were produced by motion and friction alone, as he could
not, with the help of the best glasses, perceive any insects floating in
the water. But it would seem, from the experiments and observations of
many learned men, that this phenomenon is produced by various causes,
both jointly and separately. It has been proved by one set of
experiments, that the putrefaction of animal substances produces light
and scintillation in the sea. A little white fish placed in seawater
rendered it luminous in the space of twenty-eight hours. On another
hand, it is certain that there is in the sea a prodigious quantity of
shining insects or animalcules, which contribute to this phenomenon. A
French astronomer, M. Dangelet, who returned from Terra Australis in
1774, brought with him several kinds of worms which shine in water, when
it is set in motion; and M. Rigaud affirms, that the luminous surface of
the sea, from Brest to the Antilles, contains a great quantity of
little, round, shining polypi, of about a quarter of a line in diameter.
Other learned men, who acknowledge the existence of these luminous
animals, can not, however, be persuaded to consider them as the cause of
all that light and scintillation which appear on the surface of the
ocean. They imagine that some substance of a phosphoric nature, arising
from putrefaction, must be admitted as one of the causes of this
phenomenon. By other naturalists it has been ascribed to the oily and
greasy substances with which the sea is impregnated; in proof of which a
kind of fish, resembling the tunny, is cited, as being provided with an
oil which shines with considerable luster.

The Abbe Nollent was convinced, by a series of experiments, that this
phenomenon is caused by small animals, either by their luminous aspect,
or by some liquor or effluvium which they emit. He did not, however,
exclude other causes; and among these, the spawn or fry of fishes is
deserving of attention. M. Dangelet, in sailing into the bay of
Antongil, in the island of Madagascar, observed a prodigious quantity of
fry, which covered the surface of the sea for the extent of more than a
mile, and which he at first, on account of its color, mistook for a bank
of sand. This immense accumulation of spawn or fry exhaled a
disagreeable odor; and it should be remarked that the sea had, for some
days before, appeared with uncommon splendor. The same accurate
observer, perceiving the sea remarkably luminous in the road of the cape
of Good Hope, during a perfect calm, remarked that the oars of the
canoes produced a whitish and pearly kind of luster: when he took in his
hand the water, which contained phosphorus, he discerned in it, for some
minutes, globules of light as large as the heads of pins. On pressing
these globules, they appeared to his touch like a soft and thin pulp;
and some days after the sea was covered with entire banks of small
fishes, in innumerable multitudes.

From all these facts it may be deduced, that various causes contribute
to the light and scintillation of the sea; and that the light which the
Cayenne naturalist attributed to agitation and friction, differs from
that which is extended far and near, seeming to cover the whole surface
of the ocean, and producing a very beautiful and striking appearance,
particularly in the torrid zone, and in the summer season.


                          TIDES AND CURRENTS.

Alternate tides in sacred order run.—BLACKMORE.

Among the most wonderful phenomena of nature may be reckoned the tides
of the sea. They were but little understood by the ancients, although
Pliny, Ptolemy and Macrobius, were of opinion that they were influenced
by the sun and moon. The former expressly says, that the cause of the
ebb and flow is in the sun, which attracts the waters of the ocean; and
he adds, that the waters rise in proportion to the proximity of the moon
to the earth.

The phenomena of the tides have been ascribed to the principle of innate
gravitation; but Sir Richard Phillips, in his theory of the system of
the universe, refers them to that general law of motion which he
considers as the primary and proximate cause of all phenomena,
operating, in a descending series, from the rotation of the sun round
the fulcrum of the solar system, to the fall of an apple to the earth.
This motion being transferred through all nature from its source, serves
as the efficient cause of every species of vitality, of every organic
arrangement, and of all those accidents of body heretofore ascribed to
attraction.

The waters of the ocean are observed to flow and rise twice a day, in
which motion, or flux, which in the same direction lasts nearly six
hours, the sea gradually swells, and, entering the mouths of rivers,
drives back the river-waters toward their head. After a continued flux
of six hours, it seems to repose for a quarter of an hour, and then
begins to ebb, or retire back, for six hours more; in which time, by the
subsidence of the waters, the rivers resume their usual course. After a
quarter of an hour, the sea again flows and rises as before.

According to the theory of Newton, these phenomena were supposed to be
produced by an imaginary power called attraction. The moon was supposed
to attract the waters by the influence of an occult power inherent in
all matter; just as the earth was supposed to attract the moon, the moon
the earth, and the planets one another. Others, again, ridicule this
idea, as unsustained and visionary, giving in their turn some theory
that has no better argument to sustain it. And it is probable the time
is yet future when we shall have any theory that will fully account for
all the phenomena of the tides. On account of the shallowness of some
seas, and the narrowness of the straits in others, there arises a great
diversity in the phenomena, only to be accounted for by an exact
knowledge of the place. For instance, in the English channel and the
German ocean, the tide is found to flow strongest in those places that
are narrowest, the same quantity of water being, in this case, driven
through a smaller passage. It is often seen, therefore, rushing through
a strait with great force, and considerably raised, by its rapidity,
above that part of the ocean through which it runs.

The shallowness and narrowness of many parts of the sea, give rise also
to a peculiarity in the tides of some parts of the world: for in many
places, in the British seas in particular, the greatest swell of the
tide is not while the moon is in its meridian hight, and directly over
the place, but some time after it has declined thence. The sea, in this
case, being obstructed, pursues the moon with what dispatch it can, but
does not arrive with all its waters, until after the moon has ceased to
operate. Lastly, from this shallowness of the sea, and from its being
obstructed by shoals and straits, it happens that the Mediterranean, the
Baltic and the Black sea, have not any sensible tides, to raise or
depress them in a considerable degree.

Among the phenomena of the tides, one of the most singular is the bore,
peculiar to several rivers: it is ascribed to the waters, which were
before expansive, being suddenly pent up, and confined within a narrow
space. This bore or impetuous rush of waters, accompanies the first
flowing of the tide in the Ferret, in Somersetshire, and in the Seine,
in France. It is also one of the peculiarities of the Severn, the most
rapid river in England.

One of the greatest known tides is that of the Bristol channel, which
sometimes flows upward of forty feet. At the mouth of the river Indus,
the water rises thirty feet. The tides also are remarkably high on the
coasts of Malay, in the straits of Sunda, in the Red sea, at the mouth
of the river St. Lawrence, along the coasts of China and Japan, at
Panama, and in the gulf of Bengal. The most remarkable tides, however,
are those at Batsha, in the kingdom of Tonquin, in twenty degrees, fifty
minutes, north latitude. In that port, the sea ebbs and flows once only
in twenty-four hours, while in all other places there are two tides
within that space. What is still more extraordinary, twice in each
month, when the moon is near the equinoctial, there is not any tide, the
water being for some time quite stagnant. These, with other anomalies of
the tides there, Sir Isaac Newton, with peculiar sagacity, ascertained
to arise from the concurrence of two tides, one from the South sea, and
the other from the Indian ocean. Of each of these two tides there come
successively two every day; two at one time greater, and two at another
which are less. The time between the arrival of the two greater was
considered by him as high tide; that between the two less, as ebb. In
short, with these simple facts in his possession, that great
mathematician solved every appearance, and so established his theory as
to silence every opposer.

Besides the common and periodical tides, a variety of local currents are
met with in different seas, on different parts of the ocean, and for the
greater part at an inconsiderable distance from land. They have been
usually ascribed to particular winds; but their origin is not easy to
trace, as they have been occasionally found beneath the surface of the
water, running in a contrary direction to the stratum above, and can
not, therefore, have been owing to winds or monsoons. These particular
currents have been ascribed to the immense masses of polar ice, which
produce a greater degree of cold in the under than in the upper stratum
of waters; and it has been suspected that there is an under-current of
cold water flowing perpetually from the poles toward the equator, even
where the water above flows toward the poles. The great disparity of
temperature which is frequently found in deep and superficial soundings
of the same space of water, is thus accounted for.

The most extraordinary current of this kind, is that of the gulf of
Florida, usually called the Gulf stream, which sets along the coast of
North America to the northward and eastward, and flows with an
uninterrupted rapidity. It is ascribed to the trade-winds, which,
blowing from the eastern quarter into the great Mexican gulf, cause
there an accumulation above the common level of the sea. The water,
therefore, constantly runs out by the channel where it finds least
resistance, that is, through the gulf of Florida, with such force as to
continue a distinct stream to a very great distance. A proof of its
having thus originated is, that the water in the Gulf stream has been
found to have retained a great portion of the heat it had acquired in
the torrid zone.

A very singular upper current often prevails to the westward of Scilly,
and is highly dangerous to ships which approach the British channel.
Currents of this description are, however more frequently met with about
the straits of Gibraltar, and near the West India islands, the coasts of
which are so subject to counter-tides, or extraordinary currents, that
it is often dangerous for boats to land. They proceed to the westward,
along the coasts of Yucatan and Mexico, and running round into the gulf,
return into the great ocean by the straits of Bahama, along the coasts
of Florida, in order to pursue, in the north, the course ordained them
by the great Author of nature. In this course the waters run with an
extraordinary rapidity, passing on, however, by a motion so even and
imperceptible, that their speed is not realized by the spectator. But
against the shores and coasts of the various islands in their way, their
progress becomes very manifest, and even dangerous, interrupting the
navigation, and rendering it hardly possible to stem them in their
course.

In addition to these regular currents, there are others, called
counter-tides, which are observable on the sea-coasts and shores. In
places where these flow, the sea rolls and dashes in an extraordinary
manner, becoming furious without any apparent cause, and without being
moved by any wind. The waves rise and open very high, breaking on the
shore with such violence, that it is impossible for vessels to land.
These counter-tides have been, by some, ascribed to the pressure of the
heavy black wind-clouds which are occasionally seen to hang over an
island, or over the sea where they occur, though it is far more probable
that in every case they are caused by under-currents and hidden shoals,
by which the ordinary currents are checked and broken so as to cause the
effects described.

Somewhat similar to these, at least in its hidden cause, is the
celebrated Maelstrom on the coast of Norway, a view of which is given in
the cut. This is caused by the tides, in their violent passage between
the Loffoden islands; and its terrors, though at all times great, are
sometimes greatly increased by the winds. The roar of the sea, when the
Maelstrom is in full action, is said to be terrific. It is stated that
not only ships, but even whales, have been sucked into this vortex, and
killed by being dashed against the hidden rocks. The following
description, though imaginary, gives a correct idea of the destruction
of a ship in this whirlpool.

[Illustration: THE MAELSTROM.]

“The breeze, which had been long flagging, now lulled into a calm, and
soon a low continual hum, like that of an army of bees, which seemed to
rise out of the stilled ocean, became audible to every ear. Not a word
was spoken; every one held his breath whilst he listened with an
intensity of eagerness that betokened the awe that was fast filling the
heart. ‘It is the Moskoestrom!’ cried the boatswain. ‘The Moskoestrom!’
echoed the crew. ‘Away, men!’ shouted the mate; ‘down to the hold, bring
up the spare sails, clear the deck, set up a spar for a mast; away,
away!’

“The din of preparation drowned the stern hum of the distant whirlpool:
there was, however, an anxious pause when the new sail was set into the
air; and experienced sailors suffered themselves to be cheated with the
hope that there was still breeze enough to make the good ship answer her
helm. But, alas! the heavy canvas refused to expand its folds, and not a
breath of wind ruffled the dull surface of the sullen waters. They had
not another hope; the sailors looked on one another with blank dismay,
and now they heard, with awful distinctness, the roar of the terrible
Maelstrom, and the frowning rocks of Loffoden were but too plainly
visible on the right. It became evident to all, that the ship, borne
along by the tide, was fast drawing near the dreadful whirlpool. The
vessel continued slowly to approach, and the certainty of unavoidable
death became every moment more overpowering and intense. At first the
sailors stood together in a group, gazing gloomily upon one another; but
as the roar of the whirlpool became louder and louder, and the
conviction of inevitable destruction became stronger, they all dispersed
to various parts of the ship. * * *

“It was a beautiful day; the sun shone forth without a cloud to dim his
luster, the waves sparkled beneath his influence, and the white plumage
of a thousand busy sea-birds became more dazzling with his rays. The
isle of Moskoe was close at hand, and looked cheerful and inviting, but
the ship was not to approach nearer to its shores; the stream which bore
her along never suffered any vessel to pause in its career. And now
there arose at some distance ahead of the vessel, a horrible and dismal
bellowing. It was the voice of the leviathan in his agony; and when
those on deck who had still ears for exterior sounds looked forward to
ascertain its cause, they beheld a huge black monster upon the surface
of the sea, struggling against the irresistible stream, and with his
immense tail lashing the waters into foam, as he vainly strove to escape
from destruction. They beheld him borne away by the might of his furious
enemy; and they heard his last roar above the noise of the whirlpool, as
he was sucked down into the never satisfied abyss, and disappeared from
their eyes to be torn to atoms; for such is the fate of everything that
seeks the depths of the Maelstrom.

“The ship glides along faster and faster; she begins to toss and roll
uneasily in the angry rapids that boil around her; her race is nearly
run. Terrible! terrible moment! The ship hurries on to her doom with mad
impetuosity. She is in the rapids! she hurries along swift as a flash of
fire. She is in the whirl of water! round, round, round she goes; her
inmates catch hold of her bulwarks and of each other, to steady
themselves. And now her bow sprit is under the waves, and a wild shriek
of despair rises into the sky! The whirlpool, with greedy jaws, has
sucked her under.”

The water of the whirlpool is said to be two hundred and fifty feet
deep, and at ebb its noise is as loud as a cataract. In 1645, it was so
violently agitated by a storm, that in Moskoe the houses were so shaken
as to cause the stones to fall to the ground. Fragments of vessels
wrecked in the Maelstrom are frequently seen on the coast, brought up by
the return of the tide, their edges mashed and jagged as with a saw,
which would induce the belief that the bottom is composed of sharp
rocks.

Similar in its cause to the Maelstrom, though on a much inferior scale,
is the current, or whirlpool, called _Hurlgate_ or _Hellgate_, between
the East river and Long Island sound, near New York. In the narrow
channel here, the tide flows backward and forward with great force; and
there being large, irregular rocks in this channel, the water is thrown
into the most violent agitation. In passing through the place, it is
easy to see the waves seeming to boil as if in a pot. This place is
dangerous to vessels, and many have been wrecked here; though the
navigation is now so well understood, that fewer accidents happen than
formerly. The steamboats generally pass in safety, but still the superb
Oregon got upon the rocks here, within a few years, and came near being
lost.

Between Sicily and the main land are the straits of Messina, where the
current is rapid. Ancient mariners deemed this a terrible place; one
side they called Scylla, and the other Charybdis. The poets depicted the
sailor in this rapid, as beset by horrors; for if he escaped Scylla on
one side, Charybdis was ready to dash him in pieces on the other. This
idea has come down to our day, and has even passed into a proverb.

                  ------------------------------------


              -------------------------------------------


                  ------------------------------------


                         CATARACTS AND CASCADES


It has often been remarked that no one is insensible to the beauty of
flowing water. When it glides quietly on in a stream, its character is
that of gentleness, and it suggests only the ideas of calm and tranquil
beauty. But when it expands to a greater width, and its floods are
poured forth in an impetuous tide, then it assumes the aspect of
grandeur, and wakens in the beholder the emotions of sublimity.

The beauty of running water has, indeed, long been celebrated, and the
river has often suggested an image illustrative of human life. Even
Pliny, who wrote some two thousand years ago, likens a river to the
progress of man. “Its beginnings,” he says, “are insignificant, and its
infancy is frivolous; it plays among the flowers of a meadow, it waters
a garden, or turns a mill. Gathering strength in its growth, it becomes
wild and impetuous. Impatient of the restraint it meets with in the
hollows of the mountains, it is restless and fretful, quick in its
turnings, and unsteady in its course. Now it is a roaring cataract,
tearing up and overturning whatever opposes its progress, and it shoots
headlong down a rock; then it becomes a gloomy, sullen pool, buried in
the bottom of a glen. Recovering breath by repose, it again dashes
along, till, tired of uproar and mischief, it quits all that it has
swept along, and leaves the opening of the valley strewed with the
rejected waste. Now, quitting its retirement, it comes abroad into the
world, journeying with more prudence and discretion through cultivated
fields, yielding to circumstances, and winding round what would trouble
it to overwhelm or remove. It passes through the populous cities, and
all the busy haunts of man, tenders its services on every side, and
becomes the support and ornament of the country. Increased by numerous
alliances, and advanced in its course, it becomes grave and stately in
its motions, loves peace and quiet, and in majestic silence rolls on its
mighty waters, till it is laid to rest in the vast abyss.”


                           FALLS OF NIAGARA.

Cataracts or falls are formed by the descent of rivers over rocks, from
a higher to a lower level. That of Niagara, is situated on the river
Niagara, between Canada and the United States, which takes its rise in
the eastern extremity of Lake Erie, and, after flowing for thirty-five
miles, empties itself into Lake Ontario. Its breadth is nine hundred
feet, and its depth very considerable; but its current is so exceedingly
strong and irregular, and its channel so frequently interspersed with
rocks, that it is navigable for small boats only. Proceeding lower, the
stream widens, and the rocks gradually recede from the view, and the
current though strong, is smooth and regular. At Fort Chippewa, however,
situated one league above the cataracts, the scene is again changed, and
the river so agitated, that a boat would be inevitably dashed in pieces,
were it permitted to pass Fort Niagara, situated on its bank. So
impetuously do the waves break among the rocks, that the mere sight of
them, from the adjacent shore, is sufficient to strike terror in the
spectator. As it approaches the falls, the stream rushes along, with
redoubled fury, until it reaches the edge of the stupendous precipice,
when it tumbles suddenly to the bottom, without meeting with any
obstruction in its descent. Precisely at this place, the river strikes
off to the right, and the line of cataracts winds obliquely across,
instead of extending, in the shortest direction, from the one bank to
the other. It ought to be observed, that the water does not precipitate
itself down the vast abyss in one entire sheet, but, being separated by
islands, forms three distinct, collateral falls.

One of these is called the great or Horseshoe fall, from the similarity
of its form to that of a horseshoe. It is situated on the north-west
extremity of the river, and is most deserving of the attention of the
spectator, as probably seven-eighths of the water passes over it, and as
its grandeur is evidently superior to that of the adjacent cataracts,
although its hight may be somewhat less. As the extent of this fall can
be ascertained by the eye only, it is impossible precisely to describe
its limits; but its circumference is generally computed at eighteen
hundred feet, somewhat more than one-third of a mile. Beyond the
intervening island, the width of which may be equal to one thousand and
fifty feet, is the second fall, about fifteen feet wide; and at the
distance of ninety feet, occupied by the second island, is the third
fall, the dimensions of which may be reckoned equal to those of the
large island; so that the entire extent of the precipice, including the
intermediate islands, is four thousand and five feet; a computation
which certainly does not exceed the truth. The quantity of water
precipitated from the falls is prodigious, and it has been estimated,
amounts to _six hundred and seventy thousand, two hundred and fifty tuns
per minute_.

From the eminence entitled the Table rock, the spectator has a fine
prospect of the terrific rapids above the falls, and of the surrounding
shores, embellished with lofty woods. He there sees to advantage the
adjacent Horseshoe fall, and the dread abyss, into which he may look
perpendicularly from the edge of the rock, if his courage be equal to
his curiosity. The immensity of the various objects which here present
themselves to the view, infallibly overwhelms a stranger with
astonishment, and several minutes must elapse before he can possibly
collect himself sufficiently to form any just conception of the awful
and magnificent scene before him, which requires that all its component
parts should be separately examined, and which affords so truly
surprising an exhibition, that persons who have resided in its vicinity
for several years, and who have been constantly habituated to its
sublimity, ingenuously acknowledge, _at their last visit_, that they
were never able before to discover its peculiar grandeur.

From a cliff nearly opposite to one extremity of the third fall, the
falls are seen in a very interesting point of view: the scenery there,
it is true, is less magnificent, but is infinitely more beautiful than
from any other station. For several miles beneath the precipice the
river is bounded, on either side, by steep and lofty cliffs, composed of
earth and rocks, which in most parts are perpendicular. The descent to
the bottom of the falls was formerly accomplished by two ladders, formed
of long pine trees, with notches on their sides, on which the traveler
rested his feet, and passed down amidst a variety of huge misshapen
rocks and pendant trees, seeming to threaten him with instantaneous
destruction. The breadth of the river in this part is about two
furlongs; and toward the right, on the opposite side, the third fall
appears in a very advantageous point of view. About one-half of the
Horse-shoe fall is concealed by the projecting cliff, but its partial
prospect is extremely fine. The bottom of the former of these falls is
skirted with a beautiful white foam, which ascends from the rock in
thick volumes, but does not rise into the air like a cloud of smoke, as
is the case with that of the latter fall, although its spray is so
considerable, as to descend like a shower of rain, near the second
ladder, on the opposite side of the river. On its brink, and along the
strand, to the great fall, are to be constantly seen shattered trees and
bodies of animals, which have been carried away by the extreme violence
of the current.

The color of the water of the cataracts, as it descends perpendicularly
on the rocks, is occasionally a dark green, and sometimes a foaming,
brilliant white, displaying a thousand elegant variations, according to
the state of the atmosphere, the hight of the sun, or the force of the
wind. A portion of the spray, resulting from the falls, frequently
towers above the hight, and literally mingles with the clouds: while the
remainder, broken in its descent by fragments of rocks, is in continual
agitation. The noise, irregularity, and rapid descent of the stream,
continue about eight miles further; and the river is not sufficiently
calm to admit of navigation, till it reaches Queenstown, on the west
side of the river, and nine miles from the falls.

A late tourist has given us a more recent and fresh view of this
wonderful cataract, which will aid us more fully to understand its
various aspects as taken from different points of observation. “From the
bank just below the ‘Clifton House,’ he says, “is perhaps the finest
panoramic view of the falls. The general outline bears a resemblance to
the shape of a human ear; the great Horseshoe fall [which is represented
on the right hand of the cut below] constituting the upper lobe, while
Goat island and the American fall [as seen on the left] represent the
remaining portion. The river, whose general course has been east and
west, makes a sharp turn to the right just at the point where the fall
now is. Its breadth is here contracted from three-fourths of a mile to
less than one-fourth. The Horseshoe fall only occupies the head of the
chasm, while the American cataract falls over its side; so that this
fall and a part of the Horseshoe lie directly parallel with the Canada
shore, and its whole extent can be taken in at a single glance. It is
this oneness of aspect which renders the prospect from this side so much
the more impressive for a first view of Niagara. It gives a strong,
sharp outline which may afterward be filled up at leisure.

[Illustration: NIAGARA FALLS.]

“The most complete view of the Horseshoe fall is that from the bottom of
the cliff, at a point near the ferry landing. If, however, the water is
unusually high, the quiet pool which is ordinarily seen in the
foreground, becomes a fierce and angry rush of waters, foaming above and
around the jagged rocks. If the water is very low, the bed of this pool
is entirely dry. Last year [1852] there were but few days when the whole
spot was not overflowed. The current nearest the Canada shore runs
up-stream, as though seeking an outlet in the direction from which it
came. The middle distance is marked by a line of white foam, beyond
which the current runs downstream. The center of the Horse-shoe fall is
directly in front, defined on the right by the verge of Table Rock, and
on the left by the upper extremity of Goat island. Just below the tower
which seems to rise from the midst of the waters on the American side,
an immense mass of rock is dimly visible, which became detached from the
precipice in February, 1852.

“A very charming glimpse of that portion of the fall directly in front
of the tower, may be caught through a clump of trees which stand a
little above the ferry landing. The limitation of view hightens the
effect, when contrasted with the unlimited prospect of the fall
presented from almost every other point on the Canada side.

“It is no very difficult task for a stout pedestrian to make his way
along under the edge of the precipice from the ferry up to the foot of
the fall. The path winds among huge fragments of rock which have tumbled
from above, and is slippery with the falling spray. You stop to rest
upon a huge rock, where a couple of rough-coated men are fishing. They
tell you that it is named ‘Bass rock,’ and you recognize the propriety
of the appellation, as you observe the finny spoil that has repaid their
labor. The water rushes foaming and eddying around the fragments of
rock, sometimes rising in great swells to the spot on which you stand.
Fragments of timber, their ends rounded and worn like pebbles on a
wave-beaten shore, are scattered around: some groaning and tossing in
the water, others stranded high and dry upon the rocks, where they have
been flung by some swell higher than usual. You are so near the foot of
the fall that the descending sheet of water occupies the entire field of
vision: the immense rock which interposes between Bass rock and the
descending water has as yet received no distinctive name.

“The path now begins to ascend the sloping bank, winding around huge
bowlders, and among gay shrubs which the perpetual spray nourishes in
luxuriant greenness, wherever there is a resting-place for a patch of
soil. At last you reach the dilapidated staircase which descends the
perpendicular face of the cliff, and clambering around its base upon a
rotten and slimy plank, you find yourself below the overhanging mass of
Table Rock. You are close at the edge of the falling water, which
descends in a mass apparently as solid as though carved from marble. You
now begin to comprehend the hight of the fall. It makes you dizzy to
look up to the upper edge of the rushing column. You stand just midway
between the top and the bottom. Above you hangs the imminent mass of
Table Rock; below, far down by the wet and jagged rocks, is the seething
whirlpool, where the water writhes and eddies as though frenzied with
its fearful leap. Round and round it goes in solemn gyrations, bearing
with it whatever floating object may have been plunged into its vortex.

“A year ago this very month of August, a young woman walked in the cool
gray morning down to the brink of the cliff and flung herself into the
whirlpool below. So resolute was the leap, that she shot clear of the
jagged rocks at the base, and plunged sheer into the water beyond. When
the visitors came sauntering down to the fall, her body was seen
whirling round and round in the mad eddies, now submerged for an
instant, and then leaping up, as though imploring aid. A day or two
afterward, I was one of a group to whom a rough-looking man was
describing the scene. He told how he and two others had descended amid
the blinding spray close to the foot of the fall. A rope was then
fastened to his body, which was held fast from above by the others,
while he groped his misty way down to the very edge of the waters, where
he waited till they whirled the corpse close inshore. He then darted a
spear with a spring-barb into the body, but the force of the current
tore out the hold, and it drifted away. Again it came within reach, and
again the hold of the spear was too weak to overcome the force of the
current. A third time the body approached, and the spear was darted.
This time it caught among the strong muscles of the thigh, and held, so
that the body was drawn to shore. The narrator was a rough man, roughly
clad, and told his story roughly; but there was in his voice a low
thrill of horror as he told how he was obliged to cut the spear-head out
of the flesh with his knife, before the weapon could be extracted: ‘It
was too bad,’ said he; ‘but it couldn’t be helped.’ And it was with
unconscious pathos that he told how they stripped off their own rough
garments, and tenderly covered the poor maimed and mutilated body before
they bore it up the bank. It was a commentary, wrought out into
practice, upon Hood’s immortal ‘Bridge of Sighs.’

“With the exception of the fall itself, the Canada side presents little
of interest. The brink of the gorge is bare and naked, the trees which
once clothed it having been cut away. The regular drive seems to be up
to the Burning Spring, and thence back by way of Drummondville and
Lundy’s Lane. At the Burning Spring you register your name, pay your
fee, and are introduced into a small apartment, in the floor of which is
a spring in constant ebullition from the escape of an inflammable gas.
The flaxen-pated children of the show-woman place a receiver over the
spring, and set fire to the gas, as it comes out of the jet; they then
remove the receiver, and light the gas as it rises to the surface of the
water; and that is all. You take your departure, looking vastly edified;
while the driver thrusts his tongue into his cheek, as though he were
mentally quoting a certain proverb touching ‘a fool and his money.’

[Illustration: Niagara Falls on the American side]

“In the early morning you commit yourself to the little boat in which
you are to be ferried over to the American shore. Your half-felt
misgivings are dissipated as you see the dexterous manner with which the
brawny boatman handles his oars, and takes advantage of the ‘up-eddy’
and ‘down-eddy;’ and in a few minutes you are landed close at the foot
of the American fall. Half-way up the ferry-stairs is an opening which
gives access to a path along the foot of the perpendicular precipice to
the verge of the falling water. From this point in the early morning,
may be gained one of the most picturesque views of Niagara. Your
position gives a fine view of the fall on the American side, as seen in
the cut; the hight of which forms a standard by which you measure that
of the Horseshoe fall, which stretches away in the distant perspective.
Completing the ascent of the ferry-stairway, you reach Prospect point,
at its head, from whence the same general view is gained, from a more
elevated point. It is hard to say whether the view from above or below
is the finer. The latter brings more into notice the hight of the
falling column of water, thus gaining an additional element of grandeur,
while the latter embraces a view of the wooded islands above the fall,
adding greatly to the picturesque effect. The precise point from which
the artist has taken this sketch is not now attainable. It was a
projecting shelf of rock, a few feet below the precipice, which has been
cut away to make room for the terribly unpicturesque, but most
convenient stairway.

“This was apparently the point from which honest Father Hennepin, who
has left us the earliest written account of Niagara, gazed upon that
‘prodigious Cadence of Waters, which falls down after a surprising and
astonishing Manner, insomuch that the Universe can not afford its
parallel.’ ‘The Waters,’ goes on the quaint narrative, ‘which fall from
this horrible Precipice, do foam and boyle after the most hideous Manner
imaginable, making an outrageous Noise more terrible than that of
Thunder.’ The good Jesuit would seem to have been deeply moved by this
‘dismal Roaring;’ for in the curious picture which he gives of the
falls, he represents the spectators holding their hands to their ears to
shut out the din; and he hints that the Indians were forced to abandon
the neighborhood of the falls, lest they should become deafened by the
uproar. But the good father must have heard the ‘horrid Noise of the
Falls,’ as he elsewhere calls it, with the imagination rather than with
the ear. You hardly notice it as you loiter along the brink, except when
some sudden atmospheric change varies its deep and solemn monotone. The
sound is like the continuous and pervading murmur of the wind through a
forest of somber pines. You are not forced to raise your voice in
conversing with a friend by whose side you loiter along the brink of the
fall, toward the bridge which gives you access to the wooded islands
that beckon you on.

“Nothing can exceed the picturesque beauty of the small wooded islands
which stud the rapids upon the American side. Two of rare beauty, known
as Ship and Brig islands, stem the current a little above the bridge
which connects Goat island with the shore. It needs but little effort of
the imagination to fancy them vessels under full press of sail,
endeavoring to sheer out of the current that hurries them inevitably
down. The former of these islands is accessible by a bridge which
connects it with Bath island, and is one of the loveliest spots
imaginable. The old cedars, whose gnarled and contorted trunks overhang
the waters, dipping their branches into the current, seem to cling with
desperate clutch to the rocks, as though fearful of losing their hold
and being swept away.

“From the bridge leading to Goat island, the rapids present that same
appearance of plunging from the sky which renders their view from the
Canadian shore so impressive. Goat island—so let it still be called, in
spite of the foppery which has lately attempted to change its name to
Iris island—presents an aspect almost as wild as it did before it had
been rendered accessible to human foot. Were it not for the path which
girdles its entire circumference, and the rustic seats disposed here and
there, one might fancy that he was the first who had ever sauntered
through its grand and stately woods. The beauty and variety of the trees
on this island are wonderful. There is the maple, greeting the early
spring sunshine with its fire-tipped buds; spreading out in summer its
broad dome of dark green leaves in masses so thick, that beneath them
you have no fear of the passing shower; and in autumn wearing its
gorgeous crimson robe like an oriental monarch. The beech shows its
dappled trunk and bright green foliage at every point, giving perpetual
life and vivacity to the scene. The silvery trunks of the white birch
gleam among the underwood. An occasional aspen, with its ever-quivering
leaves, which almost shed a sense of breezy coolness in the stillest,
sultriest day, contrasts finely with the dark evergreens by which it is
relieved. Almost all of our northern fauna have their representatives
here. Even upon the little Ship island, which can be crossed in any
direction in a dozen strides, and which appears to a hasty view but a
mass of twisted and gnarled cedars, there are at least seven distinct
species of trees. Those trees, however, which immediately overhang the
falls, have an aspect peculiar to themselves. They are bent, broken,
twisted and contorted, in every direction. They seem to be starting back
in horror from the abyss before them, and to wind their long finger-like
roots around the rocks, in order to maintain their hold.

“One of these, an aged birch, growing upon the ridge known as the ‘Hog’s
Back,’ affords a resting-place from which to gain one of the finest
views of the American falls. Right in front is the small central fall,
and the footbridge which leads to Luna island, with its trees dwarfed
and stunted by the weight of frozen spray which loads them in the
winter. Beyond is the serrated line of the American fall; while the
distance is filled up with the receding lines of the banks of the river
below.

“A few paces—past groups of blithe tourists, past companies of somber
Indian girls in blue blankets and high-crowned hats, with their gay
wares spread out at their feet—brings you to the Biddle staircase, down
which you wind to the foot of the precipice. The path to the left leads
along the foot of the overhanging cliff, up to the verge of the
Horseshoe fall, only a portion of whose circumference is visible from
any point on the American shore. You are here close upon the fragments
of rock that fell from just in front of the tower, in February, 1852,
the latest of those changes which are slowly and almost imperceptibly
altering the form and position of the falls. This fall of rock was seen
by an artist who has given us a faithful picture of its effects. He was
just recovering from an illness, and while sitting in his room at the
Clifton House, on the opposite Canadian shore, he was startled by a
crash, almost like that of an earthquake. Tottering to the window, he
beheld the immense curtain of rock in front of the tower precipitated
from its ancient hold, and lying in huge masses upon the ice below;
while a few streams of water trickled down the brown cliff, where but a
moment before nothing had been seen but a surface of dazzling ice. The
water at this extremity of the fall descends in light feathery forms,
contrasting finely with the solid masses in which it seems to plunge
down the center of the sweeping curve. The tower is perched upon the
very brink of the precipice, so close that the next fall of rock must
carry it along with it. The path to the right from the foot of the
staircase, leads to the entrance to the Cave of the Winds, which lies
behind the central fall. It is hard to imagine how this cavern missed
being called the ‘Cave of Æolus,’ by those classicists who have
exhausted ancient mythology for appellations for our American scenery.
But it has escaped this infliction; and the ‘Cave of the Winds,’ it is,
and will be. From the little house close by the entrance, where the
requisite changes of dress are made, you look down into an abyss of cold
gray mist, driven ever and anon like showers of hail into your face, as
you grope your way down the rocky slope. Haste not, pause not. Here is
the platform, half-seen, half-felt amid the blinding spray. Shade of
Father Hennepin, this is truly a ‘dismal roaring’ of wind and water. We
are across, and stand secure on the smooth, shaly bottom of the cave.
Look up: what a magnificent arch is formed by the solid rock on the one
side, and the descending mass of water on the other. Which is the
solider and firmer you hardly know. Yet look again—for it is sunset—and
see what we shall see nowhere else on earth, three rainbows one within
another; not half-formed and incomplete, as is the scheme of our daily
life, but filling up the complete circle, perfect and absolute.

“Upon an isolated rock at the very brink of the cataract stands a round
tower. It is approached by a long, narrow bridge, resting now upon
ledges of solid rock, and now upon loose bowlders. From the balcony upon
its summit, you can lean far over the edge of the precipice, and there
catch the freshness of the cloud of spray that rises evermore from the
unseen foot of the great fall. Or you can climb down the low rock upon
which the tower stands, and gather shells and pebbles from within arm’s
length of the verge of the descent, so gentle, to all appearance, is the
current. But be not over-bold. These waters, apparently so gentle, sweep
down with a force beyond your power to stem. Not many months ago, a man
fell from the bridge into their smooth flow, and was in the twinkling of
an eye swept to the brink of the descent. Here he lodged against one of
those rocks that lie apparently tottering upon the brow, looking over
the fearful descent, with as little power to retrace his course, as he
would have had to reascend the perpendicular fall. A rope was floated
down to him, which he had just strength to fasten around his body, and
he was drawn up from his perilous position.

“It is usual to speak of the Horseshoe fall as Canadian; and our rather
slow neighbors across the river have been wont to plume themselves upon
the possession of the more magnificent part of Niagara; while Young
America has been heard to mutter between his teeth something about
‘annexation,’ on the ground that the lesser nation has no fair claim to
the possession of the major part of the crowning wonder of the
continent. But the portion of Niagara belonging to Canada is hardly
worth contending for. The boundary line between the two countries is the
deepest water, which runs far over toward the Canadian shore. The line
passes through the lonely little isle in the center of the river, which
has never been trodden by human foot. Right through the very center of
the Horseshoe fall, where the water is greenest, cutting the thickest
pillar of spray, through the inmost convolution of the whirlpool,
through the calmest part of the quiet reach of water above the
suspension bridge, through the maddest work of the rapids below, goes
the boundary line, leaving to Canada nothing of Niagara except Table
Rock, which yearly threatens to fall, and the half of the great fall:
while to America it gives, together with full one-half of the Horseshoe
fall, the varying beauties of the lesser cataracts, and the whole wealth
of the lovely islands which gem the rapids.

“The general form of the falls is slowly changing from age to age. When
Father Hennepin saw them, a century and three-quarters ago, they
presented little of that curved and indented outline which now forms
their most striking peculiarity. The fall on the western side extended
in nearly a straight line from the head of Goat island to Table Rock,
which terminated in a bluff that turned a portion of the water from its
direct course, forming another cataract which fell to the east. A
century later, this projecting rock had disappeared, but the spot which
it had occupied was distinctly traceable. From the character of the
strata through which the water has slowly worn its way back from the
shores of Lake Ontario, we learn what must have been the appearances of
the fall at any period of its history. Thus it can never have overcome
the descent of three hundred and fifty feet at Lewiston at a single
leap, but must have formed at least three cataracts separated by
intervening rapids. When the falls occupied the position of the
whirlpool, three miles below their present site, the descent was
evidently greater than at any period before or since. But there never
can have been a period when their beauty equaled that which they present
at the present age. The immense breadth of the sheet of falling water,
its graceful sweep of curves, and the picturesque islands that stud the
brink, belong solely to our present Niagara. The falls recede at
present, we are told, at the rate of something less than a foot in a
year. Geology is able to predict that when a recession of a mile has
taken place, some five or six thousand years hence, the hight of the
fall will be reduced by a score of feet. Another five thousand years
will subtract two score more of feet. Ten thousand years more, when the
fall shall have worn its way four miles further back, all that
constitutes Niagara will have disappeared, and the whole descent will be
accomplished by a series of rapids like those near the whirlpool.

“It is strange how little of direct human interest is connected with
Niagara. One would have supposed that it would have been a sacred spot
with the Indians; but, with the exception of a few graves on the upper
extremity of Goat island, no special memorial of the aborigines exists
here. The falls have been known to the white race for too short a time
to gather around them legendary associations. One or two points are
associated with the memory of a young Englishman who, something like a
score of years ago, set up as the ‘Hermit of the Falls.’ A picturesque
little break in the rapids between Goat island and one of the rocky
islets known as the Three Sisters, has been named from him the ‘Hermit’s
cascade.’ It is a lovely spot, by the side of which one may lie under
the overarching trees, and while away the noontide hour, lulled into
dreamy slumber by the deep voice of the cataract. This hermit seems
hardly worthy of being made the hero of the falls. Little is told of him
except that he was fond of music and of pacing by night along the margin
of the river; that he was alike indisposed for human society and for
clean linen. It is said, indeed, that he was accustomed to record his
musings in Latin, but as no fragments of these were discovered after his
death, we may set the story down as apocryphal. A deeper tragic interest
is attached to a tale, now some three years old, which will be told you
as you stand by the margin of the lesser fall. A party of visitors stood
here, in gay discourse. Among them were a young man and his affianced
bride, and with them a laughing child. The young man, catching up the
child, said sportively to her, ‘Now I shall throw you over;’ when she,
gliding from his hold in affright, half real and half feigned, slipped,
and falling, plunged headlong into the stream; he sprang after, but the
current was stronger than his strength, and swept them both down the
smooth slope, and over the fall. Their bodies, mangled and bruised, were
recovered from the rocks below.

“The pedestrian can hardly find a pleasanter summer day’s ramble, than
that along the river to Lewiston, descending on the American side, and
returning by the opposite bank. For a mile below the falls, where the
channel is narrowest, the current is so smooth, that one might fancy he
was gazing down into some quiet tarn embosomed in the mountains, were it
not that you catch the white margin of the lower rapids just where the
suspension bridge stretches its slender line from the summits of the
opposing cliffs.”

This bridge, a view of which is given in the cut below, is about two and
a half miles below the falls, and spans the river near the head of the
rapids, above the whirlpool. From pier to pier it is eight hundred feet
long, and in breadth eight feet. It is suspended on eight wire cables,
four on each side, which pass over towers fifty-four feet high, built of
heavy timber. The present structure is only the scaffolding for
constructing a larger bridge, intended for the passage of railroad cars.
The towers for the large bridge will be of solid masonry, each eighty
feet high. Each of the cables is eleven hundred feet long, and composed
of seventy-two strong, No. 10 iron wires, closely wrapped round with
small wire three times boiled in linseed oil, which anneals it, and
prevents injury from rust or exposure to the weather. The cables, after
passing over the piers on the banks, are fast anchored in solid masonry
fifty feet back of them. The _suspenders_, which form the sides, are
composed of eight wires each, and are four and a half feet apart. The
bridge itself is two hundred feet above the water, and is a wonder alike
of enterprise and art.

[Illustration: Suspension Bridge over Niagara River]

Our tourist proceeds as follows. “In the quiet reach of the water below
this bridge, plies the little steamer, the Maid of the Mist. After
passing the ugly, bustling little village growing up around the American
extremity of the bridge, a path leads through quiet fields and woods
along the very verge of the precipice. Here and there some tree growing
upon the brink forms a safe balustrade over which you lean, and look
down upon the green water dashing furiously through its confined channel
far below.

“The whirlpool, three miles below the falls, is an adjunct worthy of
Niagara. The stream makes a sharp bend just where the channel is
narrowest and the descent of the rapids the steepest. At the angle the
current has scooped out an immense basin, around whose whole
circumference the water circles before it can find an outlet. All
floating bodies that pass down the river are drawn into the whirlpool,
where they are borne round and round for days, and weeks sometimes, it
is said, before they make their escape. A practicable path winds down
the bank to the water’s edge. The character of the banks gradually
changes as we descend toward the outlet of the river. The hard limestone
overlying the softer rock, and forming the perpendicular portion of the
cliff, becomes thinner; the sloping talus at the foot grows higher, and
the rocks are clothed with a luxurious forest growth. A half mile below
the whirlpool is a deep cleft in the precipitous bank, which is
connected with a wild Indian legend ascribing terrible convulsions of
nature, and even the approach of the fatal white men, to an unauthorized
violation of the privacy of a great demon who once abode here. This was
the scene of a terrible tragedy in the old French wars. A convoy of
British soldiers fell into an ambush of Indians at this point, and were
all, with the exception of two, slain outright or driven over the edge
of the chasm. The little rivulet which flows over the brink, ran red
with the blood of the slaughtered, and thus gained the name, which it
still bears, of the Bloody Run.

“Close by the Devil’s Hole, the railroad now in course of construction
from Lewiston to the falls, gains the level of the top of the bank. From
this point downward, it is excavated in the face of the cliff, forming a
steep grade to its bottom. An almost continuous line of shanties,
occupied by the laborers engaged in the excavation, extends along the
very verge of the precipice. It was curious, as I passed along in the
early April days, to see children whom we should scarcely trust out of
the nurse’s arms, sprawling upon the very verge of the cliff. The
laborers are apparently all Irish, and it is noteworthy to see how much
more intelligent is the aspect of the younger than of the older
children. I thought I could distinguish by their mere physical
appearance, those who were born under the freer and happier auspices
which surround them here. At the foot of the cliff the suspension bridge
stretches like a slender thread across the stream, its supporting towers
resting on a ledge above the level of the roadway. No line of guards
watches the quiet frontiers of two great nations. The sole police is a
small boy at the gate, and the only passport demanded is a shilling for
toll. You climb the smooth slope to the summit, where the shattered
monument to the noble Brock is the only memorial of the day when the
thrice-won victory was at last wrenched from the hands of the Americans.
A flock of sheep are cropping the tender herbage; a couple of lambs have
found a shady resting-place in the crumbling archway of the monument. To
the right the white village of Lewiston presents an aspect of bustling
activity; while to the left, on the opposite Canadian shore, Queenstown
rests gray and somber. At your feet, just below the dilapidated memorial
of war, the bridge, symbol of union, binds the two shores: may it never
be a pathway for the march of hostile armies!

“There are two or three things in the way of excursion which must sooner
or later be performed. Some bright afternoon, when the west is all
aglow, as you sit upon Table Rock, watching the clouds of spray momently
torn from the face of the descending column, the guide with the hollow
voice, whose mission is to conduct visitors behind the great sheet,
presents himself. You commit yourself to his guidance, and donning the
suit of yellow oil-skin, follow him down the spiral staircase, along the
base of the precipice up to the verge of the cataract. You shudder, and
hesitate to enter the blinding spray along that winding path, which
seems in the dimness like a slender line drawn upon the face of the
rock. The guide whispers a word of encouragement, deftly insinuating how
boldly ‘the lady’ trod its slippery length. You take courage and
advance. You can scarcely breathe, much less see; but you feel that the
torrent is plunging from the immeasurable hight above into the
unfathomable depth below. Somehow, how you hardly know, you have passed
through the thick curtain of blinding spray, and are peering eagerly
into the gray depth beyond. You are on Termination rock, and further
than this mortal foot may never penetrate within the vail. Whichever way
you turn, it is all cold gray mist, shrouding the overhanging rock and
the overarching water above, and the profound depths below; all mist,
cold gray mist above, below, around, except when you turn your eyes back
along the path by which you entered, where you behold a strip of golden
sky between the grim rock and the edge of the descending flood. Drenched
and dripping, spent and exhausted, as a shipwrecked sailor flung by the
surf upon some inhospitable shore, you follow your guide back along the
misty path, and emerge gladly enough into the clear outer air, into the
free sunshine, and beneath the bright sky. As you doff the heavy
oil-skin integuments, a printed paper is put into your hand, certifying
that you ‘have been under the great sheet of water, the distance of two
hundred and forty feet from the commencement of the falls to the
termination of Table Rock,’ verified by the signature of the proprietor
of ‘Table Rock House.’ Your guide looks on you complacently, as though
he would assure you that the great end of life was now attained, and you
might take up your ‘=Nunc dimittis=.’

“Or you take your place upon the deck of the Maid of the Mist, hard by
the suspension bridge, and are steamed up to the foot of the cataract.
The little steamer answers but poorly to her romantic name. She swings
wearily from her moorings, and goes panting and tugging up the current.
Yet she manages to hold her course, unless the wind blows too strong
down-stream, and slowly wins her way close up to the huge rocks on which
the waters of the American fall are broken and shattered into the
thickest of spray. In that spray a sharp and angry gust of wind tears a
sudden rent, and through it you catch a glimpse of the green crest of
the Horseshoe fall, sinking grandly into the ocean of vapor below. Or
better still, if in some calm moonlight night, you glide, with the
boatman, along the foot of the American fall, keeping just outside of
the dark line of shadow, you will find there is nothing on earth so
weird and ghost-like as the spectacle before you. The column of spray
rises from the blackness below, like the specter of some gigantic tree,
and spreads solemnly up into the clear air above.

“The mere summer tourist, however, sees but half the glory of Niagara.
In the winter the great rocks at the foot of the fall are piled up with
an accumulation of frozen spray to the depth of half a hundred feet. By
creeping cautiously up the slippery ascent, you may stand face to face
with the cataract, half-way up its giddy hight. Every shrub on its
margin is loaded with glittering ice. The thick-branched evergreens are
bowed beneath its weight, and bend to the ground like enormous plumes.
The face of the cold gray rock is cased in the frozen element, and
ribbed with pillars and pilasters which flash back the reflection of all
the gems in the rays of the sun; and when in a clear, unclouded day,
that sun shines down in its splendor, the scene is one of matchless
magnificence and glory.”

Thus we have attempted a full description of Niagara; and yet words seem
but feeble to set forth the magnificence and grandeur of the scene as it
rises to the view of the actual beholder. There, in its vast volume and
resistless power, it ever flows on with ceaseless, patient, unwearied
tide. At midnight and noonday, through summer and winter, and seed-time
and harvest, it is still the same. The drought of summer does not
sensibly diminish, or the freshets of spring augment its mighty current.
The scorching sun does not dry it up, and the chains of winter do not
bind it. Emblem of God and of eternity, it rolls on, speaking in calm
sublimity of Him who made it. Nor is sublimity the only characteristic
of this greatest of waterfalls. There are traits of beauty, which seem
even to highten the effect of its grandeur. The rainbow, ever playing in
sunshine over its awful front, and seeming indifferent to the boiling
whirlpool beneath; the tide of many-colored gems, into which the spray
often seems converted, as it plunges over the rocks; the heaps of foam,
white as wool, dancing on the billows that rush away from the foot of
the fall; and more than all, an aspect of tranquillity and of repose,
which settles upon the whole scene, when viewed at a little distance,
are all incidents which blend in the majestic picture imprinted on the
memory by this stupendous yet lovely work of nature’s God.

The falls of Niagara have been the frequent theme of poetry, but the
following lines by Brainard are deemed the finest that have been
produced upon the subject.

          “The thoughts are strange that crowd into my brain,
          While I look upward to thee. It would seem
          As if God poured thee from his ‘hollow hand,’
          And hung his bow upon thine awful front;
          And spoke in that loud voice, which seemed to him
          Who dwelt in Patmos for his Saviour’s sake,
          ‘The sound of many waters;’ and had bade
          Thy flood to chronicle the ages back,
          And notch His centuries in the eternal rocks!

          “Deep calleth unto deep, and what are we,
          That hear the question of that voice sublime?
          Oh! what are all the notes that ever rung
          From war’s vain trumpet, by thy thundering side!
          Yea, what is all the riot man can make
          In his short life, to thine unceasing roar!
          And yet, bold babbler, what art thou to Him,
          Who drown’d a world, and heaped the waters far
          Above its loftiest mountains?—a light wave,
          That breaks and whispers of its Maker’s might!”


                       FALLS OF THE MONTMORENCI.

The Montmorenci empties itself at the distance of about eight miles
northeast of Quebec, into the great river St. Lawrence, to the coast of
which it gradually descends from the elevated mountain on which it has
its source. At a station called La Motte, situated on the northern
extremity of a sloping ground, its waters diffuse themselves into
shallow currents, interrupted by rocks which break them into foam, and
accompanied by murmuring sounds which enliven the solitude and solemn
stillness prevailing throughout the surrounding forests and desolate
hills. Further down, its channel is bounded by precipitous rocks, its
breadth becoming extremely contracted, and the rapidity of its current
proportionably augmented. At a place called “the natural steps,” there
are several beautiful cascades of ten or twelve feet. These steps, which
are extremely regular, have been gradually formed by the accession of
waters the river receives in its progress, at the breaking up of winter,
by the melting of the snows. From the middle of April to the end of May,
its waters roll with increasing hight and rapidity. Being powerfully
impelled in their course, they insinuate themselves between the strata
of the horizontal rock, vast fragments of which are detached by the
rushing violence of the sweeping torrent.

[Illustration: FALLS OF MONTMORENCI.]

On the eastern side, the bank, which is almost perpendicular, and fifty
feet high, is surmounted by lofty trees. The south-west bank rises
beyond the steps, and terminates in a precipice. On the opposite side,
the bank is regular, and of a singular shape, resembling the ruin of an
elevated wall. The trees by which the banks are inclosed, united with
the effect produced by the foaming currents, and the scattered masses of
stone, form a scene wild and picturesque. The stream now taking a
southern direction, is augmented in its velocity, and forms a grand
cascade interrupted by huge rocks. A quarter of a mile further down a
similar effect is produced. After exhibiting an agreeable variety
through its course, the river is precipitated, in an almost
perpendicular direction, over a rock two hundred and fifty feet in
hight. A view of this latter cascade is given in the cut. Wherever it
touches the rock, it falls in white clouds of rolling foam; and,
beneath, where it is propelled with uninterrupted gravitation, it forms
numerous flakes, like wool or cotton, which are gradually protracted in
the descent, until they are received into the boiling profound abyss
beneath.

The effect from the summit of the cliff is awfully grand, and truly
sublime. The prodigious depth of the descent of the waters of this
surprising fall; the brightness and volubility of their course; the
swiftness of their movement through the air; and the loud and hollow
noise emitted from the basin, swelling with incessant agitation from the
weight of the dashing waters, forcibly combine to attract the attention,
and to impress the mind of the spectator with sentiments of grandeur and
elevation. The clouds of rising vapor, which assume the prismatic
colors, contribute to enliven the scene. They fly off from the fall in
the form of a revolving sphere, emitting with velocity pointed flakes of
spray, which spread in receding, until they are interrupted by the
neighboring banks, or dissolved in the atmosphere.

The breadth of the fall is one hundred feet; and the basin, which is
bounded by steep cliffs, forms an angle of forty-five degrees. When
viewed from the beach, the cataract is seen, with resplendent beauty, to
flow down the gloomy precipice, the summit of which is crowded with
woods. The diffusion of the stream, to the breadth of fifteen hundred
feet, and the various small cascades produced by the inequalities of its
rocky bed, on its way to the river St. Lawrence, display a very singular
and pleasing combination.


                            THE TUCCOA FALL.

This fall, in Franklin county, Georgia, is as yet scarcely known to the
best informed of our geographers, and is notwithstanding one of the most
beautiful that can be conceived. It is much higher than the great fall
of Niagara; and the water is charmingly propelled over a perpendicular
rock. When the stream is full, it passes down the steep in one expansive
sheet, magnificent to behold.


                         FALLS OF THE MISSOURI.

The most prominent features of this great river, which is fed by so many
streams, having their sources in a great variety of soils and climates,
are its wonderful falls, rapids and cascades, the following connected
view of which is abstracted from the very accurate draught and survey
made by Captain Clarke.

This river is nine hundred feet wide at the point where it receives the
waters of Medicine river, which is four hundred and one feet in width.
The united current continues five thousand, four hundred and twelve
feet, somewhat more than a mile, to a small rapid on the north side,
from which it gradually widens to four thousand, two hundred feet, and
at the distance of nine thousand and forty-two feet, (nearly a mile and
three-fourths,) reaches the head of the rapids, narrowing as it
approaches them. Here the hills on the north, which had withdrawn from
the bank, closely border the river, which, for the space of a mile,
makes its way over the rocks with a descent of thirty feet: in this
course the current is contracted to sixteen hundred and forty feet, and,
after throwing itself over a small pitch of five feet, forms a beautiful
cascade of twenty-six feet, five inches; this does not, however, fall
quite perpendicularly, being stopped by a part of the rock, which
projects at about one-third of the distance. After descending this fall,
and passing the Cotton-wood island, on which the eagle has fixed its
nest, the river goes on for eight thousand, seven hundred and
seventy-eight feet, (more than a mile and a half,) over rapids and
little falls, the estimated descent of which is thirteen feet six
inches, till it is joined by a large fountain boiling up underneath the
rocks near the edge of the river, and falling into it with a cascade of
eight feet. It is of the most perfect clearness, and rather of a bluish
cast; and even after falling into the Missouri it preserves its color
for half a mile. From this fountain the river descends with increased
rapidity for the distance of thirty-five hundred and thirty-one feet,
during which the estimated descent is five feet: from this, for a
distance of twenty-two hundred and twenty-seven feet, the river descends
fourteen feet seven inches, including a perpendicular fall of six feet
seven inches. The river has now become pressed into a space of fourteen
hundred and nineteen feet, and here forms a grand cataract, by falling
over a plain rock, the whole distance across the river, to the depth of
forty-seven feet, eight inches: after recovering itself, the Missouri
then proceeds with an estimated descent of three feet, till at the
distance of sixteen hundred and eighty-three feet it again is
precipitated down the crooked falls, nineteen feet perpendicularly;
below this at the mouth of a deep ravine, is a fall of five feet, after
which, for the distance of sixteen thousand and five feet, (upward of
three miles,) the descent is much more gradual, not being more than ten
feet, and then succeeds a handsome level plain for the space of
twenty-nine hundred and thirty-seven feet, (more than half a mile,) with
a computed descent of three feet, making a bend toward the north. Thence
it descends, during seventy-nine hundred and twenty feet, about eighteen
feet and a half, when it makes a perpendicular fall of two feet, which
is fourteen hundred and eighty-five feet beyond the great cataract, in
approaching which it descends thirteen feet, within a distance of about
six hundred feet, and gathering strength from its confined channel,
which is only eight hundred and forty feet wide, rushes over the fall to
the depth of eighty-seven feet and three-quarters of an inch. After
raging among the rocks, and losing itself in foam, it is compressed
immediately into a bed of two hundred and seventy-nine feet in width; it
continues for fifty-six hundred and ten feet to the entrance of a run or
deep ravine, where there is a fall of three feet, which, joined to the
decline of the river during that course, makes the descent six feet. As
it goes on, the descent within the next thirty-nine hundred and sixty
feet is only four feet; from this, passing a run or deep ravine, the
descent for sixteen hundred feet is thirteen feet: within thirty-nine
hundred and sixty feet, is a second descent of eighteen feet; thence
twenty-six hundred and forty feet further, is a descent of six feet;
after which, to the mouth of Portage creek, a distance of forty-six
hundred and twenty feet, the descent is ten feet. From this survey and
estimate it results that the river experiences a descent of three
hundred and fifty-two feet in the course of fifteen or sixteen miles,
from the commencement of the rapids, to the mouth of Portage creek,
exclusive of almost impassable rapids which extend for a mile below its
entrance.


                            CATSKILL FALLS.

The Catskill, or Kauterskill falls, represented in the cut below, are in
the south-west part of the town of Catskill, about fourteen miles from
the village, and two miles west from Pine Orchard, a celebrated summer
resort on the brow of the Catskill mountain. Two ponds, uniting their
outlets, pour the stream thus formed, by falls and rapids in a deep
ravine, to the plain below. The first fall is a hundred and eighty feet
perpendicular; and the second, which is within a short distance, about
eighty feet. Behind the first fall is an immense natural amphitheater,
into which the visitor can go, and look through the water as it falls
from above. The view from the ‘Mountain house,’ near by, is extensive
and varied. The landscape, in a clear atmosphere, is visible for sixty
miles.

[Illustration]


                             TRENTON FALLS.

Among the most beautiful and romantic cascades of the United States, may
justly be reckoned Trenton falls, situated about eighteen miles
north-east of Utica, in the state of New York, on West Canada creek.
Here, within a course of two miles, there are six falls, with an
aggregate descent of three hundred and twelve feet. The scenery is the
most wild and picturesque imaginable; the stream flowing through a
narrow ravine, between perpendicular walls of limestone, which in some
places are one hundred and fifty feet high. The pathway of the spectator
is mostly along the very margin of the chasm which forms the channel of
the rushing waters, on a ledge, or shelf, so narrow and perilous, that
the head often is giddy from the sight; and sometimes it is difficult to
sustain one’s self. These cascades are more remarkable for the wildness
and variety of scenery, than for the volume of water they present. The
hight of the principal fall is estimated at one hundred feet.


                       WATERFALL OF SOUTH AFRICA.

The great chain of mountains which runs from north to south through the
colony of the Cape of Good Hope, divides into two branches, one of which
stretches south-east, and the other due south. At the extremity of the
latter branch is “the waterfall mountain,” in one of the clefts of which
a large stream of water falls from the high rock above, and presents, in
the winter season, when swollen by the rains, a glorious spectacle. To
view this fall to advantage, the traveler has to climb to a considerable
hight over the steep and broken rocks which form one side of the
mountain, and, on reaching the top, sees it on the other side. Its hight
is estimated at between eighty and ninety feet, and its breadth at
between thirty and forty. Adequate terms can not be found to describe
the sublimity of this scene, after abundant rains, when it is in its
full beauty. In the vale beneath, the water is collected in a vast and
deep basin, excavated in the stone; and by the side of the stream is a
grotto, which runs within the rock to the depth of between thirty and
forty feet. The arched entrance to this grotto is close to the falling
water, when the stream is full. The rocks about it are thickly grown
over with shrubs, which are then sprinkled by the spray. The European
travelers who proceed from Cape Town to the interior of South Africa,
seldom fail to make a pilgrimage to this enchanting spot.


                         CATARACTS OF THE NILE.

This celebrated river, through its long and fertile range of about two
thousand British miles, in winding through abrupt and precipitous
countries, exhibits very considerable cataracts, ten or twelve of which,
having a descent of more than twenty feet, occur, before it reaches the
level of Egypt. The one which, by way of eminence, is called the
cataract of the Nile, was visited by Mr. Bruce, from whose relation the
following particulars are extracted.

At the distance of half a mile beneath the cataract, the river is
confined between two rocks, over which a strong bridge of a single arch
has been thrown, and runs into a deep trough, with great roaring, and an
impetuous velocity. On ascending, the cataract presents itself amid
groves of beautiful trees, and exhibits a most magnificent and
stupendous sight, such as, Mr. Bruce observes, ages, added to the
greatest length of human life, could not efface or eradicate from his
memory. It struck him with a kind of stupor, and total oblivion of where
he was, as well as of every sublunary concern. At the time of his visit,
the river had been considerably increased by rains, and fell in one
sheet of water, above half an English mile in breadth, and to the depth
of at least forty feet, with a force and noise which were truly
terrific, and which, for a time, stunned him, and made him giddy. A
thick fume, or haze, covered the fall in every part, and hung over the
course of the stream both above and below, marking its track, although
the waters were not seen. The river, although much swollen, preserved
its natural clearness, and fell, partly into a deep pool, or basin, in
the solid rock, and partly in twenty different eddies to the very foot
of the precipice. In falling, a portion of the stream appeared to run
back with great fury on the rock, as well as forward in the line of its
course, raising waves, or violent ebullitions, which chafed against each
other.


                        CATARACT OF THE MENDER.

The cataract which constitutes the source of this river, the Scamander
of the ancients, is thus beautifully described by Doctor Clarke. “Our
ascent, as we drew near to the source of the river, became steep and
rocky. Lofty summits towered above us, in the greatest style of alpine
grandeur; the torrent, in its rugged bed below, all the while foaming on
our left. Presently we entered one of the sublimest natural
amphitheaters the eye ever beheld; and here the guides desired us to
alight. The noise of waters silenced every other sound. Huge craggy
rocks rose perpendicularly, to an immense hight; whose sides and
fissures, to the very clouds, concealing their tops, were covered with
pines. These grew in every possible direction, among a variety of
evergreen shrubs; and enormous plane-trees waved their vast branches
above the torrent. As we approached its deep gulf, we beheld several
cascades, all of foam, pouring impetuously from chasms in the naked face
of a perpendicular rock. It is said the same magnificent cataract
continues all seasons of the year, wholly unaffected by the casualties
of rain or melting snow. Having reached the chasms whence the torrent
issues, we found, in their front, a beautiful natural basin, six or
eight feet in depth, serving as a reservoir for the water during the
first moments of its emission. It was so clear that the minutest object
might be discerned at the bottom. The copious overflowing of this
reservoir causes the appearance, to a spectator below, of different
cascades, falling to the depth of about forty feet, but there is only
one source. Behind are the chasms whence the water issues. We entered
one of these, and passed into a cavern. Here the water appeared, rushing
with great force, beneath the rock, toward the basin on the outside. The
whole of the rock about the source was covered with moss; close to the
basin grew hazel and plane trees; above were oaks and pines; and all
beyond a naked and fearful precipice.”

The bold and precipitous country of the Alps offers a variety of
waterfalls and perpendicular torrents which are well deserving of
notice; more particularly those in the vicinity of Mount Rosa, a part of
the northern boundary of Piedmont. The river Oreo, fed by numerous
streams from Mount St. Gothard, Mount Cenis, and several branches of the
Apennines, forms, at Cerosoli, a vertical cascade, estimated at four
hundred fathoms, or twenty-four hundred feet; while the torrent Evanson,
descending from another part of Mount Rosa, exhibits a fall of more than
two hundred fathoms, rolling down pebbles of quartz, veined with the
gold which is occasionally traced in the mountains of Challand. The
Cascata del Marmore, or Marble Cascade, so denominated from the mountain
down which the Velcino falls being almost wholly of marble, lies about
three miles from Terni. In proceeding toward it, the traveler is struck
with terror on viewing the precipices, which are of a romantic hight;
but is sufficiently rewarded, when, on reaching the summit of the
mountain, he regards the stupendous cataract, formed by the river as it
rushes from the mountain. Having reached the declivity of its channel,
the waters descend with a rapid course for a short space, and then fall
from a perpendicular hight of three hundred feet, breaking against
lateral rocks, which cause vapors to ascend much higher than the summit
of the cataract, by which the neighboring valley receives a perpetual
fall of rain. After this descent, the waters rush into the cavities of
the rocks, and then bursting through several openings, at length reach
the bed of the river.

The grand cascade of the Anio, near Tivola, flows down the edge of a
steep rock; and at its foot, the water, in a succession of ages, has
hollowed grottos of various shapes and sizes, in a manner so beautifully
picturesque, as to baffle all description. Of these, the grotto of
Neptune is the most celebrated. Near to it are three smaller cascades,
which rush murmuring through the ruins of the villa Mecænas, down the
woody steep which forms the opposite bank of the river, and present the
painter with one of the most picturesque views imaginable, the
foreground varying beautifully at every step he takes.

In Savoy, the Arve flows many miles between high, craggy and
inaccessible rocks, which appear to have been purposely cleft to give
its waters a free passage. The surprising echoes and continual sounds
occasioned by its streams, the trampling of the horses and mules, the
hallooing of passengers, &c., are, in these places, reverberated three,
four, and even in some parts six or seven times, with a noise so deep
and wild, as to strike with terror the traveler who is unaccustomed to
them; and the firing of a gun or pistol, is there more terrible than the
loudest claps of thunder. A steep precipice, with monstrous impending
rocks, which seem ready to fall, joined to the roaring of the river, add
largely to the general sublimity. The cataracts of this river are more
or less loud and terrible, in proportion as the waters are more or less
swollen by the melting snows, with which the tops of the mountains are
covered. One in particular, called the Nun of Arpena, falls from a
prodigiously high rock with great noise and violence: its descent is
said to exceed eleven hundred feet.

In Dalmatia, the river Cettina forms a magnificent cascade, called by
the inhabitants Velica Gubavisa, to distinguish it from a less fall a
little below. The waters precipitate themselves from a hight of above
one hundred and fifty feet, forming a deep majestic sound, which is
caused by the echo resounding between the steep and naked marble banks.
Many broken fragments of rocks, which impede the course of the river
after its fall, break the waves, and render them still more lofty and
sonorous. By the violence of the repercussion, their froth flies off in
small white particles, and is raised in successive clouds, which are
scattered, by the agitation of the air, over the valley. When these
clouds ascend directly upward, the inhabitants expect the noxious
south-east wind called the sirocco.

The fall of the Staub-Bach, in the valley of Lauterbrannen, is estimated
at nine hundred feet of perpendicular hight; and about a league from
Schaffhausen, at the village of Lauffen, in Switzerland, is a tremendous
cataract of the Rhine, where that river precipitates itself from a rock
said to be seventy feet in hight, and not less than four hundred and
fifty feet broad.

In Sweden, near Gottenburgh, the river Gotha rushes down from a
prodigiously high precipice into a deep pit, with a dreadful noise, and
with such amazing force, that the trees designed for the masts of ships,
which are floated down the river, are usually turned upside down in
their fall, and shattered in pieces. They frequently sink so far under
water, as to disappear for a quarter of an hour, half an hour, and
sometimes for three-quarters of an hour. The pit into which the torrent
precipitates them, is of a depth not to be ascertained, having been
sounded with a line of several hundred fathoms, without the bottom being
found.

In addition to the other North American cataracts already described, may
be noticed the Passaic falls, formed by the river Passaic, which
discharges itself into the sea at the northern extremity of the state of
New Jersey. About twenty miles from the mouth of this river, where it
has a breadth of about a hundred and twenty feet, and runs with a very
swift current, it reaches a deep chasm, or cleft, which crosses its
channel, and falls about seventy feet perpendicularly in an entire
sheet. One end of the cleft is closed up, and the water rushes out of
the other with incredible rapidity, in an acute angle to its former
direction, and is received into a large basin. It thence takes a winding
course through the rocks, and spreads again into a very considerable
channel. The cleft is from four to twelve feet in breadth, and is
supposed to have been produced by an earthquake. The falls of St.
Anthony, on the river Mississippi, descend from a perpendicular hight of
thirty feet, and are nearly eight hundred feet in width, while the shore
on each side is a level flat, without any intervening rock or precipice.

In England, among the cataracts which merit a brief mention, may be
cited the one in Devonshire, near the spot where the Tamer receives the
small river Lid. The water there falls above a hundred feet: it proceeds
from a mill at some distance, and after a course on a descent of nearly
one hundred feet from the level of the mill, reaches the brink of the
precipice, whence it falls in a most beautiful and picturesque manner,
and, striking on a part of the cliff, rushes from it in a wider cataract
to the bottom; where falling again with great violence, it makes a deep
and foaming basin in the ground. This fine sheet of water causes the
surrounding air at the bottom to be so impregnated with aqueous
particles, that those who approach it find themselves in a mist. In
Cumberland there are several cataracts; but these are exceeded in beauty
by a remarkable fall of the Tees, on the western side of the county of
Durham, over which is a bridge suspended by chains, seldom passed unless
by the adventurous miners. Asgarth force, in Yorkshire, is likewise a
very interesting fall.

In Scotland, the fall of Eyers, near Loch Ness, is a vast cataract, in a
darksome glen of a stupendous depth. The water rushes beneath, through a
narrow gap between two rocks, and thence precipitating itself more than
forty feet lower into the bottom of the chasm, the foam, like a great
cloud of smoke, rises and fills the air. The sides of this glen are
stupendous precipices, blended with trees overhanging the water, through
which, after a short space, the waters discharge themselves into the
lake. About half a mile to the south of this fall, is another which
passes through a narrow chasm, whose sides it has undermined for a
considerable distance. Over the gap is a true alpine bridge, formed of
the trunks of trees covered with sods, from the middle of which is an
awful view of the water roaring beneath. In Perthshire, the river Keith
presents a very considerable cataract, the noise produced by which is so
violent as to stun those who approach it. The western coast of
Ross-shire is, however, peculiarly distinguished by these natural
wonders, among which may be cited the grand cataract of the river
Kirkag, and the cascade of Glamma, which latter being situated amid the
constant obscurity of woody hills, is truly sublime.

In Ireland, the noble river Shannon has a prodigious cataract, which, at
about fifty miles from its mouth, prevents it from being longer
navigable for vessels of a large burden.




                           SPRINGS AND WELLS.


                          ST. WINIFRED’S WELL.

Holywell, in Flintshire, is famous for St. Winifred’s well, one of the
finest springs in the world. On account of the sanctity in which it was
holden, it gave name to the town. This well pours out, each minute,
_twenty-one tuns of water_, which, running to the middle of the town,
down the side of a hill, is made use of by every house as it passes,
after which it turns several mills, and is employed in various
manufactures, which greatly increase the population of the place and its
neighborhood. Over the spring, where a handsome bath has been erected,
is a neat chapel, supported by pillars, and on the windows are painted
the chief events of St. Winifred’s (or, as it was anciently written,
Wenefrede’s) life. About the well grows moss, which the ignorant and
superstitious devotees most stupidly imagine to be St. Winifred’s hair.
This saint is reported to have been a virgin martyr, who lived in the
seventh century, and, as the legend says, was ravished and beheaded in
this place by a pagan tyrant; the spring having miraculously risen from
her blood. Hence this bath was much frequented by popish pilgrims, out
of devotion, as well as by those who came to bathe in it for medicinal
purposes. Mr. Pennant says, “The custom of visiting this well in
pilgrimage, and offering up devotions there, is not yet entirely laid
aside: in the summer a few are to be seen in the water, in deep
devotion, up to their chins for hours, sending up their prayers, or
performing a number of evolutions round the polygonal well.”

It might have been supposed that the present enlightened age would have
been secure against a repetition of impostures of this kind; but Doctor
Milner, a Catholic bishop, of Wolverhampton, took much pains to persuade
the world that an ignorant proselyte, of the name of Winefrid White, was
there cured of various chronic diseases, so late as the year 1804, by a
miracle. Sir Richard Phillips, having, in the Monthly Magazine, referred
this pretended miracle to the known effect of strong faith on ignorant
minds, in any proposed means of cure, was attacked by the Catholic
clergy for his incredulity; but in number three hundred and two, of the
Monthly Magazine, he replies in the following words.

“We have no doubt whatever that Winefrid White was cured by her journey
to Holywell, and by bathing in the wonderful natural spring at that
place; but we are not credulous enough to believe that her cure was
effected by any antagonist properties of the water to the cause of her
disease; nor impious enough so to sport with eternal omnipotence, as to
assert that a capricious suspension of the laws of nature took place for
this purpose. On the contrary, we believe that the poor woman was cured
by causes well known to every medical practitioner, and proved in
hundreds of recorded instances; that is to say, by her faith in the
means proposed for her cure, wrought to the highest pitch by her
religion, and by the assurances of those to whom she was accustomed to
defer. We think, nevertheless, that the publication of this ‘case of
Winefrid White,’ savors strongly of religious empiricism, and is exactly
analogous to the ‘cases of cure’ which we every day see advertised in
all the newspapers. We refrain from treating the subject theologically,
yet it appears to us that Matthew xxiv. 24, proves that ‘signs and
wonders’ are not only no evidence of divine interposition, but may be
used even by ‘false prophets, so as to deceive the very elect.’ The
continuance of miraculous powers will be found, we suspect, to depend on
other circumstances than the date of the year. They disappear wherever
the printing-press begins to be freely used, and, by its agency, fixes
all the circumstances that attend them; and they still continue to
flourish wherever the history of the circumstances depends for any
period on traditional evidence. Miracles are, therefore, performed in
abundance, even in our days, among the negroes, the Hottentots, the
Caffres, the Tartars, the South Sea islanders, and the Indians of the
two Americas. The last we believe on record are to be found in the Hon.
M. Elphinstone’s published embassy to Cabul in 1808: he states that the
sick were carried after him many days’ journey; and, at page
twenty-eight, he says: ‘Some thought we could raise the dead; and there
was a story current, that we had made and animated a wooden ram at
Mooltaun; that we had sold him as a ram; and that it was not till the
purchaser began to eat him, that the material of which he was made was
discovered.’ We forbear to press the subject further.”


                              WIGAN WELL.

About a mile from Wigan, in Lancashire, is a spring, the water of which
burns like oil. On applying a lighted candle to the surface, a large
flame is suddenly produced, and burns vigorously. A dishful of water
having been taken up at the part whence the flame issues, and a lighted
candle held to it, the flame goes out; notwithstanding which the water
in this part boils and rises up like water in a pot on the fire, but
does not feel warm on introducing the hand. What is still more
extraordinary, on making a dam, and preventing the flowing of fresh
water to the ignited part, that which was already there having been
drained away, a burning candle being applied to the surface of the dry
earth at the same point where the water before burned, the fumes take
fire, and burn with a resplendent light, the cone of the flame ascending
a foot and a half from the surface of the earth. It is not discolored,
like that of sulphureous bodies, neither has it any manifest smell, nor
do the fumes, in their ascent, betray any sensible heat. The latter
unquestionably consist of inflammable air, or hydrogen gas; and it ought
to be observed that the whole of the country about Wigan, for the
compass of several miles, is underlaid with coal. This phenomenon may
therefore be referred to the same cause which occasioned the dreadful
explosion of Felling colliery; but in the present case, this destructive
gas, instead of being pent up in the bowels of the earth, accompanies
the water in its passage to the surface.


                    DROPPING WELL AT KNARESBOROUGH.

This dropping well, or petrifying spring, rises at the foot of a
limestone rock, at an inconsiderable distance from the bank of the river
Nidd. The spring, after running about sixty feet, divides, and spreads
itself over the top of the rock, whence it trickles very fast, from
thirty or forty places, into a channel hollowed for the purpose, as seen
in the cut, each drop producing a musical kind of tinkling, probably
owing to the concavity of the rock, which, bending in a circular
projection from the bottom to the top, occasions its brow to overhang
about fifteen feet. This rock, which is about thirty feet in hight,
forty-eight in length, and from thirty to fifty in breadth, started, in
the year 1704, from the common bank, and left a chasm, from five to nine
feet wide, over which the water passes by an aqueduct formed for the
purpose. It is clothed with evergreen and other shrubs, which add
greatly to the beauty of this very interesting scene.

[Illustration: DROPPING WELL AT KNARESBOROUGH.]

The water is said to abound with fine particles of a nitrous earth,
which it deposits, but when in a languid motion only, and leaves its
incrustations on the leaves, moss, &c., which it meets with, in
trickling thus slowly through the cavities of the rock. This spring is
estimated to send forth twenty gallons of water in a minute. Here are to
be seen pieces of moss, bird’s nests with their eggs, and a variety of
other objects, some of them very curious which have been incrusted or
petrified by the water.


                            BROSELEY SPRING.

This celebrated boiling spring, or well, at Broseley, in Shropshire, was
discovered in the month of June, 1711. It was first announced by a
terrible noise in the night, there having been a remarkable
thunder-storm. Several persons who resided in the vicinity having been
awakened in their beds by this loud and rumbling noise, arose, and
proceeding to a bog under a small hill, about two hundred yards from the
river Severn, perceived a surprising commotion and shaking of the earth,
and a little boiling up of water through the grass. They took a spade,
and digging up a portion of the earth, the water immediately flew up to
a great hight, and was set on fire by a candle which was presented to
it. To prevent the spring from being destroyed, an iron cistern has been
placed over it, provided with a cover, and a hole in the center, through
which the water may be viewed. If a lighted candle, or any burning
substance, be presented to this aperture, the water instantly takes
fire, and burns like spirit of wine, continuing to do so as long as the
air is kept from it; but on removing the cover of the cistern, it
quickly goes out. The apparent boiling and ascent of the water of this
spring, are still more obviously the result of hydrogen gas, or
inflammable air, than in the preceding instance of Wigan well.


                      HOT SPRINGS OF ST. MICHAEL.

In the eastern part of this island, (one of the Azores,) is a round,
deep valley surrounded by high mountains, in which are many hot springs;
but the most remarkable is that called the Caldeira, situated in the
eastern part of the valley on a small eminence by the side of a river,
on which is a basin about thirty feet in diameter, where the water
continually boils with prodigious fury. A few yards distant from it, is
a cavern in the side of a bank, in which the water boils in a dreadful
manner, throwing out a thick, muddy, unctuous water, several yards from
its mouth, with a hideous noise. In the middle of the river are several
places where the water boils with so intense a heat, that a person can
not dip his finger into it without being scalded. On its banks are
several apertures, out of which the steam rises to a considerable hight,
and is so hot that it can not be approached by the hand. In other parts,
the spectator would be led to suppose that the bellows of a hundred
forges were blowing in concert; while sulphureous streams issue out in a
thousand places. The bushes even, near these spots, are covered with
pure brimstone, condensed from the steam which issues from the ground.
In the small caverns whence the steam issues, many of the inhabitants
prepare their food.


                       HOT SPRINGS OF THE TROAD.

The Troad, a country of Phrygia, in Asia Minor, of which Troy was the
capital, abounds with hot springs; the most interesting one of which is
thus described by Doctor Clarke. It is situated near a place called
Bonarbashy, signifying literally “the head of the springs,” and gushes
perpendicularly out of the earth, rising from the bottom of a marble and
granite reservoir, and throwing up as much water as the famous fountain
of Holywell, in Wales. Its surface seems vehemently boiling; and, during
cold weather, the condensed vapor above it causes the appearance of a
cloud of smoke over the well. While the mercury stood at forty-six
degrees in the open air, it rose, when the thermometer was plunged in
the water, to sixty-two degrees. Notwithstanding the warmth of this
spring, fishes were seen sporting in the reservoir. In every part of the
district through which the Mender flows, from Ida to the Hellespont, are
many of these springs, of different degrees of temperature.

The Geysers have already been described, in treating of Mount Hecla, and
its surprising volcano. In following up the details of the phenomena of
this nature given above, by a brief notice of other bubbling, tepid and
boiling springs, it may not be improper to premise that heat, water and
vapors of various kinds, exist in prodigious quantities beneath the
surface of the earth; and frequently, as has been seen in the phenomena
of volcanoes and earthquakes, burst forth from enormous openings, with
tremendous destruction. It often happens, however, that the openings are
small and porous, and that the vapors ascending through them, are simply
combined with water. Hence that almost infinite variety in the
characters of these springs, fountains and lakes, the waters of which
are combined with extraneous substances. In some cases the clastic
gases, or vapors, ascend from specific levity alone, and are destitute
of all taste and odor; insomuch that springs are found which bubble
without boiling, or betraying heat or any other foreign quality. In
other cases they are strongly impregnated with heat; and are then either
tepid or boiling, according to the proportion of extricated caloric they
contain. Occasionally, whether hot or cold, they are blended with
metallic, sulphureous, saline, and other substances, and hence assume
the name of mineral waters; while, if the substance thus dissolved be
combustible, as naphtha, bitumen, or turpentine, the fountain will often
inflame and burn on the application of a lighted torch.

The water of the noted boiling spring at Peroul, near Montpelier, is
observed to heave and boil up very furiously in small bubbles, which
manifestly proceed from a vapor breaking out of the earth, and rushing
through the water, so as to throw it up with noise, and in many bubbles;
for on digging in the vicinity of the ditch where the spring lies, and
pouring fresh water on the dry spot newly dug, the same boiling is
immediately observed. A similar bubbling of the water is likewise found
near Peroul, on the seashore. In several dry places near the spring, are
small ventiducts, passages or clefts, whence steam issues; and at the
mouths of these passages, small light bodies, such as feathers, pieces
of straw, leaves, &c., being placed, are soon blown away. This vapor, on
the application of a lighted candle or torch, does not flame or take
fire, as is the case with that of the boiling spring at Wigan; so that
there are two different sorts of steam, to occasion these boilings, at
the same time that neither of the fountains is medicinal, or even warm.

Other boiling waters, of a very different temperature, possess, like
those of the hot springs of St. Michael, a sufficient degree of heat to
boil eggs, and to serve for other culinary purposes. Among these may be
instanced those of the Solfatara, near Naples; those on the summit of
Mount Zebio, in the Modenese territory; and those which constitute the
source of the imperial bath at Aix la Chapelle. In Japan, a hot spring
is said to burst forth which constantly maintains the boiling-point, and
the water of which retains its heat much longer than common water. It
does not flow regularly, but during an interval of two hours each day;
and the force and violence of the vapors are then so great, that large
stones are ejected, and raised to the hight of ten or twelve feet, with
a noise like that of the explosion of a piece of artillery.

From the phenomena which have been adduced, it appears that the
exhalations constantly escaping from the vast subterraneous magazines in
which they are prepared, vary greatly in their qualities and effects.
Some are cold and dry, resembling air or wind, as those near Peroul, and
in the cavities of mountains, especially those of Æolus and other hills
of Italy, as well as in particular mines. Others are inflammable, and of
a bituminous nature, though not positively warm, as those of Wigan well.
Others are very hot, sulphureous and saline, more especially those of
the natural stoves, sweating-vaults, grottos, baths and volcanoes near
Naples, Baiæ, Cuma and Pozzuoli, as also in some of the subterraneous
works at Rome. And others, again, are of an arsenical, or other noxious
quality, as those of the Grotta del Cane. Now, these various streams
meeting with, and running through water, must occasion in it a great
variety of phenomena and effects.

It is observed by Doctor Thomson, in his history of the Royal Society,
that the hot spring at Bath, has continued at a temperature higher than
that of the air for a period of not less than two thousand years,
although it is so far distant from any volcano, that, without a very
violent and improbable extension of the agency of volcanic fires, it can
not be ascribed to them. There are various decompositions of mineral
bodies, which generate considerable heat; or, to speak more properly,
water is itself the decomposed substance generating heat by its
decomposition. The evolution of azotic gas is a proof that the heat of
the Bath waters is owing to a particular decomposition which takes place
within the bowels of the earth. The greatest heat of these waters is one
hundred and sixteen degrees of Fahrenheit’s scale; but that of the
mineral waters of Carlsbad, in Bohemia, ascends to one hundred and
sixty-five degrees.

There are several curious springs which are worthy of notice in this
connection, though somewhat varying from the class thus far mentioned.
One of these was recently discovered in California, about fifty miles
east of San Felipe, in San Diego county. It was discovered by a party
engaged in surveying the public lands, and consists of a collection of
fountains or springs of soda water, situated in a sandy plain or
depression of the surface of the desert. The spring is in a mound of
symmetrical shape, tapering like a sugar-loaf, in the center of the top
of which is a hole, apparently unfathomable, containing the carbonated
beverage fresh from some natural laboratory below. Some of these mounds
are six feet high, and clothed with a green and luxuriant coat of grass,
while others are shaped like an inverted bowl, and fringed by a growth
of cane. The water is described as having the same sparkling and
effervescing quality as that ordinarily sold by apothecaries, and was
drunk with avidity by both the men and animals belonging to the party
discovering it. When impregnated with acid of any kind, it produced
instant effervescence, and in that form was peculiarly refreshing as a
drink.

Another singular spring has also been discovered on the way from the
Great Salt lake, to Los Angelos, through the Cajon pass. The traveler
who gives the account of it says: “We had crossed the great desert
without any accident, and then camped on a stream of deliciously cool
water, about twelve to eighteen inches wide, which distributes itself
about half a mile lower down in a meadow covered with luxuriant grasses.
This camp-ground is called by the Spaniards, ‘Las Vegas.’ Once more we
had plenty of grass for our fatigued animals, and we determined to rest
here for the day. During our journey we passed a number of deserted
wagons, chairs, &c. An ox-train from Little Salt lake had preceded about
ten days; and it was not difficult to follow their trail, for in the
space of one hour I counted the putrid carcasses of nineteen oxen and
horses. What a lesson to those who venture on such a journey unadvisedly
and unprepared! The strong north wind which blew all day, raised a cloud
of dust which almost blinded me, although I had goggles and a green vail
to protect my eyes; however, the delightful and refreshing water of this
oasis soon purified me; and I felt, having crossed the desert,
breakfasted and bathed, much more comfortable, both mentally and
physically. The acacia was the only tree on this stream. Having remained
at this camp all one day, the next morning we were on the road to
Cottonwood springs, some twenty miles distant, where we would find water
and grass, and then commence a journey over another desert of fifty-five
miles. We followed up this little stream for about three miles, when the
road turned a little to the right; but I was anxious to see the head of
the stream, for, from the appearance of the surrounding country, I
judged it to be very near. Several gentlemen and myself continued up the
stream, and after a ride of half a mile, we came to a large spring,
thirty-five feet wide and forty long, surrounded by acacias in full
bloom. We approached through an opening, and found it to contain the
clearest and most delicious water I ever tasted; the bottom appeared to
be not more than two feet from the surface, and to consist of white
sand. One of the party prepared himself for a bath, and soon his body
divided the crystal waters. While I was considering whether I should go
in, I heard him calling to me that it was impossible to sink, the water
was so buoyant. I hardly believed it, and, to be able to speak
certainly, I also undressed and jumped in. What was my delight and
astonishment to find that all my efforts to sink were futile. I raised
my body out of the water, and suddenly lowered myself, but I bounded
upward as if I had struck a springing-board; I walked about the water up
to my armpits, just the same as if I had been walking on dry land. The
water instead of being about two feet deep, was over fifteen, the length
of the longest tent-pole we had along. It is impossible for a man to
sink over his head in it; the sand on the banks is very fine and white;
the temperature is seventy-eight degrees of Fahrenheit. I can form no
idea as to the cause of this singular phenomenon. Great Salt lake also
possesses this quality, but this water is perfectly sweet. In the
absence of any other name I have called it Buoyant spring. I have never
heard of it as possessing this quality, and should like some of the
savants to explain the cause of buoyancy. We lingered in the spring for
fifteen minutes, when we dressed and resumed our ride, highly delighted
and gratified by our exploration. I made drawings of this spot and
surrounding mountains.”

Still another singular spring, also in California, was discovered by a
Mr. Dabney, when boring for water in San Jose. The auger penetrated
through a stiff bed of clay fifty-eight feet thick, when a stream of
water was struck which forced itself up the aperture with unprecedented
power, and in a volume greater, it is believed, than all the other
artesian streams in the neighborhood combined. From this well alone
flowed a sufficiency of water to turn a mill. It boiled up with great
force, and ran off in a stream four feet wide and six inches deep. At
the mouth the current washed out a hole of several feet wide and very
deep. Serious apprehensions were entertained, when the stream first
burst forth, that it would be impossible to control it. The water was
cold and delightful, and it was estimated that the spring would be
sufficient to supply the whole city plentifully.

Reciprocating fountains, or springs, may be cited among the most curious
phenomena of nature. An irregularity of flow is not uncommon in boiling
springs; but there are other springs which evince a periodical influx
and reflux, almost as regular as the tides of the ocean. These changes,
it will be seen, frequently occur several times in a day, or even in an
hour. They are ascribed to various causes, either subterraneous or
superficial; but in general, springs and lakes of this description, have
been ascertained to communicate with others beneath, through pores or
apertures of various diameters, which serve equally to carry off the
waters, and to supply them afresh. In such cases the flux and reflux of
the upper head of water, must necessarily depend on the state of that
beneath; and the causes which alternately augment and diminish the
latter, must produce a similar effect on the former.

Paderborn spring, in Westphalia, disappears twice in twenty-four hours,
returning constantly, after a lapse of six hours, with a great noise,
and so forcibly as to drive three mills at a short distance from its
source. The inhabitants call it the _bolderborn_, that is, the
boisterous spring. Lay-well spring, near Torbay, is about six feet in
length, five in breadth, and nearly six inches deep. The flux and
reflux, which are very visible, are performed in about two minutes; when
the spring remains at its lowest ebb for the space of about three
minutes. In this way it ebbs and flows twenty times within the hour. As
soon as the water begins to rise, many bubbles ascend from the bottom;
but on its falling, the bubbling instantly ceases. Giggleswick spring,
in the West Riding of Yorkshire, lies at the foot of a hill of
limestone, named Giggleswick Scar. Its reciprocations are irregular,
both with respect to duration and magnitude, the interval of time
between any two succeeding flows being sometimes greater, and at other
times less, insomuch that a just standard of comparison can not be
formed. The rise of the water, in the stone trough or cistern which
receives it, during the time of the well’s flowing, is equally
uncertain, varying from one inch to nine or ten inches, in the course of
a few reciprocations. This spring, like the preceding one, discharges
bubbles of air at the time of its flowing. Near the lake of Bourget, in
Savoy, is a reciprocating spring which rises and falls with a great
noise, but not at stated and regular times. After Easter, its ebbings
and flowings are frequently perceived six times in an hour; but in dry
seasons not more than once or twice. It issues from a rock, and is
called =La Fontaine de Merville=, the marvelous fountain.


              -------------------------------------------

                      BITUMINOUS AND OTHER LAKES.


                        PITCH LAKE OF TRINIDAD.

Near Point la Braye, (Tar point,) the name assigned to it on account of
its characteristic feature, in the island of Trinidad, is a lake which
at the first view appears to be an expanse of still water, but which, on
a nearer approach, is found to be an extensive plain of mineral pitch,
with frequent crevices and chasms filled with water. On its being
visited in the autumnal season, the singularity of the scene was so
great, that it required some time for the spectators to recover
themselves from their surprise, so as to examine it minutely. The
surface of the lake was of an ash color, and not polished or smooth, so
as to be slippery, but of such a consistence as to bear any weight. It
was not adhesive, although it received in part the impression of the
foot, and could be trodden without any tremulous motion, several head of
cattle browsing on it in perfect security. In the summer season,
however, the surface is much more yielding, and in a state approaching
to fluidity, as is evidenced by pieces of wood and other substances,
thrown upon it, having been found enveloped in it. Even large branches
of trees, which were a foot above the level, had, in some way, become
enveloped in the bituminous matter. The interstices, or chasms, are very
numerous, ramifying and joining in every direction; and being filled
with water in the wet season, present the only obstacle to walking over
the surface. These cavities are in general deep in proportion to their
width, and many of them unfathomable: the water they contain is
uncontaminated by the pitch, and is the abode of a variety of fishes.
The arrangement of the chasms is very singular, the sides invariably
shelving from the surface, so as nearly to meet at the bottom, and then
bulging out toward each other with a considerable degree of convexity.
Several of them have been known to close up entirely, without leaving
any mark or seam.

The pitch lake of Trinidad contains many islets covered with grass and
shrubs, which are the haunts of birds of the most exquisite plumage. Its
precise extent can not, any more than its depth, be readily ascertained,
the line between it and the neighboring soil not being well defined; but
its main body may be estimated at three miles in circumference. It is
bounded on the north and west sides by the sea, on the south by a rocky
eminence, and on the east by the usual argillaceous soil of the country.


                           MUD LAKE OF JAVA.

The following details relative to the volcanic springs of boiling mud in
Java are extracted from the Penang Gazette.

Having received an account of a wonderful phenomenon in the plains of
Grobogna, a party set off, from Solo, in September, 1814, to examine it.
On approaching the place, they saw what at first appeared like the surf
breaking over the rocks, with a heavy spray falling to the leeward.
Alighting, they went to the “Bluddugs,” as the Javanese call them, which
they found to be an elevated plain of mud, about two miles in
circumference, in the center of which immense bodies of soft mud were
thrown up to the hight of ten or fifteen feet, in the form of large
bubbles, which bursting, emitted great volumes of dense white smoke. The
largest bubbles, of which there were two, rose and burst some seven or
eight times a minute, throwing up from one to three tuns of mud, the
smell of the smoke from which was very offensive, like the washings of a
gun-barrel. It was both difficult and dangerous to go near the large
bubbles, as the surface, except where it had been hardened by the sun,
was all a quagmire. They went, however, close to a small bubble, (the
plain was full of them, of all sizes,) and observed it for some time. It
appeared to heave and swell, and when the air within had raised it to
some hight, it burst, and the mud fell down in concentric circles, and
then remained quiet till again it was raised, again to burst; which was
at intervals of from one to two minutes. The water drained from the mud
was collected by the Javanese, and being exposed to the sun deposited
crystals of salt.

Next morning the party rode to a place in the forest, to view a salt
lake, a mud hillock, and various boiling pools. The lake was about half
a mile in circumference, of dirty-looking water, boiling up all over in
gurgling eddies; the water being cold, bitter and salt, with an
offensive smell. The mud hillock, which was near, was about fifteen feet
high, in the form of a cone, with a base of eighty, and a top of eight
feet diameter. The top was open, and the interior, which was full of
boiling and heaving mud, was found to be eleven fathoms deep. Every rise
of the mud was attended by a rumbling noise from within; and the mud was
more liquid than at the bluddugs, and unattended by smoke. Near the foot
of this hillock was a small pool of water, like that of the lake,
boiling violently; and some two hundred yards distant, two larger pools
or springs of the same general description, the smell of which was very
offensive, and the boiling of which could be heard at quite a distance,
resembling the noise of a small waterfall. The water both of the
bluddugs and of the lake, is used medicinally by the Javanese, and also,
as stated above, for the making of salt, which is gathered in
considerable quantities, and the government income from which adds not a
little to the public revenues. The general cause of the phenomena here
witnessed, is supposed, beyond all question, to be volcanic; the salt
water being thrown up by this agency in a heated state, and thus
mingling with the soil to produce the boiling and heaving mud above
described.


                           SALT LAKE OF UTAH.

Before leaving the subject of lakes, springs, &c., we must not omit to
mention the Great Salt lake of Utah territory, which has been gazed upon
with interest by many an emigrant, passing with his family, as
represented in the following cut, to his far western home. This lake
lies in a region abounding with scenery of unrivaled magnificence and
beauty. “Descend from the mountains,” says a late writer, “where you
have the scenery and climate of Switzerland, to seek the sky of your
choice among the many climates of Italy, and you may find, welling out
of the same hills, the freezing springs of Mexico, and the hot springs
of Iceland, both together coursing their way to the great salt sea in
the plain below. The pages of Malte Brun provide me with a less truthful
parallel to it, than those which describe the happy valley of Rasselas,
or the continent of Balnibarbi. In the midst of this interesting region,
the most remarkable object is the Great Salt lake: which, in the
saltness of its waters, in the circumstance of its having no outlet, and
being fed from another and smaller lake of fresh water, (with which it
is connected by a stream which has appropriately been called the
Jordan,) and in the rugged character of some portions of the surrounding
region, bears a remarkable resemblance to the Dead sea of Palestine.
Instead, however, of lying one thousand feet below, it is more than four
thousand feet above the level of the sea; and its waters, being an
almost pure solution of common salt, are free from the pungent and
nauseous taste which characterizes those of the Dead sea. This lake is
about seventy miles long, and thirty miles wide, and is so intensely
salt that no living thing can exist in it; and by evaporation in hot
weather, it leaves on its shores a thick incrustation of salt.

[Illustration: THE EMIGRANT FAMILY.]

Some twenty-five miles south of this, and connected with it by the river
Jordan, as mentioned above, is Utah lake, a body of fresh water, some
thirty-five miles in length, which abounds with trout and other fish.
And some seven hundred feet higher still, is Pyramid lake, on the slope
of the Sierra Nevada mountains, so named from a singular pyramidal mount
rising from its transparent waters to the hight of some six hundred
feet; and walled in by almost perpendicular precipices, in some places
three thousand feet high. Some distance from here, too, are the _boiling
springs_, described by Fremont, the largest basin of which is several
hundred feet in circumference, and has a circular space at one end some
fifteen feet in diameter, entirely occupied with the boiling water. A
pole sixteen feet in length, was entirely submerged on thrusting it down
near the center; and the temperature of the water near the edge was two
hundred and six degrees. In this vicinity also, are appearances similar
to the _mirages_ of the great deserts of the old world. In traveling
over the salt deserts of the Fremont basin, his party saw themselves
reflected in the air, probably, as Fremont himself suggests, from the
saline particles floating in the atmosphere, and in some way affecting
its refracting power. The entire region, is one of great wildness and
grandeur.


              -------------------------------------------


                        ATMOSPHERICAL PHENOMENA.


                  ------------------------------------


                                METEORS.

           From look to look, contagious through the crowd
           The panic runs, and into wond’rous shapes
           The appearance throws: armies in meet array,
           Thronged with aerial spears and steeds of fire;
           Till the long lines of full-extended war
           In bleeding fight commixt, the sanguine flood
           Rolls a broad slaughter o’er the plains of heaven.
           As thus they scan the visionary scene,
           On all sides swells the superstitious din.
           Incontinent; and busy frenzy talks
           Of blood and battle; cities overturned,
           And late at night in swallowing earthquake sunk,
           Or hideous wrapt in fierce ascending flame;
           Of sallow famine, inundation, storm;
           Of pestilence, and every great distress;
           Empires subversed, when ruling fate has struck
           The unalterable hour: even nature’s self
           Is deemed to totter on the brink of time.
           Not so the man of philosophic eye,
           And aspect sage; the waving brightness he
           Curious surveys, inquisitive to know
           The causes, and materials, yet unfixed,
           Of this appearance beautiful and new.—THOMSON.


The nature of those splendid phenomena of the heavens which are embraced
under the general term meteors, can not be so well elucidated as by an
extract from the travels of Messrs. Humboldt and Bonpland to the
equinoctial regions of the new continent. The sublime wonders described
by the former of these travelers were witnessed by them at Cumana, a
city of Venezuela, in South America.

“The night of the eleventh of November, 1779, was cool and extremely
beautiful. Toward the morning, from half after two, the most
extraordinary luminous meteors were seen toward the east. M. Bonpland,
who had risen to enjoy the freshness of the air in the gallery,
perceived them first. Thousands of bolides (fire-balls) and falling
stars, succeeded each other during four hours. Their direction was very
regular, from north to south. They filled a space in the sky extending
from the true east thirty degrees toward the north and south. In an
amplitude of sixty degrees the meteors were seen to rise above the
horizon at east-north-east, and at east to describe arcs more or less
extended, falling toward the south, after having followed the direction
of the meridian. Some of them attained a hight of forty degrees; and all
exceeded twenty-five or thirty degrees. There was very little wind in
the low regions of the atmosphere, and this blew from the east. No trace
of clouds was to be seen. M. Bonpland relates, that from the beginning
of the phenomenon, there was not a space in the firmament equal in
extent to three diameters of the moon which was not filled at every
instant with bolides and falling stars. The first were fewer in number,
but as they were seen of different sizes, it was impossible to fix the
limit between these two classes of phenomena. All these meteors left
luminous traces from five to ten degrees in length, as often happens in
the equinoctial regions. The phosphorescence of these traces, or
luminous bands, lasted seven or eight seconds. Many of the falling stars
had a very distinct nucleus, as large as the disk of Jupiter, from which
darted sparks of vivid light. The bolides seemed to burst as by
explosion; but the largest, those from one degree to one degree and
fifteen minutes in diameter, disappeared without scintillation, leaving
behind them phosphorescent bands (_trabes_) exceeding in breadth fifteen
or twenty minutes, or sixtieth parts of a degree. The light of these
meteors was white, and not reddish, which must be attributed, no doubt,
to the absence of vapors, and the extreme transparency of the air. For
the same reason, under the tropics, the stars of the first magnitude
have, at their rising, a light evidently whiter than in Europe.

“Almost all the inhabitants of Cumana were witnesses of this phenomenon,
and did not behold these bolides with indifference; the oldest among
them remembered, that the great earthquakes of 1766 were preceded by
similar phenomena. The fishermen in the suburbs asserted, that the
fire-work had begun at one o’clock; and that, as they returned from
fishing in the gulf, they had already perceived very small falling stars
toward the east. They affirmed at the same time, that igneous meteors
were extremely rare on those coasts after two in the morning.

“The phenomenon ceased by degrees after four o’clock, and the bolides
and falling stars became less frequent; but we still distinguished some
toward the north-east, by their whitish light, and the rapidity of their
movement, a quarter of an hour after sunrise. This circumstance will
appear less extraordinary, when I state that in full daylight, in 1788,
the interior of the houses in the town of Popayan was highly illumined
by an aerolite of immense magnitude. It passed over the town when the
sun was shining clearly, about one o’clock. M. Bonpland and myself,
during our second residence at Cumana, after having observed on the
twenty-sixth of September, 1800, the immersion of the first satellite of
Jupiter, succeeded in seeing the planet distinctly with the naked eye,
eighteen minutes after the disk of the sun had appeared in the horizon.
There was a very slight vapor in the east, but Jupiter appeared on an
azure sky. These facts prove the extreme purity and transparency of the
atmosphere under the torrid zone. The _mass_ of diffused light is so
much less, as the vapors are more perfectly dissolved. The same cause
that weakens the diffusion of the solar light, diminishes the extinction
of that which emanates either from a bolis, Jupiter, or the moon, seen
on the second day after her conjunction.

“The researches of M. Chladni having singularly fixed the attention of
the scientific world upon the bolides and falling stars, at my departure
from Europe, we did not neglect during the course of our journey from
Caraccas to the Rio Negro, to inquire everywhere, whether the meteors of
the twelfth of November had been perceived. In the savage country, where
the greater number of the inhabitants sleep out in the air, so
extraordinary a phenomenon could not fail to be remarked, except when
concealed by clouds from the eye of observation. The Capuchin missionary
at San Fernando de Apura, a village situated amid the savannas of the
province of Varinas, and the Franciscan monks stationed near the
cataracts of the Orinoco, and at Maroa, on the banks of the Rio Negro,
had seen numberless falling stars and bolides illumine the vault of
heaven. Maroa is south-west of Cumana, and one hundred and seventy-four
leagues’ distance. All these observers compared the phenomenon to a
beautiful fire-work, which had lasted from three till six in the
morning. Some of the monks had marked the day upon their ritual; others
had noted it by the nearest festivals of the church. Unfortunately, none
of them could recollect the direction of the meteors, or their apparent
hight. From the position of the mountains and thick forest which
surround the missions of the cataracts and the little village of Maroa,
I presume that the bolides were still visible at twenty degrees above
the horizon. On my arrival at the southern extremity of Spanish Guiana,
at the little fort of San Carlos, I found a party of Portuguese, who had
gone up the Rio Negro from the mission of St. Joseph of the Maravitains,
and who assured me, that in that part of Brazil, the phenomenon had been
perceived, at least as far as San Gabriel das Cachoeiras, consequently
as far as the equator itself.

“I was powerfully struck at the immense hight which these bolides must
have attained, to have been visible at the same time at Cumana, and on
the frontiers of Brazil, in a line of two hundred and thirty leagues in
length. But what was my astonishment, when at my return to Europe, I
learned that the same phenomenon had been perceived, on an extent of the
globe of sixty-four degrees of latitude, and ninety-one degrees of
longitude; at the equator, in South America, at Labrador, and in
Germany! I found accidentally, during my passage from Philadelphia to
Bordeaux, in the memoirs of the Pennsylvanian society, the corresponding
observations of Mr. Ellicott (latitude thirty degrees, forty-two
minutes;) and, upon my return from Naples to Berlin, I read the account
of the Moravian missionaries among the Esquimaux, in the library of
Göttingen. Several philosophers had already discussed at this period the
coincidence of the observation in the north with those at Cumana, which
M. Bonpland and I had published in 1800.

“The following is a succinct enumeration of facts. First, the fiery
meteors were seen in the east, and the east-north-east, to forty degrees
of elevation, from two to six hours at Cumana, (latitude ten degrees,
twenty-seven minutes, fifty-two seconds, longitude sixty-six degrees,
thirty minutes;) at Porto Cabello, (latitude ten degrees, six minutes,
fifty-two seconds, longitude sixty-seven degrees, five minutes;) and on
the frontiers of Brazil, near the equator, in the longitude of seventy
degrees west of the meridian of Paris. Secondly, in French Guiana,
(latitude four degrees, fifty-six minutes, longitude fifty-four degrees,
thirty-five minutes,) the northern part of the sky was seen all on fire.
Innumerable falling stars traversed the heavens during an hour and a
half, and diffused so vivid a light, that those meteors might be
compared to the blazing sheaves shot out from fire-works. Thirdly, Mr.
Ellicott, an astronomer in the United States, having terminated his
trigonometric operations for the rectification of the limits on the
Ohio, being, on the twelfth of November, in the gulf of Florida, in the
latitude of twenty-five degrees, and longitude eighty-one degrees, fifty
minutes, saw, in all parts of the sky, ‘as many meteors as stars, moving
in all directions: some appeared to fall perpendicularly; and it was
expected every minute that they would drop into the vessel.’ The same
phenomenon was perceived upon the American continent as far as the
latitude of thirty degrees, forty-two minutes. Fourthly, in Labrador, at
Nain (latitude fifty-six degrees, fifty-five minutes) and Hoffenthal
(latitude fifty-eight degrees, four minutes,) and in Greenland, at
Lichtenau (latitude sixty-one degrees, five minutes) and New Herrnhutt,
(latitude sixty-four degrees, fourteen minutes, longitude fifty-two
degrees, twenty minutes,) the Esquimaux were frightened at the enormous
quantity of bolides which fell during twilight toward all points of the
firmament, some of them being a foot broad. Fifthly, in Germany, M.
Zeissing, vicar of Itterstadt, near Weimar, (latitude fifty degrees,
fifty-nine minutes, longitude nine degrees, one minute east,) perceived,
on the twelfth of November, between the hours of six and seven in the
morning, when it was half after two at Cumana, some falling stars, which
shed a very white light. Soon after, toward the south and south-west,
luminous rays appeared from four to six feet long: they were reddish,
and resembled the luminous track of a sky-rocket. During the morning
twilight, between the hours of seven and eight, the south-west part of
the sky was seen, from time to time, strongly illuminated by white
lightning, which ran in serpentine lines along the horizon. At night the
cold increased, and the barometer rose.

“The distance from Weimar to the Rio Negro, is eighteen hundred sea
leagues; and from Rio Negro to Herrnhutt, in Greenland, thirteen hundred
leagues. Admitting that the same fiery meteors were seen at points so
distant from each other, we must also admit, that their hight was at
least four hundred and eleven leagues. Near Weimar, the appearance like
sky-rockets was seen in the south and south-east; at Cumana, in the east
and in the east-north-east. We may therefore conclude, that numberless
aerolites must have fallen into the sea, between Africa and South
America, to the west of the Cape Verde islands. But, since the direction
of the bolides was not the same at Labrador and at Cumana, why were they
not perceived in the latter place toward the north, as at Cayenne? I am
inclined to think, that the Chayma Indians of Cumana did not see the
same bolides as the Portuguese in Brazil, and the missionaries in
Labrador; but, at the same time, it can not be doubted, and this fact
appears to me very remarkable, that in the new world, between the
meridians of forty-six degrees and eighty-two degrees, between the
equator and sixty-four degrees north, at the same hour, an immense
number of bolides and falling stars were perceived; and that those
meteors had everywhere the same brilliancy, throughout a space of nine
hundred and twenty-one thousand square leagues.

“The scientific men who have lately made such laborious researches on
falling stars and their parallaxes, consider them as meteors belonging
to the furthest limits of our atmosphere, between the region of the
=aurora borealis= and that of the lightest clouds. Some have been seen,
which had not more than fourteen thousand toises, or about five leagues
of elevation. The highest do not appear to exceed thirty leagues. They
are often more than a hundred feet in diameter; and their swiftness is
such, that they dart, in a few seconds, over a space of two leagues.
Some of these have been measured, the direction of which was almost
perpendicularly upward, or forming an angle of fifty degrees with the
vertical line. This extremely remarkable circumstance has led to the
conclusion, that falling stars are aerolites, which, after having
hovered about a long time in space, take fire on entering accidentally
into our atmosphere, and fall toward the earth.

“Whatever may be the origin of these luminous meteors, it is difficult
to conceive any instantaneous inflammation taking place in a region
where there is less air than in the vacuum of our air-pumps; and where
(twenty-five thousand toises high) the mercury in the barometer would
not rise to twelve-thousandths of a line. We have ascertained the
uniform mixture of atmospheric air to three-thousandths nearly, only to
an elevation of three thousand toises: consequently, not beyond the last
stratum of fleecy clouds. It might be admitted, that, in the first
revolutions of the globe, gaseous substances which yet remain unknown to
us, may have risen toward that region, through which the falling stars
pass: but accurate experiments, made upon mixtures of gases which have
not the same specific gravity, prove that we can not admit a superior
stratum of the atmosphere entirely different from the inferior strata.
Gaseous substances mix and penetrate each other with the least motion;
and a uniformity of their mixture would have taken place in the lapse of
ages, unless we suppose in them the effects of a repulsive action
unexampled in those substances which we can subject to our observations.
Further, if we admit the existence of a particular aerial fluid in the
inaccessible region of luminous meteors, falling stars, bolides, and the
=aurora borealis=, how can we conceive why the whole stratum of those
fluids does not at once take fire, but that the gaseous emanations, like
the clouds, occupy only limited spaces? How can we suppose an electrical
explosion without some vapors collected together, capable of containing
unequal charges of electricity, in air, the mean temperature of which
is, perhaps, twenty-five degrees below the freezing-point of the
centigrade thermometer, and the rarefaction of which is so considerable,
that the compression of the electrical shock could scarcely disengage
any heat? These difficulties would in great part, be removed, if the
direction of the motion of falling stars allowed us to consider them as
bodies with a solid nucleus, as cosmic phenomena (belonging to space
beyond the limits of our atmosphere) and not as telluric phenomena
(belonging to our planet only.)

“Supposing that the meteors of Cumana were only at the usual hight at
which falling stars in general move, the same meteors were seen above
the horizon in places more than three hundred and ten leagues distant
from each other. Now, what an extraordinary disposition to incandescence
must have reigned on the twelfth of November, in the higher regions of
the atmosphere, to have furnished, during four hours, myriads of bolides
and falling stars, visible at the equator, in Greenland, and in Germany.

“Mr. Benzenberg judiciously observes, that the same cause, which renders
the phenomenon more frequent, has also an influence on the largeness of
the meteors, and the intensity of their light. In Europe, the nights
when there are the greatest number of falling stars, are those in which
very bright ones are mixed with very small ones. The periodicalness of
the phenomenon augments the interest which it excites. There are months,
in which M. Brandes has reckoned in our temperate zone, only sixty or
eighty falling stars in one night; and in other months their number has
risen to two thousand. Whenever one is observed, which has the diameter
of Sirius or of Jupiter, we are sure of seeing so brilliant a meteor
succeeded by a great number of smaller meteors. If the falling stars be
very frequent during one night, it is very probable that this frequency
will continue during several weeks. It would seem that, in the higher
regions of the atmosphere, near that extreme limit where the centrifugal
force is balanced by gravity, there exists, at regular periods, a
particular disposition for the production of bolides, falling stars, and
the =aurora borealis=. Does the periodicalness of this great phenomenon
depend upon the state of the atmosphere? or upon something which the
atmosphere receives from without, while the earth advances in the
ecliptic? Of all this we are still as ignorant as men were in the days
of Anaxagoras.

“With respect to the falling stars themselves, it appears to me, from my
own experience, that they are more frequent in the equinoctial regions
than in the temperate zone; more frequent over the continents, and near
certain coasts, than in the middle of the ocean. Do the radiation of the
surface of the globe, and the electrical charge of the lower regions of
the atmosphere, which varies according to the nature of the soil, and
the positions of the continents and seas, exert their influence as far
as those hights, where eternal winter reigns? The total absence even of
the smallest clouds, at certain seasons, or above some barren plains
destitute of vegetation, seems to prove, that this influence can be felt
at least as far as five or six thousand toises high. A phenomenon
analogous to that of the twelfth of November, was observed thirty years
before, on the table-land of the Andes, in a country studded with
volcanoes. At the city of Quito, there was seen, in one part of the sky,
above the volcano of Gayambo, so great a number of falling stars, that
the mountain was thought to be in flames. This singular sight lasted
more than an hour. The people assembled in the plain of Exico, where a
magnificent view presents itself of the highest summit of the
Cordilleras. A procession was already on the point of setting out from
the convent of St. Francis, when it was perceived that the blaze of the
horizon was caused by fiery meteors, which ran along the skies in all
directions, at the altitude of twelve or thirteen degrees.”

The bolides, or fire-balls, and falling stars, so striking an example of
which is given above, are of all sizes, from a small shooting-star of
the fifth magnitude, to a cone or cylinder of two or three miles in
diameter. They differ in consistency as much as in dimensions, and in
color as much as in either. Occasionally, they are a subtile, luminous
and pellucid vapor; and sometimes a compact ball, or globe, as though
the materials of which they are formed, were more condensed and
concentrated. Not unfrequently they have been found to consist of both,
and consequently to assume a comet-like appearance, with a nucleus or
compact substance in the center, or toward the center, and a long, thin,
pellucid or luminous main, or tail, sweeping on each side. They are
sometimes of a pale white light; at others, of a deep igneous crimson;
and, occasionally iridescent and vibratory. The rarer meteors appear
frequently to vanish on a sudden, as though abruptly dissolved or
extinguished in the atmospheric medium, their flight being accompanied
by a hissing sound, and their disappearance by an explosion. The most
compact of them, or the nuclei of those which are rarer, have often
descended to the surface of the earth, and with a force sufficient to
bury them many feet under the soil; generally exhibiting marks of
imperfect fusion and considerable heat. The substance is, in these
cases, for the greater part metallic; but the ore of which they consist
is not anywhere to be found, in the same constituent proportions, in the
bowels of the earth. Under this form the projected masses are
denominated aerolites, or meteoric stones.

It may not be uninteresting to preface a succinct account of the most
surprising of these meteors, by a notice of the hypotheses which have
been imagined concerning them; however justly the learned Humboldt may
have concluded, in the words of the extracts given above, that we are
still “as ignorant on this subject as men were in the days of
Anaxagoras.” Sir J. Pringle contended, with other philosophers, that
they are revolving bodies, or a kind of terrestrial planets. Doctor
Halley conjectured them to consist of combustible vapors, accumulated
and formed into concrete bodies on the outskirts, or extreme regions of
the atmosphere, and to be suddenly set on fire by some unknown cause; an
opinion which, with little difference, has been since entertained by Sir
W. Hamilton and Dr. King. Dr. Blagdon regarded them altogether as
electrical phenomena. M. Izarn believed them to consist of volcanic
materials, propelled into the atmosphere in the course of explosions of
great violence. M. Chladni supposed them to be formed of substances
existing exteriorly to the atmosphere of the earth and other planets,
which have never incorporated with them, and are found loose in the vast
ocean of space, being there combined and inflamed by causes unknown to
us. Lastly, another and rather wild hypothesis is, that the whole, or at
least the more compact division of these meteors, are made up of
materials thrown from immense volcanoes in the moon. This hypothesis,
which was started by M. Olbers, in 1795, has been since very plausibly
supported by the celebrated Laplace, but does not apply to the smaller
and less substantial meteors, named shooting-stars. Hence these
philosophers derive the latter phenomena from some other cause, as
electricity, or terrestrial exhalations; and observe, in support of the
distinction they find it necessary to make, that shooting-stars must be
of a different nature from fire-balls, since they sometimes appear to
ascend as well as to fall. This observation has been especially dwelt on
by Messrs. Chladni and Benzenberg, both of them favorably noticed, as
accurate observers, by Humboldt.

By far the most plausible and satisfactory theory, however, is one
somewhat like that of Dr. Halley, which may be illustrated thus. If a
stick of wood, after being covered over night in the hot ashes, so as to
become in part or wholly charred, be taken out in the morning, and waved
back and forth in the air, every one has noticed that it will send forth
sparks by hundreds and thousands. Now the more modern theory as to these
aerolites, or falling-stars, is, that they are thrown off from small,
opaque, planetary bodies, revolving in space, which when they come
within the atmosphere of the earth, are heated from their rapid motion
through it, and throw off small heated portions, like the sparks from
the waving brand. And this theory is confirmed by the fact, that, of
late years, these meteoric showers have been annual, and always at about
the same period of the year, as if the earth was then passing in that
part of her orbit where she meets with the planetary bodies spoken of,
and they come in contact with her atmosphere. In the volumes of the
“American Journal of Science,” may be found abundant facts on this
subject, and also the various theories started to account for the facts.

On the twenty-first of March, 1676, two hours after sunset, an
extraordinary meteor was seen to pass over Italy. At Bononia, its
greatest altitude in the south-south-east, was thirty-eight degrees; and
at Sienna, fifty-eight degrees toward the north-north-east. In its
course, which was from east-north-east to west-south-west, it passed
over the Adriatic sea, as if coming from Dalmatia. It crossed all Italy,
being nearly vertical to Rimini and Savigniano, on the one side, and to
Leghorn on the other: its perpendicular altitude was at least
thirty-eight miles. At all the places near its course it was heard to
make a hissing noise as it passed, like that of artificial fireworks. In
passing over Leghorn, it gave a very loud report, like that of a cannon;
immediately after which another sort of sound was heard, like the
rattling of a deeply loaded wagon passing over the stones, which
continued for several seconds. The professor of mathematics at Bononia,
calculated the apparent velocity of this surprising meteor at not less
than one hundred and sixty miles in a minute of time, which is above ten
times as swift as the diurnal rotation of the earth under the
equinoctial, and not many times less than that with which the annual
motion of the earth about the sun is performed. It there appeared larger
than the moon in one diameter, and above half as large again in the
other; which, with the given distance of the eye, made its real smaller
diameter above half a mile, and the larger one in proportion. It is,
therefore, not surprising, that so great a body, passing with such an
amazing velocity through the air, however rarefied it may be in its
upper regions, should occasion so loud a hissing noise as to be heard at
such a distance. It finally went off to sea toward Corsica.

Two luminous meteors of great magnitude were noted at Leipsic within the
space of six years. On the twenty-second of May, 1680, about three in
the morning, the first of these was seen, to the great terror of the
spectators, descending in the north, and leaving behind it a long white
streak where it had passed. As the same phenomena was witnessed in the
north-north-east at Haarburg, and also at Hamburg, Lubeck and Stralsund,
all of which places are about a hundred and fifty English miles from
Leipsic, it was concluded that this meteor was exceedingly high above
the earth. The second meteor was still more terrific. On the ninth of
July, 1686, at half past one in the morning, a fire-ball with a tail was
observed in eight and a half degrees of Aquarius, and four degrees
north, which continued nearly stationary for seven or eight minutes,
with a diameter nearly equal to half the moon’s diameter. At first, its
light was so great that the spectators could see to read by it; after
which it gradually disappeared. This phenomenon was observed at the same
time in several other places, more especially at Schlaitza, a town
distant from Dantzic forty English miles toward the south, its altitude
being about six degrees above the southern horizon. At Leipsic it was
estimated to be distant not more than sixty English miles, and to be
about twenty-four miles perpendicular above the horizon, so that it was
at least thirty miles high in the air.

A very extraordinary meteor, which the common people called a flaming
sword, was first seen at Leeds, in Yorkshire, on the eighteenth of May,
1710, at a quarter after ten at night. Its direction was from south to
north: it was broad at one end, and small at the other; and was
described by the spectators as resembling a trumpet, moving, with the
broad end foremost. The light was so sudden and intense, that they were
startled at seeing their own shadows, when neither sun nor moon shone
upon them. This meteor was, in its course, seen not only in Yorkshire
and Lancashire, but also in the counties of Nottingham and Derby,
notwithstanding which, each of those who observed it, although so many
miles distant from each other, fancied it fell within a few yards of
him. In disappearing, it presented bright sparklings at the small end.

A blazing meteor was, on the nineteenth of March, 1719, seen in every
part of England. In the metropolis, about a quarter after eight at
night, a sudden powerful light was perceived in the west, far exceeding
that of the moon, which then shone very bright. The long stream it gave
out appeared to be branched about the middle; and the meteor, in its
course, turned pear-fashioned, or tapering upward. At the lower end it
came at length to be larger and spherical, although not so large as the
full moon. Its color was whitish, with an eye of blue of a most vivid,
dazzling luster, which seemed in brightness very nearly to resemble, if
not to surpass, that of the body of the sun in a clear day. This
brightness obliged the spectator to turn his eyes several times from it,
as well when it was a stream, as when it was pear-fashioned and a globe.
It seemed to move, in about half a minute or less, about the length of
twenty degrees, and to disappear about as much above the horizon. Where
it had passed, it left behind a track of a cloudy or faint
reddish-yellow color, such as red-hot iron or glowing coals have: this
continued more than a minute, seemed to sparkle, and kept its place
without falling. This track was interrupted, or had a chasm toward its
upper end, at about two-thirds of its length. No explosion was heard;
but the place where the globe of light had been, continued for some time
after it was extinct, of the same reddish-yellow color with the stream,
and at first sparks seemed to issue from it, such as proceed from
red-hot iron beaten out on an anvil.

It was agreed by all the spectators in the capital, that the splendor of
this meteor was little inferior to that of the sun. Within doors the
candles did not give out any light; and in the streets, not only all the
stars disappeared, but the moon, then nine days old, and high near the
meridian, the sky being very clear, was so far effaced as scarcely to be
seen: it did not even cast a shade, where the beams of the meteor were
intercepted by the houses; so that, for a few seconds of time, there was
in every respect, a resemblance of perfect day.

The perpendicular hight of this surprising meteor was estimated at
sixty-four geometrical miles; and it was computed to have run about
three hundred of these miles in a minute. It was seen, not only in every
part of Great Britain and Ireland, but likewise in Holland, in the
western parts of Germany, in France and in Spain, nearly at the same
instant of time. The accounts from Devonshire, Cornwall, and the
neighboring counties, were unanimous in describing the wonderful noise
which followed its explosion. It resembled the report of a large cannon,
or rather of a broadside at some distance, which was soon followed by a
rattling noise, as if many small arms had been promiscuously discharged.
This tremendous sound was attended by an uncommon tremor of the air; and
everywhere in those counties, not only the windows and doors of the
houses were sensibly shaken, but, according to several of the reports,
even the houses themselves, beyond the usual effect of cannon, however
near.

On the eleventh of December, 1741, at seven minutes past one in the
afternoon, a globe of fire, somewhat larger than the horizontal full
moon, and as bright as the moon appears at any time when the sun is
above the horizon, was seen at Peckham, in Surrey, in a south-south-east
direction, moving toward the east with a continued equable motion, and
leaving behind it a narrow streak of light, whiter than the globe
itself, throughout its whole course. Toward the end it appeared less
than at the beginning of its motion; and within three or four seconds
suddenly vanished. Its apparent velocity was nearly equal to half the
medium velocity of the ordinary meteors called falling or shooting
stars; and its elevation, throughout the whole of its course, about
twenty degrees above the horizon.

On the eighteenth of August, 1783, an uncommon meteor was seen in
several parts of Great Britain, as well as on the continent. Its general
appearance was that of a luminous ball, which, rising in the
north-north-east, nearly of a globular form, became elliptical, and
gradually assumed a tail as it ascended. In a certain part of its course
it underwent a remarkable change, which might be compared to bursting,
and which, it ought to be observed, has been since frequently noticed in
the passage of the aerolites, or meteoric stones, particular mention of
which will be made hereafter. After this it no longer proceeded as an
entire mass, but was apparently divided into a great number, or cluster
of balls, some larger than others, and all carrying a tail, or leaving a
train behind. Under this form, it continued its course with a nearly
equable motion, dropping or casting off sparks, and yielding a
prodigious light, which illumined all objects to a surprising degree;
until, having passed the east, and verging considerably to the
southward, it gradually distended, and was at length lost to the sight.
The time of its appearance was sixteen minutes past nine in the evening,
mean time of the meridian of London, and it continued visible about half
a minute.

This beautiful meteor having been seen in Shetland, and in the northern
parts of Scotland, ascending from the north, and rising like the planet
Mars, little doubt was entertained of its course having commenced beyond
the furthest extremity of Great Britain, somewhere over the northern
ocean. Having passed over Essex and the straits of Dover, it probably
entered the continent not far from Dunkirk, where, as well as at Calais
and Ostend, it was thought to be vertical. Still holding on its course
to the southward, it was seen at Brussels, at Paris, and at Nuits in
Burgundy; insomuch that there was sufficient proof of its having
traversed thirteen or fourteen degrees of latitude, describing a track
of at least one thousand miles over the surface of the earth; a length
of course far exceeding the extent of what had been then ascertained of
any similar phenomenon.

During the passage of this meteor over Brussels, the moon appeared quite
red, but soon recovered its natural light. The results of several
observations give it an elevation of more than fifty miles above the
surface of the earth, in a region where the air is at least thirty
thousand times rarer than here below. Notwithstanding this great
elevation, the fact of a report having been heard some time after it
disappeared, rests on the testimony of too many witnesses to be
controverted. It was compared to the falling of some heavy body in a
room above stairs, or to the discharge of one or more large cannon at a
distance: this report was loudest in Lincolnshire and the adjacent
counties, and also in the eastern parts of Kent.

Supposing the transverse diameter of this meteor to have subtended an
angle of thirty minutes when it passed over the zenith, and that it was
fifty miles high, it must have been almost half a mile across. The tail
sometimes appeared ten or twelve times longer than the body; but most of
this was train, and the real elongation behind seems seldom to have
exceeded twice or thrice its transverse diameter; it consequently was
between one and two miles in length. Now if the cubical contents be
considered, for it appeared equally round and full in all directions,
such an enormous mass must afford just matter of astonishment, when the
extreme velocity with which it moved is considered. This velocity,
agreeably to the observations of Sir William Herschel and several other
astronomers, could not have been less than twenty miles in a second,
exceeding that of sound above ninety times, and approaching toward that
of the earth in her annual orbit. At such a rate it must have passed
over the whole island of Great Britain in less than half a minute, and
would, in the space of less than seven minutes, have traversed the whole
diameter of the earth!

On the fourth of October, of the above year, 1783, two meteors were seen
in England. The first, at three in the morning, on account of the early
hour, was witnessed by but few spectators, who represented it as rising
from the north to a small altitude, and then becoming stationary with a
vibratory motion, and an illumination like daylight: it vanished in a
few moments, leaving a train behind. This sort of tremulous appearance
has been noticed in other meteors, as well as their continuing
stationary for some time, either before they begin to shoot, or after
their course is ended. The second of these meteors appeared at
forty-three minutes past six in the evening, and was much smaller, and
also of much shorter duration, than the one seen in August. It was first
observed to the north, like a stream of fire, similar to that of the
common shooting-stars, but large; and having proceeded some distance
under this form, suddenly burst out into that intensely bright bluish
light, peculiar to such meteors, which may be most aptly compared to the
blue lights of India, or to some of the largest electrical sparks. The
illumination was very great; and on that part of its course where it had
been so bright, a dusky red streak or train was left, which remained
visible about a minute, and was thought by some gradually to change its
form. Except this train, the meteor had not any tail, but was nearly of
a round body, or, perhaps, somewhat elliptical. After moving not less
than ten degrees in this bright state, it became suddenly extinct,
without any appearance of bursting or explosion.


                               AEROLITES.

These phenomena, otherwise entitled meteoric stones, have been
ascertained, by recent observations, to be connected with the bolides,
or fire-balls, described above. Scoriaceous masses have frequently been
either actually seen to fall at the time of the disappearance of the
latter, or have been found soon after on the surface of the earth. Most
of the stones which have fallen from the atmosphere, have been preceded
by the appearance of luminous bodies, or meteors. These meteors burst
with an explosion, and then the shower of stones falls to the earth.
Sometimes the stones continue luminous till they sink into the earth;
but most commonly their luminousness disappears at the time of their
explosion. These meteors move in a direction nearly horizontal, and seem
to approach the earth before they explode.

The stony bodies, when found immediately after their descent, are always
hot. They commonly bury themselves some depth under ground. Their size
differs, from fragments of a very inconsiderable weight, to masses of
several tuns. They usually approach the spherical form, and are always
covered with a black crust; in many cases they smell strongly of
sulphur. The black crust consists chiefly of oxyd of iron; and from
several accurate analyses of these stones, the following important
inferences have been drawn: that not any other bodies have as yet been
discovered on our globe which contain the same ingredients; and that
they have made us acquainted with a species of pyrites not formerly
known, nor anywhere else to be found.

The ancients were not unacquainted with these meteoric stones, a shower
of which is reported by Livy to have fallen at Rome under the consulate
of Tullus Hostilius, and another under that of C. Martius and M.
Torquatus. Pliny relates that a shower of iron (for thus he designates
these stones) fell in Lucania, a year before the defeat of Crassus, and
likewise speaks of a very large stone which fell near the river Negos,
in Thrace. In the chronicle of Count Marcellin, there is an account of
three immensely large stones having fallen in Thrace, in the year 452
before the advent of Christ.

To proceed to more modern and well authenticated instances of the fall
of aerolites. On the seventh of November, 1492, a little before noon, a
dreadful thunder-clap was heard at Ensisheim, in Alsace, instantly after
which a child saw a huge stone fall on a field newly sown with wheat. On
searching, it was found to have penetrated the earth about three feet,
and weighed two hundred and sixty pounds, making its size equal to a
cube of thirteen inches the side. All the contemporary writers agree in
the reality of this phenomenon, observing that, if such a stone had
before existed in a plowed land, it must have been known to the
proprietor. The celebrated astronomer Gassendi relates an instance of an
aerolite descent of which he was himself an eye-witness. On the
twenty-seventh of November, 1627, the sky being clear, he saw a burning
stone fall on Mont Vasir, in the south-east extremity of France, near
Nice. While in the air, it seemed to be about four feet in diameter, was
inclosed in a luminous circle of colors like a rainbow, and in its fall
produced a sound like the discharge of cannon. It weighed fifty-nine
pounds, was very hard, of a dull metallic color, and had a specific
gravity considerably greater than that of marble. In the year 1672, two
stones fell near Verona, in Italy, the one weighing three hundred, the
other two hundred pounds. This phenomenon was witnessed in the evening,
by three or four hundred persons. The stones fell, with a violent
explosion, in a sloping direction, and in calm weather. They appeared to
burn, and plowed up the ground. Paul Lucas, the traveler, relates that
when he was at Larissa, a town of Greece, near the gulf of Salonica, a
stone weighing seventy-two pounds, fell in the vicinity. It was observed
to come from the northward, with a loud hissing noise, and seemed to be
enveloped in a small cloud, which exploded when the stone fell. It
looked like iron dross, and smelt of sulphur. In September, 1753,
several stones fell in the province of Bresse, to the west of Geneva:
one in particular fell at Pont de Vesle, and another at Liponas, places
nine miles distant from each other. The sky was clear, and the weather
warm. A loud noise, and a hissing sound, were heard at those two places,
and for several miles round, on the fall of these stones, which exactly
resembled each other, were of a darkish, dull color, very ponderous, and
manifesting on their surface that they had suffered a violent degree of
heat. The largest weighed about twenty pounds, and penetrated about six
inches into the plowed ground; a circumstance which renders it highly
improbable that they could have existed there before the explosion. This
phenomenon has been described by the astronomer Delalande, whose strict
inquiries on the spot enabled him to testify the truth of the
circumstances he relates. In the year 1768, three stones were presented
to the French Academy of Sciences, which had fallen in different parts
of France; one at Luce, in the Maine; another at Aire, in Artois; and
the third in Cotentin. They were all externally of the same identical
appearance; and on the former of them a particular report was drawn up
by Messrs. Fougeraux, Cadet and Lavoisier. This report states, that on
the eighteenth of September, 1768, between four and five in the
afternoon, there was seen, near the above village of Luce, a cloud in
which a short explosion took place, followed by a hissing noise, but
without any flame. The same sound was heard by several persons about ten
miles from Luce; and, on looking up, they perceived an opaque body
describe a curve in the air, and fall on a piece of green turf near the
high road. They immediately ran to the spot, where they found a kind of
stone, half-buried in the earth, extremely hot, and weighing about seven
pounds and a half.

In the particular instance now to be cited, very distinct traces were
left to show the progress of aerolites through the air. During the
explosion of a meteor near Bordeaux, on the twentieth of August, 1789, a
stone, in diameter about fifteen inches, fell through the roof of a
cottage, and killed a herdsman and some cattle. Part of this stone is
now in the Greville museum, and part in the museum of Bordeaux. On the
twenty-fourth of July, 1790, between nine and ten at night, a shower of
stones fell near Agen, in Guienne, near the south-west angle of France.
First a luminous ball of fire was seen traversing the atmosphere with
great rapidity, and leaving behind it a train of light which lasted
about fifty seconds; soon after this a loud explosion was heard, and
sparks were seen to fly off in all directions. This was soon after
followed by the fall of stones, over a considerable extent of ground,
and at various distances from each other. These were all alike in
appearance, but of many different sizes, the greater number weighing
about two ounces, but many a vast deal more. Some fell with a hissing
noise, and entered the ground; but the smaller ones remained on the
surface. The only damage done by this shower of stones was, that they
broke the tiles of several houses, in falling on which they had not the
sound of hard and compact substances, but of matter in a soft,
half-melted state. Such as fell on straws adhered to them, and could not
be readily separated; a manifest proof that they were in a state of
fusion.

On the eighteenth of December, 1795, several persons near the house of
Captain Topham, in Yorkshire, heard a loud noise in the air, followed by
a hissing sound, and soon after felt a shock, as if a heavy body had
fallen to the ground at a little distance from them. In reality, one of
them saw a huge stone fall to the earth, at the distance of eight or
nine yards from the place where he stood. When he first observed it, it
was seven or eight yards above the ground; and in its fall it threw up
the mold on every side, burying itself twenty-one inches in the earth.
This stone on being dug up, was found to weigh fifty-six pounds. On the
seventeenth of March, 1798, a body, burning with an intense light,
passed over the vicinity of Ville Franche, on the Saone, near Lyons,
accompanied by a hissing sound, and leaving behind a luminous track.
This phenomenon exploded with a great noise, about twelve hundred feet
from the ground, and one of the splinters, still luminous, having been
observed to fall in a neighboring vineyard, was traced. It was about a
foot in diameter, and had penetrated twenty inches into the ground. On
the fourth of July, 1803, a ball of fire struck a public house at East
Norton, in Oxfordshire. The chimney was thrown down, the roof partly
torn off, the windows shattered to atoms, and the dairy, &c., converted
into a heap of rubbish. It was of considerable magnitude, and, on coming
in contact with the house, exploded with great noise, and a very
oppressive sulphureous smell. Several fragments of stones were found on
the spot, having a surface of a dark color, and varnished, as if in a
state of fusion, with numerous globules of a whitish metal, combining
sulphur and nickel. The indentures on these surfaces render it probable
that the ball was soft when it descended; and it was obviously in a
state of fusion, as the grass was burned where the fragments fell. The
motion of the fire-ball, while in the air, was very rapid, and
apparently parallel to the horizon.

The latest remarkable fall of aerolites in Europe, of which there is a
distinct account, was in the vicinity of Laigle, in Normandy, early in
the afternoon of the twenty-sixth of April, 1812. A fiery globe of a
very brilliant splendor, which moved in the air with great rapidity, was
followed in a few seconds by a violent explosion, which lasted five or
six minutes, and was heard to the extent of more than thirty leagues in
every direction. Three or four reports, like those of a cannon, were
followed by a discharge resembling a fire of musketry, after which a
dreadful rumbling was heard like the beating of a drum. The air was
calm, and the sky serene, with the exception of a few clouds, such as
are frequently observed. The noise proceeded from a small cloud of a
rectangular form, the largest side being in a direction from east to
west. It appeared motionless all the time the phenomenon lasted; but the
vapor of which it was composed was projected momentarily from the
different sides by the effect of the successive explosions. This cloud
was about half a league to the north-north-east of the town of Laigle,
and was at so great an elevation, that the inhabitants of two hamlets, a
league distant from each other, saw it at the same time over their
heads. In the whole canton over which this cloud hovered, a hissing
noise, like that of a stone discharged from a sling, was heard; and a
multitude of meteoric stones were seen to fall at the same time. The
district in which they fell forms an elliptical extent of about two
leagues and a half in length, and nearly one in breadth; the greatest
dimension being in a direction from south-east to north-west, forming a
declination of about twenty-two degrees. This direction, which the
meteor must have followed, is exactly that of the magnetic meridian;
which is a remarkable fact. The number of these stones was reckoned to
exceed three thousand; and the largest of them weighed nearly twenty
pounds. They were friable some days after their fall, and smelt strongly
of sulphur. They subsequently acquired the degree of hardness common to
this kind of stones.

While, in Europe, these phenomena thus strongly confirmed the long
exploded idea of the vulgar, that many of the luminous meteors observed
in the atmosphere, are masses of ignited matter, an account of one of
precisely the same description was received from the East Indies. On the
nineteenth of December, 1798, at eight in the evening, a large
fire-ball, or luminous meteor, was seen at Benares, and at several
places in its vicinity. It was attended by a loud rumbling noise; and,
about the same time, the inhabitants of Krakhut, fourteen miles from
Benares, saw the light, heard what resembled a loud thunder-clap, and,
immediately after, the noise of heavy bodies falling around them. Next
morning the mold in the fields was found to have been turned up in many
spots; and unusual stones of various sizes, but of the same substances,
were picked from the moist soil, generally at a depth of six inches. One
stone fell through the roof of a hut, and buried itself in the earthen
floor.

From these multiplied evidences it is proved that, in various parts of
the world, luminous meteors have been seen moving through the air with
surprising rapidity, in a direction more or less oblique, accompanied
with a noise, commonly like the whizzing of cannon-balls, followed by
explosion, and the fall of hard, stony, or semi-metallic masses in a
heated state. The constant whizzing sound; the fact of stones being
found, like each other, but unlike all others in the vicinity, at the
spots toward which the luminous body, or its fragments, had been seen to
move; the scattering or plowing up of the soil at those spots, always in
proportion to the size of the stones; the concussion of the neighboring
ground at the same time; and especially, the impinging of the stones on
bodies somewhat above the earth, or lying loose on its surface; all
these are circumstances perfectly well authenticated in these reports,
proving that such meteors are usually inflamed hard masses, descending
rapidly through the air to the earth.


                 AURORA BOREALIS AND AURORA AUSTRALIS.

These splendid meteors are generally considered as the result of a
combination of the two powers of magnetism and electricity. When the
_light_, or _aurora_, appears chiefly in the north part of the heavens,
it is called the _aurora borealis_, or northern lights; and when chiefly
in the south part, the =aurora australis=, or southern lights. Where the
coruscation is more than ordinarily bright and streaming, which,
however, seldom occurs in the north, it is denominated =lumen boreale=;
and where these streams have assumed a decided curvature, like that of
the rainbow, they are distinguished by the name of luminous arches.

The aurora is chiefly visible in the winter season, and in cold weather.
It is usually of a reddish color, inclining to yellow, and sends out
frequent coruscations of pale light, which seem to rise from the horizon
in a pyramidal, undulating form, shooting with great velocity up to the
zenith. It never appears near the equator; but of late years has
frequently been seen toward the south pole. The =aurora borealis= has
appeared at some periods more frequently than at others. This phenomenon
was so rare in England, or so little regarded, that its appearance was
not recorded in the English annals between a remarkable one observed on
the fourteenth of November, 1554, and a very brilliant one on the sixth
of March, 1716, and the two succeeding nights, but which was much
strongest on the first night. Hence it may be inferred, that the state
of either the air or earth, or perhaps of both, is not at all times
fitted for its production.

The extent of these appearances is surprisingly great. The very
brilliant one referred to above was visible from the west of Ireland to
the confines of Russia, and the east of Poland, extending over, at the
least, thirty degrees of longitude, and, from about the fiftieth degree
of latitude, over almost all the northern part of Europe. In every
place, it exhibited, at the same time, the same wonderful features. The
elevation of these lights is equally surprising: an =aurora borealis=
which appeared on the sixteenth of December, 1737, was ascertained, by
means of thirty computations, to have an average hight from the earth of
one hundred and seventy-five leagues, equal to four hundred and
sixty-four English miles.

Captain Cook, in his first voyage round the world, observed that these
coruscations are frequently visible in southern latitudes. On the
sixteenth of September, 1770, he witnessed an appearance of this kind
about ten o’clock at night, consisting of a dull, reddish light, and
extending about twenty degrees above the horizon. Its extent was very
different at different times, but it was never less than eight or ten
points of the compass. Rays of light, of a brighter color, passed
through and without it; and these rays vanished and were renewed nearly
in the same time as those in the =aurora borealis=, but had little or no
vibration. Its body bore south-south-east from the ship, and continued,
without any diminution of its brightness, till twelve o’clock, when the
observers retired. The ship was at this time within the tropic of
Capricorn.

On the seventeenth of February, 1773, during his second voyage, Captain
Cook speaks of a beautiful phenomenon that was observed in the heavens.
“It consisted of long columns of a clear white light, shooting up from
the horizon to the eastward, almost to the zenith, and spreading
gradually over the whole southern parts of the sky. These columns even
sometimes bent sideways at their upper extremity; and, although in most
respects similar to the northern lights, (the =aurora borealis= of our
hemisphere,) yet differed from them in being always of a whitish color;
whereas ours assume various tints, especially those of a fiery and
purple hue. The stars were sometimes hidden by, and sometimes faintly to
be seen through the substance of these southern lights, =aurora
australis=. The sky was generally clear when they appeared, and the air
sharp and cold, the mercury in the thermometer standing at the
freezing-point; the ship being then in fifty-eight degrees south.” On
six different nights of the following month (March) the same phenomenon
was observed.


                  LUMEN BOREALE, OR STREAMING LIGHTS.

On the eighth of October, 1726, uncommon streams of light were exhibited
in every part of the heavens, about eight o’clock in the evening. They
were seen throughout England, as well as in the southern parts of
Europe. They were mostly pointed, and of different lengths, assuming the
appearance of flaming spires or pyramids; some again were truncated, and
reached but half-way; while others had their points reaching up to the
zenith, or near it, where they formed a sort of canopy, or thin cloud,
sometimes red, sometimes brownish, sometimes blazing as if on fire, and
sometimes emitting streams all around it. This canopy was manifestly
formed by the matter carried up by the streaming on all parts of the
horizon. It sometimes seemed to ascend with a force, as if impelled by
the impetus of some explosive agent below; and this forcible ascent of
the streaming matter gave a motion to the canopy, and sometimes a
gyration, like that of a whirlwind. This was manifestly caused by the
streams striking the outer part of the canopy; but if they struck the
canopy in the center, all was then confusion. The vapors between the
spires, or pyramids, were of a blood-red color, which gave those parts
of the atmosphere the appearance of blazing lances and bloody-colored
pillars. There was also a strange commotion among the streams, as if
some large cloud or other body was moving behind and disturbing them. In
the northern and southern parts the streams were perpendicular to the
horizon; but in the intermediate points they seemed to decline more or
less in one way or the other, or rather to incline toward the meridian.
Several persons declared, that in the time of the streaming, they heard
a hissing, and in some places a crackling noise, like that which is
reported to be often heard in earthquakes.

At Naples, on the sixteenth of December, 1737, early in the evening, a
light was observed in the north, as if the air was on fire, and
flashing. Its intenseness gradually increasing, about seven o’clock it
spread to the westward. Its greatest hight was about sixty-five degrees.
Its extremities were unequally jagged and scattered, and followed the
course of the westerly wind; so that for a few hours it spread
considerably wider, yet without ever extending to the zenith. About
eight o’clock, a very regular arch, of a parabolic figure, was seen to
rise gently to two degrees of rectangular elevation, and to twenty
degrees of horizontal amplitude. At ten the intenseness of the color
disappeared; and by midnight not any traces of this phenomenon were
left. It was seen throughout Italy, as the subsequent accounts will
show. At Padua, on the appearance of this extraordinary meteor, the air
was calm, and the barometer remarkably high. At five in the afternoon a
blackish zone, with its upper limb of a sky-color, appeared near the
horizon; and above this zone was another, very luminous, resembling the
dawn pretty far advanced. The highest zone was of a red, fiery color. A
little after six o’clock, the upper parts of these zones emitted an
abundance of red streamings, or rays; their vivid color being
occasionally intermixed with whitish and dark spots. In a few seconds
after, there issued from the west, a red and very bright column, which
ascended to the third part of the heavens, and a little after became
curved like a rainbow. At half past eight, almost instantaneously, the
bright zone, from eight degrees west to fifty degrees east, became more
vivid, and rose higher; and above this appeared another and larger one,
of a red, fiery color, with several successive streamings tending
upward, and exceeding sixty degrees of altitude; the western part having
assumed the form of a thin cloud. At midnight these splendid lights
disappeared entirely. At Bononia, this surprising meteor spread to such
an extent as to occupy about one hundred and forty degrees of the
heavens. Its light was so vivid that houses could be distinguished, at
eight in the evening, at a very considerable distance; and these were so
reddened, that many persons thought there was a fire in the
neighborhood. At that time the aurora formed itself into a concave arch
toward the horizon; and in half an hour, at its eastern limit, a pyramid
was displayed, of a more intense color toward the north, from the center
of which there shot up vertically a streak of light, between a white and
a yellow color. A very dark, narrow cloud crossed the whole phenomenon,
and terminated in the pyramid. At the upper part, a very considerable
tract of the heavens was enlightened by a very vivid red light, which
was interrupted by several streaks or columns of a bright yellowish
light. These streamings shot up vertically, and parallel to each other,
the narrow cloud seeming to serve them as a basis. Under the cloud there
issued forth two tails of a whitish light, hanging downward on a basis
of a weak red, and seeming to kindle and dart the light downward. A
white streak, which passed across these two tails, and extended from one
end of the phenomenon to the other, in a position almost parallel to the
above-mentioned cloud, gave a splendid effect to the whole. This
surprising and beautiful meteor disappeared a short time after nine
o’clock; but an abundance of falling stars were afterward seen in the
south.

Similar observations were made at Rome; but in Great Britain, where this
phenomenon was likewise seen, different appearances were displayed. At
Edinburgh, at six in the evening, the sky appeared to be in flames. An
arch of red light reached from the west, over the zenith, to the east,
its northern border being tinged with a color approaching to blue. This
aurora did not first form in the north, as usually happens, and after
forming an arch there, rise toward the zenith; neither did the light
shiver, and spread itself, by sudden jerks, over the hemisphere, as is
common, but it gradually and gently stole along the face of the heavens,
till it had covered the whole hemisphere: this alarmed the vulgar, and
was indeed a strange sight. At Rosehill, in Sussex, it appeared as a
strong and very steady light, nearly of the color of red ocher. It did
not dart or flash, but kept a steady course against the wind, which blew
fresh from the south-west. It began in the north-north-west, in the form
of a pillar of light, at a quarter past six in the evening: in about ten
minutes a fourth part of it divided from the rest, and never joined
again. In ten minutes more it described an arch, but did not join at the
top; and at seven o’clock it formed a bow, disappearing soon after. It
was lightest and reddest at the horizon, and gave as much light as a
full moon.


                            LUMINOUS ARCHES.

In the month of March, 1774, a very beautiful luminous arch was seen at
Buxton. It was white, inclining to yellow: and its breadth in the crown
was apparently equal to that of the rainbow. As it approached the
horizon, each leg of the arch became gradually broader. It was
stationary and free from any sensible coruscations. Its direction was
from north-east to south-west; and its crown or most elevated part, not
far from the zenith. This phenomenon lasted about half an hour.

The grandest spectacle of this kind which appears to have been seen in
Great Britain, was observed at Leeds, in Yorkshire, on the twelfth of
April, 1783, between the hours of nine and ten at night. A broad arch of
a bright pale yellow, and having an apparent breadth of about fifteen
degrees, arose in the heavens, and passed considerably south of the
zenith. Such was its varied density, that it appeared to consist of
small columns of light, having a sensible motion. After about ten
minutes, innumerable bright coruscations shot out at right angles from
its northern edge, elongating themselves more and more till they had
nearly reached the northern horizon. As they descended, their
extremities were tipped with an elegant crimson, such as is produced by
the electric spark in an exhausted tube. After some time this beautiful
northern light ceased to shoot, and, forming a line of bright yellow
clouds, which extended horizontally about the fourth of a circle, its
greatest portion, which darted from this arch toward the north, as well
as the cloudlike and more stationary aurora, became so dense as to hide
the stars from view. The moon was eleven days old, and shone brightly
during this scene, but did not eclipse the splendor of these
coruscations. The wind was in the north, a little inclined to the east.
A similar phenomenon was observed at Leeds on the twenty-sixth of the
same month. From a mass or broad column of light in the west, issued
three luminous arches, each of which made a different angle with the
horizon. They had not been viewed many minutes when they were rendered
invisible by a general blaze of =aurora borealis=, which possessed the
space just before occupied by these arches.


                      IGNES FATUI, OR MOCK FIRES.

These meteors, denominated by the vulgar, Will-with-a-wisp, and
Jack-with-a-lantern, and at sea or on the coast, mariner’s lights, or
St. Helmo’s fires, are now considered as real exhalations from the
earth, produced by gas, vapor, or some other attenuated substance,
emanating from vegetable, animal or mineral materials, and combined with
the matter of light or heat, or both. Instead of being dense or solid,
they are uniformly rare and subtile; and, instead of originating in the
loftiest regions of the atmosphere, or beyond its range, are generated
for the greater part in low, marshy plains or valleys. To the fearful
and superstitious, they are a source of as much terror as the nobler and
sublimer meteors which have just been contemplated; and it is probable
that they have occasionally been the source of real and extensive
damage, when in a state of actual combustion, and that they have still
more frequently seduced a timid and benighted traveler into dangerous
bogs and quagmires.

In Italy, in the Bolognese territory, they are so frequent, in the
morassy grounds, that they are to be seen every night, some of them
affording as much light as a kindled torch, and others not being larger
than the flame of a candle, but all of them so luminous as to shed a
luster on the surrounding objects. They are constantly in motion, but
this motion is various and uncertain. They sometimes rise and at other
times sink, sometimes suddenly disappearing, and appearing again in an
instant in some other place. They usually hover about six feet from the
ground, differing both in figure and size, and spreading out and
contracting themselves alternately. Sometimes they break to appearance
into two parts, soon after uniting again in one body, and at intervals
float like waves, letting fall portions of ignited matter, like sparks
from a fire. They are more frequently observed in winter than in summer,
and cast the strongest light in rainy and moist weather. They are most
friendly to the banks of brooks and rivers, and to morasses; but they
are likewise seen on elevated grounds, where they are, however, of a
comparatively diminutive size.

In the month of March, 1728, a traveler being in a mountainous road,
about ten miles south of Bononia, perceived, as he approached the river
Riovedere, between eight and nine in the evening, a light shining very
brightly on some stones which lay on the banks. It was elevated about
two feet above them; its figure describing a parallelopiped, more than a
foot in length, and about six inches high, its longest side lying
parallel to the horizon. Its light was so strong that he could
distinguish by it very plainly a part of a neighboring hedge, and the
water in the river. On a near approach, it changed from a bright red to
a yellowish color, and on drawing still nearer, became pale; but when
the observer reached the spot it vanished. On his stepping back, he not
only saw it again, but found that the further he receded, the stronger
and more luminous it became. This light was afterward seen several
times, both in spring and autumn, precisely at the same spot, and
preserving the same shape.

On the twelfth of December, 1776, several very remarkable =ignes fatui=
were observed on the road to Bromsgrove, five miles from Birmingham, in
England, a little before daylight. A great many of these lights were
playing in an adjacent field, in different directions; from some of
which there suddenly sprang up bright branches of light, somewhat
resembling the explosion of a rocket, filled with many brilliant stars,
if, in the case of the latter, the discharge be supposed to be upward,
or vertical, instead of taking the usual direction. The hedge, and the
trees on each side, were strongly illuminated. This appearance continued
a few seconds only, when the =ignes fatui= played as before. The
spectator was not sufficiently near to observe whether the apparent
explosions were attended with any report.

In the month of December, 1693, between the twenty-fourth and thirtieth,
a fiery exhalation, without doubt generated in the same way with the
meteors described above, set fire to sixteen ricks of hay, and two barns
filled with corn and hay, at the village of Hartech, in Pembrokeshire.
It had frequently been seen before, proceeding from the sea, and in
these instances lasted for a fortnight or three weeks. It not only fired
the hay, but poisoned the grass, for the extent of a mile, so as to
induce a distemper among the cattle. It was a weak blue flame, easily
extinguished, and did not in the least burn any of the men who
interposed their endeavors to save the hay, although they ventured, not
only close to it, but sometimes into it. All the damage sustained
happened constantly in the night.

Belonging to this class of meteors is the =draco volans=, a fiery
exhalation, frequent in marshy and cold countries. It is most common in
summer; and, although principally seen playing near the banks of rivers,
or in boggy places, still it sometimes mounts up to a considerable hight
in the air, to the no small terror of the amazed beholders. Its
appearance is that of an oblong (sometimes roundish) fiery body, with a
long tail. It is entirely harmless, frequently sticking to the hands and
clothes of the spectators, without doing them the least injury.


                        SPECTER OF THE BROCKEN.

This is one of those curious and interesting atmospheric phenomena, or
deceptions, which proceed from one common cause, an irregularity in the
tenuity of the atmospheric fluid. This fluid is commonly of an
homogeneous or equable tenuity, and consequently suffers the rays of the
sun to penetrate it without any obstruction or change; but is at times
irregular, and composed of parts of bodies of a denser medium than its
general texture and constitution. Under these circumstances, the fluent
ray, if it do not enter the denser medium in a direct or perpendicular
line, will be either reflected, or refracted, or both; and the object
surveyed through it, will assume a new, and, not unfrequently, a
grotesque or highly magnified appearance.

The specter of the Brocken is an aerial figure which is sometimes seen
among the Hartz mountains in Hanover. The phenomenon has been witnessed
by various travelers, and among them by M. Haue, from whose relation the
following particulars are extracted. “Having ascended the Brocken
[mountain] for the thirtieth time, I was at length so fortunate as to
have the pleasure of seeing this phenomenon. The sun rose about four
o’clock, and the atmosphere being quite serene toward the east, its rays
could pass without any obstruction over the Heinrichshohe mountain. In
the south-west, however, toward the mountain Achtermannshohe, a brisk
west wind carried before it thin transparent vapors. About a quarter
past four, I looked round, to see whether the atmosphere would permit me
to have a free prospect to the south-west, when I observed, at a very
great distance toward the Achtermannshohe, a human figure of monstrous
size! A violent gust of wind having almost carried away my hat, I
clapped my hand to it; and in moving my hand toward my head, the
colossal figure did the same.

“The pleasure which I felt at this discovery can hardly be described;
for I had already walked many a weary step in the hope of seeing this
shadowy image, without being able to gratify my curiosity. I immediately
made another movement, by bending my body, and the colossal figure
before me repeated it. I was desirous of doing the same once more, but
my colossus had vanished. I remained in the same position, waiting to
see whether it would return; and in a few minutes it again made its
appearance on the Achtermannshohe. I then called the landlord of the
neighboring inn, and having both taken the position which I had taken
alone, we looked toward the Achtermannshohe, but did not perceive
anything. We had not, however, stood long, when two such colossal
figures were formed over the above eminence, [as represented in the
cut,] which repeated their compliments by bending their bodies as we
did, after which they vanished. We retained our position, kept our eyes
fixed on the spot, and in a little time the two figures again stood
before us, and were joined by a third, [that of a traveler who then came
up and joined the party.] Every movement made by us, these figures
imitated; but with this difference, that the phenomenon was sometimes
weak and faint, sometimes strong and well defined.”

[Illustration: SPECTER OF THE BROCKEN.]

In Clarke’s “Survey of the Lakes,” a phenomenon similar to that of the
specter of the Brocken, is recorded to have been observed in the years
1743 and 1744, on Souter-Fell, a mountain in Cumberland. It excited much
conversation and alarm at the time, and exposed to great ridicule those
who asserted they had witnessed it. It is, however, too well attested
not to deserve a short notice here, and may be referred to the same
causes by which the above aerial images on the Brocken mountain were
produced. The relation is as follows. Souter-Fell is a mountain about
half a mile in hight, inclosed on the north and west sides by
precipitous rocks, but somewhat more open on the east, and easier of
access. At Wilton Hall, within half a mile of this mountain, on a
summer’s evening, in the year 1743, a farmer and his servant, sitting at
the door, saw the figure of a man with a dog, pursuing some horses along
Souter-Fell side, a place so steep that a horse could scarcely travel on
it. They appeared to run at a very great pace, till they got out of
sight at the lower end of the fell. On the following morning the farmer
and his servant ascended the steep side of the mountain, in full
expectation that they should find the man lying dead, being persuaded
that the swiftness with which he ran must have killed him, and imagining
also that they should pick up some of the shoes which they thought the
horses must have lost, in galloping at so furious a rate. They were,
however, disappointed in these expectations, as not the least vestige of
either man or horses could be discovered, not so much, even, as the mark
of a horse’s hoof on the turf.

On the twenty-third of June, of the following year, 1744, about half
past seven in the evening, the same servant, then residing at
Blakehills, at an equal distance from the mountain, being in a field in
front of the farm-house, saw a troop of horsemen riding on Souter-Fell
side in pretty close ranks, and at a brisk pace. Having observed them
for some time, he called out his young master, who before the spot was
pointed out to him, discovered the aerial troopers; and this phenomenon
was shortly after witnessed by the whole of the family. The visionary
horsemen appeared to come from the lowest part of Souter-Fell, and were
visible at a place called Knott: they then moved in regular troops along
the side of the fell, till they came opposite to Blakehills, when they
went over the mountain. They thus described a kind of curvilinear path,
and their first as well as their last appearance, was bounded by the
foot of the mountain. Their pace was that of a regular swift walk, and
they were seen for upward of two hours, when darkness intervened.
Several troops were seen in succession, and frequently the last, or last
but one in the troop, would quit his position, gallop to the front, and
then observe the same pace with the others. The same change was visible
to all the spectators; and the sight of this phenomenon was not confined
to Blakehills, but was witnessed by the inhabitants of the cottages
within a mile. It was attested before a magistrate by the two
above-cited individuals in the month of July, 1745. Twenty-six persons
are said in the attestation to have witnessed the march of these aerial
travelers.

It should be remarked that these appearances were observed on the eve of
the rebellion, when troops of horsemen might be privately exercising;
and as the imitative powers of the specter of the Brocken demonstrate
that the actions of human beings are sometimes pictured in the clouds,
it seems highly probable, on a consideration of all the circumstances of
this latter phenomenon on Souter-Fell, that certain thin vapors must
have hovered round the summit of the mountain when the appearances were
observed. It is also probable that these vapors may have been impressed
with the shadowy forms which seem to “imitate humanity,” by a particular
operation of the sun’s rays, united with some singular but unknown
refractive combinations then taking place in the atmosphere.


                              THE MIRAGE.

This very curious phenomenon, which was remarked by M. Monge, one of the
French savans belonging to the institute of Cairo, in the hot and sandy
desert between Alexandria and that city, is described by him as
resulting from an inverted image of the cerulean sky intermixed with the
ground scenery, the neighboring villages appearing to be surrounded with
a most beautiful sheet of water, and to exist, like islands, in its
liquid expanse, tantalizing the eye by an unfaithful representation of
what the thirsty traveler earnestly desires.

Doctor Clarke, in his interesting travels, introduces the following
animated description of this phenomenon. “Here [at the village of Utko]
we procured asses for our party, and, setting out for Rosetta, began to
recross the desert, appearing like an ocean of sand, but flatter and
firmer as to its surface, than before. The Arabs, uttering their harsh,
guttural language, ran chattering by the side of our asses; until some
of them calling out _‘Raschid!’_ we perceived its domes and turrets,
apparently upon the opposite side of an immense lake or sea, that
covered all the intervening space between us and the city. Not having in
my own mind, at the time, any doubt as to the certainty of its being
water, and seeing the tall minarets and buildings of Rosetta, with all
its groves of dates and sycamores, as perfectly reflected by it as by a
mirror, insomuch that even the minutest detail of the architecture and
of the trees might have been thence delineated, I applied to the Arabs
to be informed in what manner we were to pass the water. Our
interpreter, although a Greek, and therefore likely to have been
informed of such a phenomenon, was as fully convinced as any of us, that
we were drawing near to the water’s edge, and became indignant, when the
Arabs maintained, that within an hour we should reach Rosetta, by
crossing the sands in the direct line we then pursued, and that there
was no water. ‘What!’ said he, giving way to his impatience, ‘do you
suppose me an idiot, to be persuaded contrary to the evidence of my
senses?’ The Arabs, smiling, soon pacified him, and completely
astonished the whole party, by desiring us to look back at the desert we
had already passed, where we beheld a precisely similar appearance. It
was, in fact, _the mirage_, a prodigy to which all of us were then
strangers, although it afterward became more familiar. Yet upon no
future occasion did we ever behold this extraordinary illusion so
marvelously displayed. The view of it afforded us ideas of the horrible
despondency to which travelers must sometimes be exposed, who, in
traversing the interminable desert, destitute of water, and perishing
with thirst, have sometimes this deceitful prospect before their eyes.”

This appearance is often seen, when the sun shines, upon the extensive
flat sand upon the shores of the Bristol channel, in Somersetshire, and
probably on the sea-shore in other parts of England.


                             FATA MORGANA.

       “As when a shepherd of the Hebride isles,
         Placed far amid the melancholy main,
       (Whether it be lone fancy him beguiles,
         Or that aerial beings sometimes deign
         To stand embodied to our senses plain,)
       Sees on the naked hill, or valley low,
         The whilst in ocean Phœbus dips his wain,
       A vast assemblage moving to and fro;
     Then all at once in air dissolves the wondrous show.”—THOMSON.

These optical appearances of figures in the sea and air, in the Faro of
Messina, are the great delight of the populace, who, whenever the vision
is displayed, run about the streets shouting for joy, and calling on
every one to partake of the glorious sight. To produce this pleasing
deception, many circumstances must concur which are not known to exist
in any other situation. The spectator must stand with his back to the
east, in some elevated place behind the city, that he may command a view
of the whole bay, beyond which the mountains of Messina rise like a
wall, and darken the background of the picture. The winds must be
hushed, the surface of the water quite smooth, the tide at its hight,
and the waters pressed up by currents to a great elevation in the middle
of the channel. All these events coinciding, as soon as the sun
surmounts the eastern hills behind Reggio, (on the Calabrian coast
opposite,) and rises high enough to form an angle of forty-five degrees
on the water before the city, every object, existing or moving at
Reggio, will be repeated a thousand-fold in this marine mirror, which,
by its tremulous motion, is, as it were, cut into facets. Each image
will pass rapidly off in succession, as the day advances, and the stream
carries down the wave on which it appeared. Thus the parts of this
moving picture will vanish in the twinkling of an eye. Sometimes the air
is at this time so impregnated with vapors, and undisturbed by winds, as
to reflect objects in a kind of aerial screen, rising about thirty feet
above the level of the sea. In cloudy, heavy weather, they are drawn on
the surface of the water, bordered with fine prismatic colors.

Swinburne, in his travels, cites Father Angelucci as having been the
first to describe this phenomenon accurately. His relation is as
follows. “On the fifteenth of August, 1643, as I stood at my window, I
was surprised with a most wonderful and delectable vision. The sea which
washes the Sicilian shore, swelled up, and became, for twelve miles in
length, like a chain of dark mountains; while the waters near our
Calabrian coast grew quite smooth, and in an instant appeared as one
polished mirror, reclining against the aforesaid ridge. On this glass
was depicted, in _chiar-oscura_, a string of several thousands of
pilasters, all equal in altitude, distance and degree of light and
shade. In a moment they lost half their hight, and bent into arcades,
like Roman aqueducts. A long cornice was next formed on the top, and
above it rose castles innumerable, all perfectly alike. These soon split
into towers, which were shortly after lost in colonnades, then in
windows, and at last ended in pines, cypresses, and other trees, even
and similar. This was the Fata Morgana, which, for twenty-six years, I
had thought a mere fable.”


                       ATMOSPHERICAL REFRACTION.

A surprising instance of atmospherical refraction occurred at Hastings,
England, on the twenty-sixth of July, 1798. W. Latham, Esq., sitting in
his dining-room, situated on the parade, close to the sea-shore, and
nearly fronting the south, about five in the afternoon, had his
attention suddenly drawn by a great number of people running down to the
seaside. On inquiring the reason, he was informed that the coast of
France was plainly to be distinguished by the naked eye. On going down
to the shore, he was surprised to find that, even without the assistance
of a telescope, he could very plainly see the cliffs on the opposite
coast; which, at the nearest part, are between forty and fifty miles
distant, and are not to be discerned, from that low situation, by the
aid of the best glasses. They appeared to be only a few miles off, and
seemed to extend for some leagues along the coast. Pursuing his walk
along the shore to the eastward, close to the water’s edge, and
conversing on the subject with the sailors and fishermen, they could
not, at first, be persuaded of the reality of the appearance; but soon
became so thoroughly convinced, by the cliffs gradually appearing more
elevated, and approaching nearer as it were, that they pointed out and
named to him the different places they had been accustomed to visit,
such as, the Bay, the Old Head or Man, the Windmill, &c., at Boulogne;
together with St. Vallery, and other places on the coast of Picardy.
This they afterward confirmed, when they viewed them, thus refracted,
through their telescopes, observing that the above places appeared as
near as if they had been sailing, at a small distance, into the harbors.
From the eastern cliff, which is of a very considerable hight, a most
beautiful scene presented itself to Mr. Latham’s view, for there he
could at once see Dungeness, Dover cliffs, and the French coast, all
along from Calais, Boulogne, &c., to St. Vallery; and, as some of the
fishermen affirmed, as far to the westward even as Dieppe. By the
telescope, the French fishing-boats were plainly to be seen at anchor,
and the different colors of the land on the hights, with the buildings,
were perfectly discernible. This curious phenomenon continued in the
highest splendor till half past eight o’clock, notwithstanding a black
cloud for some time totally obscured the face of the sun, and then
vanished gradually. So remarkable an instance of atmospherical
refraction had not been before witnessed by the oldest inhabitant of
Hastings. It was likewise observed at Winchelsea, and other places along
the coast. The day was remarkably hot, without a breath of wind
stirring.

As another instance of this refracting power of the atmosphere, Dr.
Vince, an English philosopher, was once looking through a telescope at a
ship, which was so far off, that he could only see the upper parts of
the masts. The hulk was entirely hidden by the bending of the water, but
between himself and the ship he saw two perfect images of it in the air.
These were of the same form and color as the real ship; but one of them
was turned upside down. And when Captain Scoresby was in the polar sea
with his ship, he was separated by the ice from that of his father for
some time, and looked out for her every day with great anxiety. At
length, one evening, to his utter astonishment, he saw her suspended in
the air, in an inverted position, traced on the horizon in the clearest
colors, and with the most distinct and perfect representation. He sailed
in the direction in which he saw this visionary phenomenon, and actually
found his father’s vessel by its indication. He was separated from the
ship by immense masses of icebergs, and at such a distance that it was
impossible to have seen her in her actual situation, or to have seen her
at all, if her spectrum had not been thus raised several degrees above
the horizon in the air by this most extraordinary refraction. It is by
this bending of the rays of light that the images of people are often
seen at a distance, and sometimes magnified to a gigantic size. We have
given an account of such an appearance in the Hartz mountains, in
Germany.

Another singular instance of the refracting power of the atmosphere, was
witnessed within the present year, (1854,) by Mr. Elliott, the aeronaut,
while ascending in his balloon from Petersburg, Virginia. After he had
ascended about three thousand feet he discharged some five pounds of
ballast, when he shot onward and upward with amazing rapidity till he
began to approximate to the clouds. He then discharged about five pounds
more of sand, the remainder of the bag, when he again darted upward
among the clouds, which were so dense as to wholly exclude all
terrestrial objects from his view, and of course he was lost to all
observers below. These discharges were distinctly seen by persons
watching him, and on the first occasion some one exclaimed that the
balloon had burst. While among the clouds, it seemed to him as if he was
in the midst of a large ground-glass globe, some two or three hundred
feet in diameter, against the side of which opposite to the sun, the
shadow of his balloon rested, some five or six times larger than the
corporeal one. About half-way between him and the shadow, which seemed
as if resting on the glass wall, another balloon was seen, of a size
between the shadow and the real one, resting as if in a vacuum, which
displayed every color of the original faithfully. He then saw another
Elliott, clad and with features like himself, and seemingly self-like.
He then extended his own fingers, when he was mimicked by his image; and
whether he extended one finger or more, or whatever he did, this figure
duplicated exactly. When he would cause his balloon to oscillate, this
balloon would move exactly like his. When he threw out more ballast to
elevate himself, this figure _sank down_ instead of rising with him; and
when he arose above the clouds into the rays of the unclouded sun, he
left the mimic aeronaut below him.

In the rays of the sun above the clouds he found it so warm as to cause
him to perspire freely, a state of heat never before experienced at this
hight, nearly twenty-four thousand feet, where the air is very rarefied
and generally very chilly. He then opened the valve for the purpose of
descending, and as soon as he had sunk one or two thousand feet, which
he ascertained by barometrical indications, he felt as if he had entered
an ice-house, and a cold chill seized his whole person. Here he again
met his mimic aerial voyager, whom he kept in company for some time,
from philosophical motives. Whenever he moved sideways, this _mum_
gentleman would move in the same direction. But when he moved up or
down, the duplicate would move in a directly opposite way; and when he
concluded to descend, the image moved upward until the tricolored flag
was out of sight, when he could see the car and the aeronaut still
standing in it as if in a basket attached to nothing. He continued to
look until his head was Robespierred, and finally, piece by piece, his
body, and, at last, his feet and basket, ascended out of his sight. Mr.
Elliott said that he had been up a hundred and one times, but never had
seen anything in the form of an illusion like this before.

[Illustration: SHIP REFRACTED IN THE AIR.]

But one of the most remarkable cases of atmospheric refraction of which
we have any record, is that which occurred at New Haven, Connecticut, in
the early settlement of the colony. The colonists had built a ship, and
freighted her for England with a valuable cargo, with which she sailed
from their harbor in the winter of 1647, having several of their
principal men on board. They were obliged to cut their way through the
ice to get out of the harbor; and the ship, never being heard of
afterward, was supposed to have foundered at sea. No tidings arriving of
the ship or of her fate, the colonists were deeply distressed, and “were
very earnest in their prayers, both public and private, that God would
in some way make manifest to them what had become of their friends.” In
the following June, a violent thunder-storm arose out of the north-west,
after which the atmosphere being very calm and serene, about an hour
before sunset, a ship of the dimensions and form of the one they had
lost, with all her canvas set and flags flying, appeared in the air,
coming up the harbor, her sails filled as though by a fresh gale, and
sailing against the wind, for the space of half an hour.

At length, as she came nearer, her maintop seemed to be blown off,
though left hanging in the shrouds; then, her mizzen-top; then all her
masting seemed blown away by the board; quickly after, her hulk
careening, she overset, and seemed to sink and vanish in the clouds, and
as these clouds passed away, the air where she was seen, was, as before,
perfectly clear. The crowd of spectators could distinguish the
appearance of the various parts of the ship, the principal rigging, and
such proportions as made them satisfied that this was indeed their ship;
and Mr. Davenport, the minister, declared, in public, that God, for the
quieting of the hearts of the people, had given them this extraordinary
exhibition and account of what he had done with their property and
friends. But science gives us a more natural and less miraculous
explanation of the matter, in the refracting power of the air when in
certain states; and the probability is, that the ship, thus seen in the
air, was some strange vessel (which they imagined looked like their own)
coming up the harbor before the breeze, and then driven off and wrecked
by the storm, which reached her after it had passed New Haven; or else
that it was, indeed, their own ship, which after being driven about for
months, was now coming back to her port, when she was thus caught in the
tempest and destroyed. And as confirming this view of the matter, it may
be added, in conclusion, that within the present century, it is said, a
similar refraction of a ship in the air, has been witnessed in the same
place.


                        PARHELIA, OR MOCK SUNS.

On the fifth of February, 1674, near Marienberg, in Prussia, the sky
being everywhere serene, the sun, which was still some degrees above the
horizon, was seen to lance out very long and reddish rays, forty or
fifty degrees toward the zenith, notwithstanding it shone with great
luster. Beneath this planet, toward the horizon, there hung a somewhat
thin small cloud, at the inferior part of which there appeared a mock
sun, of the same apparent size with the true sun, and of a reddish
color. Soon after, the true sun descending gradually to the horizon,
toward the said cloud, the spurious sun beneath it grew clearer and
clearer, in so much that the reddish color in this apparent solar disk
vanished, and it put on the genuine solar light, in proportion as it was
approached by the genuine disk of the sun. The latter, at length, passed
into the lower counterfeit sun, and thus remained alone. This phenomenon
was considered the more wonderful, as it was perpendicularly under the
sun, instead of being at its side, as parhelia usually are; not to
mention the color, so different from that which is usual in mock suns,
nor the great length of the tail cast up by the genuine sun, of a far
more vivid and splendid light than parhelia commonly exhibit. This
appearance was soon followed by an exceedingly intense frost, which
lasted till the twenty-fifth of March, the whole bay being frozen up
from the town of Dantzic to Hela in the Baltic sea.

On the twenty-eighth of August, 1698, about eight o’clock in the
morning, there was seen at Sudbury, in Suffolk, England, the appearance
of three suns, which were then extremely brilliant. Beneath a dark,
watery cloud, in the east, nearly at its center, the true sun shone with
such strong beams, that the spectators could not look at it; and on each
side were the reflections. Much of the firmament was elsewhere of an
azure color. The circles were not colored like the rainbow, but white;
and there was also, at the same time, higher in the firmament, and
toward the south, at a considerable distance from the other phenomena,
the form of a half-moon, but apparently of double the size, with the
horns turned upward. This appearance was, within, of a fiery red color,
imitating that of the rainbow. These phenomena faded gradually, after
having continued about two hours.

Two mock suns, an arc of a rainbow inverted, and a halo, were seen at
Lyndon, in the county of Rutland, on the twenty-second of October, 1621,
at eleven in the morning. There had been an =aurora borealis= the
preceding night, with the wind at west-south-west. The two parhelia, or
mock suns, were bright and distinct, and in the usual places, namely, in
the two intersections of a strong and large portion of a halo, with an
imaginary circle parallel to the horizon, passing through the true sun.
Each parhelion had its tail of a white color, and in direct opposition
to the true sun; that toward the east being some twenty or twenty-five
degrees long, and that toward the west from ten to twelve degrees, both
narrowest at the remote ends. The mock suns were evidently red toward
the sun, but pale or whitish at the opposite sides, as was the halo
also. Still higher in the heavens, was an arc of a curiously inverted
rainbow, about the middle of the distance between the top of the halo
and the vertex. This arc was as distinct in its colors as the common
rainbow, and of the same breadth. The red color was on the convex, and
the blue on the concave of the arc, which seemed to be about ninety
degrees in length, its center being in or near the vertex. On the top of
the halo was a kind of inverted bright arc. This phenomenon was seen on
the following day, and, again, on the twenty-sixth. On the eleventh of
the preceding month, September, a very splendid and remarkable =aurora
borealis=, presenting truly unaccountable motions and removals, was
witnessed in Rutlandshire, in Northamptonshire, and at Bath.


                             LUNAR RAINBOW.

This very rare phenomenon was witnessed at Glapwell Hall, in Derbyshire,
England, on the twenty-fifth of December, 1710, about eight in the
evening, with a remarkable and very unusual display of colors. The moon
had passed her full about twenty-four hours, and the evening had been
rainy; but the clouds were dispersed, and the moon then shone quite
clear. This =iris lunaris= had all the colors of the solar iris,
exceedingly beautiful and distinct, only faint in comparison with those
which are seen in the day; as must necessarily have been the case, both
from the different beams by which it was occasioned, and the disposition
of the medium. What most surprised the observer was the largeness of the
arc, which was not so much less than that of the sun, as the different
dimensions of their bodies, and their respective distances from the
earth, seemed to require; but the entireness and beauty of its colors
furnished a charming spectacle.


                          CONCENTRIC RAINBOWS.

This extraordinary phenomenon, which is seen at sunrise on the Andes, in
South America, was first witnessed by Ulloa and his companions in the
wild heaths of Pambamarca, and is thus described by him. “At day-break
the whole of the mountain was enveloped in dense clouds, which at
sunrise were dissipated, leaving behind them vapors of so extreme a
tenuity, as not to be distinguishable to the sight. At the side opposite
to that where the sun rose on the mountain, and at the distance of about
sixty yards from the spot where we were standing, the image of each of
us was seen represented as if in a mirror, and three concentric
rainbows, the last or most exterior colors of one of which touched the
first of the following one, were centered on each head. Without the
whole of them, and at an inconsiderable distance, was seen a fourth arc
purely white. They were all perpendicular to the horizon; and in
proportion as any one of us moved from one side to the other, he was
accompanied by the phenomenon, which preserved the same order and
disposition. What was, however, most remarkable, was this, that although
six or seven persons were thus standing close together, each of us saw
the phenomenon as it regarded himself, but did not perceive it in the
others. This, adds Bouguer, is a kind of apotheosis, in which each of
the spectators, seeing his head adorned with a glory formed of three or
four concentric crowns of a very vivid color, each of them presenting
varieties similar to those of the first rainbow, tranquilly enjoys the
sensible pleasure of reflecting that the brilliant garland he can not
discover in the others is destined for himself alone.”

A similar phenomenon is described by Mr. Hagarth, as having been seen by
him in Wales, on the thirteenth of February, 1780. His relation is as
follows. “In ascending, at Rhealt, the mountain which forms the eastern
boundary of the vale of Clwyd, (in Denbighshire,) I observed a rare and
curious phenomenon. In the road above me, I was struck with the peculiar
appearance of a very white, shining cloud, which lay remarkably close to
the ground. The sun was near setting, but shone extremely bright: I
walked up to the cloud, and my shadow was projected into it, its
superior part being surrounded, at some distance, by a circle of various
colors, whose center appeared to be near the situation of the eye, and
whose circumference extended to the shoulders. This circle was complete,
except what the shadow of my body intercepted. It exhibited the most
vivid colors, the red being outermost; and all of them appearing in the
same order and proportion as they are presented to the view by the
rainbow. It resembled very exactly what in pictures is termed a glory,
surrounding the heads of saints; not indeed that it exhibited the
luminous radiance that is painted close to the head, but an arch of
concentric colors placed separately and distinctly from it. As I walked
forward, this glory approached or retired, just as the inequality of the
ground shortened or lengthened my shadow. The cloud being sometimes in a
small valley below me, sometimes on the same level, or on higher ground,
the variation of the shadow and glory became extremely striking and
singular. To add to the beauty of the scene, there appeared, at a
considerable distance to the right and left, the arches of a white,
shining bow. These arches were in the form of, and broader than a
rainbow; but were not completely joined into a semicircle above, on
account of the shallowness of the cloud.”


                         THUNDER AND LIGHTNING.

To conceive justly of the nature of thunder and lightning, we have only
to view the effects of a common electrical machine, and its apparatus,
in an apartment. These experiments mimic the great, wonderful and
terrific phenomena of nature. The stream, or spark, from the machine to
the hand, represents the shaft of lightning from the clouds to the
earth; and the snapping noise of the diminutive spark corresponds with
the explosion produced by the lightning, which we call thunder. In what
manner the clouds become electrified, and, in short, what is the nature
of electricity itself, our present range of experiments so little
qualify us to determine, that a century will perhaps elapse before a
philosophical precision can be attained. At present we only know for
certain that the electrical power displays itself merely on the surface
of bodies; and whether it is a fluid =per se=, a vacuum restoring
itself, or whatever its nature may be, the state of experimental
knowledge does not enable us to determine.

The obvious analogy between lightning and electricity, had long been
suspected, and was placed beyond a doubt by Franklin, who was the first
to conceive the practicability of drawing down lightning from the
clouds. Having found by previous experiments, that the electric fluid is
attracted _by points_, he apprehended that lightning might likewise
possess the same quality; although the effects of the latter would in
that case surpass those of the former in an astonishing degree. Flashes
of lightning, he likewise observed, are generally seen crooked and
waving in the air; and the electric spark drawn _from_ an irregular body
at some distance, when it is drawn _by_ an irregular body, or through a
space in which the best conductors are disposed in an irregular manner,
always exhibits the same appearance.

Lightning strikes the highest and most pointed objects in its way, in
preference to others, as high hills, trees, spires, masts, &c.; and all
pointed conductors receive and throw off the electric fluid more readily
than those which are terminated by flat surfaces. Lightning is observed
to take the best and readiest conductor; and this is also the case with
electricity, in the discharge of the Leyden phial; whence Franklin
inferred that, in a thunder-storm, it would be safer for a person to
have his clothes wet than dry. Lightning burns, dissolves metals, rends
some particular bodies, such as the roots and branches of trees, strikes
persons with blindness, destroys animal life, deprives magnets of their
virtue and reverses their poles; and these are well known properties of
electricity. Lightning not only gives polarity to the magnetic needle,
but to all bodies which have any portion of iron in them, as brick, &c.;
and, by observing which way the poles of these bodies lie, the direction
in which the stroke has passed may be known with the utmost certainty.

In order to demonstrate, by actual experiment, the identity of the
electric fluid with the matter of lightning, Franklin contrived to bring
lightning from the heavens by means of an electrical kite, which he
raised on the approach of a thunder-storm; and, with the electricity
thus obtained, charged phials, kindled spirits, and performed all other
electrical experiments, as they are usually exhibited by an excited
globe or tube. This happened in 1752, a month after the French
electricians, pursuing the method which he had proposed, had verified
the same theory; but without any knowledge on his part of what they had
done. On the following year, he further discovered that the air is
sometimes electrified positively, and sometimes negatively; and that in
the course of one thunder-storm, the clouds change from positive to
negative electricity several times. He was not long in perceiving that
this important discovery was capable of being applied to practical use;
and proposed a method, which he soon accomplished, of securing buildings
from being damaged by lightning, by means of conductors, or
lightning-rods, the use of which is now universally known.

From a number of judicious experiments made by him, Signor Beccaria
concluded that the clouds serve as conductors to convey the electric
fluid from those parts of the earth which are overloaded with it, to
those where it is exhausted. The same cause by which a cloud is first
raised, from vapors dispersed in atmosphere, draws to it those which are
already formed, and still continues to form new ones, till the whole
collected mass extends so far as to reach a part of the earth where
there is a deficiency of the electric fluid, and where the electric
matter will discharge itself on the earth. A channel of communication
being thus produced, a fresh supply of electric matter is raised from
the overloaded part, which continues to be conveyed by the medium of the
clouds, till the equilibrium of the fluid is restored between the two
places of the earth. He further observes that as the wind constantly
blows from the place where the thunder-cloud proceeds, the sudden
accumulation of such a prodigious quantity of vapors must displace the
air, and repel it on all sides. Indeed, many observations of the descent
of lightning confirm his theory of the mode of its ascent; for it often
throws before it the parts of conducting bodies, and distributes them
along the resisting medium through which it must force its passage; and
on this principle the longest flashes of lightning seem to be produced,
by its forcing in its way part of the vapors in the air. One of the
chief reasons why the report of these flashes is so much protracted, is
the vast length of the vacuum made by the passage of the electric
matter; for although the air collapses the moment after it has passed,
and the vibration, on which the sound depends, commences at the same
moment, still, when the flash is directed toward the person who hears
the report, the vibrations excited at the nearer end of the track will
reach his ear much sooner than those from the remote end, and the sound
will, without any echo or repercussion, continue till all the vibrations
have successively reached him. The rattling noise of the thunder, which
makes it seem as if it passed through arches or were variously broken,
is probably owing to the sound being excited among clouds hanging over
one another, and the agitated air passing irregularly between them.

Among other precautions pointed out by Franklin, he recommends to those
who happen to be in the fields, at the time of a thunder-storm, to place
themselves within a few yards of a tree, but not quite near it. Signor
Beccaria, however, cautions persons not to depend on a higher, or, in
all cases, a better conductor than their own body; since, according to
his repeated observations, the lightning by no means descends in one
undivided track, but bodies of various kinds conduct their share of it
at the same time, in proportion to their quantity and conducting power.
The late Earl of Stanhope, in his principles of electricity, observes
that damage may be done by lightning, not only by the main stroke and
lateral explosion, but likewise by what he calls _the returning stroke_;
that is, by the sudden violent return of that part of the natural share
of electricity of any conducting body, or any combination of conducting
bodies, which had been gradually expelled from such body or bodies
respectively, by the superinduced elastic electrical pressure of a
thunder-cloud’s electrical atmospheres.

Among the awful phenomena of nature, none have excited more terror than
thunder and lightning. It is recorded of several of the profligate Roman
emperors, who had procured themselves to be deified, that when they
heard the thunder, they tremblingly concealed themselves, acknowledging
a divine power greater than their own; _a Jupiter thundering in the
heavens_.


                       REMARKABLE THUNDER-STORMS.

A few instances in which the effects of these storms have been
particularly characterized, will be both interesting and instructive.

That fermented liquors are apt to be soured and spoiled by thunder, is a
fact well known; but that dried substances should be so acted on, is a
still more remarkable phenomenon, and not so easy of explanation. It
happened, however, some years ago, that in the immense granaries of
Dantzic, the repositories of the corn, of Polish growth, intended for
exportation, the wheat and rye, which were before dry and sweet, were,
by the effect of a violent thunder-storm in the night, rendered clammy
and stinking, insomuch that it required several weeks to sweeten them
and render them fit for shipping.

The effects of a thunder-storm on a house and its furniture, at New
Forge, Ireland, on the ninth of August, 1707, were very singular. It was
observed that the day was, throughout, close, hot and sultry, with
scarcely any wind, until toward evening, when a breeze came on with
mizzling rain, which lasted about an hour. As the air darkened after
sunset, several faint flashes of lightning were seen, and thunder-claps
heard, as at a distance; but between ten and eleven o’clock they became,
in their approach, very violent and terrible, progressively increasing
in their intensity, and coming on with more frequency, until toward
midnight. A flash of lightning, and a clap of thunder, louder and more
dreadful than all the rest, came simultaneously, and shook and inflamed
the whole house. The mistress being sensible, at that instant, of a
strong sulphureous smell in her chamber, and feeling a thick, gross dust
fall on her hands and face as she lay in bed, concluded that part of her
house had been thrown down by the thunder, or set on fire by the
lightning. The family being called up, and candles lighted, both the
bed-chamber, and the kitchen beneath it, were found to be filled with
smoke and dust. A looking-glass in the chamber had been broken with such
violence, that not a piece of it was to be found of the size of half a
crown: several of the pieces were stuck in the chamber-door, which was
of oak, as well as on the other side of the room. The edges and corners
of some of the pieces of broken glass were tinged of a light flame
color, as if they had been heated by the fire. On the following morning
it was found that the cornice of the chimney next the bed-chamber had
been struck off, and a breach twenty inches in breadth, made in the
wall. At this part there was seen on the wall a smutted scar or trace,
as if left by the smoke of a candle, which pointed downward to another
part of the wall, where a similar breach was made. Within the chamber,
the boards on the back of a large hair trunk, filled with linen, were
forced in, and two-thirds of the linen pierced or cut through, the cut
appearing of a quadrangular figure. Several pieces of muslin and wearing
apparel, which lay on the trunk, were dispersed about the room, not in
any way singed or scorched, notwithstanding the hair on the back of the
trunk, where the breach was made, was singed. In the kitchen, a cat was
found dead, with its legs extended as in a moving posture, without any
other sign of being hurt, except that the fur was singed a little about
the rump.

In the parish of Samford Courtney, near Oakhampton, in Devon, on the
seventh of October, 1811, about three in the afternoon, a sudden
darkness came on. Several persons being in the church-porch, a great
fire-ball fell among them, and threw them down in various directions,
but without any one being hurt. The ringers in the belfry declared that
they never knew the bells go so heavily, and were obliged to desist from
ringing. Looking down from the belfry into the church, they perceived
four fire-balls, which suddenly burst, and the church was filled with
fire and smoke. One of the congregation received a blow in the neck,
which caused him to bleed both at nose and mouth. He observed the fire
and smoke to ascend to the tower, where a large beam, on which one of
the bells was hung, was broken, and the gudgeon breaking, the bell fell
to the floor. One of the pinnacles of the tower, next the town, was
carried away, and several of the stones were found near a barn, at a
considerable distance from the church.

On the fifteenth of December, 1754, a vast body of lightning fell on the
great hulk at Plymouth. It burst out a mile or two to the westward of
the hulk, and rushed toward it with incredible velocity. A portion of
the derrick (a part of the apparatus which served to hoist in and fix
the masts of the men-of-war) was cut out, of a diameter of at least
eighteen inches, and about fifteen feet in length: this particular piece
was in three or four places girt with iron hoops, about two inches
broad, and half an inch thick, which were completely cut in two by the
lightning, as if done by the nicest hand and instrument. The lightning
was immediately succeeded by a dreadful peal of thunder, and that by a
most violent shower of hail, the hailstones being as large as nutmegs,
and for the greatest part of the same size and shape.

Among the many fatal accidents by lightning which have befallen ships,
the following is a remarkable instance. In the year 1746, a Dutch ship
lay in the road of Batavia, and was preparing to depart for Bengal. The
afternoon was calm, and toward evening the sails were loosed, to take
advantage of the wind which then constantly blows from the land. A black
cloud gathered over the hills, and was brought by the wind toward the
ship, which it had no sooner reached, than a clap of thunder burst from
it, and the lightning set fire to the maintopsail: this being very dry,
burned with great fury: and thus the rigging and mast were set on fire.
An attempt was immediately made to cut away the mast, but this was
prevented by the falling of the burnt rigging from the head of the mast.
By degrees the fire communicated to the other masts, and obliged the
crew to desert the ship, the hull of which afterward took fire, and
burning down to the powder magazine, the upper part was blown into the
air, and the lower part sunk where the ship was at anchor.

In crossing the Atlantic, in the month of November, 1749, the crew of an
English ship observed a large ball of blue fire rolling on the water. It
came down on them so fast, that before they could raise the main-tack,
they observed the ball to rise almost perpendicularly, and within a few
yards of the main chains: it went off with an explosion as if hundreds
of cannon had been fired off simultaneously, and left behind it a great
smell of brimstone. The maintopmast was shattered into a thousand
pieces, and splints driven out of the mainmast which stuck in the
main-deck. Five seamen were knocked down, and one of them greatly burnt,
by the explosion. The fireball was apparently of the size of a large
millstone, and came from the north-east.

The ingenious and indefatigable Professor Richman lost his life on the
sixth of August, 1753, as he was observing, with M. Sokolow, engraver to
the royal academy of St. Petersburgh, the effects of electricity on his
gnomon, during a thunder-storm. It was ascertained that the lightning
was more particularly directed into the professor’s apartment, by the
means of his electrical apparatus, for M. Sokolow distinctly saw a globe
of blue fire, as large as his clenched hand, jump from the rod of the
right gnomon, toward the forehead of Professor Richman, who at that
instant was about a foot distant from the rod, observing the electrical
index. The globe of fire which struck the professor, was attended with a
report as loud as that of a pistol. The nearest metal wire was broken in
pieces, and its fragments thrown on M. Sokolow’s clothes, on which burnt
marks of their dimensions were left. Half of the glass vessel was broken
off, and the metallic filings it contained thrown about the room. Hence
it is plain that the force of the lightning was collected on the right
rod, which touched the filings of metal in the glass vessel. On
examining the effects of the lightning in the professor’s chamber, the
door-case was found split half through, and the door torn off, and
thrown into the chamber. The lightning therefore seems to have continued
its course along the chain conducted under the ceiling of the apartment.
In a Latin treatise, published by M. Lomonosow, member of the royal
academy of sciences of St. Petersburgh, several curious particulars are
mentioned relative to this melancholy catastrophe. At the time of his
death, Professor Richman had in his left coat-pocket seventy silver
coins, called rubles, which were not in the least altered by the
accident which befell him. His clock, which stood in the corner, of the
next room, between an open window and the door, was stopped; and the
ashes from the hearth thrown about the apartment. Many persons without
doors declared that they actually saw the lightning shoot from the cloud
to the professor’s apparatus at the top of his house. The author, in
speaking of the phenomena of electricity, observes that he once saw
during a storm of thunder and lightning, brushes of electrical fire,
with a hissing noise, communicate between the iron rod of his apparatus
and the sides of his window, and that these were three feet in length,
and a foot in breadth.

Somewhat analogous to these movements of electricity, are those
connected with the electric telegraph during the violent thunder-storms
that so often take place in the summer season. When such storms are
raging, and particularly when the lightning is abundant and near, not
only is the operation of the telegraph entirely suspended, but sometimes
the lightning itself passes with great violence over the wires, in some
cases melting and destroying them, and in others passing by them as it
does by the lightning-rod, and manifesting its violence chiefly at the
point of their termination. In some instances, the wires have been
instantly melted by the electric fluid, and in others the machinery of
the offices injured or destroyed, while at other times persons have been
struck, or dwellings set on fire by its power.


                              HAIL-STORMS.

On the seventeenth of July, 1666, a violent storm of hail fell on the
English coast, in Norfolk and Suffolk. At North Yarmouth the hailstones
were comparatively small; but at Snapebridge, one was taken up which
measured a foot in circumference; at Seckford Hall, one which measured
nine inches; and at Melton, one measuring eight inches. At Friston Hall,
one of these hailstones, being put into a balance, weighed two ounces
and a half. At Aldborough, it was affirmed that several of them were as
large as turkeys’ eggs. A carter had his head broken by them through a
stiff felt hat: in some places it bled, and in others tumors arose: the
horses were so pelted that they hurried away his cart beyond all
command. The hailstones were white, smooth without, and shining within.

On the twenty-fifth of May, 1686, the city of Lille, in Flanders, was
visited by a tremendous hail-storm. The hailstones weighed from a
quarter of a pound to a pound in weight, and even more. One was observed
to contain in the center a dark brown matter, and being thrown into the
fire, gave a very loud report. Others were transparent, and melted
instantly before the fire. This storm passed over the city and citadel,
leaving not a whole glass in the windows on the windward side. The trees
were broken, and some beaten down, and partridges and hares killed in
abundance.

In 1697, a horrid black cloud, attended with frequent lightnings and
thunder, coming with a south-west wind out of Caernarvonshire, in Wales,
and passing near Snowdon, was the precursor of a most tremendous
hailstorm. In the part of Denbighshire bordering on the sea, all the
windows on the weather side were broken by the hailstones discharged
from this cloud, and the poultry and lambs, together with a large
mastiff, killed. In the north part of Flintshire, several persons had
their heads broken, and were grievously bruised in their limbs. The main
body of this hail-storm fell on Lancashire, in a right line from
Ormskirk to Blackburn, on the borders of Yorkshire. The breadth of the
cloud was about two miles, within which compass it did incredible
damage, killing all descriptions of fowl and small creatures, and
scarcely leaving a whole pane of glass in any of the windows where it
passed. What was still worse, it plowed up the earth, and cut off the
blade of the green corn, so as utterly to destroy it, the hailstones
burying themselves in the ground. These hailstones, some of which
weighed five ounces, were of different forms, some round, others
semi-spherical; some smooth, others embossed and crenulated, like the
foot of a drinking-glass, the ice being very transparent and hard; but a
snowy kernel was in the midst of most of them, if not of all. The force
of their fall showed that they descended from a great hight. What was
thought to be most extraordinary in this phenomenon was, that the vapor
which disposed the aqueous parts thus to congeal, should have continued
undispersed for so long a tract as upward of sixty miles, and should,
during this extensive passage, have occasioned so extraordinary a
coagulation and congelation of the watery clouds, as to increase the
hailstones to so vast a bulk in so short a space as that of their fall.

On the fourth of May, 1767, at Hitchin, in Hertfordshire, after a
violent thunder-storm, a black cloud suddenly arose in the south-west,
about two o’clock in the afternoon, the wind then blowing strongly in
the east, and was almost instantly followed by a shower of hail, several
of the hailstones measuring from seven or eight to thirteen or fourteen
inches in diameter. The extremity of the storm fell near Offley, where a
young man was killed, and one of his eyes was beaten out of his head,
his body being in every part covered with bruises. Another person,
nearer to Offley, escaped with his life, but was much bruised. At a
nobleman’s seat in the vicinity, seven thousand squares of glass were
broken, and great damage was done to all the neighboring houses. The
large hailstones fell in such immense quantities, that they tore up the
ground, and split many large oaks and other trees, cutting down
extensive fields of rye, and destroying several hundred acres of wheat,
barley, &c. Their figures were various, some being oval, others round,
others pointed, and others again flat.


                              HURRICANES.

The ruin and desolation accompanying a hurricane can scarcely be
described. Like fire, its resistless force rapidly consumes everything
in its track. It is generally preceded by an awful stillness of the
elements, and a closeness and mistiness in the atmosphere, which make
the sun appear red, and the stars of more than an ordinary magnitude.
But a dreadful reverse succeeding, the sky is suddenly overcast and
wild; the sea rises at once from a profound calm into mountains; the
wind rages and roars like the noise of cannon; the rain descends in a
deluge; a dismal obscurity envelops the earth with darkness; and the
superior regions appear rent with lightning and thunder. The earth, on
these occasions, often does, and always seems to tremble, while terror
and consternation distract all nature: birds are carried from the woods
into the ocean; and those whose element is the sea, fly for refuge to
the land. The affrighted animals in the fields assemble together, and
are almost suffocated by the impetuosity of the wind, in searching for
shelter, which, when found, serves them only for destruction. The roofs
of houses are carried to vast distances from their walls, which are
beaten to the ground, burying their inmates beneath them. Large trees
are torn up by the roots, and huge branches shivered off, and driven
through the air in every direction, with immense velocity. Every tree
and shrub that withstands the shock, is stripped of its boughs and
foliage. Plants and grass are laid flat to the earth. Luxuriant spring
is in a moment changed to dreary winter. This direful tragedy ended,
when it happens in a town, the devastation is surveyed with accumulated
horror: the harbor is covered with wrecks of boats and vessels; and the
shore has not a vestige of its former state remaining. Mounds of rubbish
and rafters in one place; heaps of earth and trunks of trees in another;
deep gullies from torrents of water; and the dead and dying bodies of
men, women and children, half-buried, and scattered about, where streets
but a few hours before were, present to the miserable survivors a
shocking conclusion of a spectacle, often followed by famine, and, when
accompanied by an earthquake, by mortal diseases. Such is the true and
terrific picture of a hurricane in the West Indies, as drawn by an
actual observer.

On the Indian coast, hurricanes are both frequent and disastrous. On the
second of October, 1746, the French squadron, commanded by Le
Bourdonnai, being at anchor in Madras roads, a hurricane came on which
in a few hours destroyed nearly the whole of the fleet, together with
twenty other ships belonging to different nations. One of the French
ships foundered in an instant, and only six of the crew were saved. On
the thirtieth of December, 1760, during the siege of Pondicherry, a
tremendous hurricane drove ashore and wrecked three British ships
belonging to the besieging squadron: the crews were saved. On the
twentieth of October of the following year, 1761, the British fleet,
then lying in Madras roads, had to encounter a violent hurricane. The
men-of-war put to sea, and were thus providentially saved; but all the
vessels which still lay at anchor were lost, and scarcely a soul on
board saved. On the twenty-ninth of October, 1768, another hurricane
was, on the coast of Coromandel, fatal to the Chatham Indiaman, which
neglected to put to sea.

In the West Indies, a tremendous hurricane on the twenty-first of
October, 1817, was particularly severe at the island of St. Lucie. All
the vessels in the port were entirely lost. The government-house was
blown down, and all within its walls, comprising the governor, his lady
and child, his staff, secretaries, servants, &c., amounting to about
thirty persons, were buried in its ruins: not one survived the dreadful
accident; and still more horrid to relate, the barracks of the officers
and soldiers were demolished, and all within them (about two hundred
persons) lost. All the estates on the island were reduced to a heap of
ashes. At Dominica, nearly the whole of the town was inundated, with an
immense destruction of property.

In Great Britain, a dreadful hurricane, commonly called the great storm,
set in at ten at night on the twenty-sixth of November, 1703, and raged
violently until seven the next morning. It extended its ravages to every
part of the kingdom. In the capital, upward of two thousand stacks of
chimneys were blown down. The lead on the tops of several churches was
rolled up like skins of parchment. Many houses were leveled with the
ground, and by the fall of the ruins, twenty-one persons were killed,
and more than two hundred wounded. The ships in the Thames broke from
their moorings: four hundred wherries were lost, and many barges sunk,
with a great loss of lives. At sea the destruction was still greater:
twelve ships of war, with upward of eighteen hundred men on board, were
totally lost, together with many merchantmen.


                             THE MONSOONS.

The setting in of the monsoon, or tropical sea-wind, in the East Indies,
is thus described by Forbes in his “Oriental Memoirs.” The scene was at
Baroche, where the British army was encamped. “The shades of evening
approached as we reached the ground, and just as the encampment was
completed, the atmosphere grew suddenly dark, the heat became
oppressive, and an unusual stillness presaged the immediate setting in
of the monsoon. The whole appearance of nature resembled those solemn
preludes to earthquakes and hurricanes in the West Indies, from which
the east in general is providentially free. We were allowed very little
time for conjecture; in a few minutes the heavy clouds burst over us. I
had witnessed seventeen monsoons in India, but this exceeded them all in
its awful appearance and dreadful effects. Encamped in a low situation,
on the borders of a lake formed to collect the surrounding water, we
found ourselves in a few hours in a liquid plain. The tent-pins giving
way, in a loose soil, the tents fell down, and left the whole army
exposed to the contending elements. It requires a lively imagination to
conceive the situation of a hundred thousand human beings of every
description, with more than two hundred thousand elephants, camels,
horses and oxen, suddenly overwhelmed by this dreadful storm, in a
strange country, without any knowledge of high or low ground; the whole
being covered by an immense lake, and surrounded by thick darkness,
which prevented our distinguishing a single object, except such as the
vivid glare of lightning displayed in horrible forms. No language can
describe the wreck of a large encampment thus instantaneously destroyed,
and covered with water, and this amid the cries of old men and helpless
women, terrified by the piercing shrieks of their expiring children,
unable to afford them relief. During this dreadful night, more than two
hundred persons and three thousand cattle perished, and the morning dawn
exhibited a shocking spectacle.”

The south-west monsoon generally sets in very early in certain parts of
India. “At Anjengo,” observes the above author, “it commences with great
severity, and presents an awful spectacle; the inclement weather
continues, with more or less violence, from May to October: during that
period, the tempestuous ocean rolls from a black horizon, literally of
‘darkness visible,’ a series of floating mountains heaving under hoary
summits, until they approach the shore, when their stupendous
accumulations flow in successive surges, and break upon the beach; every
ninth wave is observed to be generally more tremendous than the rest,
and threatens to overwhelm the settlement. The noise of these billows
equals that of the loudest cannon, and, with the thunder and lightning,
so frequent in the rainy season, is truly awful. During the tedious
monsoon I passed at Anjengo, I often stood upon the trembling sand-bank,
to contemplate the solemn scene, and derive comfort from that sublime
and omnipotent decree, ‘Hitherto shalt thou come, but no further; and
here shall thy proud waves be stayed!’”


                      WHIRLWINDS AND WATERSPOUTS.

                               “The dreadful spout
               Which shipmen do the hurricano call
               Constring’d in mass by the almighty sun.”
                  SHAKSPEARE (_Troilus and Cressida_.)

In number three hundred and two of the Monthly Magazine, Sir Richard
Phillips, in describing a waterspout observed by him, points out the
connection between those phenomena and hurricanes, and offers a very
philosophical explanation of the formation of the former. It happened to
him, he observes, on the twenty-seventh of June, 1817, about seven in
the evening, to witness the formation, operation and extinction of what
is called a waterspout. His attention was drawn to a sudden hurricane
which nearly tore up the shrubs and vegetables in the western gardens,
and filled the air with leaves and small collections of the recently cut
grass. Very dark clouds had collected over the adjacent country, and
some stormy rain, accompanied by several strokes of lightning, followed
this hurricane of wind. The violence lasted a few minutes, and it was
evident that a whirlwind agitated a variety of substances which had been
raised into the air. The storm proceeded from west to east, that is,
from Hampstead over Kentish-Town, toward Holloway. In about five
minutes, in the direction of the latter place, a magnificent projection
was visible from the clouds, somewhat like a tunnel, with the smallest
part downward. It descended two-thirds of the distance from the clouds
toward the earth, and evidently consisted of parts of clouds descending
in a vortex, violently agitated like smoke from the chimney of a furnace
recently supplied with fuel. It then shortened, and appeared to be drawn
up toward the stratum of clouds, and finally drew itself into the cloud;
but a small cone, or projecting thread, of varying size and length,
continued for ten minutes. At the time, and for half an hour after, a
severe storm of rain was visibly falling from the ruins of clouds
connected with it, the extent being exactly defined by the breadth of
Holloway, Highgate and Hornsey. About two hours after, it was found that
one of the heaviest torrents of rain remembered by the inhabitants, had
fallen around the foot of Highgate hill; and some persons having seen
the projected cloud, an absolute belief existed that a waterspout had
burst at the crossing of the new and old roads. On proceeding toward
London, various accounts agreeing with the superstition or preconceived
notions of the bystanders were given; and at one place it appeared that
some haymakers were stacking hay from a wagon which stood between two
ricks, and that the same whirlwind which passed over Kentish-Town, had
passed over the loaded wagon with an impetus sufficient to carry it
about twenty yards from its station, and to put the men on it and on the
rick, in fear of their lives. Passing the road, it carried with it a
stream of hay, and, nearly unroofing a shed on the other side, filled
the air to a great hight with fragments of hay, leaves and boughs of
trees, which resembled a vast flight of birds. A family in the vicinity
beheld the descending cloud, or waterspout, pass over, and saw its
train, which, at the time, they took to be a flight of birds. They
afterward beheld the descending cloud draw itself upward, and they and
other witnesses described it as a vast mass of smoke working about in
agitation; to them it was nearly vertical in a northern direction; and
to persons a quarter of a mile north, it was nearly vertical in a
southern direction; and all agree that it drew itself up without rain,
and was followed near the earth by the train of light bodies. It
appeared also, on various testimony, to let itself down in a gradual and
hesitating manner, beginning with a sort of knob in the cloud, and then
descending lower, and curling and twisting about till it shortened, and
gradually drew itself into the cloud.

The inferences which Sir Richard draws from what he saw and heard, are
as follows. That the phenomenon called a waterspout is a mere collection
of clouds, of the same rarity as the mass whence they are drawn. That
the descent is a mechanical effect of the whirlwind, which creating a
vacuum, or high degree of rarefaction, extending between the clouds and
the earth, the clouds descend in it by their gravity, or by the pressure
of the surrounding clouds or air. That the convolutions of the
descending mass, and the sensible whirlwind felt at the earth, as well
as the appearance of the commencement, increase and decrease of the
mass, all demonstrate the whirl of the air to be the mechanical cause.
That the same vortex, whirl or eddy of the air, which occasions the
clouds to descend, occasions the loose bodies on the earth to ascend.
That, if in this case the lower surface had been water, the same
mechanical power would have raised a body of foam, vapor and water,
toward the clouds. That, as soon as the vortex or whirl exhausts or
dissipates itself, the phenomena terminate by the fall to the lower
surface of the light bodies or water, and by the ascent of the cloud.
That when water constitutes the light body of the lower surface, it is
probable that the aqueous vapor of the cloud, by coalescing with it, may
occasion the clouds to condense, and fall at that point, as through a
siphon. That if the descending cloud be highly electrified, and the
vortex pass over a conducting body, as a church steeple, it is probable
it may be condensed by an electrical concussion, and fall at that spot,
discharging whatever has been taken up from the lower surface, and
producing the strange phenomena of showers of frogs, fish, &c. And,
lastly, it appears certain, that the action of the air on the mass of
clouds, pressing toward the mouth of the vortex as to a funnel, (which,
in this case, it exactly represented,) occasioned such a condensation as
to augment the simultaneous fall of rain to a prodigy.

In the month of July, 1800, a waterspout was seen rapidly to approach a
ship navigating between the Lipari islands. It had the appearance of a
viscid fluid, tapering in its descent, and proceeding from the cloud to
join the sea. It moved at the rate of about two miles an hour, with a
loud sound of rain, passing the stern of the ship, and wetting the after
part of the mainsail. It was thence concluded that waterspouts are not
continuous columns of water, which has been confirmed by subsequent
observations.

In November, 1801, about twenty miles from Trieste, in the Adriatic sea,
a waterspout was seen eight miles to the southward: round its lower
extremity was a mist, twelve feet high, nearly of the form of an Ionian
capital, with very large volutes, the spout resting obliquely on its
crown. At some distance from this spout, the sea began to be agitated,
and a mist rose to the hight of about four feet: a projection then
descended from the black cloud which was impending, and met the
ascending mist about twenty feet above the sea, the last ten yards of
the distance being described with great rapidity. A cloud of a light
color appeared to ascend in this cloud like quicksilver in a glass tube.
The first spout then snapped at about one-third of its hight, the
inferior part subsiding gradually, and the superior curling upward.
Several other projections from the cloud, appeared with corresponding
agitations of the water below, but not always in spouts vertically under
them: seven spouts in all were formed, and two other projections
reabsorbed. Some of the spouts were not only oblique, but curved, the
ascending cloud moving most rapidly in those which were vertical. They
lasted from three to five minutes, and their dissipation was not
attended with any fall of rain. For some days before the weather had
been very rainy, with a south-east wind, but not any rain had fallen on
the day of observation.

In some cases, however, the waterspout at sea, is a continuous column of
water, carried upward from the surface of the waves, and possibly
meeting with water brought down from the clouds and condensed by the
force of the revolving hurricane. Such waterspouts are now and then seen
on the ocean, having an appearance like that represented in the cut on
the next page. And as the wind blows first this way, and then that, they
often writhe and bend, from one point to another, while the sea below,
and all around, is agitated and covered with foam. Woe to that vessel
that comes within the reach of one of these mighty phenomena. It would
be crushed and sunk like a leaf on the waters. The usual defense at sea
is to fire a cannon-shot into the whirling waterspout, which commonly
breaks and dispels it, and causes the water to fall in a tremendous
cataract or shower.

[Illustration: WATERSPOUT ON THE OCEAN.]

Waterspouts, however, are not confined to the ocean. They are
occasionally witnessed on the great fresh-water lakes of our own
country, as they have been on the inland seas of other parts of the
globe. Several of these remarkable phenomena were seen in 1854, on Lake
Ontario, two of which were visible at Sodus point. They were dense,
cone-shaped columns, and formed a continuous line from the earth to the
clouds. One of them, the largest, which was nearly thirty feet in
diameter, was precipitated against the bluffs, and broke with a
deafening noise upon the rocks below, causing so great a commotion of
the waters that a large quantity of logs and lumber were torn from their
moorings and washed far out into the lake. The smaller of the two
pursued its terrific and onward course as far as the eye could reach,
filling the beholders with wonder and astonishment, and awakening such a
feeling of grandeur and sublimity that they stood almost mute and
statue-like, until the sound of this gigantic column of water died far
away in the distance. A portion of the pier of the light-house was swept
away by the elements, and considerable damage was done to the
light-house. There was a severe storm out on the lake, and several
schooners, brigs, &c., came scudding in, under bare poles, seeking
security from the tempestuous billows without, upon the placid bosom of
the harbor. The velocity and power of the whirlwind which caused these
waterspouts, were very great. As it passed on westward in its furious
course, it is said that in a town in Ohio, a grove of oak-trees was
almost entirely blown down by it. The trunk of one of these trees, on
being measured, was found to be about three feet in diameter. Assuming,
however, that its diameter was but two and a half feet, it would require
to break it, a force of one hundred and forty-nine thousand pounds. The
surface of the tree exposed to the action of the wind, was about one
thousand square feet, which would give a pressure by the wind of one
hundred and forty-seven pounds to the square foot, or a velocity of not
less than one hundred and seventy-one miles per hour, which is nearly
one-fourth the velocity of a cannon-ball just leaving the cannon.
Allowing the hight of the hurricane or whirlwind to have been sixty
feet, the whole force exerted, at one time, along its track, was equal
to more than half the steam power of the globe!

These corresponding phenomena of whirlwinds have been occasionally
productive of much mischief, as the following brief narratives will
show. On the thirtieth of October, 1669, about six in the evening, the
wind being then westwardly, a formidable whirlwind, scarcely of the
breadth of sixty yards, and which spent itself in about seven minutes,
arose at Ashly, in Northamptonshire, England. Its first assault was on a
milkmaid, whose pail and hat were taken from off her head, and the
former carried many scores of yards from her, where it lay undiscovered
for some days. It next stormed a farmyard, where it blew a wagon body
off the axletrees, breaking in pieces the latter, and the wheels, three
of which, thus shattered, were blown over a wall. Another wagon, which
did not, like the former, lie across the passage of the wind, was driven
with great speed against the side of the farm-house. A branch of an
ash-tree, so large that two stout men could scarcely lift it, was blown
over a house without damaging it, although torn from a tree one hundred
yards distant. A slate was carried nearly two hundred yards, and forced
against a window, the iron bar of which it bent. Several houses were
stripped; and in one instance, this powerful gust, or stream of air,
forced open a door, breaking the latch; whence it passed through the
entry, and, forcing open the dairy door, overturned the milk-pans, and
blew out three panes of glass. It next ascended to the chambers, and
blew out nine other panes. Lastly, it blew a gate-post, fixed two feet
and a half in the ground, out of the earth, and carried it many yards
into the fields.

On the thirtieth of October, 1731, at one in the morning, a very sudden
and terrific whirlwind, having a breadth of two hundred yards, was
experienced at Cerne-Abbas, in Dorsetshire. From the south-west side of
the town, it passed to the north-east, crossing the center, and
unroofing the houses in its progress. It rooted up trees, broke others
in the middle, of at least a foot square, and carried the tops a
considerable distance. A sign-post, five feet by four, was broken off
six feet in the pole, and carried across a street forty feet in breadth,
over a house opposite. The pinnacles and battlements of one side of the
church-tower were thrown down, and the leads and timber of the north
aisle broken in by their fall. A short time before, the air was
remarkably calm. It was estimated that this sudden and terrible gust did
not last more than two minutes.

About the middle of August, 1741, at ten in the morning, several
peasants being on a heath near Holkham, in Norfolk, perceived, about a
quarter of a mile from them, a wind like a whirlwind approach them
gradually, in a straight line from east to west. It passed through the
field where they were plowing, and tore up the stubble and grass in the
plowed ground, for two miles in length, to the breadth of thirty yards.
In reaching an inclosure at the top of a rising ground, it appeared like
a great flash or ball of fire, emitting smoke, and accompanied by a
noise similar to that of carts passing over a stony ground. Both before
and after the wind passed, there was a strong smell of sulphur; and the
noise was heard long after the smoke had been perceived. This fiery
whirlwind moved so slowly forward, that it was nearly ten minutes in
proceeding from the inclosure to a farm-house in the vicinity, where it
did much mischief.


                           SOUNDS AND ECHOES.

Sound is propagated successively from the sounding body to the places
which are nearest to it, then to those more distant, &c. Every observer
knows that when a gun is fired at a considerable distance from him, he
perceives the flash a certain time before he hears the report; and the
same thing is true with respect to the stroke of a hammer, or of a
hatchet, the fall of a stone, or, in short, any visible action which
produces a sound or sounds. In general, sound travels through the air at
the rate of eleven hundred and forty-two feet in a second, or about
thirteen miles in a minute. This is the case with all kinds of sounds;
the softest whisper flying as fast as the loudest thunder. Sound, like
light, after it has been reflected from several places, may be collected
into one point as a focus, where it will be more audible than in any
other part; and on this principle whispering galleries are constructed.
The particulars relative to the celebrated whispering gallery in the
dome of St. Paul’s church, London, will be comprehended in the
description of that noble edifice.

An echo is the reflection of sound striking against a surface adapted to
the purpose, as the side of a house, a brick wall, hill, &c., and
returning back again to the ear, at distinct intervals of time. If a
person stand about sixty-five or seventy feet from such a surface, and
perpendicularly to it, and speak, the sound will strike against the
wall, and be reflected back, so that he will hear it as it goes to the
wall, and again on its return. If a bell situated in the same way be
struck, and an observer stand between the bell and the reflecting
surface, he will hear the sound going to the wall, and also on its
return. Lastly, if the sound strike the wall obliquely, it will go off
obliquely, so that a person who stands in a direct line between the bell
and the wall will not hear the echo. According to the greater or less
distance from the speaker, a reflecting object will return the echo of
several, or of fewer syllables; for all the syllables must be uttered
before the echo of the first syllable reaches the ear, to prevent the
confusion which would otherwise ensue. In a moderate way of speaking,
about three and a half syllables are pronounced in one second, or seven
syllables in two seconds: therefore, when an echo repeats seven
syllables, the reflecting object is eleven hundred and forty-two feet
distant; for sound travels at the rate of eleven hundred and forty-two
feet per second, and the distance from the speaker to the reflecting
object, and again from the latter to the former, is twice eleven hundred
and forty-two feet. When the echo returns fourteen syllables, the
reflecting object must be twenty-two hundred and eighty-four feet
distant, and so on.

The most remarkable echo recorded, is at the palace of a nobleman,
within two miles of Milan, in Italy. The building is of some length in
front, and has two wings jutting forward; so that it wants only one side
of an oblong figure. About one hundred paces before the mansion, a small
brook glides gently; and over this brook is a bridge forming a
communication between the mansion and the garden. A pistol having been
fired at this spot, fifty-six reiterations of the report were heard. The
first twenty were distinct; but in proportion as the sound died away,
and was answered at a greater distance, the repetitions were so doubled
that they could scarcely be counted, the principal sound appearing to be
saluted in its passage by reports on either side at the same time. A
pistol of a larger caliber having been afterward discharged, and
consequently with a louder report, sixty distinct reiterations were
counted. From this example it follows, that the further the reflecting
surface is, the greater number of syllables the echo will repeat; but
that the sound will be enfeebled nearly in the same proportion, until at
length the syllables can not be distinctly heard. On the other hand,
when the reflecting object is too near, the repetition of the sound
reaches the ear, whilst the perception of the original sound still
continues, in which case an indistinct resounding is heard, as may be
observed in empty rooms, passages, &c. In such places, several
reflections from the walls to the hearer, as also from one wall to the
other, and then to the hearer, clash with each other, and increase the
indistinctness of the sound.




                             BURIED CITIES.


                     THE YANAR, OR PERPETUAL FIRE.

Before passing on to the buried cities of Herculaneum and Pompeii, it
may be as well to notice a singular phenomenon, supposed by some to be
of volcanic origin, _viz._, the Yanar, or perpetual fire. Captain
Beaufort, of the British navy, among the interesting details of his
survey of Karamania, on the south coast of Asia Minor, describes this
curious phenomenon; and from his account the following particulars are
extracted, as supplementary to and connected with the details of
volcanoes and their effects.

Having perceived during the night a small but steady light among the
hills, he found that this was represented by the inhabitants as a
_yanar_ or _volcanic light_; and on the following morning curiosity led
him to visit the spot. In the inner corner of a ruined building he came
to a wall, so undermined as to leave an aperture of about three feet in
diameter, and shaped like the mouth of an oven. From this aperture the
flame issued, giving out an intense heat, but without producing any
smoke on the wall; and although several small lumps of caked soot were
detached from the neck of the opening, the walls were scarcely
discolored. Trees, brushwood and weeds, grew close around this little
crater; a small stream trickled down the hill in its vicinity; and the
ground did not appear to feel the effect of its heat at more than a few
yards’ distance. No volcanic productions were perceived near to it; but
at a short distance, lower down on the side of the hill, was another
hole or aperture, which had apparently been at some remote period the
vent of a similar flame. It was asserted, however, by the guide, that,
in the memory of the present race of inhabitants, there had been but one
such volcanic opening, and that its size and appearance had been
constantly the same. He added, that it was never accompanied by
earthquakes or noises; and that it did not eject either stones, smoke or
noxious vapors; but that its brilliant and perpetual flame could not be
quenched by any quantity of water. At this flame, he observed, the
shepherds were in the habit of cooking their food. This phenomenon
appeared to Captain Beaufort to have existed for many ages, and he was
persuaded that it is the spot to which Pliny alludes in the following
passage: “Mount Chimera, near Phaselis, emits an unceasing flame, which
burns day and night.” Within a short distance is the great mountain of
Takhtalu, the naked summit of which rises, in an insulated peak,
seventy-eight hundred feet above the level of the sea. In the month of
August a few streaks of snow were discernible on the peak; but many of
the distant mountains of the interior were completely white for nearly a
fourth the way down their sides. It may hence be inferred, that the
elevation of this part of Mount Taurus is not less than ten thousand
feet, which is equal to that of Mount Etna.

Such a striking feature as this stupendous mountain, in a country
inhabited by illiterate and credulous people, can not fail to have been
the subject of numerous tales and traditions. Accordingly, the captain
was informed by the peasants, that there is a perpetual flow of the
purest water from the very apex; and that notwithstanding the snow,
which was still lingering in the chasms, roses blew there all the year
round. He was assured by the agha of Deliktash, that every autumn a
midnight groan is heard to issue from the summit of the mountain, louder
than the report of any cannon, but unaccompanied by fire or smoke. The
agha professed his ignorance of the cause, but on being pressed for his
opinion, gravely replied, that he believed it was an annual summons to
the elect, to make the best of their way to Paradise. However amusing
this theory may have been, it may possibly be true that such explosions
take place. The mountain artillery heard by Lewis and Clarke, among the
Rocky mountains, and similar phenomena which are said to have occurred
in South America, seem to lend some probability to the account. The
natives have also a tradition, that when Moses fled from Egypt, he took
up his abode near this mountain, which was therefore named Moossa-Daghy,
or the mountain of Moses. Between this story, and the Yanar, as it has
been described above, may there not have been some fanciful connection?
The site of this volcanic opening is at an inconsiderable distance from
the mountain; and the flame issuing from the thicket which surrounds it,
may have led to some confused association with the burning bush on Mount
Horeb, of which we have the account in the book of Exodus.


                                POMPEII.

To every traveler through the southern part of Europe, Pompeii and
Herculaneum are, of course, the objects of earliest attention and
deepest interest. The tragic story of these buried towns is now familiar
to most intelligent persons; while the vivid romance of Bulwer makes one
feel as if he had known the inhabitants, and almost as though he had
been a witness of the catastrophe. The story is recorded not more
faithfully by the younger Pliny, in his celebrated letter to Tacitus,
than it is plainly read in the material evidence, whose unexpected
discovery, almost in our own day, has supplied both to the antiquarian
and the geologist, most valued and truthful evidences; contemporary
records, expounding to the antiquary an interesting chapter of human
history, filled with the minutest details of personal interest, and to
the geologist, the close of one and the commencement of another of those
great cycles of change, whose history, strangely connected in this
instance with the vicissitudes of his own race, engrosses his delighted
attention.

A great and rich town, which, after sleeping eighteen centuries in its
deep and dark grave, is again shone on by the sun, and stands among
other cities as much a stranger to them as any one of its former
inhabitants would be among men of the present day, is surely one of the
wonders of the world; and such is Pompeii. The distance from Naples to
Pompeii, is little more than ten English miles. Near the Torre
dell’Annunziata, to the left, and amid hills planted with vineyards, the
town itself, which, throwing off its shroud of ashes, came forth from
its grave, breaks on the view. The buildings are without roofs, which
are supposed to have been destroyed by the lava, or torn off by the
hurricane which preceded it. The tracks of the wheels which anciently
rolled over the pavement are still visible. An elevated path runs by the
side of the houses, for foot-passengers; and, to enable them in rainy
weather to pass more commodiously to the opposite side, large flat
stones, three of which take up the width of the road, were laid at a
distance from each other. As the carriages, in order to avoid these
stones, were obliged to use the intermediate spaces, the tracks of the
wheels are there most visible. The whole of the pavement is in good
condition: it consists merely of considerable pieces of lava, which,
however, are not cut as at present into squares, and may have been on
that account the more durable.

The part which was first cleared, is supposed to have been the main
street of Pompeii; but this is much to be doubted, as the houses on both
sides, with the exception of a few, were evidently the habitations of
common citizens, and were small and provided with booths. The street
itself likewise is narrow: two carriages only could go abreast; and it
is very uncertain whether it ran through the whole of the town; for,
from the spot where the moderns discontinued digging, to that where they
recommenced, and where the same street is supposed to have been again
found, a wide tract is covered with vineyards, which may perhaps occupy
the places of the most splendid streets and markets, still concealed
underneath.

Among the objects which attract particular attention, is a booth in
which liquors were sold; the marble table within which, bears the marks
of the cups left by the drinkers. Next to this is a house, the threshold
of which is inlaid with a salutation in black stone, as a token of
hospitality. On entering the habitations, the visitor is struck by the
strangeness of their construction. The middle of the house forms a
square, something like the cross passages of a cloister, often
surrounded by pillars: it is cleanly, and paved with party-colored
mosaic, which has an agreeable effect. In the middle is a cooling well,
and on each side a little chamber, about ten or twelve feet square, but
lofty, and painted with a fine red or yellow. The floor is of mosaic;
and the door is made generally to serve as a window, there being but one
apartment which receives light through a thick blue glass. Many of these
rooms are supposed to have been bed-chambers, because there is an
elevated, broad step, on which the bed may have stood, and because some
of the pictures appear most appropriate to a sleeping-room. Others are
supposed to have been dressing-rooms, from the fact that on the walls a
Venus is described decorated by the Graces, added to which, little
flasks and boxes of various descriptions have been found in them. The
larger of these apartments served for dining-rooms, and in some are
suitable accommodations for cold and hot baths.

The manner in which a whole room was heated, is particularly curious.
Against the usual wall a second was erected, standing at a little
distance from the first. For this purpose large square tiles were taken,
having, like modern tiles, a sort of hook, thus keeping the first wall
as it were off from them: a hollow space was thus left all around, from
the top to the bottom, into which pipes were introduced, that carried
the warmth into the chamber, and as it were rendered the whole of the
place one stove. The ancients were also attentive to avoid the vapor or
smell from their lamps. In some houses there is a niche made in the wall
for the lamp, with a little chimney in the form of a funnel, through
which the smoke escaped. Opposite to the house-door the largest room is
placed: it is properly a sort of hall, for it has only three walls,
being quite open in the fore part. The side rooms have no connection
with each other, but are divided off in little cells, the door of each
leading to a fountain.

Most of the houses consist of one such square, surrounded by rooms. In a
few, some decayed steps seem to have led to an upper story, which is no
longer in existence. Some habitations, however, probably belonging to
the richer and more fashionable, are far more spacious. In these, a
first court is often connected with a second, and even with a third, by
passages: in other respects their arrangements are similar to those
above described. Many garlands of flowers and vine-branches, and many
handsome pictures, are still to be seen on the walls. The guides were
formerly permitted to sprinkle these pictures with fresh water, in the
presence of travelers, and thus revive their former splendor for a
moment: but this is now strictly forbidden; and, indeed, not without
reason, since the frequent watering might at length totally rot away the
wall.

One of the houses belonged to a statuary, whose workshop is still full
of the vestiges of his art. Another appears to have been inhabited by a
surgeon, whose profession is equally evident from the instruments
discovered in his chamber. A large country-house near the gate,
undoubtedly belonged to a very wealthy man, and would, in fact, still
invite inhabitants within its walls. It is very extensive, stands
against a hill, and has many stories. Its finely decorated rooms are
unusually spacious; and it has airy terraces, from which you look down
into a pretty garden, that has been now again planted with flowers. In
the middle of this garden is a large fishpond, and near that an ascent
from which, on two sides, six pillars descend. The hinder pillars are
the highest, the middle somewhat lower, and the front the lowest: they
appear, therefore, rather to have propped a sloping roof, than to have
been destined for an arbor. A covered passage, resting on pillars,
incloses the garden on three sides; it was painted, and probably served
in rainy weather as an agreeable walk. Beneath is a fine arched cellar,
which receives air and light by several openings from without;
consequently its atmosphere is so pure, that in the hottest part of
summer it is always refreshing. A number of _amphoræ_, or large
wine-vessels, are to be seen here, still leaning against the wall, as
the butler left them when he carried up the last goblet of wine for his
master. Had the inhabitants of Pompeii preserved these vessels with
stoppers, wine might still have been found in them; but as it was, the
stream of ashes running in, of course forced out the wine. More than
twenty human skeletons of fugitives, who thought to save themselves here
under ground, but who must have experienced a tenfold more cruel death
than those suffered who were in the open air, were found in this cellar.

The destiny of the Pompeians must have been dreadful. It was not a
stream of fire that encompassed their abodes: they could then have
sought refuge in flight. Neither did an earthquake swallow them up;
sudden suffocation would then have spared them the pangs of a lingering
death. _But a rain of ashes buried them alive_ BY DEGREES! Hear the
delineation of Pliny: “A darkness suddenly overspread the country; not
like the darkness of a moonless night; but like that of a closed room,
in which the light is of a sudden extinguished. Women screamed, children
moaned, men cried. Here, children were anxiously calling their parents;
and there, parents were seeking their children, or husbands their wives;
all recognized each other only by their cries. The former lamented their
own fate, and the latter that of those dearest to them. Many wished for
death, from the fear of dying. Many called on the gods for assistance:
others despaired of the existence of the gods, and thought this the last
eternal night of the world. Actual dangers were magnified by unreal
terrors. The earth continued to shake, and men, half-distracted, to reel
about, exaggerating their own fears, and those of others, by terrifying
predictions.”

Such is the frightful but true picture which Pliny gives us of the
horrors of those who were, however, far from the extremity of their
misery. But what must have been the feelings of the Pompeians, when the
roaring of the mountain and the quaking of the earth, awaked them from
their first sleep? They also attempted to escape the wrath of the gods;
and, seizing the most valuable things they could lay their hands upon in
the darkness and confusion, endeavored to seek their safety in flight.
In this street, and in front of the house marked with the friendly
salutation on its threshold, seven skeletons were found: the first
carried a lamp, and the rest had still between the bones of their
fingers something that they wished to save. On a sudden they were
overtaken by the storm which descended from heaven, and buried in the
grave thus made for them. Before the above mentioned country-house, was
still a male skeleton, standing with a dish in his hand; and, as he wore
on his finger one of those rings which were allowed to be worn by Roman
knights only, he is supposed to have been the master of the house, who
had just opened the back garden gate with the intent of flying, when the
shower overwhelmed him. Several skeletons were found in the very posture
in which they had breathed their last, without having been forced by the
agonies of death to drop the things they had in their hands. This leads
to a conjecture, that the thick mass of ashes must have come down all at
once, in such immense quantities as instantly to cover them. It can not
otherwise be imagined how the fugitives could all have been fixed, as it
were by a charm, in their position; in which manner their destiny was
the less dreadful, seeing that Death suddenly converted them into
motionless statues, and thus was stripped of all the horrors with which
the fears of the sufferers had clothed him in imagination. But what then
must have been the pitiable condition of those who had taken refuge in
the buildings and cellars! Buried in the thickest darkness, they were
secluded from everything but lingering torment; and who can paint to
himself without shuddering, a slow dissolution approaching, amid all the
agonies of body and of mind? The soul recoils from the contemplation of
such images.

To proceed now to the public edifices. The temple of Isis is still
standing, with its Doric pillars, and its walls painted with emblems of
the service of the deity, such as the hippopotamus, cocoa-blossom, ibis,
&c. A view of it is given in the cut. The sacred vessels, lamps and
tables of Isis, are still to be seen. From a little chapel within, a
poisonous vapor is said to have formerly arisen, which the heathen
priests may have used for every species of deception. This vapor is said
to have increased after the violent eruption of Vesuvius; but it has not
latterly given out the slightest smell. A small Grecian temple, of which
only two pillars remain, had been probably already destroyed by an
earthquake, which, in the reign of Titus, preceded the dreadful
irruption of the volcano. On the opposite side of this temple there is
still an edifice, called the quarters of the soldiers, because all sorts
of arms, pictures of soldiers, and a skeleton in chains, were found
there. By others it has been considered as the forum of Pompeii.

[Illustration: TEMPLE OF ISIS AT POMPEII.]

Two theaters, the smaller one particularly, are in an excellent state of
preservation. The structure of this one is such as was usually adopted
by the ancients, and is better arranged than some of modern
construction, as it affords the spectators commodious seats, a free view
of the stage, and facility of hearing. Although sufficiently large to
contain two thousand persons, the plebeians, standing in a broad gallery
at the top, were quite as able to see all that was passing on the stage,
as the magistrate in his marble balcony. In this gallery the
arrangements for spreading the sail-cloth over the spectators are still
visible. The stage itself is very broad, as it has no side walls; and
appears less deep than it really is. A wall runs across it, and cuts off
just as much room as is necessary for the accommodation of the
performers. But this wall has three very broad doors; the middle one is
distinguished by its hight, and the space behind it is still deeper than
in front. If these doors, as may be conjectured, always stood open, the
stage was in fact large, and afforded besides the advantage of being
able to display a double scenery: if, for example, the scene in front
was that of a street, there might have been behind a free prospect into
the open field.

The cemetery lies before the gate of the high road. The tomb of the
priestess Mammea is very remarkable: it was erected, according to the
epitaph, by virtue of a decree of the decemvirs. In the midst of little
boxes of stone, in square piles, and on a sort of altar, the family urns
were placed in niches; and without these piles the broken masks are
still to be seen. In front of the cemetery, by the road-side, is a
beautiful seat, forming a semicircle, that will contain twenty or thirty
persons. It was probably overshaded by trees eighteen hundred years ago;
under which the women of Pompeii sat in the cool evenings, while their
children played before them, and viewed the crowds which were passing
through the gate.

To the above particulars from the pen of the elegant and lively
Kotzebue, the following details, given by a later and accurate traveler,
are subjoined. The entrance into Pompeii is by a quadrangular court; and
this court is surrounded on every side by a colonnade which supports the
roof of a gallery; and the latter leads to several small apartments, not
unlike the cells of a prison. The columns are of brick, stuccoed over,
and painted of a deep red: they are in hight from ten to twelve feet,
are placed at about a like distance from each other, and are of the
Doric order, fluted two-thirds from the top, and well proportioned.
After a variety of conjectures relative to the purpose to which this
building was applied, it has been ascertained that it was either a
barrack for soldiers, (various pieces of armor having been found in some
of the cells,) or the prætorium of the governor, where a body of
military must have been stationed. Adjacent to it stood the theaters,
the forum, and one or two temples, all connected by very neat and
well-paved courts. The smaller of the theaters is to the right, and is
called the covered theater, because it was so constructed, that by the
means of canvas awnings, the spectators were defended from the sun and
rain. A door through the wall leads to the different galleries, and to
the open space in the center, resembling the pit of a modern theater.
The interior is beautifully neat; and with the exception of the
spoliation of the marble slabs, removed to the palace at Naples, with
which the whole of the inside, not excepting the seats, had been
covered, it is in excellent preservation. On each side are the seats for
the magistrates; the orchestra, as in modern theaters, is in front of
the stage; and the latter, with its brick wings, is very shallow. This
theater was calculated to contain about two thousand spectators. From
its level a staircase leads to an eminence on which several public
buildings are situated. The most conspicuous of these is a small temple
said to have been dedicated to Isis, and having a secret passage,
perforated in two places, whence the priests are supposed to have
delivered to the deluded multitude the oracles of that deity.

Within a paved court is an altar, of a round shape, on the one side, and
on the other side a well. A cistern, with four apertures, was placed at
a small distance, to facilitate the procuring of water. In this court,
sacrifices and other holy rites are conjectured to have taken place,
various utensils for sacrifice, such as lamps, tripods, &c., having been
found, when the place was first excavated. One of the tripods is of the
most admirable workmanship. On each of the three legs, a beautiful
sphinx, with an unusual head-dress, is placed, probably in allusion to
the hidden meanings of the oracles which were delivered in the
above-mentioned temple. The hoop in which the basin for the coals was
sunk, is elegantly decorated with rams’ heads connected by garlands of
flowers; and within the basin, which is of baked earth, the very cinders
left from the last sacrifice (nearly two thousand years ago) are seen as
fresh as if they had been the remains of yesterday’s fire!

From the above court, you enter on a somewhat larger, with a stone
pulpit in the center and stone seats near the walls. The spot,
therefore, was either the auditory of a philosopher, or the place where
the public orators pleaded in the presence of the people. Everything
here is in the highest order and preservation.

The great amphitheater proudly rears its walls over every other edifice
on the same elevated spot. It is a stupendous structure, and has
twenty-four rows of seats, the circumference of the lowest of which is
about seven hundred and fifty feet. It is estimated to have contained
about thirty thousand spectators. The upper walls are much injured,
having partially projected above ground long before the discovery of
Pompeii.

A corn-field leads to the excavated upper end of the high street, which
consists of a narrow road for carts, with foot-pavements on each side.
The middle is paved with large blocks of marble, and the ruts of the
wheels proclaim its antiquity, even at the time of its being
overwhelmed. The foot-paths are elevated about a foot and a half from
the level of the carriage-road. The houses on each side, whether shops
or private buildings, have no claim to external elegance: they consist
of a ground-floor only, and, with the exception of the door, have no
opening toward the street. The windows of the private houses look into
an inner square court, and are in general very high. The apartments
themselves are, with the exception of one in each house, which probably
served as a drawing-room, both low and diminutive. In point of
decoration they are neat, and, in many instances, elegant: the floors
generally consist of figured pavements, either in larger stones of
various colors, regularly cut and systematically disposed, or are formed
of a beautiful mosaic, with a fanciful border, and an animal or figure
in the center. The geometrical lines and figures in the design of the
borders, have an endless variety of the most pleasing shapes, to display
the fertile imagination of the artists. Their tesselated pavements alone
must convince us that the ancients were well skilled in geometry. The
ground is usually white, and the ornaments black; but other colors are
often employed with increased effect.

The walls of the apartments are equally (if not still more) deserving
attention. They are painted, either in compartments, exhibiting some
mythological or historical event, or simply colored over with a light
ground, adorned with a border and perhaps an elegant little vignette, in
the center or at equal distances. But few of the historical paintings
now exist in Pompeii; for wherever a wall was found to contain a
tolerable picture, it was removed and deposited in the museum at Naples.
To effect this, the greatest care and ingenuity were required, so as to
peel off, by the means of sawing pieces of wall, twenty and more square
feet in extent, without destroying the picture. This, however, was not a
modern invention; for, among the excavated remains of Stabiæ, the
workmen came to an apartment containing paintings which had been
separated by the ancients themselves from a wall, with the obvious
intent of their being introduced in another place. This was, however,
prevented by the ruin of the city; and the paintings, therefore, were
found leaning against the wall of the apartment.

Another excavated portion of Pompeii is likewise part of a street, and,
being perfectly in a line with the one already described, is conjectured
to be a continuation, or rather the extremity of the latter; in which
case Pompeii must have been a city of considerable importance, and its
main street nearly a mile in length. The houses here, as in the other
instance, are distributed into shops and private dwellings, some of the
latter of which are distinguished by the remains of former internal
elegance, such as tesselated pavements, painted walls, &c.: most of them
have likewise an interior court, surrounded by apartments.


                         THE MUSEUM AT NAPLES.

The museum was formerly at Portici, but was removed to Naples some years
ago and is now called the Musæo Borbonico. The best statues, busts,
vases, and in short, whatever was supposed, from its materials or
construction, to have a superior value, were packed in fifty-two chests,
and conveyed from Portici to Palermo, at the time the court sought
refuge in that city, on the French penetrating into the Neapolitan
territory. What still remains, however, in the museum, has a high
intrinsic value; since no one can behold, without the strongest emotions
of admiration, the relics of the most transitory things, which for
nearly eighteen hundred years, have braved the ravages of time. Here are
to be seen bread, corn, dough which was about to be placed in the oven,
soap which had been used for washing, figs, and even egg-shells
perfectly white, and in as good a state as if the cook had broken them
an hour before. Here a kitchen presents itself provided with everything
requisite: trivets and pots stand on the hearth; stew-pans hang on the
wall; skimmers and tongs are placed in the corner; and a metal mortar
rests on the shaft of a pillar. Weights, hammers, scythes, and other
utensils of husbandry, are here blended with helms and arms. Sacrificing
bowls and knives; a number of well shaped glasses; large and small glass
bottles; lamps; vases; decorations for furniture; a piece of cloth;
nets; and even shoe soles; all sorts of female ornaments—necklaces,
rings and ear-rings; a wooden chess-board, reduced, indeed, to a cinder:
all these things are more or less injured by the fire; but still are
distinguishable at first sight.

Every apartment of the museum is laid with the most charming antique
floors, which are partly mosaic, from Pompeii, and partly marble, from
Herculaneum. Statues, vases, busts, chandeliers, altars, tables of
marble and bronze, are all in as good a state as if they had just come
from the hands of the artist. The coins which have been collected are
very numerous, and fill several cases. Medallions of marble, containing
on each side a bas-relief, are suspended by fine chains from the ceiling
of one of the apartments, and are within the reach of the hand, so as to
be conveniently turned and examined.

Most of the pictures found at Herculaneum, Pompeii and Stabiæ, and now
deposited in the museum, have been sawed from the walls of the edifices
they adorned. These unique relics of ancient art form an extensive
gallery of genuine antique pictures, the only one in the world, and may
on that account alone, be considered as an invaluable treasure. They are
placed in a range of apartments on the ground floor, and are suspended
against the walls in plain frames. Their size varies from a foot square,
to whole-length groups, nearly as large as life. Beside the injury they
have sustained by having been exposed to the heat of burning cinders,
they have been impaired by the modern varnish which was intended to
protect them: it would, therefore, not be right to subject their
coloring to the rigid rules of art; but the grouping of the Minotaur, of
the Telephus, of the sitting Orestes, and of the Bacchus and Ariadne, is
admirable. In their paintings, as well as in their sculptures, the
ancients were influenced by that love of simplicity which distinguishes
their works from those of the moderns, and the result is, that in them
the chief merits of composition are combined, unity of subject, and
unity of interest. When, again, it is considered that the paintings
collected in the museum at Naples were taken from the provincial towns,
it must be inferred, that those which were admitted in the chief seats
of art corresponded in excellence with the Laocoön and the Apollo. Such,
at least, was the judgment of the ancients themselves, and their taste
is not to be disputed.

[Illustration: PAPYRI.]

The museum at Naples excels all others in ancient bronze, a substance
which, although dearer, more difficult to be wrought, more inviting to
the rude grasp of avarice, and less beautiful than marble, forms the
greater proportion of the statues. The larger of them had been
originally composed of pieces connected by dove-tail joints; and these
promiscuous fragments have been recompiled into new figures, as in the
instance of the single horse made from four, in the center of the
court-yard of the museum. Those fragments which had escaped fusion, were
rent, inflated, or bruised, by the burning lava. In addition to these
misfortunes, they have been made up unhappily; for the eye of an artist
can sometimes detect two styles of art, evidently different, the large
and the exquisite, soldered together in the same statue. The figures the
most admired are, the drunken Faun, the sleeping Faun, the sitting
Mercury, the Amazon adjusting her robe, and an Augustus and a Claudius,
both of heroic size.

The most remarkable objects in the museum at Naples are the manuscripts,
found in two chambers of a house at Herculaneum. Although they have been
so frequently described, they must be seen, to furnish a correct idea of
them. Before they are unrolled, they resemble sticks of charcoal, or
cudgels reduced to the state of a cinder, and partly petrified. Their
general appearance before they are unrolled may be seen on the previous
page. In color they are black and chesnut-brown: and they are
unfortunately so decayed, that under each of them, as they lie in glass
cases, a quantity of dust and detached fragments may be perceived. Their
characters are legible in a certain light only, by a gloss and relief
which distinguishes the ink, or rather black paint, from the tinder.
Cut, crushed, crumbled on the edge, and caked by the sap remaining in
the leaves of the papyrus, they require in the operator great sagacity
to meet the variety of injuries they have received; since, in gluing
rashly the more delicate parts, he might reach the heart of a volume,
while working at the outside. At first, it appeared almost impracticable
ever to decipher a syllable of them; but to the industry and talents of
man nothing is impossible, and his curiosity impels him to the most
ingenious inventions.


                              HERCULANEUM.

This city was, together with Pompeii and Stabiæ, involved in the common
ruin occasioned by the dreadful eruption of Vesuvius, in the reign of
Titus, which has already been described in our previous pages.

It was situated on a point of land stretching into the gulf of Naples,
about two miles distant from that city, near where the modern towns of
Portici and Resini, and the royal palace, by which they are separated,
now stand. The neck of land on which it was built, and which has since
disappeared, formed a small harbor. Hence the appellation of =Herculis
Porticum=, (the small haven of Hercules,) sometimes given to
Herculaneum, and thence in all probability, the modern name of Portici.

The latter being situated immediately above some of the excavations of
Herculaneum, the just fear of endangering its safety, by undermining it,
is given as a principal reason why so little progress has been made in
the Herculanean researches.

The discovery of Herculaneum is thus explained. At an inconsiderable
distance from the royal palace of Portici, and close to the seaside,
Prince Elbeuf, in the beginning of the last century, inhabited an
elegant villa. To obtain a supply of water a well was dug, in the year
1730, through the deep crust of lava on which the mansion itself had
been reared. The laborers, after having completely pierced through the
lava, which was of considerable depth, came to a stratum of dry mud.
This event precisely agrees with the tradition relative to Herculaneum,
that it was in the first instance overwhelmed by a stratum of hot mud,
which was immediately followed by a wide stream of lava. Whether this
mud was thrown up from Vesuvius, or formed by torrents of rain, does not
appear to have been decided. Within the stratum the workmen found three
female statues, which were sent to Vienna.

It was not until some years after this, that the researches at
Herculaneum were seriously and systematically pursued. By continuing
Elbeuf’s well, the excavators at once came to the theater, and from that
spot carried on their further subterraneous investigation. The condition
of Herculaneum was at that time much more interesting, and more worthy
the notice of the traveler, than it is at present. The object of its
excavation having unfortunately been confined to the discovery of
statues, paintings, and other curiosities, and not carried on with a
view to lay open the city, and thus to ascertain the features of its
buildings and streets, most of the latter were again filled up with
rubbish as soon as they were divested of everything movable. The marble
even was torn from the walls of the temples. Herculaneum may therefore
be said to have been overwhelmed a second time by its modern
discoverers; and the appearance it previously presented, can now only be
ascertained from the accounts of those who saw it in a more perfect
state. Agreeably to them, it must at that time have afforded a most
interesting spectacle.

The theater was one of the most perfect specimens of ancient
architecture. It had, from the floor upward, eighteen rows of seats, and
above these, three other rows, which, being covered with a portico, seem
to have been intended for the female part of the audience, to screen
them from the rays of the sun. It was capable of containing between
three and four thousand persons. Nearly the whole of its surface, as
well as the arched walls which led to its seats, was cased with marble.
The area, or pit, was floored with thick squares of =giallo antico=, a
beautiful marble of a yellowish hue. On the top stood a group of four
bronze horses, drawing a car, with a charioteer, all of exquisite
workmanship. The pedestal of white marble is still to be seen in its
place; but the group itself had been crushed and broken in pieces by the
immense weight of lava which fell on it. The fragments having been
collected, might easily have been brought together again, but having
been carelessly thrown into a corner, a part of them were stolen, and
another portion fused, and converted into busts of their Neapolitan
majesties. At length, it was resolved to make the best use of what
remained, that is, to convert the four horses into one, by taking a fore
leg of one of them, a hinder leg of another, the head of a third, &c.,
and, where the breach was irremediable, to cast a new piece. To this
contrivance the bronze horse now shown in the museum of Naples owes its
existence; and, considering its patchwork origin, it still conveys a
high idea of the skill of the ancient artist.

In the forum, which was contiguous to the theater, beside a number of
inscriptions, columns, &c., two beautiful equestrian statues of the
Balbi family were found. These were of white marble, and were deposited
in the hall of the left wing of the palace at Portici. Adjoining to the
forum stood the temple of Hercules, an elegant rotunda, the interior of
which was decorated with a variety of paintings, such as Theseus
returning from his Cretan adventure with the Minotaur, Telephus’s birth,
Chiron, the centaur, instructing Achilles, &c. These were carefully
separated from the walls, and are deposited in the museum at Naples.

The most important discovery, however, was that of a villa, at a small
distance from the forum; not only on account of the peculiarity of its
plan, but because the greater number of the works of art were dug out of
its precinct; and more especially because it contained a library
consisting of more than fifteen hundred volumes, which are likewise
safely deposited in the museum, and which, were they legible, would form
a great classic treasure. These have been mentioned in the account of
the museum at Naples, which will be found on a previous page. The villa
is conjectured to have belonged to one of the Balbi family. Although
elegant, it was small, and consisted of a ground-floor only, like those
of Pompeii. Beside a number of small closets round an interior hall, it
contained a bathing-room, curiously fitted up with marble and
water-pipes, and a chapel of a diminutive size, without any window or
aperture for daylight, the walls of which were painted with serpents,
and within which a bronze tripod, filled with cinders and ashes, was
found standing on the floor. The apartment which contained the library
was fitted up with wooden presses around the walls, about six feet in
hight: a double row of presses stood insulated in the middle of the
room, so as to admit a free passage on every side. The wood of which the
presses had been made, was burned to a cinder, and gave way at the first
touch; but the volumes, composed of a much more perishable substance,
the Egyptian or Syracusan papyrus, were, although completely carbonized
through the effect of the heat, still so far preserved as to admit of
their removal to a similar set of modern presses, (provided, however,
with glass doors,) in the museum.

In the middle of the garden belonging to this villa, was a large basin,
having its edges faced with stone, and the two narrow ends rounded off
in a semicircular form. This piece of water was surrounded by beds or
parterres of various shapes; and the garden was on every side inclosed
by a covered walk supported by columns. Of these columns there were
sixty-four, ten for each of the shorter, and twenty-two for each of the
longer sides of the quadrangle: they were made of brick, neatly stuccoed
over, exactly similar to those in the Pompeian barracks. Each pillar
supported one end of a wooden beam, the other extremity of which rested
on the garden wall, thus forming an arbor, in all probability planted
with vines around the whole garden. Under this covered walk, several
semicircular recesses, which appear to have served as bathing-places,
were built. The spaces between the pillars were decorated with marble
busts and bronze statues, alternately arranged. This garden was
surrounded by a narrow ditch; and another covered walk, of a
considerable length, led to a circular balcony, or platform, the ascent
to which was by four steps, but which overhung the sea about fifteen
feet. The floor of the balcony consisted of a very beautiful tesselated
pavement. From this charming spot the prospect over the whole bay of
Naples, including the mountains of Sorrento, the island of Capri, and
Mount Posilipo, must have been delightful.


                                POMPEII.

Having thus given the accounts of Kotzebue, and also of an English
tourist, as to Pompeii and Herculaneum, we will now add the narrative of
our distinguished fellow-citizen, Professor Silliman, who passed over
the same ground in 1851. All these views are given, because the subject
is one of so much intrinsic interest, and because some objects are
mentioned by each writer that are not by the others. Professor Silliman
says: “We passed rapidly along through Portici, Resina, and Torre del
Greco,[6] which form one long-continued street, lying over Herculaneum,
a large city, whose entombed remains were far beneath our carriage
wheels. Vesuvius was on our left, quiet and sublime. Clouds vailed its
crater from our view, but its venerable sides were enveloped in the
black drapery of its own lava floods. The currents have often flowed
over the road on which we were traveling. Here and there, the lava had
been cut through in the streets, and it protrudes in black, rocky
masses, upon which many of the houses have been erected. Lava formed the
walls of the houses, and the fences around the fields, and lava, only
lava, was everywhere around us. After a short interval of cultivated
fields, we arrived in Torre del Annunciata, in a street similar to those
we had passed, and surrounded by a country in the highest state of
cultivation, where every foot of the rich volcanic soil is made
available. Farm-houses and villas appeared clustering around the eastern
and southern foot of Vesuvius, and creeping up its sloping sides, so
reckless are the people of past catastrophes, although Herculaneum
reposes in its profound grave at the foot of the mountain, and the great
sepulcher of Pompeii, with its funereal monuments, is in full view
before them. They have also been very recently warned again, by the
terrific eruption of February, 1850, which, bursting out back of
Vesuvius, on the east, took an unwonted direction, thus giving another
proof that no situation on or near the mountain is safe; but still the
inhabitants repose in careless security.

-----

Footnote 6:

  “Torre del Greco, a town containing eighteen thousand people, was
  overwhelmed, in 1794, by an eruption of lava from Vesuvius, flowing
  from the middle of its western slope, only five miles above the town.
  The melted torrent buried the place, and inundated the sea,
  encroaching upon it one-third of a square mile.”

-----

“As we drove slowly onward, checking the horses from time to time, in
order to realize the scenes around us, Antonio, from the coach-box,
suddenly exclaimed, ‘There is Pompeii!’ We eagerly looked, and saw a
low, green ridge of land, covered by grass and shrubs. It appeared as an
extended mound, over which the traveler might have driven, as thousands
have heedlessly done in centuries past, unconscious that a city of the
dead slumbered beneath the hoofs of the horses. Only a few minutes
elapsed, before standing erect in the carriage, we discerned the still
naked heaps of pumice that have been thrown out during the excavations;
and immediately after, in breathless silence, we were at the door of the
house of Diomede! An elegant country-house, a Roman villa, just outside
of the walls of the city, still stands, almost eighteen hundred years
after the great catastrophe. Its columns are erect, its walls entire,
and its open doors seem to invite the stranger to enter; but the family
are not there, and silence reigns in the halls of Diomede!

“I never before felt as I did when I entered this deserted
house—pensive, solemn, and in full sympathy with the tragical story.
Sentinels still keep these doors; not the helmeted Roman, who, firm and
unmoved, surveyed the storm of fire but yielded not to fear, preferring
to die at his post,[7] but Neapolitans stationed there by the government
to prevent invasion of the ruins. One there was, a veteran, whose snowy
hair, and visage so deeply marked by time, made us almost feel as if he
must have been present when the volcanic tempest raged, and had,
Salathiel-like, come down to our time to relate the events of those
dreadful days. But a garrulous guide, who spoke tolerable English,
placed himself at the head of our party, and was our =cicerone= through
an intensely interesting day. We mused for a few minutes in the vacant
rooms of the house of Diomede, walked upon the still beautiful mosaic
pavements and floors, passed through the dormitories, the triclinium,
the impluvium, and the hall for conversation; observed the
water-cistern, and the channels worn in the stone curb by the friction
of the rope, and then descended to the vaults beneath, in which so many
members of the family met their fate. This gallery is strongly arched
with brick, and was used as a wine-cellar, as appears from twenty-five
amphoræ still remaining there, and which were found filled with volcanic
matter.

-----

Footnote 7:

  “In the Pompeian museum at Naples, we afterward saw the skull of such
  a Roman, whose head was still covered by his helmet, and whose
  skeleton was found at his station in the gate of Pompeii.”

-----

“On the twenty-fourth of August, in the year 79 of our own era, and not
long after midday, Vesuvius broke the repose of untold ages, and
resumed, with tragical energy, his ancient reign of fire, awakening the
slumbering echoes of his power with terrible detonations and fearful
earthquakes. A darkness that might be felt, shrouded in the profoundest
gloom the midday sun, and ashes fell like snow upon the mountain, the
plain, the bays of Naples and Baiæ, and far into the surrounding
country. Rain from the condensed steam of the eruption deluged the whole
district; torrents of fluid mud, formed by the ashes and water, swept
over every obstruction, and filled to overflowing every depression of
the surface. The terrified inhabitants, overwhelmed by superstitious
fears, joined the droves of domestic animals, whose keener instincts had
already impelled them to desert a district filled with sulphureous
vapors, and vibrating with ominous and unwonted sounds, wandering, they
knew not where, in search of some place where the frightful evidences of
the wrath of the gods might be avoided.

“But the family of Diomede sought refuge from the falling pumice under
the strong arch of the wine-cellar, strong enough to resist and sustain
the load of falling materials, but not proof against the deluge of
volcanic mud, whose unexpected inundation brought death to the mistress,
her children, and fifteen female slaves. The record of the manner of
their death is even now perfectly legible. The form of the mistress,
with her back and head to the wall, with outstretched arms, is clearly
delineated by the difference of color. Surrounding her are the
impressions of the persons of seventeen others, various in stature, but
all standing, save one infant in the arms. When these silent vaults were
excavated, here stood the skeletons of these unfortunate people, the
rich jewels of the mistress and of her daughter circling the bony
fingers and wrists and neck. These we afterward saw in the museum at
Naples, the left shoulder of the mother, as also the skull of the
daughter, whose name, _Julia_, was engraved upon her bracelet. Equally
strange and wonderful was it to see the cast of the bosom of this Roman
matron, taken with lifelike precision, in the soft and fluid tufa. Her
hand still grasped the purse, whose contents are also among the
wonderful treasures of the same museum. Beyond the garden and the
fish-pond, which are contiguous to the wine-cellar, there is a gateway
where were found two skeletons, with valuable vessels and money; one
hand held a rusted key, and the other a bag with coin and cameos, and
vessels of silver and bronze were here. These are believed to have been
the remains of the master Diomede and his servant. A wrapper contained
eighty pieces of silver money, ten of gold, and some bronze. It appears
highly probable that, having left the family in a place which was
believed to be safe, they were engaged in transporting valuables to a
place of deposit, when they were overtaken by the same deluge which
destroyed their friends.

“The water-line to which the fluid magma rose in this quadrangular
vaulted gallery, is still visible upon the walls, (some twelve to
fifteen inches above the tallest head,) nearly even with several small
apertures through which, as well as through the door, it probably
flowed. It is not unlikely that this inundation was accompanied by
torrents of carbonic acid and other noxious gases, so abundantly exhaled
in more modern eruptions of Vesuvius, by which these refugees from the
dangers above ground were perhaps so suddenly suffocated as to remain
unmoved in the positions where they were found. The sudden death of the
elder Pliny, who, his nephew says, was suffocated by a noxious
exhalation upon the same occasion, and at no great distance from
Pompeii, may, with much probability, be ascribed to the same cause.

“The facts now detailed clearly show that vast torrents of mud must have
passed through the streets of Pompeii, since dry ashes and ejections of
lapilli and pumice, unaided by water, could never have found their way
into the interior of closed amphoræ, nor made perfect molds of the human
form, nor left a level water-line upon the inner walls of close arched
passages. The shower of materials which buried the city, was mainly
composed of small pieces of white pumice and rounded lapilli of various
colors, interspersed with some large projected masses of rock-bombs,
such as Vesuvius has often thrown out in later times. These by their
fall broke through the roofs, and at the places where they struck,
depressed the mosaic pavements into a concave form, as we saw in several
of the houses. A darker colored sand appears to have alternated with the
pumice, and often forms a distinct and thick layer upon it. Numerous
such alternations have been made out by the Neapolitan geologists, and
we afterward saw the same order of stratification distinctly in another
part of the town, where fresh excavations were going on. The fresh
section here showed, that these loose materials fell much as snow falls
in our northern climates when driven by the wind, being thicker in the
angles than in the centers of the houses, and rising in curves
corresponding to the elevations and depressions of the surface.

“The celebrated Appian way passed by the house of Diomede, and through
Pompeii to Stabiæ. The road is now above ground, and is evidently as
perfect as when Pompeii was buried. It is paved with large blocks of the
ancient lava of Mount Somma, which, of course, proves the occurrence of
early eruptions of the volcano, although at an unknown era. Deep ruts
are worn by the wheels in the solid lava, which is as firm as trap,
while the stones are strongly marked by the rust of the iron worn off
from the wheel-tires. The furrows prove that the wheels were not more
than four feet apart. This is proved also by the position of the
stepping-stones for crossing the streets, which were so placed that the
wheels passed between them. The stepping-stones were very large, and two
and a half or three feet long, their longest diameter coinciding with
the direction of the street; and they were laid so near to each other
that the passengers could pass quite across the street from one
side-walk to the opposite, without stepping down. There were side-walks
in the principal streets, about three feet wide, and two feet above the
pavement. The streets were paved with the same hard lava rock, and in
many places it was worn into deep hollows by human feet, thus proving
the high antiquity of the city. The street near the barracks is only
thirteen feet wide. We passed through one street in which the pavement
was in very bad order; the ruts were worn irregularly and very deep, the
stones were tilted out of the proper level, and there, as sometimes
happens in modern cities, the street commissioners had evidently not
done their duty.

“The Appian way, near to Pompeii, but outside of the walls and
immediately contiguous to them, is, as at Rome, bordered on both sides
by _tombs_. and in general they are in good condition, having been
preserved during seventeen centuries equally from injuries by the
weather and by wanton violation. They are of marble, and their Latin
inscriptions still commemorate their tenants. One tomb, constructed in
the manner of the columbaria, is dedicated to the gladiators, and is
decorated with bas-reliefs representing their combats. Near the tombs,
and outside of the walls, we saw sheds for the horses of those who
arrived after the gates of the city were closed. No stables have been
discovered in the town, but skeletons of horses were found at this
place, where there was a large tavern.

“Pompeii was first discovered in 1748. It lies about twelve miles
south-east from Naples. The town was extremely compact, and appears to
have been only three-fourths of a mile long by half a mile wide. The
houses were joined together. Twenty streets, which are only fifteen feet
wide, had been uncovered twenty years since. Although only one-third
part of the city has been cleared of its covering, five or six hours
were industriously employed by us, with our two guides, in visiting the
most interesting private dwellings and the public buildings. We were
indeed richly rewarded for our effort. Here we were, walking in the very
streets and on the very pavements on which the ancient Romans trod; we
were surveying the very houses in which they dwelt: we saw the
vestibules, the impluvium (an interior and central receptacle for the
rain-water from the roofs;) their triclinia, or dining-halls; their
colonnades, surrounding an interior open area, in which they walked and
conversed with their families and friends; the fish-ponds, also in an
open area; the private marble baths; the kitchens and other arrangements
for culinary purposes; the gardens in the rear of the houses, the halls
and colonnades opening into the garden; the whole forming a domestic
dominion secure from public inspection. All these arrangements were
perfectly intelligible to us; and as we walked from house to house, it
was not difficult to imagine that we were making calls, and that the
people were not at home.

“Everywhere, even in the smaller houses, the floors were adorned with
mosaic; many of the best designs have been sent to Naples, but,
including what is still covered, much more remains in place, and not
essentially injured. When it is considered that no melted lava flowed
into Pompeii, but that it was covered solely by a volcanic shower of
comminuted pumice and other pulverulent materials, which accumulated
until the roofs were crushed inward by the weight, it will be easily
understood that the mosaic floors may have remained for seventeen or
eighteen hundred years, substantially uninjured. The mosaic of Pompeii
is uncovered in many places, and when the dust is brushed away and the
surface is wiped with a wet cloth, as was done for our gratification,
all the original brightness and beauty of the figures shine forth, and
in the finest patterns, the execution was in a high degree tasteful and
elegant. At the door of the mansion of the edile Glaucus, which was one
of the largest and best in the city, there was, in the vestibule and
before entering the house, a very startling mosaic figure of a large and
powerful dog, secured by a chain around his neck, but crouching and
fierce, as if about to spring upon the visitor; and immediately before
this vigilant sentinel, you read in large Roman letters, CAVE
CANEM—beware of the dog! The inscription is preserved in the original
place where we saw it, but the dog has been removed to the museum at
Naples. It is still a perfect figure of a Roman dog.

“The frescoes of Pompeii and Herculaneum, have put us in possession of
very perfect specimens of the skill of the Romans in the art of
painting. The only examples of their pictorial talent previously known,
were the comparatively imperfect decorations in the baths of Titus at
Rome. In these buried cities nearly all the walls of the houses are
frescoed, and among these, have been found many superb specimens of
ancient art. Most of the best have been removed to the museum of Naples,
but some of considerable merit still remain in place, and no doubt
further excavations will show numerous others now unknown. The colors
are somewhat faded, but are bright when wet. The copies in water-colors,
sold at Naples, give very perfectly the idea of these frescoes, but with
more brilliancy than is possessed by the original. Many of these figures
are nude, although many are draped. We were particularly struck with the
singularity of some of the figures on the walls, having _shoes_ very
much like our modern ones. As the great object of art is to present
Nature in her forms of greatest purity and grace, these nude figures can
not meet with more objections than their modern representatives. We saw
nothing in Pompeii or Herculaneum, worthy of so much criticism in point
of taste, as may be seen in almost any of the European galleries of
modern painting. Titian’s Loves of the Gods in Blenheim palace,
certainly surpass the ancients in this respect.

“An expected visit of the Duke d’Aumale (son of Louis Philippe, and
allied by marriage to the royal family of Naples) has been made the
occasion of _an additional excavation_, which is now being carried on by
order of the king. We thought it rare good fortune, that we could stand
by and see the moving of materials which had not been disturbed since
the catastrophe. They are entirely unconsolidated, and are easily moved
by the shovel. The accumulations did not appear to be more than ten feet
above the tops of the houses, but if measured from the level of the
streets, they might have been twenty feet in thickness. In it were
distinctly visible the alternation of fine pumice, coarse pumice,
lapilli and dark colored sand, before mentioned.

“We had the pleasure of seeing apartments that had been recently opened,
and of going into several of them. In these, the pictures are fresh, and
far less faded than in those that have been long exposed. In one of
these houses, all the marble figures found around the impluvium, and
colonnade, and fountain, have been allowed to remain intact, as the
Romans left them, when they fled for their lives. Around the fountain in
one of these houses, there were numerous grotesque jets formed of
marble, in the shape of miniature bulls, ducks and dolphins, and
associated with them was a Bacchus. A leaden tube which formerly
conveyed water for the fountain, remains in place as it passed through
the wall. We observed, as illustrating the condition of the art of
working this metal among the Romans, that the pipe was not drawn nor
cast, but was made by folding up a sheet into the tubular form, and
closing the joint by a lap without solder. In this house was a large
vaulted music room, the walls of which are nearly perfect. The object
for which the room was constructed, was sufficiently indicated by
figures of musical instruments, and of persons playing upon them.
Columns were in general use in the better houses, around the included
area, in the gardens, and in other places. In the best dwellings they
are of polished marble, in many they are stuccoed. Some of the Roman
houses, in their most perfect and uninjured condition, must have been
very beautiful, although their accommodations were much more limited
than those of modern times. The rooms, the dormitories especially, were
much smaller, and the houses were low, and rarely rose above two
stories. They were so constructed as to admit of the most perfect
domestic seclusion: no eye could scrutinize the family privacy from the
street, or from another house. Various names have been given to several
of the larger and more beautiful houses in Pompeii, sometimes fanciful,
but more frequently from some statue, mosaic, painting, or other
distinctive work of art found in them, referring, as is sometimes
supposed, to the owner. Thus we saw the houses of the Faun, of the
Medusa, of the three Fountains, and those of Pansa, of Glaucus, of
Sallust, and of Cicero. It is doubtful whether Cicero had a house at
Pompeii, and still more doubtful whether the one called by his name had
any connection with him. The three fountains in the house of that name,
are decorated with modern sea-shells, such as now abound in the
Mediterranean, and in a style of patterns still prevalent in Naples. The
fountains in the two houses newly exposed were very elegant, and in
perfect condition.

“The forum was large and handsome, and surrounded with double rows of
columns for a covered colonnade. In connection with it, was a temple of
Jupiter, and another opposite to it, of Venus, both decorated with
massive monolithic columns. Half-dressed blocks of marble and portions
of columns lie on the ground in the forum, where they were in process of
preparation, to repair the injuries done to the building by the shocks
of an earthquake, before the destructive eruption. Numerous dislocated
and propped walls in the city bear testimony to the same event, which
occurred in the year 63. Connected with the forum, was the basilica or
hall of justice, a structure adorned with columns, and provided with an
elevated tribune for the judges. Vaulted apartments beneath, were used
as a prison, communicating by a circular opening in the crown of the
arch, with the hall above. In this prison, which we entered, were found
three skeletons of prisoners, ironed to the floor, doubtless waiting
their examination at the time of the catastrophe, which so unexpectedly
changed the venue of their trial to another bar! Many acres are inclosed
by the various structures of the forum, whose very ruins, with their
numerous columns, make a grand appearance. Among the ruins, are those of
a temple to Esculapius, one for Hercules, and another for Fortune.

“Numerous monuments and inscriptions in Pompeii, indicate the Greek
origin of the original colony, and the Egyptian customs and society
which preceded the Roman dynasty. The temple of Isis still shows its
sacrificial altar, and inscriptions in Egyptian characters cover the
columns. Some of the largest and most beautiful of the silver vessels in
the museum at Naples, were found in this temple. Curiously enough, as we
entered these ancient precincts, in which the serpent was held sacred, a
snake, reputed by the guide as venomous, crossing our path, was made a
victim, which we offered on the altar.

“Beneath a superb portico in the street of the tombs, the skeletons of a
female and several children were discovered; in the street near the
temple of Isis, another skeleton was found at the depth of ten feet, and
below it, a large collection of gold and silver medals in perfect
preservation, chiefly of the reign of Domitian.

“The theaters, whose remains are distinct, are the comic, the tragic,
and the amphitheater. They were lined with polished marble, and were, in
every way, highly finished and elegant. Of the two former, the entire
plan and the greater part of the structure are visible, and most of the
seats are in place.

“The amphitheater was in a remote part of the city, near the eastern
wall. It has undergone so little dilapidation, that it appears almost
perfect. We approached it by ascending the ground until we were quite at
the top, and we then descended by the stone seats, quite to the arena,
which, by pacing, we found to be two hundred and forty feet by one
hundred and twenty. From the arena we looked up over the entire circuit
and elevation of the seats, which are almost perfectly preserved—thanks
to the sepulture of seventeen hundred years. Had this amphitheater been
in the midst of Naples, as the Coliseum was at Rome, it would, no doubt,
have fared as ill at the hands of the architects. It was easy for us now
to people it in imagination, with the thousands of Romans who have so
often gazed and applauded from these seats, while blood, both brute and
human, was flowing in the arena where we were standing. Such may have
been the scenes when the tempest of fire broke forth, for the people of
Pompeii are said to have been then engaged in the amphitheater.

“There are two buildings for _public baths_, which are well preserved;
the bronze seats and braziers still remain in them. For men, there was a
common bath, circular and large enough for entire immersion; it is of
marble, and is now in good condition. The dome, or ceiling, has in part
fallen in, but the portion over the bath is preserved. We measured the
room and found it to be sixty feet by twenty. There was another bath for
women, contiguous to this, but at a proper distance. This marble bath is
quite perfect, and the room being entirely arched has been preserved
uninjured. It is most interesting. There is a living fountain at one
end, and there was an arrangement, whose object is even now quite
apparent, for warming the room by hot air or steam. Here, in this
ancient ladies’ bath, we dined upon our stores brought out from Naples.
Intruding upon this retreat, once so sacred, we seated ourselves quite
conveniently, on the side of the bath, in a fine frescoed room of sixty
feet by sixteen. This was the most perfect building that we saw in
Pompeii. In this vicinity, there is a _living fountain_ still abundant,
and the river Sarno runs at this moment beneath Pompeii. Through a wide
opening we saw its copious and lively stream still flowing in its
ancient channel, apparently undisturbed by volcanic and earthquake
convulsions.

“The walls of Pompeii are still in good condition; they were three miles
in circuit, from eighteen to twenty feet high, and twenty feet thick.
Seven gates have been discovered; the gate of Herculaneum, of Vesuvius,
of Capua, of Nola, of Sarno, of Stabiæ, and of the theaters. The sites
of nine towers have been ascertained. We ascended the wall by stairs of
stone, doubtless coeval with the wall itself: the view was imposing.
Vesuvius rose above the desolated city, looking down upon its naked
walls and roofless houses. The volcanic mound still covers two-thirds of
the city, and nothing on its upper surface tells of what lies below. It
were greatly to be desired, that an enlightened and energetic
government, with adequate means, would uncover the entire city, with its
numerous hidden works of art and materials of history.

“The baker’s shop, with his oven of arched and modern form, the tub of
stone in which he wet his broom, and the hourglass-shaped mills of hard
lava for grinding the grain, we saw all perfect. There were mills of two
sizes: one small, such as could be turned by hand, as when ‘two women
were grinding at the mill,’ and one much larger, and provided with
square holes to receive the ends of levers, requiring, of course, much
more force to turn them, and doubtless worked by men. The shops of the
wine and oil merchants were provided with large _amphoræ_ set in masonry
under the counter, for storing those fluids, and numerous other
arrangements for the convenience of the occupants were visible.

“In one house we saw a small circular window, in which part of the glass
plate which originally filled it still remains. One other similar glass
is said to have been found, although shutters were in general use for
most of the windows. As there were no windows, as with us, opening upon
the street, and all the doors and windows of the house opened upon
private courts and gardens, there was in this mild and equable climate
far less occasion for the use of glass than might seem at first
requisite. That they understood the manufacture of glass, and how to
color it, by the use of the oxyds of cobalt and copper, is abundantly
proved by the remains of this ancient art now in the Borbonico museum,
at Naples.

“One peculiarity in the construction of the Pompeian houses favors the
removal and preservation of the frescoes. The walls upon which the
pictures are painted are not solid, but the frescoed surface is
supported by studs of masonry or iron, at a distance of some four or
five inches in front of the brick walls. Security from dampness is thus
obtained, and the task of removing the valued surface much simplified
and facilitated. The declining sun found us still lingering on the seats
of the amphitheater, at the remotest angle of the city wall, dwelling
with delight upon these memorials of the past, and speculating upon the
probability of renewed activity in Vesuvius, whose quiet blue cone rose
over our right shoulders crowned with a soft cloud of vapor. It was late
in the evening of this most interesting day when we reached the door of
our hotel, long after darkness had hidden the landscape.


                              THE MUSEUM.

“The Musæo Borbonico (as it is now called) contains all the most choice
and valued works of art and objects of interest which the excavations at
Herculaneum and Pompeii have brought to light. To this we repaired on
the day following our visit to Pompeii, to follow up our researches into
the details of these most interesting discoveries. Here we saw the
golden ornaments found upon the skeletons in the house of Diomede, as
before mentioned, and many others also. One pair of bracelets weighed a
pound each. As for the workmanship, all that was said of the Etruscan
golden ornaments is substantially true of the Pompeian. The ladies of
these cities were certainly well provided with costly jewelry, both of
pure gold and of the same metal set with precious stones. There was one
ribbon of wrought gold. Ring stones and brooches without number are
preserved here, and among the cameos in agate, are the largest as well
as the smallest and most exquisite of these elaborate works of art ever
found. Many of the latter can be appreciated only when examined under a
strong magnifier.

“Utensils in earthen ware are abundant, but porcelain seems to have been
unknown to the Romans. Blown and molded glass of various forms and
colors, and designed for various uses, is also common. Pickle jars and
olive jars, still retaining their preserved fruits in good condition,
were found, and others contained cosmetics or colors. One elegant vase,
of the color of =lapis lazuli=, has figures in white enamel cut on its
sides, reminding us of the celebrated Portland vase. The Romans seldom
employed iron for culinary purposes, but almost every vessel of this
description was fashioned from bronze. A very extensive collection is
found in this museum, reproducing nearly all our modern metallic vessels
both of utility and ornament. They are generally elegant in form, and
are often ornamented with artistic designs, especially in the attachment
of the spouts, handles, feet or other prominent parts. They are
generally also in a remarkable state of preservation, being for the most
part merely covered by a thin coating of greenish rust, easily removed.
Sometimes, however, they are corroded through and through with holes.
Among the bronze vessels in the collection is one showing that the
Romans were well acquainted with the modern device of a heater to keep
liquids hot in a large vessel. It is quite on the model of the coffee
urn of our day. They also employed, as is evident, steam and hot water
to keep dishes hot; for there is a very pretty affair in bronze, like a
shallow pan, to hold water, set on legs, with a fire beneath, and
provided with valves for the escape of steam.

“Among the objects most frequently found in Pompeii are fishing-nets and
tackle, showing the habits of the people in this particular to be
similar to those of the modern towns of the same coast, although now
Pompeii is a mile from the sea. The iron rings in the walls for
fastening vessels were also found, and prove still more conclusively the
accumulations in seventeen hundred years. Two vases were discovered in
Pompeii full of water; in one it was tasteless and limpid, and in the
other brown and alkaline. Among the things preserved in the buried
cities were walnuts, chestnuts, almonds, dates, dried figs, prunes,
corn, oil, peas, lentils, pies and hams. Papyri were found in large
numbers, but the rolls were blackened, as were the timber and the corn,
as vegetables are by inhumation in coal beds. Beside the pickles, and
olives, and roe of fish, already mentioned, we saw in a glass globe, in
this part of the museum, wheat, and barley also, blackened by age and
dampness. The loaves of bread, bearing the baker’s stamp, which were
found in the shop already named, are singularly perfect, showing
distinctly the lines of quartering in which the loaf was designed to be
cut.

“The works of art found in Herculaneum are in general much better than
those from Pompeii, and every external sign proves it to have been a
town of more refinement and wealth than its neighbor. Numerous statues
in bronze and marble have been collected from these cities, and a large
hall in the museum is devoted to their exhibition. Many are
mythological, but busts and statues of the several emperors are also
common. One bronze horse, considerably injured and corroded, has been
found, and an admirable bronze Hercules. The candelabra were numerous
and elegant. One we observed fitted to take apart for the convenience of
traveling; its sliding rod drops into a case or sheath, and the tripod
foot folds together as snugly as the wing of a bird. A very beautiful
candelabrum, taken from the house of Diomede, has a basis formed of a
small flat table of bronze standing upon feet. It is elegantly inlaid
with silver in the form of a running vine and of leaves; some portions
have been burnished, to give an idea of its original beauty. A
perpendicular rod rises three feet in hight, and supports a cross upon
which are suspended four lamps. All the parts are preserved; and were
this tasteful candelabrum put in order and burnished, it would be a fine
form for our modern artists to copy, who, indeed, often profit by
ancient models.

“The Roman steelyards had a scale suspended so as to receive the thing
to be weighed, and the weight slid, as with us, upon a graduated beam;
in one the counterpoise is fashioned into an elegant female head. There
is a collection of surgical instruments, some of them very similar to
those used at the present day. Iron probes, iron teeth extractors,
elevators for the operation of trepanning, a cauterizing iron, lancets,
catheters, amputating instruments, spatulas and obstetric forceps. Along
with these things are rolls of the apothecary, ready to be divided into
_pills_. The articles of the _toilet_ are abundant; pins of ivory in
large numbers and great variety for the hair; combs, curling-tongs,
boxes for perfumes and rouge, which is preserved in a small glass
bottle; mirrors of metal, small, but sufficient for a lady’s face, and
reflectors, to be used probably in a position to give seasonable notice
of the approach of a visitor from the vestibule, similar to the
arrangement now common in Holland and Germany. Numerous small objects
attracted our attention, among which were the ivory dice, and tickets of
bone or ivory for admission to the theater, marked and numbered. Musical
instruments were common; among them numerous flutes or flageolets,
prepared from bone. Numerous bronze penates, truly =dii minores=, often
less than a finger’s length in hight, some partly finished, are to be
seen in the museum at Naples.

“There is an apartment here, finished in the style of an ancient Roman
house. This is in the extreme end of one of the long suites of rooms.
The sky-blue panels have each, in the center, a female figure, volant or
quiet; the upper part of the side walls, and of the dome, is divided
into compartments, which are decorated by colored lines and forms of
great beauty, the entire effect of which is charming. The eye delights
to dwell upon them, and would never be tired, because the beauty,
although exquisite, is simple and tasteful. We saw in the museum, as
already mentioned, the helmet and skull of the Roman sentinel found at
his post in the city gate at Pompeii, with his short sword by his side;
there, too, was the complete armor of a Roman knight with a decorated
and crested helmet, with figures embossed upon the breast-plate, and the
coverings of the arms and limbs. We must not forget the iron stocks for
punishment. A bar of iron or bronze of great weight had metallic
projections standing upward, between which the feet were placed, and
secured by a cross pin. It does not appear that the head was pinioned,
as in modern times; but we could well understand how the feet of the
apostles were rendered lame by confinement in the Roman stocks.

“The hall of ancient sculpture, chiefly from Pompeii and Herculaneum,
with some figures from Rome, powerfully attracted our attention. These
sculptures, usually of full size, and sometimes colossal, are very fine.
Excellent, manly forms, and noble, elevated features of men, and of
women, worthy of such companions, with great variety of characteristic
attitude, and in general, in full costume, served to convey to us, as we
may believe, a very perfect idea of the personal appearance of Roman
citizens of that age. The family of Balbus found in Herculaneum, is
particularly interesting. It is composed of the father, a noble figure,
the mother, equally impressive, and sons and daughters worthy of such
parentage. Their features are calm and mild. It is a most interesting
group, and in perfect preservation. The moral and intellectual
expression of the figures in these rooms—through a long series of
apartments and a host of figures—is as various as that of living people.

“It is convenient to introduce here a notice of the Farnesian bull; for
this inimitable piece of sculpture is in this place, although it was not
found interred in Pompeii or Herculaneum, but buried among the ruins of
the baths of Caracalla. A large bull, of perfect and beautiful form, is
rearing upon his hind legs, as if about to bound away in his course; but
this he is prevented from doing, as he is powerfully held by the horns
and the nose by two resolute, athletic young men, one on each side, who
have him in such durance that his massive neck is wrinkled in large
folds, as he turns his head backward in his efforts to escape from their
grasp. The cause of the struggle becomes apparent, when we glance at a
fine female form recumbent, and see that her abundant tresses are
interwoven with the strands of a rope which is noosed around the horns
of the bull, and it flashes at once on the mind, that should the
maddened animal escape from his keepers, she will be quickly torn in
pieces. Her noble sons have, in a critical moment, sprung forward to her
rescue, and are just able to arrest her impending fate. Filial love
proves to be stronger than disapprobation of an imputed fault, for which
their mother was to have been immolated by this horrible death. In such
a crisis we are not careful to balance the moral question: we
instinctively applaud the filial piety, and do not ask for the spirit of
Brutus. This wonderful group was sculptured out of a single block of
marble of nine feet eight inches by thirteen feet, by Appollonius and
Tauriscus, two artists in Greece, from which country it was brought, to
grace the baths of Caracalla. It is truly wonderful that such a
ponderous mass, embracing so many figures, could be brought over seas,
from a distant country, to Rome, and again be transported from that city
to Naples, without injury, after being buried for fifteen centuries in
the baths of Caracalla.


                              HERCULANEUM.

“The same eruption which destroyed Pompeii, Stabiæ, Oplontia and
Teglanum, entombed Herculaneum also. Its site was, however, unknown, as
well as that of the other buried towns; and the fatal event is only
occasionally alluded to by the Roman writers. In the year 63, an
earthquake had shattered these cities, a precursor of their coming doom.
In 1711, a peasant, in digging a well, discovered, at twenty feet depth,
pieces of colored marble. In 1713, the digging being continued, they
struck down into a temple, and discovered the statues of Cleopatra and
Hercules; and subsequent explorations disclosed the theater. Our time
being very fully occupied with Pompeii on the day when we were there, we
reserved to another opportunity a visit to Herculaneum. We descended
quite conveniently down steps of stone, and arrived at the pit of the
theater, seventy-nine feet below the level of the main street of
Portici, and Torre del Greco. With a guide, we proceeded, by the light
of candles and torches, until we came to this subterranean theater,
which had been filled with volcanic materials. I do not call it lava,
because there is every reason to believe that, like Pompeii, Herculaneum
was buried by pumice, cinders, ashes, lapilli and sand. There has been
much discussion on this subject; but had the buildings of Herculaneum
been inclosed in heated lava, it is obvious that every fresco painting
and marble would have been destroyed, and much more, the numerous papyri
and other substances of an organic character, which have been found
there. Now it happens that the frescoes of Herculaneum, so far as it has
been uncovered, are not only of a higher character in respect of art
than those in Pompeii, but also in better preservation. The solidity of
the material enveloping Herculaneum is easily understood, when we
remember that it has been for over seventeen hundred years under the
enormous pressure of seventy or eighty feet of superincumbent rock.
Since the catastrophe of August, A. D. 79, numerous flows of molten lava
have passed over the site of Herculaneum; and these successive
accumulations have amounted to the thickness just named. Add the effects
of water, dissolving lime and silica, and infiltrating these materials
among the loose pumice, and we see cause enough to account for the
solidification of these loose materials. Moreover, no sluggish and
semi-viscid lava (such as the Vesuvian lavas a short distance from their
outlet always are) could ever have entered all the intricate passages of
the theater and other buildings; while a fluid magma of volcanic mud
would act in the same situation just as it is now found, like plaster of
Paris in a mold.

“When we see with what labor and expense the excavations have been made
in Herculaneum, and how difficult it is to dispose of the materials,
which must be borne a long way through narrow passages like the
galleries of a mine, and raised nearly one hundred feet to the surface,
where a populous town forbids the accumulation of rubbish; we are the
more easily reconciled to the suspension of the labor, and to the
throwing of the fragments into cavities that had been previously
excavated, and from which all interesting matters had been removed.

“Discoveries in Herculaneum have been very numerous, but are so similar
to those made in Pompeii that it is unnecessary to go much into detail
beyond what has been already mentioned. This city being, in fact,
contemporary with Pompeii, we should, of course, expect to find great
similarity. It would seem, however, to have been a grander city, and
probably more populous. It has been computed that the theater would
contain ten thousand people, which would imply a large population. Two
temples were discovered, one of them one hundred and fifty feet by
sixty. This contained a statue of Jupiter. Opposite to this was another
building of two hundred and twenty-eight feet by one hundred and
thirty-two, supposed to have been constructed for the courts of justice.
It had a colonnade supporting a portico; its pavement was of marble, its
walls were frescoed, and there were bronze statues standing between the
forty-two columns that supported the roof.

“The theater is now the only public place that can be seen in
Herculaneum, and the excavations have brought its form very distinctly
into view. Its marble seats and the pit have been so far cleared, that
we distinctly comprehend the design and plan. The galleries of access
from the streets, and some of the rooms that were appendages of the
theater, have been opened. It appears to have had two principal gates
and seven entrances, called vomitories. Many statues, and mosaics, and
frescoes, have been found in Herculaneum, and some of them, especially
the statues, are of surpassing beauty. We were desirous to see the famed
impression of a mask, and by holding a candle near to it the form could
be distinctly seen. The impression is in concave, and is that of a
strongly marked face of an adult; the copy is well defined, and
corresponds perfectly with a molding made by soft aqueous materials, and
not at all to one made by lava.

“The well, by which the light was originally let down upon the theater,
of course attracted our attention. It is now enlarged into a pit of
fifteen to twenty feet in diameter, and narrowed toward the bottom to
the size of a common well; it descends far below the bottom of the
theater, and, like other wells, contains water. A flood of light flows
down through this orifice; and it is cheering to pass from the dark
chambers of the theater, to look up again upon the light of heaven. The
subterranean walk, aided by candles, of which each person carries one,
is, however, far from being unpleasant. Steps are cut in the solid mass,
all obstacles are cleared away, and although we find it cool and damp,
it is not gloomy, but in a high degree solemn and impressive. We are
walking in an ancient tomb—the tomb of a buried city—a city which was
large and populous. It was active with pleasure and business long before
our Saviour was on earth, and it was overwhelmed while some of his
apostles were still alive. How different was our situation here and at
Pompeii. In the latter city we walked the streets in open day and on the
common level: here, we were deep down in a stony sepulcher; the mansions
of the departed were all around us, but they were wrapped in solid rock.
The rumbling of the carriages in the streets of another city, whose busy
population was passing nearly one hundred feet above our heads, was loud
and incessant. It was an earthquake from above, and we could easily
understand how the earthquake from below should so readily propagate its
vibrations through many miles, or hundreds of miles, of solid materials.
Among the interesting places heretofore excavated, but now filled again,
were the basilica, the market, the scholæ, a columbarium, and the
so-called villa of Aristides, in which papyrus, bronzes, rare mosaics,
and all things that attested to the wealth and taste of the proprietor,
were found. In excavations made prior to 1728 they found the most
splendid house of the ancients that had ever been seen by modern eyes.

“A great work on Herculaneum was published by royal authority, in the
thirty-eight years intervening between 1754 and 1792, in nine folio
volumes, including the pictures, lamps, bronzes and candelabra; seven
hundred and thirty-eight pictures were named in the catalogue, and the
other articles were proportionally numerous. The work was presented, by
royal munificence, to the principal public libraries of Europe.

“Both Herculaneum and Pompeii were mentioned with commendation by
Cicero. Both appear to have been favorite residences of the opulent
Romans; both towns were in the first class of provincial cities, and
Herculaneum especially was adorned by many villas. They had all the
public establishments that were usual in Rome. Indeed, the entire
circuit, from Cape Misenum around through the towns and villages of the
bay of Baiæ, and onward through Naples to Herculaneum, and Pompeii, and
Stabiæ, appears to have been within the range of Roman sumptuousness,
and a cherished resort for rural retirement from the eternal city.

“The =papyri= of Pompeii are generally illegible, being penetrated by
the pulverulent material, which, aided by water, had usurped the place
of the vegetable matter, or assimilated it to coal; a portion of it was
found to be soluble in naphtha. Those buried in Herculaneum were not
penetrated by the enveloping matter; and the inscriptions, although
black like tinder, could still be read, as writing can often be seen
upon burnt paper. The papyri MSS. were generally written in Greek; a few
are in Latin. There is much variety of chirography, and there are many
erasures. Tickets were attached to the bundles, stating the title of the
work. In a single villa in Herculaneum were found sixteen hundred and
ninety-six rolls of papyrus, of the eighteen hundred thus far known. In
1819, four hundred and seven of the sixteen hundred and ninety-six had
been unrolled, of which only eighty-eight were legible; twenty-four had
been sent as presents to foreign princes; of the remaining twelve
hundred and sixty-five, only from eighty to one hundred and twenty were
in a state to promise any success, according to the chemical method at
that time recommended by Sir Humphrey Davy. The titles of four hundred
of those least injured, which have been read, although new are
unimportant, music, rhetoric and cookery being the chief subjects. There
are two volumes of Epicurus on Nature, and there are other works by that
school. The rolls, in their coiled condition, were scarcely a span long,
and two or three inches thick; they were made of pieces of Egyptian
papyrus, glued together; some of the rolls were, when extended, forty or
fifty feet long. The method found most successful for unrolling the
papyri is to suspend them by silk cords in a glass case; and by
attaching the delicate lining membrane of some species of bird to the
back, with the aid of silken cords and regulated weights suspended by
pulleys, gravity slowly unfolds the brittle tissue at a rate of almost
inappreciable tardiness. We were permitted to see this curious process.

“A little further from Vesuvius than Pompeii, but in the same direction,
was Stabiæ, which was covered at the same time with the other cities.
The town of Castel del Mare is built over a portion of it. A part of
Stabiæ was excavated, but has been covered again, so that at present
there is nothing of it to be seen. Some manuscripts on papyrus were
found there, as at Herculaneum, but very few skeletons have been
discovered; it is probable that most of the inhabitants had time to make
their escape. I have elsewhere alluded to the death of the elder Pliny,
which happened here. As commander of the Roman fleet, he was stationed
on the opposite side of the bay, at Cape Misenum; but the splendid
outburst of Vesuvius, then novel, induced him, prompted by his humanity
and by his zeal in natural science, to cross over with a few attendants;
he approached too near, and was constrained to remain over night. Being
corpulent and of an asthmatic habit, he was suffocated by the deadly
gases exhaled in the volcanic tempest, which proved too much for his
peculiar condition, and he died on the spot. The affecting and beautiful
narrative written by his nephew, the younger Pliny, addressed to the
historian Tacitus, is familiar to the readers of Roman literature, and
can never be perused without a deep and painful interest.”

We would merely add, in closing this long but deeply interesting
narrative of the buried cities, that it is supposed that about one-third
of the entire city of Pompeii is now uncovered, including four principal
streets, and all the important buildings of the ancient city. A long
street, leading to the Stabian gate, is now being excavated; and in this
street, one of the most remarkable discoveries has been made of any
which have yet occurred; _viz._, _that of the complete roofing of a
house_. As already stated, Pompeii, having been destroyed by falling
ashes, and then covered with earth, had suffered the loss of the roofs
of its houses. Indeed, some supposed they had been carried away by a
whirlwind which they imagined must have preceded or attended the
volcanic eruption. The little care used in clearing away the incumbent
matter, had left us in the dark as to the construction of the ancient
roofings. But quite recently, this discovery has been made of a complete
roof of a house, formed of tiles, each about twelve inches square, with
coping tiles running between them; and over the backbone, so to speak,
of the construction, a cement was applied to make the roofing
water-tight. So perfect is this roof, that it might have been
constructed yesterday; and it would suit a modern English or American
cottage as well as a Roman dwelling. The whole is now inclosed in a
railing, and for the present will not probably be removed.




                              EARTHQUAKES.


“He looketh on the earth, and it trembleth: he toucheth the hills, and
they smoke.”—PSALMS.

                            “Towers, temples, palaces,
            Flung from their deep foundations, roof on roof
            Crushed horrible, and pile on pile o’erturned,
            Fall total.”—MALLET.

         “The globe around earth’s hollow surface shakes,
         And is the ceiling of her sleeping sons.
         O’er devastation we blind revels keep;
         Whose buried towns support the dancer’s heel.”—YOUNG.


That fires, to a very great extent, and produced by various causes,
exist at different depths beneath the surface of the earth, must be
entirely evident to those who have perused the accounts of volcanoes in
our previous pages; and recent experiments have shown, that where the
substances in which such fires occur, lie at a considerable depth, and
are surmounted by a very deep and heavy superincumbent pressure, more
especially when they contain large portions of elastic gases, the effect
of such fires will be much greater, and more diversified, than where
these circumstances are absent.

Among the most powerful and extraordinary of these effects earthquakes
are to be reckoned. They are unquestionably the most dreadful of the
phenomena of nature, and are not confined to those countries which, from
the influence of climate, their vicinity to volcanic mountains, or any
other similar cause, have been considered as more particularly subject
to them, their effects having oft been felt in North America, although
not in so extensive and calamitous a degree. Their shocks and the
eruptions of volcanoes, have been considered as modifications of the
effects of one common cause; and where the agitation produced by an
earthquake extends further than there is reason to suspect a
subterraneous commotion, it is probably propagated through the earth
nearly in the same way that a noise is conveyed through the air. The
different hypotheses which have been imagined on this subject may be
reduced to the following. Some naturalists have ascribed earthquakes to
water, others to fire, and others, again, to air; each of these powerful
agents being supposed to operate in the bowels of the earth, which they
assert to abound everywhere with huge subterraneous caverns, veins and
canals, some filled with water, others with gaseous exhalations, and
others replete with various substances, such as niter, sulphur, bitumen
and vitriol. Each of these opinions has its advocates, who have written
copiously on the subject.

In a paper published in the “Philosophical Transactions,” Dr. Lister
ascribes earthquakes, as well as thunder and lightning, to the
inflammable breath of the pyrites, a substantial sulphur, capable of
spontaneous combustion; in a word, as Pliny had observed before him, he
supposes an earthquake to be nothing more than subterraneous thunder.
Dr. Woodward thinks, that the subterraneous fire which continually
raises the water from the abyss, or great reservoir, in the center of
the earth, for the supply of dew, rain, springs and rivers, being
diverted from its ordinary course by some accidental obstruction in the
pores through which it is used to ascend to the surface, becomes, by
such means, preternaturally assembled in a greater quantity than usual,
in one place, and thus causes a rarefaction and intumescence of the
water of the abyss, throwing it into greater commotions, and at the same
time making the like effort on the earth, which, being expanded on the
surface of the abyss, occasions an earthquake. Mr. Mitchell supposes
these phenomena to be occasioned by subterraneous fires, which, if a
large quantity of water be let loose on them suddenly, may produce a
vapor, the quantity and elastic force of which may fully suffice for the
purpose. Again, M. Amontus, a member of the French Academy of Sciences,
endeavors to prove, that, on the principle of experiments made on the
weight and elasticity of the air, a moderate degree of heat may bring
that element into a state capable of causing earthquakes.

Modern electrical discoveries have thrown much light on this subject.
Dr. Stukely strenuously denies that earthquakes are to be ascribed to
subterraneous winds, fires or vapors, and thinks that there is not any
evidence of the cavernous structure of the earth, which such a
hypothesis requires. Subterraneous vapors he thinks, are altogether
inadequate to the effects produced by earthquakes, more particularly in
cases where the shock is of considerable extent: for a subterraneous
power, capable of moving a surface of earth only thirty miles in
diameter, must be lodged at least fifteen or twenty miles below the
surface, and move an inverted cone of solid earth, whose basis is thirty
miles in diameter, and its axis fifteen or twenty miles, which he thinks
absolutely impossible. How much more inconceivable is it, then, that any
such power could have produced the earthquake of 1755, which was felt in
various parts of Europe and Africa, and in the Atlantic ocean; or that
which in Asia Minor, in the seventeenth year of the Christian era,
destroyed thirteen great cities in one night, and shook a mass of earth
three hundred miles in diameter. To effect this, the moving power,
supposing it to have been internal fire or vapor, must have been lodged
two hundred miles beneath the surface of the earth! Besides, in
earthquakes, the effect is instantaneous; whereas the operation of
elastic vapor, and its discharge, must be gradual, and require a long
space of time; and if these be owing to explosions, they must alter the
surface of the country where they happen, destroy the fountains and
springs, and change the course of its rivers, results which are
contradicted by history and observation.

To these and other considerations the doctor adds, that the strokes
which ships receive during an earthquake, must be occasioned by
something which can communicate motion with much greater velocity than
any heaving of the earth under the sea, caused by the elasticity of
generated vapors, which would merely produce a gradual swell, and not
such an impulsion of the water as resembles a violent blow on the bottom
of a ship, or its striking on a rock. Hence he deems the common
hypothesis insufficient, and adduces several reasons to show that
earthquakes are in reality electric shocks. To confirm this opinion, he
notices, among other phenomena, either preceding or attending
earthquakes, that the weather is usually dry and warm for some time
before they happen, and that the surface of the ground is thus
previously prepared for that kind of electrical vibration in which they
consist; while, at the same time, in several places where they have
occurred, the internal parts, at a small depth beneath the surface, were
moist and boggy. Hence he infers, that they reach very little beneath
the surface. That the southern regions are more subject to earthquakes
than the northern, he thinks is owing to the greater warmth and dryness
of the earth and air, which are qualities so necessary to electricity.
It may here be noticed, that, before the earthquakes of London, in 1749,
all vegetation was remarkably forward; and it is well known, that
electricity quickens vegetation. The frequent and singular appearance of
boreal and austral _auroræ_, and the variety of meteors by which
earthquakes are preceded, indicate an electrical state of the
atmosphere; and the doctor apprehends that, in this state of the earth
and air, nothing more is necessary to produce these phenomena, than the
approach of a non-electric cloud, and the discharge of its contents, on
any part of the earth, when in a highly electrified state. In the same
way as the discharge from an excited tube occasions a commotion in the
human body, so the shock produced by the discharge between the cloud and
many miles in compass of solid earth, must be an earthquake, and the
snap from the contact the noise attending it.

The theory of M. de St. Lazare differs from the above hypothesis, as
to the electrical cause. It ascribes the production of earthquakes to
the interruption of the equilibrium between the electrical matter
diffused in the atmosphere, and that which belongs to the mass of our
globe, and pervades its bowels. If the electrical fluid should be
superabundant, as may happen from a variety of causes, its current, by
the laws of motion peculiar to fluids, is carried toward those places
where it is in a similar quantity; and thus it will sometimes pass
from the internal parts of the globe into the atmosphere. This
happening, if the equilibrium be reëstablished without difficulty, the
current merely produces the effect of what M. de St. Lazare calls
ascending thunder; but if this reëstablishment be opposed by
considerable and multiplied obstacles, the consequence is then an
earthquake, the violence and extent of which are in exact proportion
to the degree of interruption of the equilibrium, the depth of the
electric matter, and the obstacles which are to be surmounted. If the
electric furnace be sufficiently large and deep to give rise to the
formation of a conduit or issue, the production of a volcano will
follow, its successive eruptions being, according to him, nothing more
in reality than electric repulsions of the substances contained in the
bowels of the earth. From this reasoning he endeavors to deduce the
practicability of forming a counter-earthquake, and a counter-volcano,
by means of certain electrical conductors, which he describes, so as
to prevent these convulsions in the bowels of the earth.

The opinion of Signior Beccaria is nearly similar; and from his
hypothesis and that of Dr. Stukely, the celebrated Priestly has
endeavored to form one still more general and more feasible. He supposes
the electric fluid to be, in some mode or other, accumulated on one part
of the surface of the earth, and, on account of the dryness of the
season, not to diffuse itself readily: it may thus, as Beccaria
conjectures, force its way into the higher regions of the air, forming
clouds out of the vapors which float in the atmosphere, and may occasion
a sudden shower, which may further promote its progress. The whole
surface being thus unloaded, will, like any other conducting substance,
receive a concussion, either on parting with, or on receiving any
quantity of the electric fluid. The rushing noise will likewise sweep
over the whole extent of the country; and, on this supposition also, the
fluid, in its discharge from the surface of the earth, will naturally
follow the course of the rivers, and will take the advantage of any
eminences to facilitate its ascent into the higher regions of the air.

Such are the arguments in favor of the electrical hypothesis; but, since
it has been supported with so much ability, an ingenious writer,
Whitehurst, in his “Inquiry into the Original State and Formation of the
Earth,” contends that subterraneous fire, and the steam generated from
it, are the true and real causes of earthquakes. When, he observes, it
is considered that the expansive force of steam is to that of gunpowder
as twenty-eight to one, it may be conceded that this expansive force,
and the elasticity of steam, are in every way capable of producing the
stupendous effects attributed to these phenomena. This is, now, the
almost universally received theory as to the cause of earthquakes, that
they originate in the same general causes which produce volcanoes; that
is, from the action of the heat and fires that are found in the interior
of the earth. When these fires find ready vent, they produce the
overflowing volcano; but when shut up and confined, their force is so
great as to shake the solid crust of the globe which covers them.

Among the most striking phenomena of earthquakes, which present a
fearful assemblage of the combined effects of air, earth, fire and
water, in a state of unrestrained contention, may be noticed the
following. Before the percussion a rumbling sound is heard, proceeding
either from the air, or from fire, or, perhaps, from both in
conjunction, forcing their way through the chasms of the earth, and
endeavoring to liberate themselves: this, as has been seen, likewise
happens in volcanic eruptions. Secondly, a violent agitation or heaving
of the sea, sometimes preceding, and sometimes following the shock: this
is also a volcanic effect. Thirdly, a spouting up of the waters to a
great hight, a phenomenon which is common to earthquakes and volcanoes,
and which can not be readily accounted for. Fourthly, a rocking of the
earth, and, occasionally, what may be termed a perpendicular rebounding:
this diversity has been supposed by some naturalists to arise chiefly
from the situation of the place, relatively to the subterraneous fire,
which, when immediately beneath, causes the earth to rise, and when at a
distance, to rock. Fifthly, earthquakes are sometimes observed to travel
onward, so as to be felt in different countries at different hours of
the same day. This may be accounted for by the violent shock given to
the earth at one place, and communicated progressively by an undulatory
motion, successively affecting different regions as it passes along, in
the same way as the blow given by a stone thrown into a lake, is not
perceived at the shore until some time after the first concussion.
Sixthly, the shock is sometimes instantaneous, like the explosion of
gunpowder, and sometimes tremulous, lasting for several minutes. The
nearer to the observer the place where the shock is first given, the
more instantaneous and simple it appears; while, at a greater distance,
the earth seems to redouble the first blow, with a sort of vibratory
continuation. Lastly, as the waters have in general so great a share in
the production of earthquakes, it is not surprising that they should
generally follow the breaches made by the force of fire, and appear in
the great chasms opened by the earth.


                     EARTHQUAKES OF ANCIENT TIMES.

The earliest earthquake, worthy of notice, of which we have any record,
was that which in the year 63 so severely injured Herculaneum and
Pompeii, and from the effects of which they had not been restored when
they were overwhelmed by the volcano. Some of the most remarkable
earthquakes of ancient times are described by Pliny. Among the most
extensive and destructive of these, was the one already noticed, by
which thirteen cities in Asia Minor were swallowed up in one night.
Another which succeeded, shook the greater part of Italy. But the most
extraordinary one, described by him, happened during the consulate of
Lucius Marcus and Sextus Julius, in the Roman province of Mutina. He
relates, that two mountains felt so tremendous a shock, that they seemed
to approach and retire with a most dreadful noise. They at the same
time, and in the middle of the day, cast forth fire and smoke, to the
dismay of the astonished spectator. By this shock several towns were
destroyed, and all the animals in their vicinity killed. During the
reign of Trajan, the city of Antioch was, together with a great part of
the adjacent country, destroyed by an earthquake; and about three
hundred years after, during the reign of Justinian, it was again
destroyed, with the loss of forty thousand of its inhabitants. Lastly,
after an interval of sixty years, that ill-fated city was a third time
overwhelmed, with a loss of sixty thousand souls. The earthquake which
happened at Rhodes, upward of two hundred years before the Christian
era, threw down the famous colossus, together with the arsenal, and a
great part of the walls of the city. In the year 1182, the greater part
of the cities of Syria, and of the kingdom of Jerusalem, were destroyed
by a similar catastrophe; and in 1594, the Italian writers describe an
earthquake at Puteoli, which occasioned the sea to retire two hundred
yards from its former bed.


                        EARTHQUAKE IN CALABRIA.

The dreadful earthquake which happened in Calabria, in 1638, is
described by the Jesuit Kircher, who was at that time on his way to
Sicily to visit Mount Etna. In approaching the gulf of Charybdis, it
appeared to whirl round in such a manner as to form a vast hollow,
verging to a point in the center. On looking toward Etna, it was seen to
emit large volumes of smoke, of a mountainous size, which entirely
covered the whole island, and obscured from his view the very shores.
This, together with the dreadful noise, and the sulphurous stench, which
was strongly perceptible, filled him with apprehensions that a still
more dreadful calamity was impending. The sea was agitated, covered with
bubbles, and had altogether a very unusual appearance. His surprise was
still more increased by the serenity of the weather, there not being a
breath of air, nor a cloud, which might be supposed to put all nature
thus in motion. He therefore warned his companions that an earthquake
was approaching, and landed with all possible diligence at Tropæa, in
Calabria.

He had scarcely reached the Jesuits’ college, when his ears were stunned
with a horrid sound, resembling that of an infinite number of chariots
driven fiercely forward, the wheels rattling, and the thongs cracking.
The tract on which he stood seemed to vibrate, as if he had been in the
scale of a balance which still continued to waver. The motion soon
becoming more violent, he was thrown prostrate on the ground. The
universal ruin around him now redoubled his amazement: the crash of
falling houses, the tottering of towers, and the groans of the dying,
all contributed to excite emotions of terror and despair. Danger
threatened him wherever he should flee; but, having remained unhurt amid
the general concussion, he resolved to venture for safety, and reached
the shore, almost terrified out of his reason. Here he found his
companions, whose terrors were still greater than his own. He landed on
the following day at Rochetta, where the earth still continued to be
violently agitated. He had, however, scarcely reached the inn at which
he intended to lodge, when he was once more obliged to return to the
boat: in about half an hour the greater part of the town, including the
inn, was overwhelmed, and the inhabitants buried beneath its ruins.

Not finding any safety on land, and exposed, by the smallness of the
boat to a very hazardous passage by sea, he at length landed at
Lopizium, a castle midway between Tropæa and Euphæmia, the city to which
he was bound. Here, wherever he turned his eyes, nothing but scenes of
ruin and horror appeared: towns and castles were leveled to the ground;
while Stromboli, although sixty miles distant, was seen to vomit flames
in an unusual manner, and with a noise which he could distinctly hear.
From remote objects his attention was soon diverted to contiguous
danger: the rumbling sound of an approaching earthquake, with which he
was by this time well acquainted, alarmed him for the consequences.
Every instant it grew louder, as if approaching; and the spot on which
he stood shook so dreadfully, that being unable to stand, he and his
companions caught hold of the shrubs which grew nearest to them, and in
that manner supported themselves.

This violent paroxysm having ceased, he now thought of prosecuting his
voyage to Euphæmia, which lay within a short distance. Turning his eyes
toward that city, he could merely perceive a terrific dark cloud, which
seemed to rest on the place. He was the more surprised at this, as the
weather was remarkably serene. Waiting, therefore, until this cloud had
passed away, he turned to look for the city; but, alas! it was totally
sunk, and in its place a dismal and putrid lake was to be seen. All was
a melancholy solitude, a scene of hideous desolation. Such was the fate
of the city of Euphæmia; and the other devastating effects of this
earthquake were so great, that along the whole coast of that part of
Italy, for the space of two hundred miles, the remains of ruined towns
and villages were everywhere to be seen, and the inhabitants, without
dwellings, dispersed over the fields. Kircher at length terminated his
distressful voyage, by reaching Naples, after having escaped a variety
of perils both by sea and land.


                     THE GREAT EARTHQUAKE OF 1755.

This very remarkable and destructive earthquake extended over a tract of
at least four millions of square miles. It appears to have originated
beneath the Atlantic ocean, the waves of which received almost as
violent a concussion as the land. Its effects were even extended to the
waters, in many places where the shocks were not perceptible. It
pervaded the greater portions of the continents of Europe, Africa and
America; but its extreme violence was exercised on the south-western
part of the former.

Lisbon, the Portuguese capital, had already suffered greatly from an
earthquake in 1531; and, since the calamity about to be described, has
had three such visitations, in 1761, 1765, and 1772, which were not,
however, attended by equally disastrous consequences. In the present
instance it had been remarked that since the commencement of the year
1750, less rain had fallen than had been known in the memory of the
oldest of the inhabitants, unless during the spring preceding the
calamitous event. The summer had been unusually cool; and the weather
fine and clear for the last forty days. At length, on the first of
November, about forty minutes past nine in the morning, a most violent
shock of an earthquake was felt; its duration did not exceed six
seconds; but so powerful was the concussion, that it overthrew every
church and convent in the city, together with the royal palace, and the
magnificent opera house adjoining to it; in short, no building of any
consequence escaped. About one-fourth of the dwelling-houses were thrown
down; and, at a moderate computation, thirty thousand persons perished.
The sight of the dead bodies, and the shrieks of those who were
half-buried in the ruins, were terrible beyond description; and so great
was the consternation, that the most resolute man durst not stay a
moment to extricate the friend he loved most affectionately, by the
removal of the stones beneath the weight of which he was crushed.
Self-preservation alone was consulted; and the most probable security
was sought, by getting into open places, and into the middle of the
streets. Those who were in the upper stories of the houses, were in
general more fortunate than those who attempted to escape by the doors,
many of the latter being buried beneath the ruins, with the greater part
of the foot-passengers. Those who were in carriages escaped the best,
although the drivers and horses suffered severely. The number, however,
of those who perished in the streets, and in the houses, was greatly
inferior to that of those who were buried beneath the ruins of the
churches; for, as it was a day of solemn festival, these were crowded
for the celebration of the mass. There were very many of these churches;
and the lofty steeples in most instances, fell with the roof, insomuch
that few escaped.

The first shock, as has been noticed, was extremely short, but was
quickly succeeded by two others; and the whole, generally described as a
single shock, lasted from five to seven minutes. About two hours after,
fires broke out in three different parts of the city; and this new
calamity prevented the digging out of the immense riches concealed
beneath the ruins. From a perfect calm, a fresh gale immediately after
sprang up, and occasioned the fire to rage with such fury, that in the
space of three days the city was nearly reduced to ashes. Every element
seemed to conspire toward its destruction; for, soon after the shock,
which happened near high-water, the tide rose in an instant forty feet,
and at the castle of Belem, which defended the entrance of the harbor,
fifty feet higher than had ever been known. Had it not subsided as
suddenly, the whole city would have been submerged. A large new quay
sunk to an unfathomable depth, with several hundreds of persons, not one
of the bodies of whom was afterward found. Before the sea thus came
rolling in like a mountain, the bar was seen dry from the shore.

The terrors of the surviving inhabitants were great and multiplied. Amid
the general confusion, and through a scarcity of hands, the dead bodies
could not be buried, and it was dreaded that a pestilence would ensue;
but from this apprehension they were relieved by the fire, by which
these bodies were for the greater part consumed. The fears of a famine
were more substantial; since, during the three days succeeding the
earthquake, an ounce of bread was literally worth a pound of gold.
Several of the corn magazines having been, however, fortunately saved
from the fire, a scanty supply of bread was afterward procured. Next
came the dread of the pillage and murder of those who had saved any of
their effects; and this happened in several instances, until examples
were made of the delinquents. The great shock was succeeded about noon
by another, when the walls of several houses which were still standing,
were seen to open, from the top to the bottom, more than a fourth of a
yard, and afterward to close again so exactly as not to leave any signs
of injury. Between the first and the eighth of November twenty-two
shocks were reckoned.

A boat on the river, about a mile distant from Lisbon, was heard by the
passengers to make a noise as if it had run aground, although then in
deep water: they at the same time saw the houses falling on both sides
of the river, in front of which, on the Lisbon side, the greater part of
a convent fell, burying many of its inmates beneath the ruins, while
others were precipitated into the river. The water was covered with
dust, blown by a strong northerly wind; and the sun entirely obscured.
On landing, they were driven by the overflowing of the waters to the
high grounds, whence they perceived the sea, at a mile’s distance,
rushing in like a torrent, although against wind and tide. The bed of
the Tagus was in many places raised to its surface; while ships were
driven from their anchors, and jostled together with such violence that
their crews did not know whether they were afloat or aground. The master
of a ship, who had great difficulty in reaching the port of Lisbon,
reported that, being fifty leagues at sea, the shock was there so
violent as to damage the deck of the vessel. He fancied he had mistaken
his reckoning, and struck on a rock.

The following observations, relative to this fatal earthquake, were made
at Colares, about twenty miles from Lisbon, and within two miles of the
sea. On the last day of October, the weather was clear, and remarkably
warm for the season. About four o’clock in the afternoon a fog arose,
proceeding from the sea, and covering the valleys, which was very
unusual at that season of the year. The wind shifted soon after to the
east, and the fog returned to the sea, collecting itself, and becoming
exceedingly thick. As the fog retired, the sea rose with a prodigious
roaring. On the first of November, the day broke with a serene sky, the
wind continuing at the east; but about nine o’clock the sun began to be
obscured; and about half an hour after a rumbling noise was heard,
resembling that of chariots, and increasing to such a degree, that at
length it became equal to the explosions of the largest artillery.
Immediately a shock of an earthquake was felt; and this was succeeded by
a second and a third, at the same time that several light flames of
fire, resembling the kindling of charcoal, issued from the mountains.
During these three shocks, the walls of the buildings moved from east to
west. In another spot, where the sea-coast could be descried, a great
quantity of smoke, very thick, but somewhat pale, issued from the hill
named the Fojo. This increased with the fourth shock, at noon, and
afterward continued to issue in a greater or less degree. At the instant
the subterraneous rumblings were heard, the smoke was observed to burst
forth at the Fojo; and its volume was constantly proportioned to the
noise. On visiting the spot whence it was seen to arise, no sign of fire
could be perceived near it. After the earthquake, several fountains were
dried up; while others, after undergoing great changes, returned to
their pristine state. In places where there had not been any water,
springs burst forth, and continued to flow; several of these spouted to
the hight of nearly twenty feet, and threw up sand of various colors. On
the hills, rocks were split, and the earth rent; while toward the coast
several large portions of rock were thrown from the eminences into the
sea.

[Illustration: EARTHQUAKE AT LISBON.]

At Oporto, the earthquake was felt with great violence. The river
continued to rise and fall five or six feet, for four hours; the houses
of the city were rocked as if by convulsions, and the earth was seen to
heave up. St. Ubes, twenty miles distant, was entirely swallowed up by
the repeated shocks, and by the vast surf of the sea. And at Cadiz it
was so violent, that, but for the great solidity of the buildings,
everything would have been destroyed. Those who had quitted the houses
and churches, seeking safety in the open air, had scarcely recovered
from their first terror, when they were plunged into a new alarm. At ten
minutes after eleven o’clock, a wave was seen coming from the sea at the
distance of eight miles, and at least sixty feet higher than usual. It
dashed against the west part of the city, which is very rocky. Although
its force was much broken by these rocks, it at length reached the
walls, and beat in the breastwork, which was sixty feet above the
ordinary level of the water, removing pieces of the fabric, of the
weight of eight or ten tuns, to the distance of forty or fifty yards. At
half past eleven came a second wave; and this was followed by four
others of equal magnitude. Others, but smaller, and gradually lessening,
continued at uncertain intervals until the evening. A considerable part
of the rampart was thrown down, and carried by the torrent above fifty
paces. Several persons perished on the causeway leading to the isle of
Lesu. The accounts brought to Cadiz reported that Seville had been much
damaged, and that a similar fate had attended St. Lucar and Cheres.
Conel was said to have been destroyed; and, indeed, with the exception
of the provinces of Catalonia, Aragon and Valencia, the effects of this
earthquake were felt throughout Spain.

At Madrid the shock was very sensibly felt soon after ten in the
morning, and lasted five or six minutes. At first the inhabitants
fancied they were seized with a swimming in the head; and, afterward,
that the houses were falling. In the churches the sensations were the
same, and the terror so great, that the people trod each other under
foot in getting out. Those who were within the towers were still more
affrighted, fancying every instant while the shock lasted, that they
were falling to the ground. It was not sensible to those who were in
carriages, and very little so to foot-passengers.

At Gibraltar it was felt about the same time as at Madrid, and began
with a tremulous motion of the earth, which lasted about half a minute.
A violent shock succeeded; and this again was followed by a second
tremulous motion, of the duration of five or six seconds. Another shock,
not so violent as the first, subsided gradually; and the whole lasted
about two minutes. Several of the guns on the batteries were seen to
rise, and others to sink, while the earth had an undulating motion. The
greater part of the garrison and inhabitants were seized with giddiness
and sickness: several fell prostrate; others were stupefied; and many
who were walking or riding, became sick, without being sensible of any
motion of the earth. Every fifteen minutes the sea rose six feet; and
then fell so low, that the boats and small vessels near the shore were
left aground, as were also numbers of small fish. The flux and reflux
lasted till next morning, having decreased gradually from two in the
afternoon.

In Africa, this earthquake was felt almost as severely as it had been in
Europe. A great part of the city of Algiers was destroyed. At Arzilla, a
town belonging to the kingdom of Fez, about ten in the morning, the sea
suddenly rose with such impetuosity, that it lifted up a vessel in the
bay, and impelled it with such force on the land, that it was shattered
in pieces; and a boat was found two musket-shots within land from the
sea. At Fez and Mequinez, great numbers of houses fell down, and a
multitude of people were buried beneath the ruins. At Morocco, similar
accidents occurred; and at Salle also, much damage was done. At Tangier
the earthquake began at ten in the morning, and lasted ten or twelve
minutes. At Tetuan it commenced at the same time, but was of less
duration; three of the shocks were so extremely violent, that it was
feared the whole city would be destroyed.

In the city of Funchal, in the island of Madeira, a shock of this
earthquake was felt at thirty-eight minutes past nine in the morning. It
was preceded by a rumbling noise in the air, like that of empty
carriages passing hastily over a stone pavement. The observer felt the
floor beneath him immediately to be agitated by a tremulous motion,
vibrating very quickly. The shock continued more than a minute; during
which space the vibrations, although continual, were twice very sensibly
weakened and increased in force. The increase after the first remission
of the shock was the most intense. During the whole of its continuance
it was accompanied by a noise in the air; and this lasted some seconds
after the motion of the earth had ceased, dying away like a peal of
distant thunder rolling through the air. At three-quarters past eleven,
the sea, which was quite calm, suddenly retired several paces; when
rising with a great swell, and without any noise, it as suddenly
advanced, overflowed the shore, and entered the city. It rose fifteen
feet perpendicularly above high-water mark, although the tide, which
there flows seven feet, was at half-ebb. The water immediately receded;
and after having fluctuated four or five times between high and low
water mark, it subsided, and the sea remained calm as before. In the
northern part of the island the inundation was more violent, the sea
there retiring above a hundred paces at first, and suddenly returning,
overflowed the shore, forcing open doors, breaking down the walls of
several magazines and storehouses, and leaving great quantities of fish
ashore and in the streets of the village of Machico. All this was the
effect of one rising of the sea, for it never afterward flowed high
enough to reach the high-water mark. It continued, however, to fluctuate
here much longer before it subsided than at Funchal; and in some places
further to the westward, it was hardly, if at all, perceptible.

These were the phenomena with which this remarkable earthquake was
attended, in those places where it was most violent. The effects of it,
however, reached to an immense distance; and were perceived chiefly by
the agitations of the waters, or some slight motion of the earth. Its
utmost boundaries to the south are unknown; the barbarousness of the
African nations rendering it impossible to procure any intelligence from
them, except where the effects were dreadful. On the north, however, we
are assured, that it reached as far as Norway and Sweden. In the former
kingdom, the waters of several rivers and lakes were violently agitated.
In the latter, shocks were felt in several provinces, and all the rivers
and lakes were strongly agitated, especially in Dalecarlia. The river
Dala suddenly overflowed its banks, and as suddenly retired. At the same
time, a lake at the distance of a league from it, and with which it had
no manner of communication, bubbled up with great violence. At Fahlun, a
town in Dalecarlia, several strong shocks were felt.

In many places of Germany the effects of this earthquake were very
perceptible; but in Holland, the agitations were still more remarkable.
At Alphen on the Rhine, between Leyden and Woerden, in the afternoon of
the first of November, the waters were agitated to such a violent
degree, that buoys were broken from their chains, large vessels snapped
their cables, small ones were thrown out of the water upon the land, and
others lying on land were set afloat. At Amsterdam, about eleven in the
forenoon, the air being perfectly calm, the waters were suddenly
agitated in the canals, so that several boats broke loose; chandeliers
were observed to vibrate in the churches; but no motion of the earth, or
concussion of any building was observed. At Haerlem, in the forenoon,
for nearly four minutes, not only the waters in the rivers, canals, &c.,
but also all kinds of fluids in smaller quantities, as in coolers, tubs,
&c., were surprisingly agitated, and dashed over the sides, though no
motion was perceptible in the vessels themselves. In these small
quantities also the fluid apparently ascended prior to its turbulent
motion; and in many places, even the rivers and canals rose one foot
perpendicularly.

The agitation of the waters was also perceived in various parts of Great
Britain and Ireland. At Barlborough, in Derbyshire, between eleven and
twelve in the forenoon, in a boat-house on the west side of a large body
of water, called Pibley Dam, supposed to cover at least thirty acres of
land, was heard a surprising and terrible noise; a large swell of water
came in a current from the south, and rose two feet on the sloped
dam-head at the north end of the water. It then subsided, but returned
again immediately, though with less violence. The water was thus
agitated for three-quarters of an hour; but the current grew every time
weaker and weaker, till at last it entirely ceased.

At Busbridge, in Surrey, at half an hour after ten in the morning, the
weather being remarkably still, without the least wind, in a canal
nearly seven hundred feet long, and fifty-eight in breadth, with a small
spring constantly running through it, a very unusual noise was heard at
the east end, and the water there observed to be in great agitation. It
raised itself in a heap or ridge in the middle; and this heap extended
lengthwise about thirty yards, rising between two and three feet above
the usual level. After this, the ridge heeled or vibrated toward the
north side of the canal, with great force, and flowed above eight feet
over the grass walk on that side. On its return back into the canal, it
again ridged in the middle, and then heeled with yet greater force to
the south side, and flowed over its grass walk. During this latter
motion, the bottom on the north side was left dry for several feet. This
appearance lasted for about a quarter of an hour, after which the water
became smooth and quiet as before. During the whole time, the sand at
the bottom was thrown up and mixed with the water; and there was a
continual noise like that of water turning a mill. At Cobham, in Surrey,
Dunstall, in Suffolk, Earsy Court, in Berkshire, Eatonbridge, Kent, and
many other places, the waters were variously agitated.

At Eyam bridge, in Derbyshire Peak, the overseer of the lead mines,
sitting in his writing-room, about eleven o’clock, felt a sudden shock,
which very sensibly raised him up in his chair, and caused several
pieces of plaster to drop from the sides of the room. The roof was so
violently shaken, that he imagined the engine-shaft had been falling in.
Upon this he immediately ran to see what was the matter, but found
everything in perfect safety. At this time two miners were employed in
carting, or drawing along the drifts of the mines, the ore and other
materials to be raised up at the shafts. The drift in which they were
working was about a hundred and twenty yards deep, and the space from
one end to the other fifty yards or upward. The miner at the end of the
drift had just loaded his cart, and was drawing it along; but he was
suddenly surprised by a shock, which so terrified him, that he
immediately quitted his employment, and ran to the west end of the drift
to his partner, who was no less terrified than himself. They durst not
attempt to climb the shaft, lest that should be running in upon them:
but while they were consulting what means they should take for their
safety, they were surprised by a second shock, more violent than the
first; which frightened them so much, that they both ran precipitately
to the other end of the drift. They then went down to another miner, who
worked about twelve yards below them. He told them that the violence of
the second shock had been so great, that it caused the rocks to grind
upon one another. His account was interrupted by a third shock, which,
after an interval of four or five minutes, was succeeded by a fourth,
and, about the same space of time after, by a fifth; none of which were
so violent as the second. They heard, after every shock, a loud rumbling
in the bowels of the earth, which continued about half a minute,
gradually descending, or seeming to remove to a greater distance.

At Shireburn Castle, Oxfordshire, a little after ten in the morning, a
very strange motion was observed in the water of a moat which
encompassed the building. There was a pretty thick fog, not a breath of
air, and the surface of the water all over the moat was smooth as a
looking-glass, except at one corner, where it flowed into the shore, and
retired again successively, in a surprising manner. How it began to move
is uncertain, as it was not then observed. The flux and reflux, when
seen were quite regular. Every flood began gently, its velocity
increasing by degrees, until at length it rushed in with great
impetuosity, till it had attained its full hight. Having remained for a
little time stationary, it then retired, ebbing gently at first, but
afterward sinking away with great swiftness. At every flux the whole
body of water seemed to be violently thrown against the bank; but
neither during the time of the flux, nor that of the reflux, did there
appear even the least wrinkle of a wave on the other parts of the moat.
Lord Parker, who had observed this motion, being desirous to know
whether it was universal over the moat, sent a person to the other
corner of it, at the same time that he himself stood about twenty-five
yards from him to examine whether the water moved there or not. He could
not perceive any motion there; but another person, who went to the
north-east corner of the moat, diagonally opposite to his lordship,
found it as considerable there as where he was. His lordship imagining,
that in all probability the water at the corner diagonally opposite to
where he was would sink as that by him rose, ordered the person to
signify by calling out, when the water by him began to sink, and when to
rise. This he did; but to his lordship’s great surprise, immediately
after the water began to rise at his own end, he heard the voice calling
that it began to rise with him also; and in the same manner he heard
that it was sinking at that end, soon after he perceived it to sink by
himself. A pond just below was agitated in a similar manner; but the
risings and sinkings happened at different times from those at the pond
where Lord Parker stood.

At White Rock, in Glamorganshire, about two hours’ ebb of tide, and near
a quarter to seven in the evening, a vast quantity of water rushed up
with a great noise, floated two large vessels, the least of them above
two hundred tuns’ burden, broke their moorings, drove them across the
river, and nearly overset them. The whole rise and fall of this
extraordinary body of water did not last above ten minutes, nor was it
felt in any other part of the river, so that it seemed to have gushed
out of the earth at that place.

Similar instances occurred at Loch Lomond and Loch Ness, in Scotland. At
Kinsale, in Ireland, and all along the coast to the westward, many
similar phenomena were observed.

Shocks were also perceived in several parts of France, as at Bayonne,
Bourdeaux and Lyons; and commotions of the waters were observed at
Angoulesme, Belleville, Havre de Grace, &c., but not attended with the
remarkable circumstances above mentioned.

These are the most striking phenomena with which the earthquake of the
first of November, 1755, was attended on the surface of the earth. Those
which happened below ground can not be known but by the changes observed
in springs, &c., which were in many places very remarkable.

At Tangier, all the fountains were dried up, so that there was no water
to be had till night. A very remarkable change was observed in the
medicinal waters of Toplitz, a village in Bohemia, famous for its baths.
These waters were discovered in the year 762; from which time the
principal spring had constantly thrown out hot water in the same
quantity, and of the same quality. On the morning of the earthquake,
between eleven and twelve, in the forenoon, this principal spring cast
forth such a quantity of water, that in the space of half an hour all
the baths ran over. About half an hour before this great increase of the
water, the spring flowed turbid and muddy; then, having stopped entirely
for a minute, it broke forth again with prodigious violence, driving
before it a considerable quantity of reddish ocher. After this, it
became clear, and flowed as pure as before. It still continued to do so,
but the water was in greater quantity, and hotter, than before the
earthquake. At Angoulesme, in France, a subterraneous noise, resembling
thunder, was heard; and presently after, the earth opened, and
discharged a torrent of water, mixed with red sand. Most of the springs
in the neighborhood sunk in such a manner, that for some time they were
thought to be quite dry. In Britain, no considerable alteration was
observed in the earth, except that, near the lead mine above-mentioned,
in Derbyshire, a cleft was observed about a foot deep, six inches wide,
and one hundred and fifty yards in length.

At sea the shocks of this earthquake were felt most violently. Off St.
Lucar, the captain of the Nancy frigate felt his ship so violently
shaken, that he thought she had struck the ground; but, heaving the
lead, he found she was in a great depth of water. Captain Clark, from
Denia, in north latitude thirty-six degrees, twenty-four minutes,
between nine and ten in the morning, had his ship shaken and strained as
if she had struck upon a rock, so that the seams of the deck opened, and
the compass was overturned in the binnacle. Tho master of a vessel bound
to the American islands, being in north latitude twenty-five degrees,
west longitude forty degrees, and writing in his cabin, heard a violent
noise as he imagined, in the steerage; and while he was asking what the
matter was, the ship was put into a strange agitation, and seemed as if
she had been suddenly jerked up, and suspended by a rope fastened to the
mast-head. He immediately started up with great terror and astonishment,
and looking out at the cabin-window, saw land, as he took it to be, at
the distance of about a mile. Coming upon the deck, the land was no more
to be seen, but he perceived a violent current cross the ship’s way to
the leeward. In about a minute, this current returned with great
impetuosity; and at a league’s distance, he saw three craggy-pointed
rocks throwing up waters of various colors, resembling fire. This
phenomenon, in about two minutes, ended in a black cloud, which ascended
very heavily. After it had risen above the horizon, no rocks were to be
seen; though the cloud, still ascending, was long visible, the weather
being extremely clear. Between nine and ten in the morning, another
ship, forty leagues west of St. Vincent, was so strongly agitated, that
the anchors, which were lashed, bounced up, and the men were thrown a
foot and a half perpendicularly up from the deck. Immediately after
this, the ship sunk in the water as low as the main-chains. The lead
showed a great depth of water, and the line was tinged of a yellow
color, and smelt of sulphur. The shock lasted about ten minutes; but
they felt smaller ones for the space of twenty-four hours.


            EARTHQUAKES IN SICILY, AND IN THE TWO CALABRIAS.

These earthquakes began on the fifth of February, 1783, and continued
until the latter end of the May following, doing infinite damage, and
exhibiting at Messina, in the parts of Sicily nearest to the continent,
and in the two Calabrias, a variety of phenomena. The part of the
Calabrian provinces most affected by this heavy calamity, lies between
the thirty-eighth and thirty-ninth degrees of latitude, being the
extreme point of the continent; and the greatest force of the
earthquakes was exerted at the foot of the particular mountains of the
Apennines, named Monte Deio, Monte Sacro and Monte Caulone, extending
westward to the Tyrrhene sea. The towns, villages and farm-houses,
nearest to these mountains, whether situated on the hills, or in the
plains, were totally ruined by the first shock, which happened about
noon; and there the destruction of lives was the greatest. The towns
still more remote, were, however, greatly damaged by the subsequent
shocks, particularly those of the seventh, twenty-sixth and
twenty-eighth of February, and that of the first of March. The earth was
in a constant tremor, and its motions were various, being either
vortical, horizontal or oscillatory, that is, by pulsations or beatings,
from the bottom upward. This variety increased the apprehensions of the
unfortunate inhabitants, who momentarily expected that the earth would
open beneath their feet, and swallow them up. The rains had been
continual and violent, often accompanied by lightning and furious gusts
of wind. There were many openings and cracks in the earth; and several
hills had been lowered, while others were quite level. In the plains,
the chasms were so deep, that many roads were rendered impassable. Huge
mountains were severed, and portions of them driven into the valleys,
which were thus filled up. The course of several rivers was changed; and
many springs of water appeared in localities which had before been
perfectly dry.

From the city of Amantea, situated on the coast of the Tyrrhene sea, in
lower Calabria, proceeding along the western coast to Cape Spartivento,
in upper Calabria, and thence along the eastern coast to Cape Alice, a
part of lower Calabria, on the Ionian sea, the towns and villages,
amounting to nearly four hundred, whether on the coast or inland, were
either totally destroyed, or suffered greatly. At Casal Nuovo, the
Princess Gerace, and upward of four thousand of the inhabitants, lost
their lives. At Bagnara, the number of dead amounted to upward of three
thousand; and Radicina and Palmi experienced a similar loss. The total
amount of the mortality occasioned by these earthquakes, in Sicily and
the two Calabrias, was, agreeably to the official returns, thirty-two
thousand, three hundred and sixty-seven; but Sir William Hamilton
thought it still greater, and carries his estimate to forty thousand,
including foreigners. On the first shock of the earthquake, on the fifth
of February, the inhabitants of Scylla escaped from their houses, built
on the rock, and, following the example of their prince, took shelter on
the sea-shore. By this shock the sea had been raised and agitated so
violently, that much damage had been done on the point of the Faro of
Messina; but here it acted with still greater violence, for, during the
night, an immense wave, which was falsely represented to have been
boiling hot, and to have scalded many persons on its rising to a great
hight, flowed furiously three miles inland, and swept off in its return
two thousand, four hundred and seventy-three of the inhabitants, with
the prince at their head, who were either at that time on the strand, or
in boats near the shore.

The shocks felt since the commencement of these formidable earthquakes,
amounted to several hundreds; and among the most violent may be reckoned
the one which happened on the twenty-eighth of March. It affected most
of the higher part of upper Calabria, and the inferior part of lower
Calabria, being equally tremendous with the first. Indeed, these shocks
were the only ones sensibly felt in Naples. With relation to the former,
two singular phenomena are recorded. At the distance of about three
miles from the ruined city of Oppido, in upper Calabria, was a hill,
having a sandy and clayey soil, nearly four hundred feet in hight, and
nearly nine hundred feet in circumference at its basis. This hill is
said to have been carried to the distance of about four miles from the
spot where it stood, into a plain called _Campo di Bassano_. At the same
time, the hill on which the city of Oppido stood, and which extended
about three miles, divided into two parts: being situated between two
rivers, its ruins filled up the valley, and stopped their course,
forming two large lakes, which augmented daily. The accounts from Sicily
were of a most alarming nature. The greatest part of the fine city of
Messina was destroyed by the shock of the fifth of February, and what
remained was greatly injured by the subsequent shocks. The quay in the
port had sunk considerably, and was in some places more than a foot
beneath the water. That superb building, the palazzata, which gave the
port a more magnificent appearance than any other in Europe could boast,
was entirely thrown down; and the lazaretto greatly damaged. The citadel
suffered little; but the cathedral was destroyed, and the tower at the
point of the entrance of the harbor much damaged. The wave which had
done so much mischief at Scylla, had passed over the point of land at
the Faro, and swept away twenty-four persons. The accounts from Melazzo,
Patti, Terra di Santa Lucia, Castro Reale, and from the island of
Lipari, were very distressing, but the damage done there by the
earthquakes not so considerable as at Messina.

Sir William Hamilton, from the limited boundaries of these earthquakes,
was persuaded that they were caused by some great operation of nature,
of a volcanic kind. To ascertain this, he began his tour by visiting the
parts of the coasts of the two Calabrias which had suffered most from
this severe visitation. He everywhere came to ruined towns and houses,
the inhabitants of which were in sheds, many of them built on such
insalubrious spots, that an epidemic had ensued. These unfortunate
people agreed that every shock they had felt, seemed to come with a
rumbling noise from the westward, beginning usually with the horizontal
motion, and ending with the vortical (or whirling) motion, which last
had ruined most of the buildings. It had also been generally observed,
that, before a shock, the clouds seemed to be fixed and motionless; and
that, after a heavy shower of rain, a shock quickly followed. By the
violence of some of the shocks, many persons had been thrown down; and
several of the peasants described the motion of the earth as so violent,
that the tops of the largest trees almost touched the ground from side
to side. During a shock, the oxen and horses, they said, kept their legs
wide asunder, to prevent being thrown down, and gave evident signs of
being sensible of the approach of each shock. Being thus warned, the
neighing of a horse, the braying of an ass, or the cackling of a goose,
drove them from their temporary huts.

From Monteleone, Sir William descended into the plain, and passed many
towns and villages in a ruined state: the city of Mileto, lying in a
bottom, was totally destroyed, without a house standing. Among the many
examples afforded by these earthquakes, of animals being able to live a
long time without food, was that of two hogs, which had remained buried
under a heap of ruins at Soriano for forty-two days, and were dug out
alive. He had frequent opportunities for observing that the habitations
situated on high grounds, having a soil of a gritty sandstone, somewhat
like granite, but without its consistence, suffered less than those in
the plain, the soil of which is a sandy clay. The latter were
universally leveled with the ground. During the first shock, he was
told, a fountain of water, mixed with sand, had been forced to a
considerable hight: prior to this phenomenon, the river was dry, but it
soon returned and overflowed its banks. The other rivers in the plain
underwent the like vicissitudes; to account for which, Sir William
supposes the first impulsion of the earthquake to have come from the
bottom upward; and that such was the fact, the inhabitants attested. The
surface of the plain having suddenly risen, the rivers, which are not
deep, would naturally disappear; and the plain seeking with violence its
former level, the rivers would necessarily return and overflow, at the
same time that the sudden depression of the boggy grounds would as
naturally force out the water which lay hidden beneath the surface.

It had been stated, in the reports made to the government, that two
tenements, named Macini and Vaticano, had, by the effect of the
earthquake, changed their situation. In this fact Sir William agrees,
and he accounts for it in the following manner. They were situated in a
valley surrounded by high grounds, and the surface of the earth which
had been removed, had probably been long undermined by the little
rivulets which flow from the mountains, and which were in full view on
the bare spot the tenements had deserted. He conjectures besides, that,
the earthquake having opened some depositions of rain-water in the
clayey hills which surrounded the valley, the water, mixing with the
loose soil, and taking its course suddenly through the undermined
surface, had lifted it up, together with the large olive and mulberry
trees, and a thatched cottage, floating the entire piece of ground, with
all its vegetation, about a mile down the valley, where he saw it, with
most of the trees erect. These two tenements occupied a space of ground
about a mile in length, and half a mile in breadth. There were in the
vicinity several deep cracks in the earth, not one of which was then
more than a foot in breadth; but Sir William was credibly assured, that,
during the earthquake, one had opened wide, and had swallowed up an ox
and nearly a hundred goats. In this valley he saw hollows, in the form
of inverted cones, from which water and sand had been ejected violently
at the time of the earthquakes, similar to those which had been pointed
out to him at Rosarno. As well at the latter place, as in every ruined
town he visited, an interesting remark was made to him, namely, that the
male dead were generally found under the ruins, in the attitude of
struggling against the danger; but that the attitude of the females was
usually with the hands clasped over the head, as if giving themselves up
to despair, unless they had children near them: in this case they were
always found clasping them in their arms, or in some attitude which
indicated their anxious care to protect them. How striking an instance
of maternal tenderness!

Sir William traveled four days in the plain, in the midst of
indescribable misery. Such was the force of the first shock, on the
fifth of February, that the inhabitants of the towns were buried in an
instant beneath the ruins of their houses. Of the population of the town
of Polistene, which was badly situated between two rivers, wont to
overflow their banks, twenty-one hundred individuals perished out of six
thousand. It was built near a ravine of great depth; and, by the violent
motion of the earth, two huge portions of the ground on which a
considerable part of the town, consisting of several hundreds of houses,
stood, were detached into the ravine, and nearly across it, to the
distance of about half a mile from their original position. What was
most extraordinary, many of the inhabitants of these houses, who had
taken this singular leap in them, were dug out alive, and several
unhurt. Terra Nuova lost three-fourths of a population of sixteen
hundred inhabitants; and near to this town and to the ravine, many acres
of land covered with trees and corn-fields had been detached and thrown
into the latter, often without having been overturned, insomuch that the
trees and crops were growing as well as if they had been planted there.
Other such pieces of ground were lying in the bottom, in an inclined
situation; and others, again, were quite overturned. Two immense
portions of land, having been detached opposite to each other, filled
the valley, and stopped the course of the river, the waters of which
formed a great lake.

Having walked over the ruins of Oppido, Sir William descended into the
ravine, which he carefully examined. Here he saw the wonderful force of
the earthquake, which had produced exactly the same effects as in the
ravine of Terra Nuova, but on a scale infinitely greater. The enormous
masses of the plain, detached from each side of the ravine, lay in
confused heaps, forming real mountains; and, having stopped the course
of two rivers, great lakes were formed. He occasionally met with a
detached piece of the surface of the plain, many acres in extent, with
the large oaks and olive-trees, having lupines and corn beneath them,
growing as well, and in as good order at the bottom of the ravine, as
their companions from which they had been separated, were in the plain,
at least five hundred feet higher, and at the distance of about
three-quarters of a mile. Entire vineyards, which had taken a similar
journey, were in the same order in the bottom. In another part of the
ravine was a mountain, composed of a clayey soil, which was probably a
portion of the plain, detached by an earthquake at some former period:
it was in hight about two hundred and fifty feet, and about four hundred
feet in diameter at its basis. It was well attested, Sir William
observes, that this mountain traveled down the ravine nearly four miles,
having been put in motion by the first shock. The abundance of rain
which fell at that time; the great weight of the newly detached pieces
of the plain, which were heaped up at its back; the nature of its soil;
and particularly its situation on a declivity: these, in his opinion,
satisfactorily account for this phenomenon. The Prince of Cariati showed
him two girls, one of the age of about sixteen years, who had remained
eleven days without food under the ruins of a house in Oppido; and the
other, about eleven years of age, who had been under the same
circumstances six days, but in a very confined and distressing posture.

Sir William describes the port of Messina, and the town, in their
half-ruined state, when viewed by moonlight, as strikingly picturesque.
On landing, he was assured by several fishermen, that, during the
earthquake of the fifth of February, at night the sand near the sea was
hot, and that in many parts they saw fire issue from the earth. This had
been often repeated to him in the Calabrian plain; and the idea he
entertained was, that the exhalations which issued during the violent
commotions of the earth, were full of electric fire, just as the smoke
of volcanoes is constantly observed to be during violent eruptions; for
he did not, during any part of his tour, perceive an indication of
volcanic matter having issued from the fissures of the earth. He was,
therefore, convinced that the whole damage had been done by exhalations
and vapors only. In this city, where they had so long an experience of
earthquakes, he was told, that all animals and birds are, in a greater
or less degree, more sensible of an approaching shock of an earthquake
than any human being; but that geese, above all, were the soonest and
the most alarmed at the approach of a shock: if in the water, they quit
it immediately, and they can not be driven into it for some time after.

The force of the earthquakes, although very violent at Messina, and at
Reggio, on the opposite side of the strait, was not to be compared to
that which was felt in the plain. In the former city the mortality did
not exceed seven hundred, of a population of thirty thousand. A curious
circumstance happened there also, to prove that animals can sustain life
for a long time without food. Two mules belonging to the Duke of
Belviso, remained under a heap of ruins, the one twenty-two, and the
other twenty-three days: for some days after they refused their food,
but drank plentifully, and finally recovered. There were numberless
instances of dogs remaining many days in the same situation; and a hen,
belonging to the British vice-consul, having been closely shut up
beneath the ruins of his house, was taken out on the twenty-second day,
and recovered, although at first it showed but little signs of life:
like the mules, it did not eat for some days, but drank freely. From
these instances, and from those above related, of the girls at Oppido,
and the hogs at Soriano, as well as from several others of the same
kind, it may be concluded, that long fasting is always attended with
great thirst, and a total loss of appetite.

A circumstance worth recording, and which was observed throughout the
whole coast of the part of the Calabrian provinces which had been most
affected by the earthquakes, was, that a description of small fishes,
named =cicirelli=, resembling what in England are called white-bait, but
larger, and which usually lie at the bottom of the sea, buried in the
sand, were, from the commencement of these earthquakes, and for a
considerable time after, taken near the surface, and in such abundance
as to become the common food of the poorer sort of people; whereas,
before these events, they were rare, and reckoned among the greatest
delicacies. Fishes in general having been taken, wherever the effects of
the shocks had reached, in much greater abundance, and with greater
facility than before, Sir William conjectures, either that the bottom of
the sea may have been heated by the volcanic fire beneath it, or that
the continual tremor of the earth had driven the fishes out of their
strongholds, in the same way as an angler, when he wants a bait, obliges
the worms to come out of a turf on the river-side, by trampling on it
with his feet, which motion never fails of its effect.

The commandant of the citadel of Messina, assured him, that on the fatal
fifth of February, and the three following days, the sea, at the
distance of about a quarter of a mile from that fortress, rose and
boiled in a most extraordinary manner, and with a horrid and alarming
noise, while the water in the other parts of the Faro was perfectly
calm. This appeared to him to point out exhalations or eruptions from
cracks at the bottom of the sea, which were probably made during the
violence of the earthquakes; and to these phenomena he ascribes a
volcanic origin. He thus attempts to explain the nature of the
formidable wave which was represented as boiling hot, and which, as has
been already noticed, was so fatal to the inhabitants of Scylla.

Sir William concludes by remarking, that the local earthquakes here
described, appear to have been caused by the same kind of matter as that
which gave birth to the Æolian or Lipari isles. He conjectures that an
opening may have been made at the bottom of the sea, most probably
between Stromboli and upper Calabria; for from that quarter, it was
agreed by all, the subterraneous noises seemed to proceed. He adds, that
the foundation of a new island, or volcano, may have been laid, although
it may be ages, which to nature are but moments, before it shall be
completed, and appear above the surface of the sea. Nature is ever
active; but her acts are in general carried on so very slowly, as
scarcely to be perceptible to the mortal view, or recorded in the very
short space of what we call history, let it be ever so ancient. It is
probable, also, he observes, that the whole of the destruction he has
described, may have simply proceeded from the exhalations of confined
vapors, generated by the fermentation of such minerals as produce
volcanoes, which would escape where they met with the least resistance,
and would consequently affect the plain in a greater degree than the
high and more solid grounds by which it is surrounded.

Count Francesco Ippolito, in speaking of the last great shock of the
twenty-eighth of March, as it affected the Calabrian territory, is
persuaded that it arose from an internal fire in the bowels of the
earth, for it took place precisely in the mountains which cross the neck
of the peninsula formed by the two rivers, the Lameto and the Corace,
the former of which flows into the gulf of St. Euphemia, and the latter
into the Ionian sea. All the phenomena it displayed, made this evident.
Like the other shocks, it came in a south-west direction: the earth at
first undulated, then shook, and finally rocked to and fro to such a
degree, that it was scarcely possible to stand. It was preceded by a
terrible groan from beneath the ground; and this groan, which was of the
same duration with the shock, terminated with a loud noise, like that of
the explosion of a mine. These thunderings accompanied not only the
shock of that night, and of the succeeding day, but likewise all the
others which were afterward felt; at the same time that the earth was
continually shaken, at first every five minutes, and subsequently each
quarter of an hour. During the night, flames were seen to issue from the
ground in the neighborhood of Reggio, toward the sea, to which the
explosion extended, insomuch that many of the peasants ran away through
fear. These flames issued precisely from a spot where some days before
an extraordinary heat had been perceived. After this great shock there
appeared in the air, in a slanting direction, and toward the cast, a
whitish flame, resembling electric fire: it was seen for the space of
two hours.

Several hills were either divided or laid level; and within the surface
of the earth apertures were made, from which a great quantity of water,
proceeding either from subterraneous concentrations, or from the rivers
adjacent to the ground thus broken up, spouted for several hours. From
one of these openings, in the territory of Borgia, and about a mile from
the sea, there issued a large quantity of salt water, which for several
days imitated the motions of the sea. Warm water likewise issued from
the apertures made in the plains of Maida. In all the sandy parts, where
the explosion took place, there were observed, from distance to
distance, apertures in the form of an inverted cone, emitting water, and
which seemed to prove the escape of a flake of electric fire. Amid the
various phenomena which either preceded or followed this particular
shock, the following are well deserving of notice. The water of a well
at Maida, which was of an excellent quality, was affected, just before
the shock, with so disgusting a sulphurous flavor, that it could not
even be smelled. On the other hand, at Catanzaro, the water of a well,
which before could not be used, on account of its possessing a strong
smell of calcination, became drinkable. For a long time before the earth
shook, the sea was considerably agitated, so as to terrify the
fishermen, at the same time that there was not a breath of wind. On the
side of Italy, the volcanoes had not emitted any eruptions for a
considerable time before; but in the same way as, during the first great
shock, Etna was in flames, so Stromboli emitted fire during this last.


                        EARTHQUAKES IN PERU, &c.

South America has been at all times very subject to earthquakes; and it
is remarkable, that the city of Lima, the capital of Peru, situated in
about twelve degrees of south latitude, although scarcely ever visited
by tempests, and equally unacquainted with rain as with thunder and
lightning, has been singularly exposed to their fury. They, indeed,
happen so frequently there, that the inhabitants are under continual
apprehensions of being, from their suddenness and violence, buried
beneath the ruins of their houses. Still they have their presages, one
of the principal of which is a rumbling noise in the bowels of the
earth, heard about a minute before the shocks are felt, and seeming to
pervade all the subterraneous adjacent parts. This is followed by the
dismal howlings of the dogs, who seem to give notice of the approaching
danger; while the beasts of burden, in their passage through the
streets, stop suddenly, as it were by a natural instinct, and seek the
attitude which may best secure them from falling. On these portents, the
terrified inhabitants flee from their houses into the streets, forming
large assemblies, in the midst of which cries of children are blended
with the lamentations of the females, whose agonizing prayers to the
saints increase the common fear and confusion. In a word, the entire
city exhibits a dreadful scene of consternation and horror.

Since the establishment of the Spaniards in Peru, the first earthquake
in this capital happened in 1582; but the damage it did was much less
considerable than that of some of those which succeeded. Six years after
Lima was again visited by an earthquake, the results of which were so
dreadful, that it is still solemnly commemorated every year. In 1609, a
third convulsion threw down many houses: and on the twenty-seventh of
November, 1630, so much damage was done by an earthquake, that in
acknowledgment of the city not having been entirely demolished, a
festival is also on that day annually celebrated. On the third of
November, 1654, the most stately edifices in Lima, and a great number of
houses, were destroyed by a similar event; but the inhabitants having
had timely presages, withdrew themselves from their houses, insomuch
that few perished. In 1678, another dreadful concussion took place.

Among the most tremendous earthquakes with which the Peruvian capital
has been visited, may be reckoned that which happened on the
twenty-eighth of October, 1687. The first shock was at four in the
morning, when several of the finest public buildings and houses were
destroyed, with the loss of many lives. This was, however, merely a
prelude to what followed; for, two hours after, a second shock was felt,
with such impetuous concussions, that all was laid in ruins, and every
description of property lost. During this second shock the sea retired
considerably, and then returned in mountainous waves, entirely
overwhelming Callao, the seaport of Lima, distant five miles, as well as
the adjacent country, together with the wretched inhabitants. From that
time six other earthquakes were felt at Lima, prior to that of 1746,
which likewise happened on the twenty-eighth of October, at half past
ten at night. The early concussions were so violent, that in somewhat
more than three minutes, the greater part (if not all) of the buildings
in the city, were destroyed, burying under their ruins such of the
inhabitants as had not made sufficient haste into the streets and
squares, the only places of safety. At length the horrible effects of
the first shock ceased; but the tranquillity was of short duration, the
concussions swiftly succeeding each other. The fort of Callao was
dilapidated; but what this building suffered from the earthquake, was
inconsiderable when compared with the dreadful catastrophe which
followed. The sea, as is usual on such occasions, receding to a
considerable distance, returned in mountainous waves, foaming with the
violence of the agitation, and suddenly buried Callao and the
neighboring country in its flood. This, however, was not entirely
effected by the first swell of the waves; for the sea, retiring still
further, returned with greater impetuosity, and covered not only the
buildings, but also the lofty walls of the fortress: so that what had
even escaped the first inundation, was totally overwhelmed by these
succeeding mountainous waves. Of twenty-three ships and vessels of light
burden, then in the harbor, nineteen were sunk; and the four others,
among which was a frigate, named the San Firmin, were carried by the
force of the waves to a considerable distance up the country. This
terrible inundation extended, as well as the earthquake, to other parts
of the coast, and several towns underwent the fate of Lima. The number
of persons who perished in that capital, within two days after the
earthquake commenced, on an estimate of the bodies found, amounted to
thirteen hundred, beside the wounded and maimed, many of whom survived
their tortures but a short time.

The earthquake of Jamaica, in 1692, was one of the most dreadful history
has had to record. In the space of two minutes it destroyed the town of
Port Royal, and sunk the houses in a gulf forty fathoms deep. It was
attended with a hollow, rumbling noise, like that of thunder. In less
than a minute, the greater part of the houses, on one side of the
streets, were, with their inhabitants, sunk beneath the water, while
those on the other side were thrown into heaps, the sandy soil on which
they were built rising like the waves of the sea, and suddenly
overthrowing them on its subsidence. The water of the wells was
discharged with a most vehement agitation; and the sea was equally
turbulent, bursting its mounds, and deluging whatever came in its way.
The fissures in the earth were in some places so great, that one of the
streets appeared of more than twice its original breadth. In many places
the earth opened and closed again; and this agitation continued for a
considerable time. Several hundreds of these openings were to be seen at
the same moment: in some of them the wretched inhabitants were swallowed
up; while in others, the earth suddenly closing, caught them by the
middle, and thus crushed them to death. Other openings, still more
dreadful, swallowed up entire streets; while others, again, spouted up
cataracts of water, drowning those whom the earthquake had spared. The
whole was attended with a most noisome stench. The thunderings of the
distant falling mountains, the sky overcast with a dusky gloom, and the
crash of the falling buildings, gave unspeakable horror to the scene.
This dreadful calamity having ceased, the whole island exhibited a scene
of desolation. Few of the houses which had not been swallowed up were
left standing; and whatever grew on the plantations shared in the
universal ruin. These cultivated spots were now converted into large
pools of water, which when dried up by the sun, left so many plains of
barren sand. The greater part of the rivers had, during the earthquake,
been choked by the falling in of the detached masses of mountains; and
it was not until some time after, that they made themselves new
channels. The mountains seem to have been more particularly exposed to
the force of the first tremendous shock; and it was conjectured that the
principal seat of the concussion was among them. Such of the inhabitants
as were saved, sought shelter on board the ships in the harbor, and
remained there above two months, the shocks continuing during that
interval with more or less violence every day.


                        EARTHQUAKE IN VENEZUELA.

On the twenty-sixth of March, 1812, between four and five in the
afternoon, Venezuela was visited by one of those tremendous earthquakes
which now and then ruin whole provinces. During a minute and fifteen
seconds the earth was convulsed in every direction, and nearly twenty
thousand persons fell victims. The towns of Caraccas, La Guayra,
Mayquetia, Merida and San Felipe, were totally destroyed. Barquisimeto,
Valencia, La Vittoria, and others, suffered considerably. This
catastrophe happened on Holy Thursday, a day when the Romish church
peculiarly commemorates the sufferings of our blessed Redeemer, and at
the very hour when the people were crowding into the churches to attend
the processions which are usual in Roman Catholic countries, and to see
the representation of our Saviour led to the cross. Troops are placed on
such occasions at the entrance of the churches to follow the procession;
and many churches, and the principal barracks at Caraccas, being thrown
down, there was a considerable number of soldiers killed, and many
thousand persons crushed under their ruins. The arms and ammunition
destined for the defense of the country were buried in a similar manner;
and what was worse, an unconquerable enemy to the independence of
Venezuela seemed to raise its head from among the ruins—that religious
prejudice which the earthquake inspired. In an era less remarkable, a
mere convulsion of nature would have had no influence on a new
government; but, notwithstanding the prosperity Venezuela then enjoyed,
the seeds of discontent had fallen on one class of the community. The
principles which formed the basis of the new constitution were
democratical, and it had been necessary to deprive the priesthood of
some of their privileges, which of course created enmity in their minds
to the present government. Immediately after the earthquake, the priests
proclaimed, that the Almighty condemned the revolution: they denounced
his wrath on all who favored it; and a counter-revolution, attended by
great bloodshed, was the unhappy consequence.


              -------------------------------------------


               CONNECTION OF EARTHQUAKES WITH VOLCANOES.


                  ------------------------------------

                            ISLAND OF JAVA.

The connection of earthquakes with volcanoes has been already noticed;
and a remarkable occurrence of this nature happened in Java. Papandayang
was formerly one of the largest volcanoes in that island; but in the
month of August, 1772, the greatest part of it was, after a short but
severe combustion, swallowed up by a dreadful convulsion of the earth.
This event was preceded by an uncommonly luminous cloud, attended with
flashes of light, by which the mountain was completely enveloped, and
which so terrified the inhabitants dwelling at the foot and on its
declivities, that they betook themselves to flight. Before they could
all save themselves, however, the mountain began to give way, and the
greater part of it actually _fell in_ and disappeared in the earth. At
the same time, a tremendous noise was heard, resembling the discharge of
the heaviest cannon; while the immense quantities of volcanic substances
which were thrown out, and spread in every direction, extended the
effects of the explosion through the space of many miles.

It was estimated that an extent of ground, belonging to the mountain
itself, and to its immediate environs, fifteen miles in length, and six
in breadth, was by this commotion swallowed up in the bowels of the
earth. Six weeks after the catastrophe, persons who were sent to examine
the condition of the surrounding territory, reported, that it was
impossible to approach the mountain, on account of the heat of the
substances which covered its circumference, and which were piled on each
other to the hight of three feet. It has been reported, that forty
villages, partly swallowed up by the opening of the earth, and partly
covered by the substances ejected, were destroyed on this melancholy
occasion, with the loss of nearly three thousand lives. A proportionate
number of cattle was destroyed; and the greater part of the plantations
of cotton, indigo and coffee, in the adjacent districts, were buried
beneath the volcanic matter. The effects of this explosion were long
apparent on the remains of the volcanic mountain.

We here introduce a sketch of several curious and novel details of
volcanic phenomena in Java, on account of their intimate connection with
the subterraneous operations of nature in the production of earthquakes.
It may be considered as supplementary to the detailed account of
volcanoes given at the beginning of this work.

There are in Java thirty-eight large mountains, which, although they
differ from each other in external figure, agree in the general
attribute of volcanoes, by their having a broad base, which gradually
verges toward the summit, in the form of a cone. One of these is named
Tankuban-Prahu, on account of its resembling, at a distance, a boat
turned upside down: it forms a vast truncated cone. Its base extends to
a considerable distance, and it is not only one of the largest mountains
in the island, but a most interesting volcano. Although it has not for
many ages had any violent eruption, as is evident from the progress of
vegetation, and from the depth of black mold which covers its sides, its
interior has continued in a state of uninterrupted activity. Its crater
is large, and has, in general, the shape of a funnel, but with its sides
very irregular: the brim, or margin, which bounds it at the top, has
also different degrees of elevation, rising and descending along the
whole course of its circumference. This may be estimated at a mile and a
half; and the perpendicular depth on the south side, where it is very
steep, is at least two hundred and fifty feet: toward the west it rises
considerably higher. The bottom of the crater has a diameter of nine
hundred feet, but is not regular in its form, which depends on the
meeting of the sides below.

Near the center it contains an irregular oval lake, or collection of
water, the greatest diameter of which is nearly three hundred feet. The
water being white, it exhibits the appearance of a lake of milk, boiling
with a perpetual discharge of large bubbles, occasioned by the
development of fixed air. Toward its eastern extremity are the remaining
outlets of the subterraneous fires, consisting of several apertures,
from which an uninterrupted discharge of sulphurous vapors takes place.
These vapors rush out with an incredible force, with violent
subterraneous noises, resembling the boiling of an immense caldron in
the bowels of the mountain. When at the bottom, the force of the
impression made on the spectator by this grand and terrific scene, is
increased by the recollection of the dangers he had to encounter in the
descent; while the extent of the crater, and the remains of the former
explosions, afford an indescribable enjoyment, and fill his mind with
the most awful satisfaction.

The explosions of mud, called by the natives _bledeg_, are, as we have
already seen, a great curiosity. This volcanic phenomenon is in the
center of a limestone district, and is first discovered, on approaching
it from a distance, by a large volume of smoke, which rises and
disappears at intervals of a few seconds, and resembles the vapors
arising from a violent surf. A dull noise, like that of thunder, is at
the same time heard; and on a nearer approach, when the vision is no
longer impeded by the smoke, a large hemispherical mass is observed,
consisting of black earth, mixed with water, about sixteen feet in
diameter, rising up to the hight of twenty or thirty feet in a perfectly
regular manner, and, as it were, pushed up by a force beneath. This mass
suddenly explodes with a dull noise, and scatters, in every direction, a
volume of black mud. After an interval of a few seconds, the
hemispherical body of earth or mud again rises and explodes. In the same
manner this volcanic ebullition goes on without interruption, throwing
up a globular body of mud, and dispersing it with violence through the
neighboring plain. The spot where the ebullition occurs is nearly
circular, and perfectly level, and is entirely covered with the earthy
particles, impregnated with salt water, which are thrown up from below.
The circumference may be estimated at about half a mile. In order to
conduct the salt water to the circumference, small passages, or gutters,
are made in the loose muddy earth, which lead it to the borders, where
it is collected in holes, or salt wells, dug in the ground, for the
purpose of evaporation. The mud recently thrown up, possesses a degree
of heat greater than that of the surrounding atmosphere, and emits a
strong, pungent and sulphurous smell. This volcanic phenomenon is
situated near the center of the large plain which interrupts the series
of the more considerable volcanoes, and owes its origin to the general
cause of the numerous volcanic eruptions which occur in the island of
Java.

The tremendous violence with which nature marks the operations of
volcanoes in these regions, will be best exemplified by the following
details of the extraordinary and wide-spreading phenomena which
accompanied the eruption of the Tomboro mountain, in the island of
Sumbawa, one of the Javanese cluster. This eruption, which happened in
April, 1815, was sensibly felt over the whole of the Molucca islands,
over Java, and over a considerable portion of Celebes, Sumatra and
Borneo, to a circumference of a thousand statute miles from its center,
by _tremulous motions_ and _loud explosions_; while, within the range of
its more immediate activity, embracing a space of three hundred miles
around it, it produced the most astonishing effects and excited the most
alarming apprehensions. On Java, at the distance of three hundred miles,
it seemed to be awfully present. The sky was overcast at noonday with a
cloud of ashes; the sun was enveloped in an atmosphere, the palpable
density of which it was unable to penetrate; showers of ashes covered
the houses, the streets and the fields, to the depth of several inches;
and, amid this darkness, explosions were heard at intervals, like the
report of artillery, or the noise of distant thunder. Every one
conceived, that the effects experienced might be caused by eruptions of
some of the numerous volcanoes on the island; but no one could have
conjectured, that the shower of ashes which darkened the air, and
covered the ground of the eastern district of Java, could have proceeded
from a mountain in Sumbawa, at the distance of several hundred miles.

The first explosions were heard at Java, on the evening of the fifth of
April, and continued until the following day, when the sun became
obscured, and appeared to be enveloped in a fog. The weather was sultry;
the atmosphere close; and the pressure of the latter, added to the
general stillness, seemed to forebode an earthquake. This lasted for
several days, the explosions continuing, but not with so much violence
as at first. On the evening of the tenth, the eruptions, however, were
more loud and more frequent; ashes fell in abundance; the sun was nearly
obscured; and in several parts of the island a _tremulous motion of the
earth_ was felt. On the following day, the explosions were so tremendous
as to shake the houses perceptibly in the more eastern districts.

In the island of Sumbawa itself, there was a great loss of lives, and
the surviving inhabitants were reduced to extreme misery. It appears
from the account of the rajah, who was a spectator of the eruption, that
on the evening of the tenth of April, three distinct columns of flame,
all apparently within the verge of the crater of the Tomboro mountain,
burst forth, and, after ascending separately to a very great hight,
united their tops in the air. The whole of the mountain now appeared
like a body of liquid fire, extending itself in every direction. Stones
and ashes were precipitated; and a whirlwind ensued, which blew down the
greater part of the houses in an adjoining village. It tore up by the
roots the largest trees, and carried them into the air, together with
men, horses, cattle, and whatever came within its influence. The sea
rose nearly twelve feet higher than usual, a phenomenon commonly
attendant on earthquakes, overwhelming the plantations of rice, and
sweeping away houses, with whatever came within its reach. It is
calculated that full twelve thousand individuals perished. The trees and
herbage of every description, along the whole of the north and west
sides of the peninsula, were completely destroyed, with the exception of
a high point of land near the spot where the village of Tomboro stood.

The extreme misery to which the inhabitants of the western part of the
island were reduced, was dreadful to behold. The roads were strewed with
dead bodies; the villages were almost entirely deserted, and the houses
fallen down. The peasants wandered in all directions in search of food;
and the famine became so severe, that one of the daughters of the rajah
died of hunger. To judge of the violence of the eruption, it will
suffice to state, that the cloud of ashes which had been carried with so
much celerity as to produce utter darkness, extended, in the direction
of the island of Celebes, two hundred and seventeen nautical miles from
the seat of the volcano; and, in a direct line toward Java, upward of
three hundred geographical miles.


              -------------------------------------------


                      BASALTIC AND ROCKY WONDERS.


                  ------------------------------------

                         THE GIANT’S CAUSEWAY.

This vast collection of basaltic pillars is in the vicinity of
Ballimony, in the county of Antrim, Ireland. The principal, or grand
causeway, (there being several less considerable and scattered fragments
of a similar nature,) consists of an irregular arrangement of many
hundred thousands of columns, formed of a black rock, nearly as hard as
marble. The greater part of them are of a pentagonal figure, but so
closely and compactly situated on their sides, though perfectly distinct
from top to bottom, that scarcely anything can be introduced between
them. These columns are of an unequal hight and breadth: several of the
most elevated, visible above the surface of the strand, and at the foot
of the impending angular precipice, are of the hight of about twenty
feet, which they do not exceed, at least not any of the principal
arrangement. How deeply they are fixed in the strand, has never yet been
ascertained.

This grand arrangement extends nearly two hundred yards, as it is
visible at low water; but how far beyond is uncertain: from its
declining appearance, however, at low water, it is probable that it does
not reach beneath the water as far as it is seen above. The breadth of
the principal causeway, which runs out in one continued range of
columns, is in general from twenty to thirty feet: in some parts it may,
for a short distance, be nearly forty. From this account are excluded
the broken and scattered pieces of the same kind of construction, which
are detached from the sides of the grand causeway, as they do not appear
to have ever been contiguous to the principal arrangement, although they
have been frequently comprehended in the width, which has led to such
wild and dissimilar representations of this causeway, in the different
accounts that have been given. Its highest part is the narrowest, at the
very spot of the impending cliff, whence the whole projects; and there,
for about the same space in length, its width is not more than from
twelve to fifteen feet. The columns of this narrow part incline from a
perpendicular a little to the westward, and form a slope on their tops,
by the unequal hight of their sides; and in this way a gradual ascent is
made at the foot of the cliff, from the head of one column to the next
above, to the top of the great causeway, which, at the distance of about
eighteen feet from the cliff, obtains a perpendicular position, and
lowering from its general hight, widens to between twenty and thirty
feet, being for nearly three hundred feet always above the water. The
tops of the columns being, throughout this length, nearly of an equal
hight, form a grand and singular parade, which may be walked on,
somewhat inclining to the water’s edge. But from the high-water mark, as
it is perpetually washed by the beating surges at every return of the
tide, the platform lowers considerably, becoming more and more uneven,
so as not to be walked on but with the greatest care. At the distance of
a hundred and fifty yards from the cliffs, it turns a little to the east
for the space of twenty or thirty yards, and then sinks into the sea.
The figure of these columns is, with few exceptions, pentagonal, or
composed of five sides; and the spectator must look very narrowly indeed
to find any of a different construction, having three, four or six
sides. What is very extraordinary, and particularly curious is, that
there are not two columns in ten thousand to be found, which either have
their sides equal among themselves, or display a like figure.

The composition of these columns or pillars, is also deserving the
attention of the curious observer. They are not of one solid stone in an
upright position, but composed of several short lengths, nicely joined,
not with flat surfaces, but articulated into each other like a ball and
socket, or like the joints in the vertebræ of some of the larger kinds
of fish, the one at the joint having a cavity, into which the convex end
of the opposite is exactly fitted. This is not visible unless on
disjointing the two stones. The depth of the concavity or convexity is
generally about three or four inches. It is still further remarkable,
that the convexity and correspondent concavity of the joint, are not
conformable to the external angular figure of the column, but exactly
round, and as large as the size or diameter of the column will admit;
consequently, as the angles of these columns are in general very
unequal, the circular edges of the joints are seldom coincident with
more than two or three sides of the pentagonal, and are, from the edge
of the circular part of the joint to the exterior sides and angles,
quite plain. It ought likewise to be noticed as a singular curiosity,
that the articulations of these joints are frequently inverted, in some
of them the concavity being upward, in others the reverse. This
occasions that variety and mixture of concavities and convexities on the
tops of the columns, which is observable throughout the platform of this
causeway, without any discoverable design or regularity with respect to
the number of either.

The length of these particular stones, from joint to joint, is various:
they are in general from eighteen inches to two feet long; and for the
greater part, longer toward the bottom of the columns than nearer the
top, the articulation of the joints being there somewhat deeper. The
size, or diameter, likewise of the columns, is as different as their
length and figure: in general they are from fifteen to twenty inches in
diameter. Throughout the whole of this combination there are no traces
of uniformity or design, except in the form of the joint, which is
invariably by an articulation of the convex into the concave of the
piece next above or below it: nor are there traces of a finishing in any
part, whether in the hight, length or breadth. If there be particular
instances in which the columns above water have a smooth top, others
near them, of an equal hight, are more or less convex or concave, which
shows them to have been joined to pieces that have been washed away, or
by other means taken off. It can not be doubted but that those parts
which are constantly above water have gradually become more and more
even, at the same time that the remaining surfaces of the joints must
necessarily have been worn smoother, by the constant action of the air,
and by the friction in walking over them, than where the sea, at every
tide, beats on the causeway, continually removing some of the upper
stones, and exposing fresh joints. As all the exterior columns, which
have two or three sides exposed to view, preserve their diameters from
top to bottom, it may be inferred, that such is also the case with the
interior columns, the tops of which alone are visible.

Notwithstanding the general dissimilitude of the columns, relatively to
their figure and diameter, they are so arranged and combined at all the
points, that a knife can scarcely be introduced between them, either at
the sides or angles. It is most interesting to examine the close
contexture and nice insertion of the infinite variety of forms exhibited
on the surface of this grand parade. From the great dissimilarity of the
figures of the columns, the spectator would be led to believe the
causeway a work of human art, were it not, on the other hand,
inconceivable that the genius or invention of man should construct and
combine such an infinite number of columns, which should have a general
apparent likeness, and still be so universally dissimilar in their
figure, as that on the minutest examination, not two in ten or twenty
thousand should be found having their angles and sides equal among
themselves, or those of one column to those of another. As there is an
infinite variety in the configuration of the several parts, so there are
no traces of regularity or design in the outlines of this curious
phenomenon: including the broken or detached pieces of a similar
structure, they are extremely scattered and confused. Whatever may have
been their original state, they do not at present appear to have any
connection with the grand or principal causeway, as to any supposable
design or use in its first construction; and as little design can be
inferred from the figure or position of the several constituent parts.

This singular formation is not confined to the Giant’s Causeway; but to
quite a distance from it, the cliffs exhibit, in many parts, similar
columns. At the depth of ten or twelve feet from the summit of the cape
of Bengore, the rock begins to assume a columnar tendency, and forms a
range of massy pillars of basalt, which stand perpendicular to the
horizon, presenting in the sharp face of the promontory, the appearance
of a magnificent gallery or colonnade, upward of sixty feet in hight.
This colonnade is supported on a solid base of coarse, black, irregular
rock, nearly sixty feet thick, abounding in what are called blebs, (that
is, little blisters as it were on the rock,) and also in air holes; but,
though comparatively irregular, it evidently affects a peculiar figure,
tending in many places to run into regular forms, resembling the
shooting of salts and many other substances during a hasty
crystallization. Beneath this great bed of stone, stands a second range
of pillars from forty to fifty feet high, more exactly defined, and
emulating in the neatness of its columns, those of the Giant’s Causeway.
This lower range is upborne by a layer of red ocher stone, which serves
as a relief to show it to greater advantage. The two admirable natural
galleries, with the interjacent masses of irregular rock, form a
perpendicular hight of one hundred and seventy feet, from the base of
which the promontory, covered with rock and grass, slopes down to the
sea a considerable space, so as to give an additional hight of two
hundred feet, making in all nearly four hundred feet of perpendicular
elevation, and presenting a mass, which for beauty and variety of
coloring, for elegance and novelty of arrangement, and for the
extraordinary magnitude of its objects, can not, perhaps, be rivaled by
anything at present known.

The promontory of Fairhead raises its lofty summit more than four
hundred feet above the level of the sea, and forms the eastern
termination of Ballycastle bay. It presents a vast compact mass of rude
columnar stones, the forms of which are extremely gross, many being a
hundred and fifty feet in length. At the base of these gigantic columns
lies a wild waste of natural ruins of an enormous size, which, in the
course of successive ages, have been tumbled down from their foundations
by storms, or some more powerful operations of nature. These massive
bodies have occasionally withstood the shock of their fall, and often
lie in groups, and clumps of pillars, resembling artificial ruins, and
forming a very novel and striking landscape.

Many of these pillars lie to the east, in the very bottom of the bay, at
the distance of about one-third of a mile from the causeway. There the
earth has evidently fallen away from them upon the strand, and exhibits
a very curious arrangement of pentagonal columns, in a perpendicular
position, apparently supporting a cliff of different strata of earth,
clay, rock, &c., to the hight of a hundred and fifty feet. Some of these
columns are from thirty to forty feet high, from the top of the sloping
bank beneath them; and being longer in the middle of the arrangement,
shortening on either of the sides, have obtained the appellation of
_organs_, from a rude likeness in this particular to the exterior or
frontal tubes of that instrument. As there are few broken pieces on the
strand, near this assemblage of columns, it is probable that the outside
range, as it now appears, is in reality the original exterior line
toward the sea; but how far these columns extend internally into the
bowels of the incumbent cliff is unknown. The very substance, indeed, of
that part of the cliff which projects to a point, between the two bays
on the east and west of the causeway, seems composed of similar
materials; for, besides the many pieces which are seen on the sides of
the cliff, as it winds to the bottom of the bays, particularly on the
eastern side, there is at the very point of the cliff, and just above
the narrow and highest part of the causeway, a long collection of them,
the heads or summits of which just appearing without the sloping bank,
make it evident that they lie in a sleeping position, and about half-way
between the perpendicular and horizontal. The heads of these columns are
likewise of mixed surfaces, convex and concave; and they evidently
appear to have been removed from their original upright position, to the
inclining or oblique one they have now assumed, by the sinking or
falling of the cliff.


                           BASALTIC COLUMNS.

In the country surrounding Padua, in Italy, there are several basaltic
columns, similar to those of the Giant’s Causeway, although less
magnificent in appearance. About seven miles in a southern direction
from that city, is a hill named Monte Rosso, or the Red mount, which
presents a natural range of prismatic columns, of different shapes and
sizes, placed in a direction nearly perpendicular to the horizon, and
parallel to each other, nearly resembling that part of the Giant’s
Causeway, called the organs.

At an inconsiderable distance is another basaltine hill, called _Il
monte del Diavolo_, or the Devil’s hill, along the sides of which
prismatic columns are arranged in an oblique position. This causeway
extends along the side of the vale beneath, with nearly the same
arrangement of the columns as is displayed on the hill. Although the
columns of both these hills are of the simple, or unjointed kind, still
they differ very remarkably from each other in many respects, but
principally in their forms, and in the texture and quality of their
parts. Those of the Monte del Diavolo commonly approach a circular form,
as nearly as their angles will allow; which is also observable in the
columns of the Giant’s Causeway and of most other basaltic groups. On
the contrary, those of Monte Rosso assume an oblong or oval figure. The
columns of the former measure, one with the other, nearly a foot in
diameter, varying but little in their size; while those of the latter
present a great variety in their dimensions, the diameter of some of
them being nearly a foot, and that of others scarcely three inches:
their common width may be estimated at six or eight inches. They differ,
therefore, very considerably in size from those of the Giant’s Causeway,
some of which measure two feet in width. The length of the columns of
the Monte del Diavolo can not be ascertained, as they present only their
summits to the view: their remaining parts are deeply buried in the
hill, and in some places entirely covered. Those of Monte Rosso, as far
as they are visible, measure from six to eight or ten feet in hight; an
inconsiderable size when compared with the hight of those of the Giant’s
Causeway. The columns of these groups display, however, all the
varieties of prismatic forms, which are observable in those of the
latter, and other similar groups. They are usually of five, six or seven
sides; but the hexagonal form seems chiefly to prevail.

The texture and quality of these columns are not less different than
their forms. Those of the Monte del Diavolo present a smooth surface,
and, when broken, appear within of a dark iron-gray color, manifesting
also a very solid and uniform texture; in which characters they
correspond with the columns of the Giant’s Causeway, and those of most
other basaltic groups. But the columns of Monte Rosso are in these
respects very different, having not only a very rough (and sometimes
knotty) surface, but displaying likewise, when broken, a variegated
color and unequal texture of parts. They are commonly speckled, more or
less distinctly, and resemble an inferior sort of granite, of which
Monte Rosso is itself formed, and which serves as a base to the range of
columns in question. It is, in general, not quite so hard as the alpine
and oriental granites, and is sometimes even friable. This species of
granite abounds in France, where large tracts of it are to be seen in
Auvergne, and the adjoining regions. But it is still more common in
Italy, seeing that, besides Monte Rosso, the bulk of the Euganean hills,
of which that is a part, principally consists of it; and these hills
occupy a considerable tract in the plains of Lombardy. It is also common
in the Roman and Tuscan states; and of this substance the mountain close
to Viterbo, on the road to Rome, is entirely composed. The columns of
Monte Rosso appear, therefore, of a different character from any
hitherto described by mineralogists, who mention those only of an
uniform color and texture. But the great singularity here is, that such
a range of prismatic columns should be found, bedded as it were, in a
mass of granite, and composed nearly of the same substance. An instance
of this kind, relative to any other causeway, is not recorded; and this
circumstance seems to render that of Monte Rosso, in one respect at
least, more curious and singular than the celebrated Giant’s Causeway is
known to be, from the regular articulation of its columns. It is
certain, that the basaltic group of Monte Rosso is not only highly
curious in itself, but interesting on account of the great light it
throws on the origin of granites in general.

It is likewise remarkable, that the columns in the two groups of Monte
Rosso and Monte del Diavolo, preserve respectively the same position,
nearly parallel to each other; which is not usually the case in basaltic
groups. For, although the principal aggregate of which the Giant’s
Causeway is formed, stands in a direction perpendicular to the horizon,
still other small detached groups of columns also appear on the eminence
above, assuming by their position different degrees of obliquity. Among
the numerous basaltic hills of Auvergne and the adjoining regions, in
France, phenomena which seem to abound in those provinces more than in
any other part of Europe, and, perhaps, of the known globe, nothing is
more common than to see the columns of the same group lying in all
possible directions, as irregularly almost as the prisms in a mass of
common crystal. Nor is this variety of position so observable in single
columns as in whole masses or ranges of them, that often present
themselves on the same hill, disposed in different strata or stages, as
it were, one above the other, many of them assuming very different, and
even opposite directions. The columns of the Monte del Diavolo are
bedded in a kind of volcanic sand, by which, in many parts of the hill,
they are entirely covered: it is probable, however, that they repose
beneath on a base of basaltic rock of a similar nature. Nothing is more
common, in the provinces of France, above mentioned, than to see
insulated basaltic hills almost exclusively composed of different layers
of columns, which present themselves in stages, one above the other,
often without any other stratum between them, resembling in some
measure, if the comparison can be allowed, a huge pile or stack of cleft
wood. Although the columnar crystallization of Monte Rosso is the only
one yet known or described, in a mass of granite, still other groups of
columns have elsewhere been met with, which are equally of a
heterogeneous substance or texture, however they may otherwise differ
from those of Monte Rosso, as well as from the common basalts.


              -------------------------------------------


                            NATURAL BRIDGES.


                  ------------------------------------


                      NATURAL BRIDGES OF ICONONZO.

Amid the majestic and varied scenery of the Cordilleras of South
America, that of their valleys most forcibly strikes the imagination of
foreign travelers. The enormous hight of these mountains is not
discoverable but at a considerable distance, and while the spectator is
on one of those plains which extend from the sea-coasts to the foot of
the central chain. The flats, or table-lands, which surround the
snow-clad summits of the mountains, are themselves, for the greater
part, of an elevation of from seven to nine thousand feet, or nearly a
mile and three-quarters, above the level of the sea. This circumstance
diminishes, to a certain degree, the impression of greatness produced by
the colossal masses of Chimborazo, Cotopaxi, Pichincha, &c., when seen
from the flats of Riobamba, or from those of Quito. It is not, however,
with the valleys as with the mountains: deeper and narrower than those
of the Alps and the Pyrenees, the valleys of the Cordilleras present
situations still more wild than these, and more adapted to fill the soul
with admiration and with terror. Fissures and chasms present themselves,
having their bottoms and sides ornamented with a vigorous vegetation,
and of such a depth, that Vesuvius and the Puy-de-Dome might be placed
within several of them, and not show their summits above the edge of the
neighboring mountains. In passing along the back of the Andes, from
Pasto to Villa d’Ibarra, and in descending the Loxa toward the banks of
the river Amazon, the traveler reaches the celebrated fissures of Chota
and Cutaco, the former of which is nearly a mile, and the latter upward
of three-quarters of a mile, in perpendicular depth. To give a more
complete idea of the grandeur of these geological phenomena, it should
be observed, that the bottoms of these fissures are by one-fourth only,
less elevated above the level of the sea, than the passages of St.
Gothard and Mount Cenis.

The valley of Icononzo, or of Pandi, is less remarkable for its
dimensions, than for the extraordinary form of its rocks, which appear
as if shaped by the hand of man. Their naked and barren summits form the
most picturesque contrasts with the tufts of trees and herbaceous
vegetables which cover the edges of the fissure. The little torrent
which has worked itself a passage through the valley of Icononzo, bears
the name of Rio de la Summa Paz. It descends from the eastern chain of
the Andes, which, with the republic of New Grenada, separates the basin
of the river of Magdelena from the vast plains of the Meta, Guaviare and
Oronoco. This torrent, confined within a bed almost inaccessible, could
not have been crossed without many difficulties, had not Nature herself
formed TWO BRIDGES OF ROCKS, which are justly regarded in the country as
among the objects most worthy of the attention of travelers. These
NATURAL BRIDGES are on the route from Bogota to Popayan and Quito.

Icononzo is the name of an ancient village of Muyscas Indians, situated
on the south side of the valley, and of which scarcely any vestige now
remains, except a few scattered huts. The nearest inhabited place to
this remarkable spot is the little village of Pandi, or Mercadillo,
distant about a mile. The road from Bogota to Fusagasuga, and thence to
Pandi, is one of the most difficult and least beaten to be met with in
the Andes. None but those who passionately love the beauties of Nature,
would fail to prefer the usual road which leads from the flat of Bogota
to the banks of the Magdelena, to the perilous descent from the Paramo
de San-Fortunato, and the mountains of Fusagasuga, toward the natural
bridges of Icononzo.

The deep chasm through which the torrent of Summa Paz precipitates
itself, occupies the center of the valley of Icononzo. Near the first
natural bridge, it maintains, for a length of nearly four-fifths of a
mile, a direction from east to west. The river forms two fine cascades,
the one at the spot where it enters the chasm on the west of Doa, and
the other at that where it leaves it, in descending toward Melgar. It is
possible that this chasm, which resembles, but on an enormous scale, the
gallery of a mine, may have been the result of an earthquake, and that,
at its formation, the compact bed of quartz, composing the superior
stratum of rock, had resisted the force which tore asunder these
mountains. The uninterrupted continuation of this quartzose bed would
thus form the bridge, which affords a passage from one part of the
valley to the other. This surprising natural arch is forty-eight feet in
length, forty in width, and eight feet in thickness at the center. By
experiments carefully made on the fall of bodies, its hight above the
level of the water of the torrent, has been ascertained to be about
three hundred and twenty feet. The depth of the torrent at the mean
hight of the water, may be estimated at twenty feet. The Indians of the
valley of Icononzo, for the security of travelers, have formed a fence
of reeds, which extends to the road leading to this first natural
bridge.

At the distance of sixty feet below is another, to which the traveler is
conducted by a path descending along the edge of the chasm. Three
enormous masses of rock have fallen into such positions as enable them
reciprocally to support each other. The one in the center forms the key
of the vault, an accident which may have conveyed to the natives of this
spot an idea of arched masonry, which was unknown to the people of the
new world, as well as to the ancient inhabitants of Egypt. It is
uncertain whether these portions of rock have been projected from a
distance, or are merely the fragments of an arch which has been
destroyed on the spot, but which was originally similar to the upper
natural bridge. This last supposition is rendered probable by an
analogous accident, observable in the Coliseum at Rome, where there are
seen, in a wall half-fallen, several stones which were arrested in their
descent, because in falling they happened to form an arch. In the midst
of this second natural bridge is an aperture of about twenty-five feet
in every direction, through which the eye reaches the bottom of the
abyss. The torrent appears to run into a dark cavern, whence a mournful
sound proceeds, formed by the cries of an infinity of nocturnal birds
which inhabit the chasm, and which at first sight may be taken for those
bats of a monstrous size, so well known in the equinoctial regions. They
can only be perceived by the help of lighted brands, thrown into the
chasm to illuminate its sides; and thousands of them may thus be
distinguished, skimming along the surface of the water. Their plumage is
uniformly of a brown gray color; and M. Humboldt, from whose account
these particulars are extracted, was assured by the Indians, that these
hitherto undescribed birds are of the size of a chicken, with the eyes
of an owl, and a curved beak. On account of the depth of the valley, it
was impossible to obtain a near view of them.

The elevation of the bridges of Icononzo, these surprising productions
of nature, above the level of the ocean, is two thousand seven hundred
feet, somewhat more than half a mile. In concluding his description of
them, M. Humboldt has noticed several other natural bridges, among which
is that in Virginia, noticed more particularly below. He considers this,
as well as the bridge of earth, called Rumichaca, which is on the
declivity of the porphyritic mountains of Chumban, in South America;
together with the bridge of Madre de Dios, named Dantcu, near Totonilco,
in Mexico; and the perforated rock near Grandola, in the province of
Alemtejo, in Portugal, as geological phenomena, which have some
resemblance to the natural bridges of Icononzo; but he doubts whether,
in any other part of the world, there has yet been discovered an
accidental arrangement so extraordinary as that of three masses of rock,
which, reciprocally sustaining each other, form a natural arch.


                      NATURAL BRIDGE IN VIRGINIA.

This natural bridge, which has been described by Mr. Jefferson, and many
other writers, is one of the most sublime productions of nature, as well
as one of the great curiosities and wonders of the world. It is situated
in Rockbridge county, in Virginia, on the ascent of a hill which seems
to have been cloven through its length by some mighty convulsion. It
consists of a stupendous arch of limestone, spanning a small stream,
called Cedar creek. Its hight above the stream to the top, is two
hundred and fifteen feet; its average width, eighty feet; its extreme
length at the top, ninety-three feet; and its thickness, from the under
to the upper side, fifty-five feet. The chasm over which it passes, is
fifty feet wide at the bottom, and ninety feet at the top. The view from
the top is exceedingly grand and impressive; from below, equally sublime
and more interesting, because divested of associations of fear. The
bridge is of important use, forming a road over this immense chasm,
which is not otherwise passable for several miles in either direction.
The top of the bridge is covered with a coat of earth, which affords
growth to many large trees. The residue, with the hill on both sides, is
a solid rock of limestone. The arch, as is seen in the engraving of the
bridge, approaches the semi-elliptical form; though the larger axis of
the ellipsis, which would be the chord of the arch, is many times longer
than its transverse. Although the sides of this bridge are provided in
some parts with a parapet of rocks, yet few persons have sufficient
resolution to stand on them, and look over into the abyss. The passenger
involuntarily falls on his hands, creeps to the parapet and peeps over
it. Looking down from this hight, for the space of a minute, occasions
giddiness and sometimes headache. But if the view from above be so
painful as not long to be borne, that from beneath is delightful in the
extreme. It is impossible for the emotions arising from the sublime, to
be felt in a greater degree than at this spot. The sensations of the
spectator can not be described, when he surveys an arch at once so
beautiful, so elevated, and so light, springing up, as it were, to
heaven!

[Illustration]

This grand natural bridge, as already mentioned, is of limestone; and
this is so soft that it may easily be cut with a knife. In this fact
there may be a foundation for the following interesting, though somewhat
overdrawn sketch, from the graphic pen of Elihu Burritt, designed to
illustrate the effect of perseverance and an honorable ambition.

“The scene opens with a view of the great natural bridge in Virginia.
There are three or four lads standing in the channel below, looking up
with awe to that vast arch of unhewn rocks, which the Almighty bridged
over those everlasting butments ‘when the morning stars sang together.’
The little piece of sky spanning those measureless piers, is full of
stars, although it is midday. It is almost five hundred feet from where
they stand, up those perpendicular bulwarks of limestone, to the
key-rock of that vast arch, which appears to them only of the size of a
man’s hand. The silence of death is rendered more impressive by the
little stream that falls from rock to rock down the channel. The sun is
darkened, and the boys have unconsciously uncovered their heads, as if
standing in the presence-chamber of the Majesty of the whole earth. At
last, this feeling begins to wear away; they look around, and find that
others have been there before them. They see the names of hundreds cut
in the limestone butments. A new feeling comes over their young hearts,
and their knives are in their hands in an instant. ‘What man has done,
man can do,’ is their watchword, while they draw themselves up, and
carve their names a foot above those of a hundred full-grown men who
have been there before them. They are all satisfied with this feat of
physical exertion, except _one_, whose example illustrates perfectly the
forgotten truth, that there is _no royal road to intellectual eminence_.
This ambitious youth sees a name just above his reach, a name that will
be green in the memory of the world, when those of Alexander, Cæsar, and
Bonaparte, shall rot in oblivion. It was the name of Washington. Before
he marched with Braddock to that fatal field, _he_ had been there, and
left his name a foot above all his predecessors. It was a glorious
thought of the boy, to write his name side by side with that of the
great father of his country. He grasps his knife with a firmer hand;
and, clinging to a little jutting crag, he cuts again into the
limestone, about a foot above where he stands; he then reaches up and
cuts another for his hands. ’Tis a dangerous adventure; but as he puts
his feet and hands into those gains, and draws himself up carefully to
his full length, he finds himself a foot above every name chronicled in
that mighty wall. While his companions are regarding him with concern
and admiration, he cuts his name in rude capitals, large and deep, into
that rocky album. His knife is in his hand, and strength in his sinews,
and a new created aspiration in his heart. Again he cuts another niche,
and again he carves his name in larger capitals. This is not enough.
Heedless of the entreaties of his companions, he cuts and climbs again.
The graduations of his ascending scale grow wider apart. He measures his
length at every gain he cuts. The voices of his friends wax weaker and
weaker, till their words are finally lost on his ear. He now for the
first time casts a look beneath him. Had that glance lasted a moment,
that moment would have been his last. He clings with a convulsive
shudder to his little niche in the rock. An awful abyss awaits his
almost certain fall. He is faint with severe exertion, and trembling
from the sudden view of the dreadful destruction to which he is exposed.
His knife is worn half-way to the haft. He can hear the voices, but not
the words, of his terror-stricken companions below. What a moment! What
a meager chance to escape destruction! There is no retracing his steps.
It is impossible to put his hands into the same niche with his feet, and
retain his slender hold a moment. His companions instantly perceive this
new and fearful dilemma, and await his fall with emotions that ‘freeze
their young blood.’ He is too high, too faint, to ask for his father and
mother, his brothers and sisters, to come and witness or avert his
destruction. But one of his companions anticipates his desire. Swift as
the wind, he bounds down the channel, and the situation of the fated boy
is told upon his father’s hearth-stone.

“Minutes of almost eternal length roll on, and there are hundreds
standing in that rocky channel, and hundreds on the bridge above, all
holding their breath, and awaiting the fearful catastrophe. The poor
boy hears the hum of new and numerous voices both above and below. He
can just distinguish the tones of his father, who is shouting with all
the energy of despair, ‘_William! William! Don’t look down! Your
mother, and Henry, and Harriet are all here, praying for you! Don’t
look down! Keep your eye toward the top!_’ The boy didn’t look _down_.
His eye is fixed like a flint toward heaven, and his young heart on
Him who reigns there. He grasps again his knife. He cuts another
niche, and another foot is added to the hundreds that remove him from
the reach of human help from below. How carefully he uses his wasting
blade! How anxiously he selects the softest places in that vast pier!
How he avoids every flinty grain! How he economizes his physical
powers! resting a moment at each gain he cuts. How every motion is
watched from below! There stand his father, mother, brother, sister,
on the very spot where, if he falls, he will not fall alone. The sun
is now half-way down the west. The lad has made fifty additional
niches in that mighty wall, and now finds himself directly under the
middle of that vast arch of rocks, earth and trees. He must cut his
way in a new direction, to get from under this overhanging mountain.
The inspiration of hope is dying in his bosom; its vital heat is fed
by the increasing shouts of hundreds perched upon cliffs and trees,
and others who stand with ropes in their hands on the bridge above, or
with ladders below. Fifty gains more must be cut before the longest
rope can reach him. His wasting blade strikes again into the
limestone. The boy is emerging painfully, foot by foot, from under
that lofty arch. Spliced ropes are ready in the hands of those who are
leaning over the outer edge of the bridge. Two minutes more, and all
will be over. That blade is worn to the last half-inch. The boy’s head
reels; his eyes are starting from their sockets. His last hope is
dying in his heart; his life must hang upon the next gain he cuts.
That niche is his last. At the last faint gash he makes, his knife,
his faithful knife, falls from his little nerveless hand, and, ringing
along the precipice, falls at his mother’s feet. An involuntary groan
of despair runs like a death-knell through the channel below, and all
is still as the grave. At the hight of nearly three hundred feet, the
devoted boy lifts his hopeless heart and closing eyes to commend his
soul to God. ’Tis but a moment—there!—one foot swings off!—he is
reeling—trembling—toppling over into eternity! Hark! a shout falls on
his ear from above! The man who is lying with half his length over the
bridge, has caught a glimpse of the boy’s head and shoulders. Quick as
thought, the noosed rope is within reach of the sinking youth. No one
breathes. With a faint, convulsive effort, the swooning boy drops his
arms into the noose. Darkness comes over him, and with the words,
_God!_ and _Mother!_ whispered on his lips just loud enough to be
heard in heaven, the tightening rope lifts him out of his last shallow
niche. Not a lip moves while he is dangling over that fearful abyss;
but when a sturdy Virginian reaches down and draws up the lad, and
holds him up in his arms before the tearful, breathless multitude,
such shouting and leaping and weeping for joy, never greeted the ear
of a human being so recovered from the yawning gulf of eternity.”

We will only add before leaving the subject of natural bridges, that the
one in Virginia is not, as has been generally supposed, the only
geological wonder of the kind in the United States. In Carter county,
Kentucky, there is a natural bridge across the Rockbridge branch of the
Cany fork of Little Sandy. It has a span of one hundred and ninety-five
feet, and is twelve feet wide, twenty feet thick in the middle of the
arch, and one hundred and seven feet above the water. In the county of
Walker, in Alabama, there is another similar natural curiosity, which
was discovered in a recent geological exploration. The span is one
hundred and twenty feet, and the hight nearly seventy feet. This bridge
is formed of sandstone, and is very symmetrical. Large beech and hemlock
trees grow on the bridge, and the surrounding scenery is represented as
sublime.


              -------------------------------------------


                      PRECIPICES AND PROMONTORIES.


                  ------------------------------------


                             BESSELY GHAUT.

The precipitous pathways which frequently occur in the Indian Apennines,
a chain of mountains extending along the western or Malabar coasts of
the peninsula, are called ghauts; and of these abrupt and perpendicular
precipices, Bessely ghaut is considered as the most romantic. It is
admirably described in the travels of Lord Valentia, from which the
following particulars are extracted.

On entering the defiles of the chain of mountains by which the
table-land of Mysore is separated from the low country of Canara and
Malabar, the scenery becomes extremely wild and romantic. Having reached
Purneah Chuttoor, situated on the summit of this celebrated ghaut, his
lordship began his descent at three in the morning, by a road formed
with great labor out of a bed of loose rock, over which the torrents of
the preceding winter had run with such force, as to wash away all the
softer parts, and in several places to leave single rocks, of four or
five feet diameter, standing in the center of the road, and not more
than two feet asunder. He alighted from his palanquin to admire the
sublimity of the scene, and entered a forest of the largest oriental
trees, several of which were one hundred feet in the stem before a
single branch extended itself; notwithstanding which, the descent was so
steep, that he was frequently on a level with their tops, at so small a
distance as to be able to distinguish them, by the gleam of the numerous
torches by which his party was accompanied, but which were insufficient
to enlighten the impenetrable canopy of foliage which for miles
concealed the face of heaven, or the deep gloom of the abyss into which
he appeared to descend. In the day-time the scene could not have been
half so awful or magnificent. The descent was impeded by numerous droves
of oxen which were ascending the ghaut. At break of day an opening, in a
winding part of the road, displayed the lofty mountain the party had
descended, covered with forests nearly to its summit. They passed
several rivulets, which at one spot had united, and formed a small
stream. The surrounding vegetation was richly variegated; and the
branches of the loftiest trees covered by plants of the parasitical
tribe. The inhabitants of a small village, in the center of this immense
forest, were employed in thrashing their grain in a truly patriarchal
manner: on a floor of hard earth the grain was trodden out by oxen,
which, agreeably to the Mosaical law, were unmuzzled.


                         THE CAPE OF THE WINDS.

The fortress of Mankoop, in the Crimea, is of a very extraordinary
magnitude, and may be described as being literally stationed on the
clouds. It covers the summit of a semicircular insulated mountain,
which, from its frightful aspect, its altitude, and craggy perpendicular
sides, independently of every other consideration than as a surprising
work of nature, fills the mind with wonder on entering the defile. In
this singular situation, where there are no visible means of ascent
toward the hight, and still less of conveying the necessary materials
for the completion of so astonishing a work, the Genoese constructed
this citadel, perhaps without a parallel in Europe, the result of their
wealth, address and enterprise. Being at a remote distance from the
coast, it is natural to conjecture that it was employed to curb the
hostile spirit of the natives toward the maritime colonial possessions.
The latest possessors of this fortress were Jews, in the cemetery of
whose colony the traveler meets with ruined tombs of marble and stone,
lying beneath the trees he has to pass in his ascent.

The whole of the passage up the mountain is steep and difficult; nor is
it rendered more practicable by the amazing labors of its original
possessors, whose dilapidated works occur almost at every step. On
reaching the summit, caverns and gloomy galleries, perforated in the
rock, present on every side their dark mouths. On the most elevated part
of this extraordinary eminence, is a beautiful plain, covered with fine
turf: it is partly fenced in by the moldering wall of the fortress, but
otherwise open to the surrounding precipices. From this spot the
adjacent mountains, valleys, hills, woods and villages, may be
discerned. “While,” observes the traveler by whom these details are
supplied, “with dismay and caution we crept on our hands and knees to
look over the brink of these fearful hights, a half-clad Tartar, wild as
the winds of the north, mounted without a saddle, and without any other
bridle except the twisted stem of a wild vine, on a colt equally
unsubdued, galloped to the very edge of the precipice, where, as his
horse stood prancing on the borders of eternity, he amused himself with
pointing out to us the different places in the vast district which the
eye commanded. We entered one of the excavated chambers, a small square
apartment, which led to another on our right hand; and, on our left, a
narrow passage conducted us to an open balcony, with a parapet in front,
formed of the rock, on the very face of one of the principal precipices,
whence the depth below might be contemplated with less danger. The
vultures which hovered over the valleys did not appear larger than
swallows; and the tops of the hills, covered by tufted woods, with the
villages scattered amid the rocks and defiles, appeared at so
intimidating a depth, that the blood chilled at the view. At length,
being conducted to the north-eastern point of the crescent, that being
the shape of the summit on which the fortress of Mankoop was built, and
descending a few stone steps, neatly hewn out in the rock, we entered by
a square door the cavern, called by the Tartars, the Cape of the Winds.
It has been chiseled, like the rest, out of the solid stone; but is open
on four sides. From the amazing prospect here commanded of all the
surrounding country, it probably served as a post of military
observation. The apertures, or windows, are large arched chasms in the
rock: through these, a most extensive range of scenery over the distant
mountains and rolling clouds, forms a sublime spectacle. There is
nothing in any part of Europe to surpass the tremendous grandeur of the
place. Beneath the cavern is another chamber leading to the several
cells on its different sides: these have all been cut out of the same
rock.”

The party, in descending, pursued a route, which, if they had taken in
their ascent, would, our traveler observes, have afforded them a view of
the sublimest scenery imaginable. They now passed beneath an old arched
gateway of the citadel, once its principal entrance. This road flanks
the northern side of the mountain; and the fall into the valley is so
bold and profound, that a single false step would precipitate both horse
and rider headlong to it. By alighting, the danger is avoided; and the
terror of the descent is compensated by the noblest scenery the eye ever
beheld. It was dark before they reached the bottom; and they had some
difficulty to regain the principal road which leads through the defile,
owing principally to the trees which project over all the lanes in the
vicinity of Tartar villages, and so effectually obstruct the passage of
persons on horseback, that they are in continual danger of being thrown.
The defile itself is not without danger in certain seasons of the year,
immense masses of limestone detaching themselves from the rocks above,
and carrying all before them in their descent. Several of these masses,
detached from the northern precipices, had crossed the river at the
bottom, and, by the prodigious velocity acquired in their descent, had
actually rolled nearly half-way up the opposite side.


                            THE NORTH CAPE.

This cape forms the most northerly point of the continent of Europe, and
may be regarded as one of the wonders of nature. It is situated within
the arctic circle, in seventy-one degrees, ten minutes, north latitude.
It has been accurately described by a voyager, from whose account the
following particulars are extracted.

In approaching the cape, a little before midnight, its rocks at first
appeared to be nearly of an equal hight, until they terminated in a
perpendicular peak; but, on a nearer view, those within were found to be
much higher than those of the extreme peak, or point. Their general
appearance was highly picturesque. The sea, breaking against this
immovable rampart, which had withstood its fury from the remotest ages,
bellowed, and formed a thick border of white froth. This spectacle,
equally beautiful and grand, was illumined by the _midnight sun_; and
the shade which covered the western side of the rocks rendered their
aspect still more sublime and almost terrific. The hight of these rocks
could not be ascertained; but here everything was on so grand a scale,
that a point of comparison could not be afforded by any ordinary known
objects. On landing, the party discovered a grotto, formed of rocks, the
surface of which had been washed smooth by the waves, and having within
a spring of fresh water. The only accessible spot in the vicinity was a
hill, some hundred paces in circumference, surrounded by enormous crags.
From the summit of this hill, turning toward the sea, they perceived to
the right a prodigious mountain, attached to the cape, and rearing its
sterile mass to the skies. To the left, a neck of land, covered with
less elevated rocks, against which the surges dashed with violence,
closed the bay, and admitted but a limited view of the ocean. To see as
far as possible into the interior, our navigators climbed almost to the
summit of the mountain, where a most singular landscape presented itself
to the view. A lake in the foreground had an elevation of at least
ninety feet above the level of the sea; and on the top of an adjacent,
but less lofty mountain, was another lake. The view was terminated by
peaked rocks, checkered by patches of snow.

At midnight the sun still remained several degrees above the horizon,
and continued to ascend higher and higher till noon, when having again
descended, it passed the north, without dipping below the horizon. This
phenomenon, which is as extraordinary to the inhabitants of the torrid
and temperate zones, as snow is to the inhabitants of the torrid zone,
could not be viewed without a particular interest. Two months of
continued daylight, during which space the sun never sets, seem to place
the traveler in a new state of existence; while the effect on the
inhabitants of these regions is singular. During the time the sun is
perpetually above the horizon, they rise at ten in the morning, dine at
five or six in the evening, and go to bed at one. But, during the winter
season, when, from the beginning of December until the end of January,
the sun never rises, they sleep above half of the twenty-four hours, and
employ the other half in sitting over the fire, all business being at an
end, and a constant darkness prevailing. The cause of this phenomenon,
as it affects the northern and southern regions of the earth, may be
readily understood. The sun always illumines half the earth at once, and
shines on every side ninety degrees from the place where he is vertical.
When he is vertical over the equator, or equidistant from both poles, he
shines as far as each pole; and this happens in spring and autumn. But,
as he declines to the north in summer, he shines beyond the north pole,
and all the countries near that pole turn round in perpetual sunshine:
while at the same time, he leaves the south pole an equal number of
degrees, so that those parts turn round in darkness.


                       PRECIPICES OF SAN ANTONIA.

The mountain of San Antonia, on the route from Guyaquil to Quito, is
described by Ulloa as presenting a series of the most fearful
precipices. In crossing this mountain, the declivity was in some parts
so great, that the mules could not have kept their footing, had not the
paths been filled with holes, upward of two feet in depth, in which the
mules placed their fore and hinder feet, occasionally dragging their
bellies, and the legs of the rider, along the ground. Without these
holes which serve as steps, the precipice would not be practicable.
Should the creature happen, however, to place his foot between two of
these holes, or to falter in the slightest degree, the rider would fall,
and perish inevitably. To lessen the difficulties and dangers of these
craggy paths, the Indians who go before the travelers, dig small
trenches across.

The descent from the hights was a task of imminent danger. Owing to the
excessive steepness, the water had washed away a greater part of the
holes; while, on the one side were steep eminences, and on the other,
the most frightful abysses. The mules were themselves sensible of the
caution requisite in descending; for, on reaching the top of an
eminence, they stopped, and having placed their fore feet close
together, as in a posture of stopping themselves, they also placed their
hinder feet together a little forward, as if going to lie down. In this
attitude, having, as it were, taken a survey of the road, they slid down
with great swiftness to the bottom. All the rider had to do, was to keep
himself fast in his saddle, without checking his beast; as the slightest
motion would have been sufficient to destroy its equilibrium, and both
would have inevitably perished. The address of the creatures was truly
wonderful, for, in this rapid motion, when they seemed to have lost all
government of themselves, they followed exactly the different windings
of the road, as if they had previously reconnoitered, and settled in
their minds the route they were to follow, and taken every precaution
for their safety, amid so many irregularities. The safety of the rider
depended entirely on their experience and address; but, long as they had
been accustomed to travel these roads, they seemed to feel a degree of
horror on reaching the top of a steep declivity. Without being checked
by their rider, they stopped; and if he inadvertently endeavored to spur
them on, they were immovable until they had placed themselves in a
secure posture. They seemed as if they were actuated by reason; for they
not only viewed the road attentively, but trembled and snorted at the
danger; emotions which inspired the party with the most dreadful
apprehensions. The Indians went before, and, placing themselves along
the sides of the mountain, where they held by the roots of trees,
animated the beasts with shouts, until they at last started down the
declivity.

There were some parts where the declivities were not on the side of the
precipices; but the road was so narrow and hollow, and the sides so
nearly perpendicular, that the danger was almost equal. The track being
extremely narrow, with scarcely a sufficient width of the road to admit
the mule with its rider, if the former had fallen, the latter would
necessarily have been crushed, and, for want of room to disengage
himself, would have been mutilated in his limbs, if he had escaped with
life. It was truly wonderful to consider with what exactness these
animals, after having overcome the first emotions of their fear, and
when they were going to slide down the declivity, stretched out their
fore-legs, to the end that they might preserve their equilibrium. The
gentle inclination they made with the body, at a proper distance, in
following the several windings of the road, was also a mark of
surprising sagacity; and, lastly, their address in stopping themselves
at the end of the impetuous career, was truly deserving of observation.
Greater prudence and conduct could not have been exhibited by man!


              -------------------------------------------


                    GEOLOGICAL CHANGES OF THE EARTH.


                  ------------------------------------

           There are more things in heaven and earth
           Than are dreamt of in our philosophy.—SHAKSPEARE.


The variety of fossil substances, many of them marine productions, which
are found in mountains remote from the sea, are undeniable proofs that
the earth’s surface has undergone considerable changes, some of which
indicate an alteration of climate not easily to be explained. The
remains of animals inhabiting hot countries, and the marine productions
of hot climates, which are frequently found in high northern latitudes,
lead to a suspicion that the earth’s axis was at a very remote period
differently inclined from what it is at present. The tropics now extend
twenty-three degrees and a half on each side the equator; but if they
were extended to forty-five degrees, then the arctic circle and the
tropics would coincide, and thence would arise inconceivable variations
in the productions and phenomena of the earth. All this would form an
amusing speculation to a person possessed of a terrestrial globe, who
might tie a thread round it to represent the tropics at forty-five
degrees of elevation.

By the gradual operation of the sea and of rivers, the face of the globe
has, in the course of ages, undergone very material changes. The former
has encroached in particular parts, and retired from others; and the
mouths of large rivers, running through low countries, have often been
variously modified, by a deposition and transfer of the matter washed
down from the land. At Havre, the sea undermines the steep coast; while
it recedes at Dunkirk, where the shore is flat. In Holland the Zuyder
Zee was probably formed, in the middle ages, by continual irruptions of
the sea, where only the small lake Flevo had before existed. The mouths
of the Rhine have been considerably altered, as well in their dimensions
as in their directions. The mud, as it is deposited by large rivers,
generally causes a _delta_, or a triangular piece of land, to grow out
into the sea. Thus the mouth of the Mississippi is said to have advanced
above fifty miles since the discovery of America. The island called
Sandy Hook, at the entrance of the harbor of New York, was formerly a
peninsula attached to the main land. The old citizens of New Haven,
Connecticut, point out places where once boats, and even small vessels,
used to anchor, but which are now at quite a distance from the water and
covered with the dwellings of the inhabitants. Most of the large rivers
of the United States are more or less changing their banks, and the
places of their channels, from year to year. The sea, within the space
of forty years, has retired more than a mile from Rosetta, in Egypt; and
the mouths of the Arno, and of the Rhone, consist in a great measure of
new land.

The Javanese have a tradition, that in former times the islands of
Sumatra, Java, Bali and Sumbawa, were united, and afterward separated
into nine different parts. They add, that when three thousand rainy
seasons shall have passed away, they will be united. In the
Mediterranean, geological phenomena evince, that the island of Malta,
and that of Gozo, its dependency, now separated by a wide channel, and
the intermediate small island of Cumino, formed, together with the
latter, a single island. By the encroachments of the sea, and the
subsidence of some parts of the land, the islands of Scilly, the
aboriginal inhabitants of which carried on a considerable trade in tin
with the Phenicians, Greeks and Romans, are now little more than barren
rocks, with small patches of earth interspersed in the hollows. Strabo
describes the Phenicians as having been so jealous of their lucrative
traffic with these islands, that they ran a vessel purposely on shore,
and risked the lives of the crew, rather than have it made known to the
Romans. The land within which these tin mines were worked, must now be
sunk, and buried beneath the sea. On the shifting of the sands between
the islands, walls and ruins are frequently seen; the difference of
level, since these walls or fences were made, to prevent the
encroachments of the sea, being estimated at sixteen feet. There is
little doubt but that there must have been a subsidence of the land,
followed by a sudden inundation. This, indeed, seems to be confirmed by
tradition, there being a strong persuasion in the western parts of
Cornwall, that there formerly existed a large country between the
Land’s-end and the islands of Scilly, now laid many fathoms under water.
Although there are no positive evidences of such an ancient connection
between the main land and these islands, still it is extremely probable,
that the cause of the inundation which destroyed the greater part of
them, may have reached the Cornish shores, there being several proofs of
a subsidence of the land in Mount’s bay. The principal anchoring place,
which was called a lake, is now a haven, or open harbor; and the mount,
from its Cornish name, signifying _the gray rock in a wood_, must have
formerly stood in a wood, but is now at full tide half a mile in the
sea.

Examples of a similar kind, relative to every known country, might be
multiplied. One of the most considerable inundations to be met with in
history, is that which happened in the reign of Henry I. and which
overflowed the estates of Earl Goodwin, forming the banks called the
Goodwin or Godwin sands. In the year 1546, a similar irruption of the
sea destroyed a hundred thousand persons in the territory of Dort, in
the United Provinces, and a still greater number round Dollart. In
Friezland and Zealand more than three hundred villages were overwhelmed;
and their remains are still visible, on a clear day, at the bottom of
the water. The Baltic sea has, by slow degrees, covered a large part of
Pomerania; and, among others, overwhelmed the famous port of Vineta. The
Norwegian sea has formed several little islands from the main land, and
still daily advances on the continent. The German sea has advanced on
the shores of Holland, near Catt, to such a degree, that the ruins of an
ancient citadel of the Romans, formerly built on that coast, are now
under water. The country surrounding the isle of Ely was, in the time of
Bede, about a thousand years ago, one of the most delightful and highly
cultivated spots in Great Britain: it was overwhelmed, and remained for
several centuries under the water, until at length, the sea, by a
caprice similar to the one which had prompted its invasions, abandoned
the earth, but without the latter being able to recover its primitive
state, that of one of the most fertile valleys in the world.

On the other hand, the sea has in many instances, deserted the land; and
by the deposition of its sediment in some places, and the accumulation
of its sands in others, has also formed new lands. In this manner the
isle of Oxney, near Romney marsh, was produced. In France, the town of
Aigues Mortes, which was a seaport in the time of Louis IX., is now
removed more than four miles from the sea. Psalmodi, also in that
kingdom, was an island in the year 815, and is now upward of six miles
within the land. In Italy, a considerable portion of land has been
gained at the mouth of the river Arno; and Ravenna, which once stood by
the sea-side, is now between four and five miles from it. Every part of
Holland seems to be a conquest from the sea, and to have been rescued,
in a manner, from its bosom. The industry of man, however, in the
formation of dikes, is here to be brought into account; for the surface
of the earth, in that country, is for the greater part below the surface
of the sea.

Three-fifths of the surface of the globe are covered by the sea, the
average depth of which has been estimated at from five to ten miles.
Demonstrative proofs exist in Great Britain, and in various parts of the
world, that great changes have taken place in the relative positions of
the present continents with the ocean, which, in former ages, rolled its
waves over the summits of our present elevated mountains. To illustrate
this subject, and before these proofs are entered on, in the
consideration of the geological phenomena named extraneous fossils, it
will be proper to introduce the pleasing and truly philosophical view of
the successive changes the earth has undergone, contained in Sir Richard
Phillips’s Morning Walk to Kew. In passing near the banks of the Thames,
Sir Richard was led, in two several places, to introduce the following
observations and reflections on this highly curious and interesting
subject. They apply the principles and facts of geology in a way in
which they may be applied to any river, and indicate how much we are
daily surrounded by the wonders of creation, the process of which, as
Sir Richard observes, is _never ceasing_. In passing over the alluvial
flat of Barnes common, he introduces the following thoughts, which are
given in very nearly his own language.

“On this common, nature still appears to be in a primeval and unfinished
state. The entire flat from the high ground to the Thames, is evidently
a mere fresh-water formation, of comparatively modern date, created out
of the rocky ruins which the rains, in a series of ages, have washed
from the high grounds, and further augmented by the decay of local
vegetation. The adjacent high lands, being elevated above the action of
the fresh water, were no doubt marine formations, created by the flowing
of the sea during the long period when the earth was last in its
perihelion during our summer months; which was probably thousands of
years since. The flat, or freshwater formation, on which I was walking,
still only approaches its completion; and the desiccated soil has not
yet fully defined the boundaries of the river. At spring-tides,
particularly when the line of the moon’s apsides coincides with the
syzygies, or when the ascending node is in the vernal equinox, or after
heavy rains, the river still overflows its banks, and indicates its
originally extended site under ordinary circumstances.

“The state of transition also appears in marshes, bogs and ponds, which,
but for the interference of man, would, many ages ago, have been filled
up with decayed forests and the remains of undisturbed vegetation.
Rivers thus become agents of the _never-ceasing creation_, and a means
of giving greater equality to the face of the land. The sea as it
retired, either abruptly from some situations, or gradually from others,
left dry land, consisting of downs and swelling hills, disposed in all
the variety which would be consequential on a succession of floods and
ebbs during several thousand years. These downs, acted upon by rain,
were mechanically, or in solution, carried off by the water to the
lowest levels, the elevations being thereby depressed, and the valleys
proportionally raised. The low lands became, of course, the channels
through which the rains returned to the sea, and the successive deposits
on their sides, hardened by the wind and sun, have in five or six
thousand years, created such tracts of alluvial soil, as those which now
present themselves in contiguity with most rivers. The soil, thus
assembled and compounded, is similar in its nature to the rocks and
hills whence it was washed; but, having been so pulverized, and so
divided by solution, it forms the finest medium for the secretion of all
vegetable principles, and hence the banks of the rivers are the favorite
residences of man. Should the channel constantly narrow itself more and
more, till it becomes choked in its course, or at its outlet, then, for
a time, lakes would be formed, which, in like manner, would narrow
themselves and disappear. New channels would then be formed, or the rain
would so diffuse itself over the surface, that the fall and the
evaporation would balance each other.

“Such are the unceasing works of _creation_, constantly taking place on
the exterior surface of the earth; where, though less evident to the
senses and experience of man, matter apparently inert is in as
progressive a state of change, from the operation of unceasing and
immutable causes, as in the visible generations of the animal and
vegetable kingdoms. Thus water, wind and heat, the energies of which
never cease to be exerted, are constantly producing new combinations,
changes and creations; which, if they accord with the harmony of the
whole, are fit and ‘good;’ but, if discordant, are speedily re-organized
or extinguished by contrary and opposing powers. In a word, _whatever
is, is fit; and whatever is not fit, is not, or soon ceases to be_! Such
seems to be the governing principle of Nature, the key of all her
mysteries, the primary law of creation! All things are the proximate
effects of a balance of immutable powers; those powers are results of a
_primordial cause_; while that _cause_ is inscrutable and
incomprehensible to creatures possessing but a relative being, who live
only in _time_ and _space_, and who feel and act merely by the _impulse_
of limited senses and powers.”

And, again, the same writer introduces the following apposite remarks on
this very interesting subject.

“As I approached a sequestered mansion-house, and the other buildings
connected with it, I crossed a corner of the meadow toward an angle
formed by a rude inlet of the Thames, which was running smoothly toward
the sea, at the rate of four miles an hour. The tide unites here with
the ordinary current, and running a few miles above this place, exhibits
twice a day the finely reduced edge of that physical balance-wheel, or
oscillating fluid-pendulum, which creates the earth’s centrifugal power,
and varies the center of its forces. In viewing the beautiful process of
nature, presented by a majestic river, we cease to wonder that
priestcraft has often succeeded in teaching nations to consider rivers
of divine origin, and as proximate living emblems of omnipotence.
Ignorance, whose constant error is to look only to the last term of
every series of causes, and which charges impiety on all who venture to
ascend one term higher, and atheism on all who dare to explore several
terms, (though every series implies a first term,) would easily be
persuaded by a crafty priesthood to consider a beneficent river as a
tangible branch of the Godhead. But we now know that the waters which
flow down a river, are but a portion of the rains and snows which,
having fallen near its source, are returning to the ocean, there to rise
again and re-perform the same circle of vapors, clouds, rains and
rivers. What a process of fertilization, and how still more luxuriant
would have been this vicinity, if man had not leveled the trees, and
carried away the crops of vegetation. What a place of shelter would thus
have been afforded to tribes of amphibiæ, whose accumulated remains
often surprise geologists, though necessarily consequent on the fall of
crops of vegetation on each other, near undisturbed banks of rivers.
Happily, in Britain, our coal-pits, or mineralized forests, have
supplied the place of our living woods; or man, regardless of the
fitness of all the parts to the perfection of every natural result,
might here, as in other long-peopled countries, ignorantly have thwarted
the course of nature by cutting down the timber, which, acting on the
electricity of the clouds, affects their destiny, and causes them to
fall in fertilizing showers. Such has been the fate of all the countries
famous in antiquity. Persia, Syria, Arabia, parts of Turkey, and the
Barbary coast, have been rendered arid deserts by this inadvertency. The
clouds from the Western ocean would long since have passed over England
without disturbance from the conducting power of leaves of trees, or
blades of grass, if our coal-works had not saved our natural conductors;
while the Thames, the agent of so much abundance and of so much wealth,
might, in that case, have become a shallow brook, like the once equally
famed Jordan, Granicus, or Ilyssus.

“I now descended toward a rude space near the river, which appeared to
be in the state in which the occasional overflowings and gradual
retrocession of the river had left it. It was one of those wastes which
the lord of the manor had not yet enabled some industrious cultivator to
disguise; and in large tracts of which Great Britain still exhibits the
surface of the earth in the pristine state in which it was left by the
secondary causes that have given it form. The Thames, doubtless, in a
remote age, covered the entire site; but it is the tendency of rivers to
narrow themselves, by promoting prolific vegetable creations on their
consequently increasing and encroaching banks, though the various
degrees of fall produce every variety of currents, and, consequently,
every variety of banks, in their devious course. In due time, the course
of the river becomes choked where a flat succeeds a rapid, and the
detained waters then form lakes in the interior. These lakes likewise
generate encroaching banks, which finally fill up their basins, when new
rivers are formed on higher levels. These in their turn, become
interrupted, and repetitions of the former circle of causes produce one
class of those elevations of land above the level of the sea, which have
so much puzzled geologists. The only condition which a surface of dry
land requires to increase and raise itself, is the absence of salt
water, consequent on which is an accumulation of vegetable and animal
remains. The Thames has not latterly been allowed to produce its natural
effects, because for two thousand years the banks have been inhabited by
man, who unable to appreciate the general laws by which the phenomena of
the earth are produced, has sedulously kept open the course of the
river, and prevented the formation of interior lakes. The Caspian sea,
and all similar inland seas and lakes, were, for the most part, formed
from the choking up of rivers which once constituted their outlets. If
the course of nature be not interrupted by the misdirected industry of
man, the gradual desiccation of all such collections of water will, in
due time, produce land of higher levels on their sites. In like manner,
the great lakes of North America, if the St. Lawrence be not sedulously
kept open, will in the course of ages, be filled up by the gradual
encroachment of their banks, and the raising of their bottoms with
strata of vegetable and animal remains. New rivers would then flow over
these increased elevations, and the ultimate effect would be to raise
that part of the continent of North America several hundred feet above
its present level. Even the very place on which I stand was, according
to Webster, once a vast basin, extending from the Nore to near Reading,
but now filled up with vegetable and animal remains; and the illustrious
Cuvier has discovered a similar basin round the site of Paris. These
once were Caspians, created by the choking and final disappearance of
some mighty rivers; they have been filled up by gradual encroachments,
and now the Thames and the Seine flow over them; but these, if left to
themselves, will, in their turn, generate new lakes or basins, and the
successive recurrence of a similar series of causes will continue to
produce similar effects, till interrupted by _superior_ causes.

“This situation was so sequestered, and therefore so favorable to
contemplation, that I could not avoid indulging myself. What, then, are
those superior causes, I exclaimed, which will interrupt this series of
natural operations to which man is indebted for the enchanting visions
of hill and dale, and for the elysium of beauty and plenty in which he
finds himself? Alas! facts prove that all things are transitory, and
that change of condition is the constant and necessary result of that
motion which is the chief instrument of eternal causation, but which, in
causing all phenomena, wears out existing organizations while it is
generating new ones. In the motions of the earth as a planet, doubtless
are to be discovered the superior causes which convert seas into
continents, and continents into seas. These sublime changes are
occasioned by the progress of the perihelion point of the earth’s orbit
through the ecliptic, which passes from extreme northern to extreme
southern declination, and _vice versa_, every ten thousand, four hundred
and fifty years; and the maxima of the central forces in the perihelion
occasion the waters to accumulate alternately upon either hemisphere.
During ten thousand, four hundred and fifty years, the sea is therefore
gradually retiring and encroaching in both hemispheres: hence all the
varieties of marine appearances and accumulations of marine remains in
particular situations; and hence the successions of layers or strata,
one upon another, of marine and earthly remains. It is evident, from
observation of those strata, that the periodical changes have occurred
at least three times; or in other words, it appears that the site on
which I now stand has been three times covered by the ocean, and three
times has afforded an asylum for vegetables and animals! How sublime,
how interesting, how affecting is such a contemplation! How transitory,
therefore, must be the local arrangements of man, and how puerile the
study of the science miscalled antiquities! How foolish the pride which
vaunts itself on splendid buildings and costly mausoleums! How vain the
ostentation of large estates, of extensive boundaries, and of great
empires! All, all will, in due time, be swept away and defaced by the
unsparing ocean; and, if recorded in the frail memorials of human
science, will be spoken of like the lost Atlantis, and remembered only
as a philosophical dream!”

Such are the speculations of Phillips, containing many things highly
interesting and instructive; though, with our advanced knowledge of
geology, we involuntarily smile at his “_periods_” of “_ten thousand,
four hundred and fifty years_,” knowing, as we now do, that some of the
great changes of which he speaks must have occupied the long ages of the
earth’s chaotic state, before God, by his word, formed it again to life
and order and beauty. The merest tyro in science now knows, that in the
great facts of geology God as truly speaks by his _works_, as in the
book of revelation he speaks by his _word_; and though we are far more
liable to misunderstand and misinterpret the former than the latter, yet
_rightly_ understood there is no discrepancy between the two, but both
speak the same language of truth. In the very structure of the earth
itself, we have the evidence of the changes it has passed through. The
wonderful wrecks of a former state of nature, preserved, like ancient
medals or marbles in the ruins of an extinct empire, tell of the
progress of the earth in past ages, and teach us that many of the
changes which Phillips would refer to comparatively modern times, belong
to a period far back of the creation of our first parents, when our
planet, though existing, had not as yet been prepared for the habitation
of mankind. We will not, however, dwell on these points; but merely
allude to them, referring our readers to any of the elementary treatises
on geology, where they may find the full details of facts, and also the
various theories which reconcile these facts with the statements of the
Mosaic history.


                          EXTRANEOUS FOSSILS.

The fossil remains of animals not now in existence, entombed and
preserved in solid rocks, present us with durable monuments of the great
changes which our planet has undergone in former ages. We are led to a
period when the waters of the primitive ocean must have covered the
summits of our highest mountains, and are irresistibly compelled to
admit one of two conclusions: either that the sea has retired, and sunk
beneath its former level; or that some power, operating from beneath,
has lifted up the islands and continents, with all their hills and
mountains, from the watery abyss to their present elevation above its
surface.

The calcareous, or limestone mountains in Derbyshire, and at Craven, in
Yorkshire, having an elevation of about two thousand feet above the
present level of the sea, contain, in a greater or less abundance, and
throughout their whole extent, fossil remains of zoophytes, shell-fish,
and marine animals. No remains of vegetables have been found in the
calcareous mountains of England; but, in the thick beds of shale and
gritstone lying upon them, are found various vegetable impressions, and
above these regular beds of coal, with strata, containing shells of
fresh-water mussels. In the earthy limestone of the upper strata are
sometimes found fossil flat-fish, with the impression of the scales and
bones quite distinct. The mountains of the Pyrenees are covered in the
highest part, at Mont Perdu, with calcareous rocks, containing
impressions of marine animals; and, even where the impressions are not
visible in the limestone, it yields a fetid cadaverous odor, when
dissolved in acids, owing, in all probability, to the animal matters it
contains. Mont Perdu, which rises ten thousand five hundred feet, or
about two miles above the level of the sea, is the highest situation in
which any marine remains have been found in Europe. In the Andes they
have been observed by Humboldt at the hight of fourteen thousand feet,
more than two miles and a half. Lastly, in southern countries, in and
under beds of clay-covering chalk, the bones of the elephant, and of the
rhinoceros are frequently found.

These bones, as they have been brought from different parts of the
world, have been examined with the utmost attention by the sagacious
naturalist Cuvier. He has observed characteristic variations of
structure, which prove that they belong to animals not now existing on
our globe: nor have many of the various zoöphytes and shell-fish, found
in calcareous rocks, been discovered in our present seas. From these
very curious facts he makes the following deductions.

“These bones are buried, almost everywhere, in nearly similar beds: they
are often blended with some other animals resembling those of the
present day. The beds are generally loose, either sandy or marly; and
always neighboring, more or less, to the surface. It is, then, probable
that these bones have been enveloped by the last, or by one of the last,
catastrophes of this globe. In a great number of places they are
accompanied by the accumulated remains of marine animals; but in some
places, which are less numerous, there are none of these remains:
sometimes the sand or marl, which covers them, contains only fresh-water
shells. No well authenticated account proves that they have been covered
by regular beds of stone, filled with sea-shells; and, consequently,
that the sea has remained on them undisturbed, for a long period. The
catastrophe which covered them was, therefore, a great, but transient,
inundation of the sea. This inundation did not rise above the high
mountains; for we find no analogous deposits covering the bones, nor are
the bones themselves there met with, not even in the high valleys,
unless in some of the warmer parts of America. These bones are neither
rolled nor joined in a skeleton, but scattered, and in part fractured.
They have not, then, been brought from afar by inundation, but found by
it in places where it has covered them, as might be expected, if the
animals to which they belonged had dwelt in these places, and had there
successively died. Before this catastrophe, these animals lived,
therefore, in the climates in which we now dig up their bones: it was
this catastrophe which destroyed them there; and, as we no longer find
them, it is evident that it has annihilated those species. The northern
parts of the globe, therefore, nourished formerly, species belonging to
the genus _elephant_, _hippopotamus_, _rhinoceros_, and _tapir_, as well
as to that of the _mastodon_; genera of which the four first have no
longer any species existing, except in the torrid zone; and the last,
none in any part.”

The researches of Dr. Buckland, connected with the kind of relics of
which we are speaking, have given them additional interest, especially
as connected with certain points of diluvial geology, and with their
assemblage in caverns. In these caverns, the bones are usually found
mixed with mud, stones and fragments; and circumstances seem to show
that the animals resided in them for a great length of time. The
celebrated Kirkdale cavern, in Yorkshire, discovered in 1821, contains
the remains of the hyena, tiger, bear, wolf, fox, weasel, elephant,
rhinoceros, hippopotamus, horse, ox, deer, hare, rabbit, rat, mouse,
raven, pigeon, lark, thrush, and a species of duck. From the mode in
which these remains were strewed over the bottom of the cavern, from the
great proportion of hyenas’ teeth over those of other animals, and from
the manner in which many of the bones were gnawed and fractured, Dr.
Buckland infers that this cavern was the den of hyenas for a long
succession of years; that they brought in as their prey, the animals
whose remains are thus mixed with their own; and that this state of
things was suddenly terminated by an irruption of turbid water into the
cave, which buried the whole in the mud in which they are now
intermingled. In other cases, the bones of other animals have been
found, indicating the same general facts as to the existence of animals
now no longer known in the same latitudes.

That every part of the dry land was once covered by the ocean, is a fact
on which all geologists agree; and the discovery, noticed above, of the
fossil remains of many genera of quadrupeds, once existing, but which
have now disappeared from the earth, leads to another fact, not less
interesting, and which is at the same time coincident with the oldest
records or traditions of the human race, namely, that at the period when
these great changes took place, man was not an inhabitant of the planet.
These fossil remains, now about to be particularized, are among the most
surprising of nature’s phenomena, and irresistibly lead to most
interesting speculations respecting the past and future condition of the
terrestrial globe.


                           FOSSIL CROCODILES.

The fossil remains of crocodiles have been collected in the neighborhood
of Honfleur, on the coast of France, and were found in a bed of hard
limestone, of a bluish gray color, which becomes nearly black when wet,
and which is found along the shore on both sides of the mouth of the
Seine, being in some places covered by the sea, and in others, above its
level, even at high water. Remains of crocodiles have also been found in
other parts of France; as at Angers and Mans. Some of these remains seem
to show, that at least one of the fossil species above noticed is also
found in other parts of France besides Honfleur.

The remains of crocodiles have been also found in different parts of
England; but particularly on the coast of Dorsetshire, and of Yorkshire
near Whitby, in the neighborhood of Bath, and near Newark in
Nottinghamshire. Somersetshire, particularly in the neighborhood of
Bath, the cliffs on the Dorsetshire, or southern coast, and on the
Yorkshire, or northern coast, are the places in this island in which the
remains of the animals of this tribe have been chiefly found. The matrix
in which they are found is in general similar to that which has been
already mentioned as containing the fossils of Honfleur, a blue
limestone, becoming almost black when wet. This description exactly
agrees with the limestone of Charmouth, Lime, &c., in Dorsetshire, on
the opposite coast to that of France on which Honfleur is situated. At
Whitby and Scarborough, where these fossils are also found, the stone is
indeed somewhat darker than in the former places; but no difference is
observable which can be regarded as offering any forcible opposition to
the probability of the original identity of this stratum, which is
observed on the northern coast of France, on the opposite southern
English coast, and at the opposite northern extremity of the island.
Some of these remains are also found in quarries of common coarse gray
and whitish limestone. Instances of this kind of matrix, for these
remains, are observable in the quarries between Bath and Bristol. The
Rev. Mr. Hawker, of Woodchester, in Gloucestershire, formerly had in his
possession, perhaps one of the handsomest specimens of the remains of
the crocodile discovered in all England. It was found by him in the
neighborhood of Bath, and contained a great part of the head and of the
trunk of the animal.


                   LARGE FOSSIL ANIMAL OF MAESTRICHT.

The large animal, whose fossil remains are found in the quarries of
Maestricht, has been deservedly a frequent object of admiration; and the
beautiful appearance which its remains possess, in consequence of their
excellent state of preservation, in a matrix which admits of their fair
display, has occasioned every specimen of this fossil to be highly
valued. The lower jaw of this animal, and some other specimens, which
were presented by Dr. Peter Camper to the Royal Society, and which are
now in the British museum, are among the most splendid and interesting
fossils in existence. In 1770, the workmen having discovered part of an
enormous head of an animal imbedded in the solid stone, in one of the
subterraneous passages of the mountain, gave information to M. Hoffman,
who, with the most zealous assiduity, labored until he had disengaged
this astonishing fossil from its matrix. But when this was done, the
fruits of his labors were wrested from him by an ecclesiastic, who
claimed it as being proprietor of the land over the spot on which it was
found. Hoffman defended his right in a court of justice; but through the
influence employed against him, he was doomed not only to the loss of
this inestimable fossil, but to the payment of heavy law expenses. But
in time, justice, though tardy, at last arrived; the troops of the
French republic secured this treasure, which was conveyed to the
national museum.

The length of the cervical, dorsal and lumbar vertebrae, appears to have
been about nine feet five inches, and that of the vertebræ of the tail
about ten foot; adding to which the length of the head, which may be
reckoned, considering the loss of the intermaxillary bones, at least at
four feet, we may safely conclude the whole length of the skeleton of
the animal to have approached very nearly to twenty-four feet. The head
is a sixth of the whole length of the animal; a proportion approaching
very near to that of the crocodile, but differing much from that of the
monitor, the head of which animal forms hardly a twelfth part of the
whole length. The tail must have been very strong, and its width, at its
extremity, must have rendered it a most powerful oar, and have enabled
the animal to have opposed the most agitated waters, as has been well
remarked by naturalists who have examined it. From this circumstance,
and from the other remains which accompany those of this animal, there
can be no doubt of its having been an inhabitant of the ocean. Taking
all these circumstances into consideration, M. Cuvier concludes, and
certainly on fair, if not indisputable grounds, that this animal must
have formed an intermediate genus between those animals of the lizard
tribe which have an extensive and forked tongue, which include the
monitors and the common lizards, and those which have a short tongue and
the palate armed with teeth, which comprise the iguanas, marbres, and
anolis. This genus, he thinks, could only have been allied to the
crocodile by the general characters of the lizards.


                     FOSSIL REMAINS OF RUMINANTIA.

Among the fossils of the British empire, none are more calculated to
excite astonishment than the enormous stags’ horns which have been dug
up in different parts of Ireland. Their dimensions, as given by Dr.
Molyneux, are as follows.

                                                        Feet.  Inch.
    From the extreme tip of each horn,                     10     10
    From the tip of the right horn to its root,             5      2
    From the tip of one of the inner branches to the
      tip of the   opposite branch,                         3     7½
    The length of one of the palms, within the
      branches,                                             2      5
    The breadth of the same palm within the branches,       1    10½
    The length of the right brow antler,                    1      2

A similar pair, found ten feet under ground, in the county of Clare, was
presented to Charles II. and placed in the horn-gallery, Hampton Court;
but was afterward removed into the guard-room of the same palace. At
Ballyward, near Ballyshannon; at Turvey, eight miles from Dublin; and at
Portumery, near the river Shannon, in the county of Galway, similar
horns have been found. In the common-hall of the Bishop of Armagh’s
house, in Dublin, was a forehead, with two amazingly large beams of a
pair of this kind of horns, which, from the magnitude of the beams, must
have much exceeded in size those of which the dimensions are given
above. Dr. Molyneux states, that in the last twenty years, thirty pair
of these horns had been dug up by accident in the country: the
observations, also, of several other persons, prove the great frequency
with which these remains have been found in Ireland. Various opinions
have been entertained respecting this animal and its existing prototype.
This, however, does not appear to have been yet discovered; and these
remains may, therefore, be regarded as having belonged to an animal now
extinct.


                      FOSSIL REMAINS OF ELEPHANTS.

Numerous remains of elephants have been found in Italy; and, although a
very considerable number of elephants were brought from Africa into that
country, yet the vast extent through which these remains have been
found, and the great probability that the Italians, particularly the
Romans, would have known enough of the value of ivory, to have prevented
them from committing the tusks to the earth, lead to the belief, that by
far the greater number of these remains which have been dug up, have
been deposited here, not by the hands of man, but by the changes that
the surface of this globe has undergone, at very remote periods. The
circumstances, indeed, under which many of these have been found, afford
indubitable proof of this fact.

In France, where it is well known that living elephants have been much
less frequent, at least in times of which we have any record, than
either in Italy or Greece, their fossil remains have been found in a
great number of places, and in situations which prove their deposition
at a very remote period. The whole valley through which the Rhine
passes, yields fragments of this animal, and perhaps more numerously on
the side of Germany than on that of France. Not only in its course, but
in the alluvia of the several streams which empty themselves into it,
are these fossil remains also found. Thus Holland abounds with them, and
even the most elevated parts of the Batavian kingdom are not exempt from
them. Germany and Switzerland appear particularly to abound in these
wonderful relics. The greater number found in these parts, is, perhaps,
as is observed by M. Cuvier, not attributable to their greater
abundance, but to the number of well-informed men, capable of making the
necessary researches, and of reporting the interesting facts they
discover. As in the banks of the Rhine, so in those of the Danube, these
fossils abound. In the valley of Altmuhl is a grand deposit of these
remains. The bones which have been found at Krembs, in Sweden; at Baden,
near Vienna; in Moravia; in different parts of Hungary and of
Transylvania; at the foot of the Hartz; in Hesse; at Hildesheim—all
appear to be referable to this animal. So also are those which are found
on the Elbe, the Oder, and the Vistula. Different parts of the British
empire are not less productive of these remains. In London, Brentford,
Harwich, Norwich, Gloucestershire, Staffordshire, Warwickshire,
Salisbury, and, indeed, in several other parts of Great Britain,
different remains of these animals have been found. When we add to those
places which have been already enumerated, Scandinavia, Norway, Iceland,
Russia, Siberia, Tunis, parts of North America, and Ibarra, in the
northern part of Equador, it will appear that there is hardly a part in
the known world, whose subterranean productions are known to us, in
which these animal remains have not been discovered. M. Cuvier is
satisfied, from the actual comparison of several skulls of the
East-Indian and African elephants, that different specific characters
exist in them respectively. In the Indian elephant, the top of the skull
is raised in a kind of double pyramid; but in the African it is nearly
rounded. In the Indian the forehead is concave, and in the African it is
rather convex. Several other differences exist, not necessary to be here
particularized, which seem to be fully sufficient to mark a difference
of species. A cursory view is sufficient to enable us to determine that
the ordinary fossil teeth of elephants are not those of the African
species, and it may be further said, that the greater number of these
teeth bear a close resemblance to those of the East-Indian species,
showing, on their masticating surface, bands of an equal thickness
through their whole length, and rudely crenulated. So great, indeed, is
the resemblance, that Pallas, and most other writers, have considered
the fossil elephant as being of the same species with the Asiatic. M.
Cuvier, anxious to discover the degree of accordance of the fossil
elephant’s skeleton with that of the living species, compared the fossil
skull, found in Siberia by Messerschmidt, with those of the African and
Asiatic elephants. The result of his comparison was, that in the fossil
species the alveoli of the tusks are much longer; the zygomatic arch is
of a different figure; the post-orbital apophysis of the frontal bone is
longer, more pointed, and more crooked; and the tubercle of the os
lachrymalis is considerably larger, and more projecting. To these
peculiarities of the fossil skull, M. Cuvier thinks, may be added the
parallelism of the molares. Comparing together the bones of the Asiatic
and of the African elephant, he was able to discover some differences
between them, as well as between those and some of the fossil bones
which he possessed. These latter he found, in general, approached
nearest to those of the Asiatic elephant. He concludes with supposing
that the fossil remains are of a species differing more widely from the
Asiatic elephant than the horse does from the ass, and therefore does
not think it impossible but that it might have existed in a climate that
would have destroyed the elephant of India.

It may, therefore, be assumed as certain, from the observations of M.
Cuvier, that at least one species of elephants has existed, of which
none are now known to be living; and, should the difference of structure
which has been pointed out in some of the fossil teeth, be admitted as
sufficient to designate a difference of species, it may be then said,
that there exist the fossil remains of, at least, two species of
elephants, which were different from those with which we are acquainted.
From the preceding observations it appears, then, that the fossil
elephantine remains, notwithstanding their resemblance in some respects
to the bones of the Asiatic elephant, have belonged to one or more
species, different from those which are now known. This circumstance
agrees with the facts of the fossil remains of the tapir and rhinoceros,
which appear to have differed materially from the living animals of the
same genera. The remains of elephants obtained from Essex, Middlesex,
Kent, and other parts of England, confirm the observation of Cuvier,
that these remains are generally found in the looser and more
superficial parts of the earth, and most frequently in the alluvia which
fill the bottoms of the valleys, or which border the beds of rivers.
They are generally found mingled with the bones of other quadrupeds of
known genera, such as those of the rhinoceros, ox, horse, &c., and
frequently, also, with the remains of marine animals.


                    FOSSIL REMAINS OF THE MASTODON.

We now come to the examination of one of the most stupendous animals
known, either in a recent or a fossil state; one which, whether we
contemplate its original mode of existence, or the period at which it
lived, can not but fill our minds with astonishment. The first traces of
this animal are sketched in a letter from Dr. Mather, of Boston, to Dr.
Woodward, in 1712, and are transcribed from a work in manuscript,
entitled _Biblia Americana_. In this work, teeth and bones of prodigious
size, supposed to be human, are said to have been found near what is now
Albany, in the state of New York. About the year 1740, numerous similar
bones were found in Kentucky, on the Ohio, and were dispersed among the
European virtuosi. Many bones of this animal were found, in 1799, in the
state of New York, in a large plain, bounded on every side by immense
mountains, in the vicinity of Newburg, situated on the Hudson or North
river. These remains have also been found on the side of the Alleghany
mountains, in the interior parts of Pennsylvania and Carolina, and in
New Jersey, not far from Philadelphia. And quite lately (1854) the tusks
of a mastodon, apparently of enormous size, were discovered protruding
from the inclined side of a marshy declivity, a few miles from the city
of Poughkeepsie. Measures were immediately taken to excavate the place
and exhume the skeleton. We are informed that the work thus far has been
remarkably successful, and the condition of the skeleton such as to
promise the security of the most perfect specimen of the mastodon ever
found. The location is extremely favorable. The excavation, which is
prosecuted under the direction of Professor Morse, the discoverer of the
magnetic telegraph, who resides at Poughkeepsie, has succeeded as far as
the head and shoulders of the mammoth. The bones are partially petrified
as far as the exhumation has extended, and this promises the recovery of
the entire skeleton in a more perfect state than any yet discovered. If
our information is correct, and it emanates from an entirely responsible
source, an object of great interest will be added to the science and
study of natural history.

From a careful attendance to every circumstance, M. Cuvier conceives we
have a right to conclude, that this great mastodon, or animal of the
Ohio, did not surpass the elephant in hight, but was a little longer in
proportion, its limbs rather thicker, and its belly smaller. It seems to
have very much resembled the elephant in its tusks, and, indeed, in the
whole of its osteology; and it also appears to have had a trunk. But,
notwithstanding its resemblance to the elephant, in so many particulars,
the form and structure of the grinders are sufficiently different from
those of the elephant, to demand its being placed in a distinct genus.
From the later discoveries respecting this animal, M. Cuvier is also
inclined to suppose that its food must have been similar to that of the
hippopotamus and the boar, but preferring the roots and fleshy parts of
vegetables; in the search of which species of food it would, of course,
be led to such soft and marshy spots as it appears to have inhabited. It
does not, however, appear to have been at all formed for swimming, or
for living much in the waters, like the hippopotamus, but rather seems
to have been entirely a terrestrial animal.


                   FOSSIL REMAINS OF THE RHINOCEROS.

There appear to be three living species of rhinoceros: 1. That of India,
a unicorn, with a rugose coat, and with incisors, separated, by a space,
from the grinders. 2. That of the Cape, a bicorn, the skin without rugæ,
and having twenty eight grinders, and no incisors. 3. That of Sumatra, a
bicorn, the skin but slightly rugose, thus far resembling that of the
Cape, but having incisive teeth, like that of India. The fossil remains
of the rhinoceros have been generally found in the same countries where
the remains of elephants have been found; but they do not appear to have
so generally excited attention; and, perhaps, but few of those who
discovered them were able to determine to what animal they belonged.
Thus a tooth of this animal is described by Grew merely as the tooth of
a terrestrial animal; and the remains of this animal, found in the
neighborhood of Canterbury, were supposed to have belonged to the
hippopotamus. The first remains of this species, of which positive
mention is made, were collected in England, in 1668, near Canterbury, in
the course of digging a well. In 1751, a large number of bones of this
kind were disinterred in the chain of the Hartz, and their form caused
them at first to be taken for those of elephants; but the celebrated
anatomist, Meckel, having compared one of the teeth found in this heap
with the teeth of the living rhinoceros he had observed at Paris,
proved, in an explicit manner, and by the same method which has yielded
us such knowledge of lost species, that the bones found in the Hartz
were the bones of the rhinoceros. Thence the path was clearly opened for
all the paleontological researches on this kind of fossil. Twenty years
after the discovery made on the slopes of the Hartz, a much more
extraordinary discovery, of which Siberia was the scene, threw a truly
striking light upon the question. A fossil rhinoceros, not reduced to
bones alone, but entire, with its skin, was found in the month of
December, 1771, on the borders of the Wiluji, a river which flows into
the Lena, below Yakoutsk, in Siberia, in the forty-fourth degree of
latitude. What characterized this individual, which was covered with
hair, proves that the species to which it belonged, differing from that
of warm countries, the only one we now know, was created to inhabit cold
and temperate regions. Unfortunately, the skin of this precious animal
has not been preserved. Since that time, constant attempts have been
made to discover the bones of the rhinoceros, in a multitude of
countries of northern Europe and Asia; and M. Cuvier, in his “Researches
on Fossil Bones,” has given minute descriptions of them; but
unfortunately, no individual as complete as that of Wiluji has since
been discovered.


                FOSSIL REMAINS OF THE SIBERIAN MAMMOTH.

It has been demonstrated by Cuvier, that this animal was of a different
species from the mastodon, or American mammoth. Its bones have been
found in the alluvial soil near London, Northampton, Gloucester,
Harwich, Norwich, in Salisbury plain, and in other places in England;
they also occur in the north of Ireland; and in Sweden, Iceland, Russia,
Poland, Germany, France, Holland, and Hungary, the bones and teeth have
been met with in abundance. Its teeth have also been found in North and
South America, and abundantly in Asiatic Russia. Pallas says, that from
the Don to the Tchutskoiness, there is scarcely a river that does not
afford the remains of the mammoth, and that they are frequently imbedded
in _alluvial soil, containing marine productions_. The skeletons, a view
of one of which is given in the cut below, are seldom complete; but the
following interesting narrative will show that, in one instance, the
animal has been found in an entire state.

[Illustration: SKELETON OF THE SIBERIAN MAMMOTH.]

In the year 1799, a Tungusian fisherman observed a strange shapeless
mass projecting from an ice-bank, near the mouth of a river in the north
of Siberia, the nature of which he did not understand, and which was so
high in the bank as to be beyond his reach. The next year he observed
the same object, which was then rather more disengaged from among the
ice, but was still unable to conceive what it was. Toward the end of the
following summer, 1801, he could distinctly see that it was the frozen
carcass of a huge animal, the entire flank of which, and one of its
tusks, had become disengaged from the ice. In consequence of the ice
beginning to melt earlier, and to a greater degree than usual, in 1803,
the fifth year of this discovery, the enormous carcass became entirely
disengaged, and fell down from the ice-crag on a sand-bank forming part
of the coast of the Arctic ocean. In the month of March of that year,
the Tungusian carried away the two tusks, which he sold for fifty
rubles, about thirty-eight dollars.

Two years afterward this animal still remained on the sand-bank, where
it had fallen from the ice; but its body was then greatly mutilated. The
peasants had taken away considerable quantities of its flesh to feed
their dogs; and the wild animals, particularly the white bears, had also
feasted on the carcass; yet the skeleton remained quite entire, except
that one of the fore legs was gone. The entire spine, the pelvis, one
shoulder-blade, and three legs, were still held together by their
ligaments, and by some remains of the skin; and the other shoulder-blade
was found at a short distance. The head remained, covered by the dried
skin, and the pupil of the eyes was still distinguishable. The brain
also remained within the skull, but a good deal shrunk and dried up; and
one of the ears was in excellent preservation, still retaining a tuft of
strong bristly hair. The upper lip was a good deal eaten away, and the
under lip was entirely gone, so that the teeth were distinctly seen. The
animal was a male, and had a long mane on its neck.

The skin was extremely thick and heavy, and as much of it remained as
required the exertions of ten men to carry away, which they did with
considerable difficulty. More than thirty pounds of the hair and
bristles of this animal were gathered from the wet sand-bank, having
been trampled into the sand by the white bears, while devouring the
carcass. The hair was of three distinct kinds: one consisting of stiff
black bristles, a foot or more in length; another of thinner bristles,
or coarse flexible hair, of a reddish-brown color; and the third of
coarse reddish-brown wool, which grew among the roots of the hair. These
afford an undeniable proof that this animal had belonged to a race of
elephants inhabiting a cold region, with which we are unacquainted, and
by no means fitted to dwell in the torrid zone. It is also evident that
this enormous animal must have been frozen up by the ice at the moment
of its death.


                             FOSSIL SHELLS.

At whatever elevations these shells may have been found, and however
remote from the parts of the globe now occupied by water, it is certain
that they were once generated in the sea, by which they were deposited.
The Altain chain of primitive mountains in Siberia is flanked on each
side by a chain of hills inclosing marine shells. On a comparison of the
forms, contexture and composition of these shells, as they have been
found imbedded in rocks, not the slightest difference can be detected
between several varieties of them and those which still inhabit the sea.
At Touraine, in France, a hundred miles from the ocean, and about nine
feet beneath the surface, a bed of fossil shells has been found nine
leagues in length, and about twenty feet in thickness. Such beds are
known to exist in every part of Europe; and in South America, according
to Ulloa, they are very frequent.

Great Britain abounds in these fossil productions. In the cliffs of the
isle of Sheppey, bordering on the Thames, several varieties of the crab,
and lobsters nearly whole, have been found in a petrified state. Within
the elevated lands in the vicinity of Reading, in Berkshire, an
abundance of oyster-shells has been found, many of them entire, and
having both their valves united. At Broughton, in Lincolnshire, there
are two quarries abounding in fresh-water shells, which are found in a
blue stone, supposed to have been formerly clay, and to have been
gradually indurated. A bed of shells, twelve feet thick, and lying in a
greenish sand, has been found about a mile from Reculver, in Kent. At
Harwich, at the entrance of the river, a sandy cliff, fifty feet in
hight, contains shells, of which there are no less than twenty-eight
varieties. On digging a moorish pasture, in Northamptonshire, many
snails and river shells were found; and these were the more abundant in
proportion as the workmen proceeded to a greater depth. And, lastly, the
petrifactions known by the name of _belemnites_, have been found in
chalk pits, in different parts of the kingdom: they are usually
cylindrical, or conical, and sometimes contain a hollow nucleus. They
are supposed to constitute a species of nautilus, and very frequently
occur in the coarser kinds of marble.


                         SUBTERRANEAN FORESTS.

In the year 1708, a breach made by the Thames, at an extraordinary high
tide, inundated the marshes of Dagenham and Havering, in Essex. Such was
the impetuous rush of the water, that a large passage or channel was
torn up, three hundred feet in width, and in some parts twenty feet in
depth. In this way, a great number of trees, that had been buried there
many ages before, were exposed to view. With one exception, that of a
large oak, having the greatest part of its bark, and some of its heads
and roots in a perfect state, these trees bore a greater resemblance to
alder than to any other description of wood. They were black and hard,
and their fibers were extremely tough. No doubt was entertained of their
having grown on the spot where they lay; and they were so numerous, that
in many places they afforded steps to the passengers. They were imbedded
in a black oozy soil, on the surface of which they lay prostrate, with a
covering of grey mold.

In passing along the channel torn up by the water, vast numbers of the
stumps of these subterraneous trees, remaining in the posture in which
they grew, were to be seen, some with their roots running down, and
others branching and spreading about in the earth, as is observed in
growing trees. That they were the ruins, not of the deluge, but of a
later age, has been inferred from the existence of a bed of shells,
which lies across the highway, on the descent near Stifford bridge,
leading to South Okendon. At a perpendicular depth of twenty feet
beneath this bed of shells, and at the distance of nearly two hundred
feet, in the bottom of the valley, runs a brook which empties itself
into the Thames at Purfleet. This brook is known to ebb and flow with
the Thames; and, consequently, if the bed of shells, as has been
conjectured, was deposited in that place by an inundation of the Thames,
it must have been such as to have drowned a vast proportion of the
surrounding country, and have overtopped the trees near the river, in
West Horrock, Dagenham, and the other marshes, overturning them in its
progress. In support of this hypothesis, it should be remarked, that the
bed of earth in which the trees grew, was entire and undisturbed, and
consisted of a spongy, light, oozy soil, filled with the roots of reeds,
of a specific gravity much less than that of the stratum above it.

The levels of Hatfield chase were, in the reign of Charles I., the
largest chase of red deer in England. They contained about one hundred
and eighty thousand acres of land, about one-half of which was yearly
inundated; but being sold to one Vermuiden, a Dutchman, he contrived, at
a great labor and expense, to dischase, drain, and reduce these lands to
arable and pasture grounds not subject to be overflowed. In every part
of the soil, in the bottom of the river Ouse even, and in that of the
adventitious soil of all marsh land, together with the skirts of the
Lincolnshire wold, vast multitudes of the roots and trunks of trees of
different sizes are found. The roots are fixed in the soil, in their
natural position, as thick as they could have grown; and near to them
lie the trunks. Many of these trees appear to have been burned, and
others to have been chopped and squared; and this in such places, and at
such depths, as could never have been opened, since the destruction of
the forest, until the time of the drainage. That this was the work of
the Romans, who were the destroyers of all the woods and forests which
are now found underground in the bottoms of moors and bogs, is evidenced
by the coins and utensils, belonging to that nation, which have been
collected, as well in these levels, as in other parts of Great Britain
where these subterraneous forests have been discovered.


                        MOORS, MOSSES AND BOGS.

It having been reported in Lincolnshire, that a large extent of islets
of moor, situated along its coast, and visible only at the lowest ebbs
of the tide, was chiefly composed of decayed trees, Dr. de Serra,
accompanied by Sir Joseph Banks, proceeded, in the month of September,
1796, to examine their nature and extent. They landed on one of the
largest of these islets, when the ebbs were at the lowest, and found its
exposed surface to be about ninety feet in length, and seventy-five in
width. They were enabled to ascertain, that these islets consist almost
entirely of roots, trunks, branches, and leaves of trees and shrubs,
intermixed with leaves of aquatic plants. The remains of many of the
trees were still standing on their roots; but the trunks of the greater
part of them lay scattered on the ground, in every direction. The bark
of the trees and roots appeared in general as fresh as when they were
growing; in that of the birches particularly, many of which were found,
even the thin silvery membranes of the outer skin were discernible. The
timber of all kinds, on the contrary, was decomposed and soft, in the
greater part of the trees; in some it was firm, especially about the
knots. Sound pieces of timber had been often found by the country
people. In general, the trunks, branches and roots of the decayed trees
were considerably flattened; a phenomenon which has been observed in the
_surtarbrand_, or fossil wood of Iceland, and also in that found near
the lake of Thun, in Switzerland. The soil was chiefly composed of
rotten leaves; and, on being thrown into water, many of these were taken
out in a perfect state.

These islets extended about twelve miles in length, and one in breadth,
opposite the shore of Sutton, at which place, on digging a well, a moor
of the same nature was found under ground, at the depth of sixteen feet,
and, consequently, very nearly on the same level with that which
constitutes the islets. On boring in the fields belonging to the Royal
Society, in the parish of Mablethorpe, to ascertain the cause of the
subterraneous stratum of decayed vegetables, a similar moor was found.
The appearance of these decayed vegetables was found exactly to agree
with that of the moor which was thrown up in Blankney fen, and in other
parts of the east fen of Lincolnshire, in making their embankments;
barks, like those of the birch-tree, being there also abundantly found.
This moor has been traced as far as Peterborough, sixty miles south of
Sutton. On the north side, the moory islets extend as far as Grimsby, on
the south of the mouth of the Humber: and it is a remarkable
circumstance, that in the large tracts of low land which lie on the
south banks of that river, a little above its mouth, there is a
subterraneous stratum of decayed trees and shrubs, exactly resembling
those observed at Sutton. At Axholme isle, a similar stratum extends
over a tract of ten miles in length, by five in breadth. The roots there
also stand in the places where they grew; while the trunks lie
prostrate, amid the roots of aquatic plants and reeds. Little doubt can
be entertained of the moory islets of Sutton being a part of this
extensive subterraneous stratum, which, by some inroad of the sea, has
been there stripped of its covering of soil. The identity of the levels;
that of the species of trees; the roots of these affixed, in both, to
the soil where they grew; and, above all, the flattened shape of the
trunks, branches, and roots, found in the islets, which can only be
accounted for by the heavy pressure of a superinduced stratum, are
sufficient reasons for this opinion. Such a wide-spread assemblage of
vegetable ruins, lying almost in the same level, and that level
generally under the common mark of low water, naturally gives rise to
reflections on the epoch of this destruction, and the agency by which it
was effected.

The original catastrophe which buried this immense forest must have been
of very ancient date; but it is to be suspected, that the inroad of the
sea which uncovered the decayed trees of the islets of Sutton, is
comparatively recent. The state of the leaves, and the timber, and also
the tradition of the country people, concur to strengthen this
suspicion. Leaves and other delicate parts of plants, though they may be
long preserved in a subterraneous situation, can not remain uninjured
when exposed to the action of the waves, and of the air. The inhabitants
of Sutton believe that their parish church once stood on the spot where
the islets now are, and was submerged by the inroads of the sea; that,
at very low water, their ancestors could even discern its ruins; and
that their present church was built to supply the place of that which
was washed away. So many concomitant (though weak) testimonies, render
their report to a certain degree deserving of credit, and lead to a
supposition, that some of the stormy inundations of the North sea, which
in these last centuries have washed away such large tracts of land on
its shores, may have carried away a soil resting on clay, and have
finally uncovered the trees of these moory islets.

Bogs and mosses are little more than lakes filled up with vegetable
matter, usually of aquatic origin. They are to be found not only in
Ireland and Scotland, but also in every northern country, more
especially when thinly peopled. It should be remarked, that Ireland
abounds in springs, which are mostly dry in summer; and that grass and
weeds grow abundantly about these spots. In the winter these springs
swell and run, softening and loosening all the earth about them. Now,
that sward or surface of the earth which consists of the roots of grass,
being lifted up, and made fuzzy or spongy by the water in the winter, is
dried in the spring, and does not fall together, but withers in a tuft.
The new grass which springs through it is again lifted during the
following winter; and thus the spring is still more and more stopped,
and the sward grows thicker and thicker, till at length it makes what is
called a quaking bog. In proportion as it rises and becomes drier, and
as the grass roots and other vegetables become more putrid, together
with the mud and slime of the water, it acquires a blackness, and
becomes what is called a turf bog. When the vegetables rot, it is
considered that the saline particles are in general carried away by the
water, in which they are dissolved; but that the oily or sulphureous
particles remain and float on the water; and it is thus that the turf
acquires its inflammability. The highest mountains of Ireland are, as
well as the plains, covered with bogs, because they abound in springs,
which, on account of a defective population, are not cleared; and thus
they are overrun with bogs. In that country mosses also abound; and the
particular kind which grows in bogs, is remarkable on this account, that
a congeries of its threads, before it is decayed, constitutes the
substance of the light spongy turf, which thus becomes so tough as not
to yield to the spade. This curious substance, in the north of Ireland,
is called _old wives’ tow_, and is not unlike flax. The turf hardens by
degrees, but is still stringy when broken, and at length becomes the red
turf employed as fuel.

The production of the quaking bogs is as follows. When a stream or
spring runs through a flat, it becomes filled with weeds in summer, and
trees fall across and dam it up. During the winter season the water
stagnates more and more every year, until the whole flat is covered. A
coarse kind of grass, peculiar to these bogs, springs up in tufts, the
roots of which are consolidated, and which, in a few years, grow to the
hight of several feet. In the winter the grass rots, and falls with its
seed on the tufts, thus adding to their growth the ensuing spring. The
tops of flags and grass are sometimes interwoven on the surface of the
water, and gradually becoming thicker, cover its surface. On this
covering herbs grow; and by the interweaving of their roots, it is
rendered so strong as to bear a man. Some of these bogs sink, where a
man stands, to a considerable depth, and rise before and behind:
underneath, the water is clear. Even these in time become red bogs; but
may easily be converted into meadow land, by clearing a trench for the
passage of the water.

Sir Hans Sloane, in his account of the bogs of Ireland, published in the
“Philosophical Transactions,” notices a curious fact, namely, that when
the turf-diggers, after having dug out the earth proper to make turf or
peat, reached the bottom, so as to come to the clayey or other soil, by
draining off the water, they met with the roots of fir-trees, with their
stumps standing upright, and their branches spread out on every side
horizontally. This was evidently the place of the growth of these trees,
the branches of the roots of which are in some parts matted, as is seen
in the roots of trees closely planted. Large pieces of wood have been
found, not only in clay-pits, but likewise in quarries or stone-pits, in
the blocks of stone raised out of their strata or layers. The black
spongy mold employed for peat smells strongly of bitumen, or petroleum,
a great proportion of the oil of which is yielded by distillation; so
that, singular as it may appear, not only oil, but a material which may
be used for candles, may be extracted from these peat-bogs in large
quantities; and it has even been proposed that this business should be
carried on on a large scale, with a view to giving prosperity to the
country. In several parts of Ireland a singular phenomenon has been
observed: on horses trampling with their feet on a space of soft ground,
a sudden appearance of light ensued. On the mold, which agreed in color,
lightness, &c., with peat earth, being examined with a microscope, the
light was found to proceed from an abundance of small, semi-transparent,
whitish, live worms which lay in it.

The commissioners appointed by parliament to inquire into the nature and
extent of the bogs of Ireland, and the practicability of draining them,
represent them as occupying thousands of acres, indeed, many square
miles. Their nature and constituent parts are described by them as
consisting of an accumulation of vegetable matter, settling in
successive generations on itself, and converted by the want of
ventilation and motion to a stagnant pool, which first furnished the
elements of life and increase to the plants covering its surface. The
progress of the accumulation may be best conceived by imagining a basin,
or concave reservoir, of a certain extent and depth, formed of clay,
limestone, gravel, &c., through which the water, scantily but constantly
supplied, can not obtain an issue. Undisturbed in this water, a surface
of bog moss grows, decays and putrefies. To this a second generation
succeeds; and this is followed by others, until, at length, the bulk
rises considerably above the level of its bed, forming hillocks of
various hights, shapes and dimensions. The surface of a bog is not level
like a lake, but undulating; and it terminates somewhat abruptly, and
almost perpendicularly. The average hight of the great bogs, above the
level of high-water mark in Dublin harbor, is about two hundred and
fifty feet. Many acres of these bogs have been reclaimed; and the
practicability of draining and cultivating the greater proportion of
them has been pointed out in the reports of the commissioners.

Perthshire, in North Britain, abounds in mosses, the contents of which
are computed to exceed nine thousand acres. The greatest hight of the
moss, above the clay on which it lies, is fourteen feet and a half. Its
surface, when viewed at a distance, seems wholly covered with heath: but
when closely examined, is found to be composed of small tufts of heath,
intermixed with a variety of moss-plants. Here also are found
innumerable trunks of trees, lying along close to their roots, the
latter being still fixed in the clay, as in the natural state.

The irruption of what is called Solway moss has greatly attracted the
public attention; for, although the cause of it is obvious, still the
alteration it produced on the surface of the earth, was more
considerable than any known in Great Britain, as resulting from a
natural cause, since the destruction of Earl Goodwin’s estate. It
happened in the year 1771, after severe rains which had in many places
produced great inundations of the rivers. The following is a concise
description of the spot where this event happened. Along the side of the
river Esk, is a vale, about a mile in breadth, bounded on the south-east
by the river, and on the north-west by a steep bank, about thirty feet
in hight above the level of the vale. From the top of the bank the
ground rises on an easy ascent for about a quarter of a mile, where it
is terminated by the moss, which extends about two miles north and
south, and about a mile and a half east and west, being bounded on the
north-west by the river Sark. It is probable that the solid ground, from
the top of the bank above the vale, was continued in the same direction
under the moss, before its irruption, for a considerable space; for the
moss, at the place where the irruption happened, was inclined toward the
sloping ground. From the edge of the moss there was a gully or hollow,
called by the country people _the gap_, and said to be thirty yards deep
where it entered the vale: down this hollow ran a small rill of water,
which was often dry in summer, not having any other supply but what
filtered from the moss.

The irruption happened, at the head of this gap, on the night of the
sixteenth of November, between the hours of ten and eleven, when all the
neighboring rivers and brooks were prodigiously swollen by the rains. A
large body of the moss was forced, partly by the great fall of rain, and
partly by the springs beneath, into a small beck or burn, which runs
within a few yards of its border to the south-east. By the united
pressure of the water behind it, and of this beck, which was then very
high, it was carried down a narrow glen between two banks about three
hundred feet high, into a wide and spacious plain, over a part of which
it spread with great rapidity. The moss continued for some time to send
off considerable quantities of its substance, which, being borne along
by the torrent, on the back of the first great body, kept it for many
hours in perpetual motion, and drove it still further on. During the
first night, at least four hundred acres of fine arable land were
covered with moss from three to twelve or fifteen feet in depth. Several
houses were destroyed, much corn lost, &c.; but all the inhabitants
escaped. When the waters subsided, the moss also ceased to flow; but two
pretty considerable streams continued to run from the heart of it, and
carried away some pieces of mossy matter to the place where it burst.
They then joined the beck, already mentioned, which with this addition,
resumed its former channel, and with a little assistance from the people
of the neighborhood, made its way to the Esk, through the midst of that
body of moss which obstructed its course. Thus, in a great measure
drained, the new moss fell several feet, and when the fair weather came
on at the end of November, it settled in a firmer and more solid body on
the lands it had overrun. By this inundation about eight hundred acres
of arable ground were overflowed before the moss stopped, and the
habitations of twenty-seven families destroyed.

Tradition has preserved the memory of a similar inundation in another
part of North Britain. At Monteith a moss changed its course in one
night, and covered a great extent of ground. There is also an account in
the “Philosophical Transactions” of a moving moss near Churchtown, in
Lancashire, which greatly alarmed the neighborhood, and was regarded as
a miracle. The moss was observed to rise to a surprising hight, and soon
after to sink as much beneath the level, moving slowly toward the south.


                        CORAL REEFS AND ISLANDS.

Coral belongs to the class of those surprising productions of nature,
which are named _zoöphytes_, or plant-animals, on account of their
filling up the intermediate space between the animal and vegetable
kingdoms; and in treating of them this curious substance will be
distinctly considered. In the mean time, the production of coral reefs
and islands presents one of those geological changes, by which the
earth’s surface has been modified, and has received a new accession from
the sea.

The common foundation of the clusters of islands discovered by modern
navigators in the Pacific ocean, as well as of those belonging to New
South Wales, is evidently of coral structure, immense reefs of which
shoot out in all directions. There is every reason to believe that the
islands which are occasionally raised by the tremendous agency of
subterraneous volcanoes, do not bear any proportion to those which are
perpetually forming, by the silent but persevering efforts of the sea
worms by which coral is produced. Banks of coral are found at all
depths, and at all distances from the shore, entirely unconnected with
the land, and detached from each other. By a quick progression, they
grow up toward the surface; while the winds, heaping up the coral from
deeper water, rapidly accelerate the formation of these banks into
shoals and islands. They become gradually shallower; and when once the
sea meets with resistance, the coral is quickly thrown up by the force
of the waves breaking against the bank. These coral banks have been seen
in all their stages: some in deep water; others with a few rocks
appearing above the surface, just formed into islands without the least
appearance of vegetation; and, lastly, others covered with soil and
weeds.

The loose corals, rolled inward by the billows in large pieces, strike
upon the grounds, and, the reflux being unable to carry them away,
become a bar to the coagulated sand with which they are always
intermixed. This sand, being easiest raised, is lodged at top; and when
its accumulated mass is elevated by violent storms, and no longer within
the reach of common waves, it becomes a resting-place to birds whom the
search of prey draws thither. Their excrement, feathers, &c., augment
the soil, and prepare it for the reception of accidental roots, branches
and seeds cast up by the waves, or brought thither by birds. Thus
islands are formed: the leaves and rotten branches, intermixing with the
sand, produce in time a light black mold, in which trees and shrubs
vegetate and thrive. Cocoa-nuts, which continue long in the sea without
losing their vegetative powers, having been thrown on such islands,
produce trees which are particularly adapted to all soils, whether
sandy, rich or rocky. The violence of the waves, within the tropics,
must generally be directed to two points, according to the monsoons.
Hence the islands formed from coral banks must be long and narrow, and
lie nearly in a meridional direction. Even supposing the banks to be
round, as they seldom are when large, the sea meeting most resistance in
the middle, must heave up the matter in greater quantities there, than
toward the extremities; and, by the same rule, the ends will generally
be open, or at least lowest. They will also commonly have soundings
there, as the remains of the banks, not accumulated, will be under
water. Where the coral banks are not exposed to the common monsoon, they
will alter their direction, and become either round, or extended in the
parallel, or of irregular forms, according to accidental circumstances.

Captain Flinders, in his voyage to the South Pacific, gives an account
of an unbroken reef of coral, three hundred and fifty miles long, on the
coast of New Holland; and he states, that between that country and New
Guinea, the coral formations extend through a distance of seven hundred
miles, interrupted by no intervals of more than thirty miles in length.
He also gives us a lively and interesting description of a coral reef on
the southern coast of New South Wales. On this reef he landed, and the
water being very clear round the edges, a new creation, as it were, but
imitative of the old, was presented to the view. Wheat sheaves,
mushrooms, stags’ horns, cabbage leaves, and a variety of other forms,
were glowing under water with vivid tints of every shade betwixt green,
purple, brown and white; equaling in beauty, and excelling in grandeur,
the most favorite _parterre_ of the curious florist. These were
different species of coral and fungus, growing, as it were, out of the
solid rock, and each had its peculiar form and shade of coloring; but,
whilst contemplating the richness of the scene, the destruction with
which it was pregnant could not be forgotten. Different corals in a dead
state, concreted into a solid mass of a dull white color, composed the
stone of the reef. The negro heads were lumps which stood higher than
the rest; and being generally dry, were blackened by the weather; but
even in these the forms of the different corals and some shells were
distinguishable. The edges of the reef, but particularly on the outside
where the sea broke, were the lightest parts; within these were pools
and holes containing live corals, sponges, sea-eggs and cucumbers; and
many enormous cockles were scattered upon different parts of the reef.
At low water, these cockles seem most commonly to lie half open, but
frequently close with much noise, and the water within the shells then
spouts up in a stream, three or four feet high: it is from this noise
and the spouting of the water that they are discovered, for, in other
respects, they are scarcely to be distinguished from the coral rock.

His description of a coral island which he afterward visited on the same
coast, is truly philosophical and throws great light on these surprising
productions of nature.

“This little island, or rather the surrounding reef, which is three or
four miles long, affords shelter from the south-east winds. It is
scarcely more than a mile in circumference, but appears to be increasing
both in elevation and extent. At no very distant period of time, it was
one of those banks produced by the washing up of sand and broken coral,
of which most reefs afford instances, and those of Torres’ strait a
great many. These banks are in different stages of progress: some, like
this, are become islands, but not yet habitable; some are above
high-water mark, but destitute of vegetation; whilst others are
overflowed with every returning tide. It seems to me, that, when the
animalcules which form the corals at the bottom of the ocean, cease to
live, their structures adhere to each other, by virtue either of the
glutinous remains within, or of some property in salt water; and the
interstices being gradually filled up with sand and broken pieces of
coral washed by the sea, which also adhere, a mass of rock is at length
formed. Future races of these animalcules erect their habitations upon
the rising bank, and die in their turn, to increase, but principally to
elevate, this monument of their wonderful labors. The care taken to work
perpendicularly in the early stages, marks a surprising instinct in
these diminutive creatures. Their wall of coral is for the most part in
situations where the winds are constant, and when it reaches the
surface, it affords a shelter, to the leeward of which their infant
colonies may be safely sent forth; and to this their instinctive
foresight it seems to be owing, that the windward side of a reef exposed
to the open sea, is generally, if not always, the highest part, and
rises almost perpendicular, sometimes from the depth of two hundred, and
perhaps many more fathoms. To be constantly covered with water, seems
necessary to the existence of the animalcules, for they do not work,
except in holes upon the reef, beyond low-water mark; but the coral sand
and other broken remnants thrown up by the sea adhere to the rock, and
form a solid mass with it, as high as the common tides reach. That
elevation surpassed, the future remnants, being rarely covered, lose
their adhesive property; and remaining in a loose state, form what is
usually called a _key_ upon the tops of the reef. The new bank is not
long in being visited by sea-birds; salt plants take root upon it, and a
soil begins to be formed; a cocoa-nut is thrown on shore; land birds
visit it and deposit the seeds of shrubs and trees; every high tide, and
still more every gale, adds something to the bank; the form of an island
is gradually assumed, and last of all comes man to take possession. This
island is well advanced in the above progressive state; having been many
years, probably some ages, above the reach of the highest spring-tides,
or the wash of the surf in the heaviest gales. I distinguished, however,
in the rock which forms its basis, the sand, coral and shells formerly
thrown up, in a more or less perfect state of cohesion; small pieces of
wood, pumice-stone, and other extraneous bodies, which chance had mixed
with the calcareous substances when the cohesion began, were inclosed in
the rock, and, in some cases, were still separable from it without much
force. The upper part of the island is a mixture of the same substances
in a loose state, with a little vegetable soil, and is covered with the
_casuarina_ and a variety of other trees and shrubs, which give food to
paroquets, pigeons, and some other birds; to whose ancestors it is
probable the island was originally indebted for this vegetation.”


              -------------------------------------------


                     WIDE AND INHOSPITABLE DESERTS.


                  ------------------------------------

                            ASIATIC DESERTS.

In Africa, as well as Asia, there are immense tracts of land called
deserts, which consist of vast plains composed of loose sand. Large
portions of these are utterly destitute of vegetation, and sometimes, in
crossing them, the traveler sees not a hill or mountain, or human
dwelling, or even a tree or shrub, or blade of grass. All around is a
sea of sand; and far as the eye can reach, it is one scene of lifeless
solitude and desolation. These trackless wastes are traversed by
caravans, which are companies of travelers usually mounted upon camels.
Horses travel in these sands with difficulty. Their feet sink in the
soil; they are overcome with heat, and parched with drought. The camel,
on the contrary, has a large, spongy foot, which does not sink in the
sand; he can bear excessive heat, and by a curious contrivance of
nature, is enabled to go without water for five or six days. This
valuable creature is called the ship of the desert, because it enables
the merchants of Asia and Africa to transport their merchandise over the
sea of sand, just as a ship carries goods from one part of the world to
another, across the briny ocean. It seems really as if Providence had
provided this singular animal on purpose to enable mankind to traverse
the great deserts which are spread out upon the eastern continent.

The chief Asiatic deserts are in Persia and Arabia, the former of which
countries contains three of considerable extent and celebrity. The first
of these commences on the east of the Tigris, in latitude thirty-three,
and extends to the north of Shuster. The second reaches from the
vicinity of Korn very nearly to the Zurra, in a line, from east to west,
of about four hundred English miles, and from north to south, of about
two hundred and fifty. In the latter direction it joins the great desert
of Kerman, which, alone, extends over a tract of three hundred and fifty
miles. The two may, therefore, be considered as forming one common
desert, stretching north-west and south-east, over a space of about
seven hundred miles; thus intersecting this wide empire into two nearly
equal portions. This vast region is impregnated with niter and other
salts, which taint the neighboring lakes and rivers, and has, on that
account, been denominated the Great Saline Desert.


                            ARABIAN DESERTS.

The sandy deserts of Arabia form one of the most striking objects of
that country. From the hills of Omon, which appear to be a continuation
of those on the other side of the Persian gulf, as far as Mecca, the
greater part of Negad is one prodigious desert, interrupted, toward the
frontiers of Hejaz and Yemen, or Arabia Felix, by Kirge, containing the
district of Sursa, and several _oases_, or fertile spots. The north-west
part of Negad presents almost a continued desert, and is considered as a
prolongation of the one above mentioned.

The Beled el Haram, or Holy Land of Islam, of which Mecca is the
capital, is comprehended between the Red sea, and an irregular line
which, commencing at Arabog, about sixty miles to the north of Djedda,
forms a bend from the north-east to the south-east, in passing by
Yelemlem, two days’ journey to the north-east of Mecca. It thence
continues to Karna, nearly seventy miles to the east of the same place,
and twenty-four miles to the west of Taif, which is without the limit of
the Holy Land; after which, turning to the south-west, it passes by
Drataerk, and terminates at Mehherma upon the coast, at the port named
Almarsa Ibrahim, about ninety miles to the south-east of Djedda.

It therefore appears that the holy land is about one hundred and seventy
miles in length, from the north-west to the south-east, and eighty-four
miles in breadth, from the north-east to the south-west; which space is
comprehended in that part of Arabia known by the name of El Hedjeaz, or
the Land of Pilgrimage, and includes the cities of Medina and Taif. It
has not any river; and the only water to be found, is that of some
inconsiderable springs, which are not numerous, and the brackish water
obtained from the deep wells. Thus it is a real desert. It is at Mecca
and Medina alone, that cisterns have been wrought to preserve the
rain-water; on which account, a garden is very rarely to be seen
throughout this vast territory. The plains are composed either of sand,
or barren earth, entirely abandoned; and, as the inhabitants do not, in
any part of the country, sow any description of grain, they are supplied
with flour, &c., from upper Egypt, Yemen and India.


                            AFRICAN DESERTS.

The most striking feature of Africa consists of the immense deserts
which pervade its surface, and which are supposed to comprise the
one-half of its whole extent. The chief of these is, by way of eminence,
called Sahara, or the Desert. It stretches from the shores of the
Atlantic, with few interruptions, to the confines of Egypt, a space of
more than forty-five degrees, or about three thousand miles, by a
breadth of twelve degrees, or about nine hundred miles; its whole extent
being two-thirds as large as that of the United States. It is one
prodigious expanse of red sand, and sandstone rock, of the granulations
of which the red sand consists. It is, in truth, an empire of sand which
seems to defy every exertion of human power or industry, although it is
interspersed with various islands, and fertile and cultivated spots of
different sizes, where water collects in springs or pools, around which
vegetation springs up. These places, which present a delightful contrast
to the surrounding sterility, and cheer the eye of the weary traveler,
are called _oases_. Fezzan, or Fessan, is the chief of those which have
been hitherto explored.

Nearly in the center of the southern line of this sandy ocean, and about
midway between the Mediterranean sea and the coast of Guinea, rise the
walls of Timbuctoo, a city which constitutes the great mart for the
commerce of all the interior of Africa. To maintain this commerce is the
laborious work of the _akkabaars_, or caravans, which cross this
enormous desert from almost every part of the African coast. The mode in
which it is traversed is highly curious. The caravans consist of several
hundred loaded camels, accompanied by the Arabs who let them out to the
merchants for the transportation of their goods. During their route,
they are often exposed to the attacks of the roving Arabs of Sahara, who
generally commit their depredations on the approach to the confines of
the desert. In this tiresome journey, the caravans do not proceed to the
place of their destination, in a direct line across the trackless
desert, but turn occasionally eastward or westward, according to the
situation of the oases of which we have spoken, which are interspersed
in various parts of the Sahara, like islands in the ocean. These serve
as watering-places to the men, as well as to feed, refresh and replenish
the hardy and patient camel. At each of these cultivated spots, the
caravan sojourns several days, and then proceeds on its journey, until
it reaches another spot of the same description. In the intermediate
journeys, the hot winds, denominated shume, or simoom, are often so
violent and penetrating, as considerably, if not entirely, to exhale the
water carried in skins by the camels for the use of the passengers and
drivers. On these occasions, it is affirmed by the Arabs, five hundred
dollars have been frequently given for a draught of water, and that ten
or twenty dollars are often paid, when a partial exhalation has
occurred. These scorching winds are sometimes called the _samiel_, and
are supposed by some, to be pestilential in their nature.

In 1805, a caravan proceeding from Timbuctoo to Tafilet, was
disappointed in not finding water at one of the usual watering-places,
when, horrible to relate, the whole of the persons belonging to it, two
thousand in number, besides one thousand eight hundred camels, perished
of thirst! Accidents of this nature, account for the vast quantities of
human and other bones which are found heaped together in various parts
of the desert.

The following is the general route of the caravans, in crossing the
great desert. Having left the city of Fez, they proceed at the rate of
three miles and a half an hour, and travel seven hours each day. In the
space of eighteen days they reach Akka, where they remain a month, as
this is the place of rendezvous at which they are formed into one grand
accumulated caravan. In proceeding from Akka to Tagassa, sixteen days
are employed; and here again, the caravan sojourns fifteen days to
refresh the camels. It then directs its course to the oasis and well of
Taudeny, which is reached in seven days; and, after another stay of
fifteen days, it proceeds to Arawan, a watering-place, situated at a
like distance. After having sojourned there fifteen days, it sets out,
and reaches Timbuctoo on the sixth day, after having performed a journey
of fifty-four days of actual traveling, and seventy-five of repose;
making, altogether, from Fez to Timbuctoo, one hundred and twenty-nine
days, or four lunar months and nine days. Another caravan sets out from
Wedinoon and Sok Assa, traversing the desert between the Black mountains
of Cape Bojador and Gualata: it touches at Tagassa and El Garbie, or
West Tagassa, where having staid to collect salt, it proceeds to
Timbuctoo. The time occupied by this caravan is five or six months, as
it proceeds as far as Gibbelel-bied, or the White mountains, near Cape
Blanco, through the deserts of Mograffa and Woled Abusebah, to a place
named Agadeen, where it sojourns twenty days.

The caravans which cross the desert, may be compared to fleets of
merchant vessels under convoy; the _stata_, or convoy of the desert,
consisting of a certain number of Arabs, belonging to the tribe through
whose territory the caravan passes. Thus, in crossing the territory of
Woled Abusebah, it is accompanied by Sebayhees, or people of that
country, who, on reaching the confines of the territory of Woled Deleim,
deliver their charge to the protection of the chiefs of that country.
These, again, conduct it to the confines of the territory of the
Mograffa Arabs, under whose care it at length reaches Timbuctoo. Any
assault on the caravan during this journey, is considered as an insult
to the whole tribe to which the convoy belongs; and for such an outrage
they never fail to take ample revenge. Besides these grand caravans,
others cross the desert, on an emergency, without a convoy or guard.
This is, however, a perilous expedition, as they are too often plundered
near the northern confines of the desert, by two notorious tribes, named
Dikna and Emjot. In the year 1798, a caravan consisting of two thousand
camels, laden with the produce of the Soudan territory, together with
seven hundred slaves, was plundered and dispersed, with great slaughter.
These desperate attacks are conducted in the following manner. The tribe
being assembled, the horses are picketed at the entrance of the tents,
and scouts sent out, to give notice when a caravan is likely to pass.
These scouts being mounted on the fleet horses of the desert, quickly
communicate the intelligence, and the whole tribe mount their horses,
taking with them a sufficient number of female camels, on whose milk
they entirely subsist. Having placed themselves in ambush near an oasis,
or watering-place, they issue thence on the arrival of the caravan,
which they plunder without mercy, leaving the unfortunate merchants
entirely destitute.

The food, dress and accommodations of the people who compose the
caravans, are simple and natural. Being prohibited by their religion the
use of wine and intoxicating liquors, and exhorted by its principles to
temperance in all things, they are commonly satisfied with a few
nourishing dates, and a draught of water, traveling for weeks
successively without any other food. At other times, when they undertake
a journey of a few weeks across the desert, a little barley meal, mixed
with water, constitutes their only nourishment. In following up this
abstemious mode of life, they never complain, but solace themselves with
the hope of reaching their native country, singing occasionally during
the journey, whenever they approach a habitation, or when the camels are
fatigued. Their songs are usually sung _in trio_; and those of the
camel-drivers who have musical voices, join in the chorus. These songs
have a surprising effect in renovating the camels; while the symphony
and time maintained by the singers, surpass what any one would conceive
who has not heard them. The day’s journey is terminated early in the
afternoon, when the tents are pitched, prayers said, and the supper
prepared by sunset. The guests now arrange themselves in a circle, and,
the sober meal being terminated, converse till they are overcome by
sleep. At day-break next morning, they again proceed on their journey.

It might seem that these inhabitants of the desert would lead a
miserable life, and especially that they would often be swallowed up in
the terrific sand storms, which sometimes sweep over these wastes. The
sand, being loose and dry, is borne upward by the whirling tempest, and
is seen driving over the plain, like a terrific thunder-cloud. The
experienced traveler sees the coming danger, and prepares himself for
it. He throws himself upon the ground, and covers his face so as not to
be choked with the dust. The horses and camels, guided by instinct, also
put their noses to the earth to prevent being suffocated. If the storm
is slight, the party escapes; but sometimes, such immense waves of sand
are drifted upon the wind, as to bury the traveler deeply beneath it,
and make it his winding-sheet forever. Sometimes whole caravans, with
their horses and camels, have been in this manner overwhelmed; thus
making the waves of the desert as fatal as the waves of the sea. Yet,
despite the terrors of the desert, the Arabs are a lively and cheerful
race. On their march, they stop at night; and in their tents, spread
beneath the starry canopy, the laugh, the jest and the song go round.
There are among them professed story-tellers, who delight the listeners
with fanciful tales of enchantment, adventure, and love, or perhaps they
repeat, in an animated manner, some fine specimens of Arabic poetry.
Thus it is, that mankind, occupying the gloomiest parts of the earth,
have amusements. As the steel is made to yield its spark, so the Arab
finds pleasure in the desert.


                     PILGRIMAGE ACROSS THE DESERTS.

The following very lively description of a pilgrimage across the desert,
is given by Ali Bey, in his travels in Morocco, Tripoli, &c. It is an
animated picture, which portrays in the strongest colors the perils and
sufferings encountered in these enterprises.

“We continued marching on in great haste, for fear of being overtaken by
the four hundred Arabs whom we wished to avoid. For this reason we never
kept the common road, but passed through the middle of the desert,
marching through stony places, over easy hills. This country is entirely
without water; not a tree is to be seen in it, not a rock which can
afford a shelter or shade. A transparent atmosphere; an intense sun,
darting its beams upon our heads; a ground almost white, and commonly of
a concave form, like a burning-glass; slight breezes, scorching like a
flame. Such is a faithful picture of this district, through which we
were passing. Every man we meet in this desert is looked upon as an
enemy. Having discovered about noon a man in arms, on horseback, who
kept at a certain distance, my thirteen Bedouins united the moment they
perceived him, and darted like an arrow to overtake him, uttering loud
cries, which they interrupted by expressions of contempt and derision;
as, ‘What are you seeking, my brother?’ ‘Where are you going, my son?’
As they made these exclamations they kept playing with their guns above
their heads. The discovered Bedouin profited by his advantage, and fled
into the mountains, where it was impossible to follow him. We met no one
else.

“We had now neither eaten nor drank since the preceding day; our horses
and other beasts were equally destitute; though ever since nine in the
evening we had been traveling rapidly. Shortly after noon we had not a
drop of water remaining, and the men, as well as the poor animals, were
worn out with fatigue. The mules, stumbling every moment, required
assistance to lift them up again, and to support their burden till they
rose. This terrible exertion exhausted the little strength we had left.
At two o’clock in the afternoon a man dropped down stiff, and as if
dead, from great fatigue and thirst. I stopped with three or four of my
people to assist him. The little wet which was left in one of the
leathern budgets, was squeezed out of it, and some drops of water poured
into the poor man’s mouth, but without any effect. I now felt that my
own strength was beginning to forsake me; and becoming very weak, I
determined to mount on horseback, leaving the poor fellow behind. From
this moment others of my caravan began to drop successively, and there
was no possibility of giving them any assistance; they were abandoned to
their unhappy destiny, as every one thought only of saving himself.
Several mules with their burdens were left behind, and I found on my way
two of my trunks on the ground, without knowing what was become of the
mules which had been carrying them, the drivers having forsaken them as
well as the care of my effects and of my instruments.

“I looked upon this loss with the greatest indifference, as if they had
not belonged to me, and pushed on. But my horse began now to tremble
under me, and yet he was the strongest of the whole caravan. We
proceeded in silent despair. When I endeavored to encourage any of the
party to increase his pace, he answered me by looking steadily at me,
and by putting his fore-finger to his mouth to indicate the great thirst
by which he was affected. As I was reproaching our conducting officers
for their inattention, which had occasioned this want of water, they
excused themselves by alleging the mutiny of the oudaias; and besides,
added they, ‘Do we not suffer like the rest?’ Our fate was the more
shocking, as every one of us was sensible of the impossibility of
supporting the fatigue to the place where we were to meet with water
again. At last, at about four in the evening, I had my turn and fell
down with thirst and fatigue. Extended without consciousness on the
ground in the middle of the desert, left only with four or five men, one
of whom had dropped at the same moment with myself, and all without any
means of assisting me, because they knew not where to find water, and,
if they had known it, had not strength to fetch it, I should have
perished with them on the spot, if providence, by a kind of miracle, had
not preserved us.

“Half an hour had already elapsed since I had fallen senseless to the
ground, (as I have since been told,) when, at some distance, a
considerable caravan, of more than two thousand souls, was seen
advancing. It was under the direction of a marabout or saint called Sidi
Alarbi, who was sent by the sultan to Ttemsen or Tremecen. Seeing us in
this distressed situation, he ordered some skins of water to be thrown
over us. After I had received several of them over my face and hands, I
recovered my senses, opened my eyes, and looked around me, without being
able to discern anybody. At last, however, I distinguished seven or
eight shereefs and faquirs, who gave me their assistance, and showed me
much kindness. I endeavored to speak to them, but an invincible knot in
my throat seemed to hinder me; I could only make myself understood by
signs, and by pointing to my mouth with my finger. They continued
pouring water over my face, arms and hands, and at last I was able to
swallow small mouthfuls. This enabled me to ask, ‘Who are you?’ When
they heard me speak, they expressed their joy, and answered me, ‘Fear
nothing; far from being robbers, we are your friends;’ and every one
mentioned his name. I began by degrees to recollect their faces, but was
not able to remember their names. They then poured over me a still
greater quantity of water, gave me some to drink, filled some of my
leather bags, and left me in haste, as every minute spent in this place
was precious to them, and could not be repaired.

“This attack of thirst is perceived all of a sudden by an extreme
aridity of the skin; the eyes appear to be bloody; the tongue and mouth,
both inside and outside, are covered with a crust of the thickness of a
crown piece; this crust is of a dark yellow color, of an insipid taste,
and of a consistence like the soft wax from a beehive. A faintness or
languor takes away the power to move; a kind of knot in the throat and
diaphragm, attended with great pain, interrupts respiration. Some
wandering tears escape from the eyes, and at last the sufferer drops
down to the earth, and in a few moments loses all consciousness. These
are the symptoms which I remarked in my unfortunate fellow-travelers,
and which I experienced myself. I got with difficulty on my horse again,
and we proceeded on our journey. My Bedouins and my faithful Salem were
gone on different directions to find out some water, and two hours
afterward they returned one after another, carrying along with them some
good or bad water, as they had been able to find it: every one presented
to me part of what he had brought; I was obliged to taste it, and I
drank twenty times, but as soon as I swallowed it my mouth became as dry
as before; at last I was not able either to spit or to speak.

“The greatest part of the soil of the desert consists of pure clay,
except some small traces of a calcareous nature. The whole surface is
covered with a bed of chalky, calcareous stone of a whitish color,
smooth, round and loose, and of the size of the fist; they are almost
all of the same dimension, and their surface is carious like pieces of
old mortar: I look upon this to be a true volcanic production. This bed
is extended with such perfect regularity, that the whole desert is
covered with it; a circumstance which makes pacing over it very
fatiguing to the traveler. No animal is to be seen in this desert,
neither quadrupeds, birds, reptiles, nor insects, nor any plant
whatever; and the traveler who is obliged to pass through it, is
surrounded by the silence of death. It was not till four in the evening
that we began to distinguish some small plants burnt with the sun, and a
tree of a thorny nature without blossom or fruit.”

The passage across the Nubian desert, is, in its general features, the
same as that over the great desert of Sahara. The following narrative is
somewhat abridged from Bayard Taylor’s “Journey to Central Africa.” “My
little caravan consisted of six camels, including that of the guide. We
passed the miserable hamlet of Korosko, turned a corner of the mountain
chain into a narrow, stony valley, and in a few minutes lost sight of
the Nile and his belt of palms. Thenceforward, for many days, the only
green thing to be seen in the wilderness was myself. The first day’s
journey lay among rugged hills, thrown together in confusion, with no
apparent system or direction. They were of jet black sandstone, and
resembled immense piles of coke or anthracite. The small glens and
basins inclosed in this chaos, were filled with glowing yellow sand,
which, in many places, streamed down the crevices of the black rocks,
like rivulets of fire. The path was strewn with hollow globes of hard,
black stones, precisely resembling cannon-balls. The guide gave me one
of the size of a rifle bullet, with a seam around the center, as if cast
in a mold. The thermometer showed a temperature of eighty degrees at two
o’clock in the afternoon, but the heat was tempered by a pure fresh
breeze. After eight hours’ travel, I made my first camp, at sunset, in a
little hollow inclosed by the mountains, where a gray jackal, after
being twice shot at, came and looked into the door of the tent.

“I found dromedary-riding not at all difficult. One sits on a very lofty
seat, with his feet crossed over the animal’s shoulders, or resting on
his neck. The body is obliged to rock backward and forward, on account
of the long, swinging gait; and as there is no stay or fulcrum, except a
blunt pommel, around which the legs are crossed, some little power of
equilibrium is necessary. My dromedary was a strong, stately beast, of a
light cream color, and of so even a gait that it would bear the Arab
test: that is, one might drink a cup of coffee while going on a full
trot, without spilling a drop. I found great advantage in the use of the
oriental costume. My trowsers allowed the legs perfect freedom of
motion, and I soon learned so many different modes of crossing those
members that no day was sufficient to exhaust them. The rising and
kneeling of the animal is hazardous at first, as his long legs double
together like a carpenter’s rule, and you are thrown backward and then
forward, and then backward again; but the trick is soon learned. The
soreness and fatigue of which many travelers complain, I never felt; and
I attribute much of it to the Frank dress. I rode from eight to ten
hours a day, read and even dreamed in the saddle, and was at night as
fresh and unwearied as when I mounted in the morning.

“My caravan was accompanied by four Arabs. They owned the burden camels,
which they urged along with the cry of ‘Yoho! Shekh Abd-el Kader!’ and a
shrill barbaric song, the refrain of which was, ‘O prophet of God, help
the camels, and bring us safely to our journey’s end!’ They were very
susceptible to cold, and a temperature of fifty degrees, which we
frequently had in the morning, made them tremble like aspen leaves, and
they were sometimes so benumbed that they could scarcely lead the
camels. They wore long swords, carried in a leathern scabbard over the
left shoulder, and sometimes favored us with a war-dance, which
consisted merely in springing into the air with a brandished sword, and
turning round once before coming down. They were all very devout,
retiring a short distance from the road to say their prayers, at the
usual hours, and performing the prescribed ablutions with sand instead
of water. On the second morning, we passed through a gorge in the black
hills, and entered a region called _El Biban_, or ‘The Gates.’ Here the
mountains, though still grouped in the same disorder, were more open,
and gave room to plains of sand several miles in length. The narrow
openings, through which the road passes from one plain to another, gave
rise to the name. The mountains are higher than on the Nile, and present
the most wonderful configurations: towers, fortresses, walls, pyramids,
temples in ruin, of an inky blackness near at hand, but tinged of a
deep, glowing violet hue in the distance. Toward noon I saw a _mirage_,
a lake in which the broken peaks were reflected with great distinctness.
One of the Nubians who was with us, pointed out a spot where he was
obliged to climb the rocks, the previous summer, to avoid being drowned.
During the heavy tropical rains which sometimes fall here, the hundreds
of pyramidal hills pour down such floods that the sand can not
immediately drink them up, and the valleys are turned into lakes. The
man described the roaring of the waters, down the clefts of the rocks,
as something terrible. In summer the passage of the desert is much more
arduous than in winter, and many men and camels perish. The road was
strewn with bones and carcasses, and I frequently counted twenty dead
camels within a stone’s throw. The stone-heaps which are seen on all the
spurs of the hills, as landmarks for caravans, have become useless,
since one could find his way by the bones in the sand. My guide, who was
a great believer in afrites and devils, said that formerly many persons
lost the way and perished from thirst, all of which was the work of evil
spirits. Toward noon, on the third day, we passed the last of the
‘gates,’ and entered the _Bahr bela Ma_, (river without water,) a broad
plain of burning yellow sand. The gateway is very imposing, especially
on the eastern side, where it is broken by a valley or gorge of
Tartarean blackness. As we passed the last peak, my guide, who had
ridden in advance, dismounted beside what seemed to be a collection of
graves—little ridges of sand, with rough head and foot stones. He sat by
one which he had just made. As I came up he informed me that all
travelers who crossed the Nubian desert, for the first time, are here
expected to pay a toll, or fee to the guide and camel-men. ‘But what if
I do not choose to pay?’ I asked. ‘Then you will immediately perish, and
be buried here. The graves are those of persons who refused to pay.’ As
I had no wish to occupy the beautiful mound he had heaped for me, with
the thigh-bones of a camel at the head and foot, I gave the men a few
piasters, and passed the place. He then plucked up the bones and threw
them away, and restored the sand to its original level.[8]

-----

Footnote 8:

  “Burckhardt gives the following account of the same custom, in his
  travels in Nubia. ‘In two hours and a half we came to a plain on the
  top of the mountain called _Akabet el Benat_, the Rocks of the Girls.
  Here the Arabs who serve as guides through these mountains, have
  devised a singular mode of extorting presents from the traveler: they
  alight at certain spots in the Akabet El Benat, and beg a present; if
  it is refused, they collect a heap of sand, and mold it into the form
  of a diminutive tomb, and then placing a stone at each of the
  extremities, they apprise the traveler that his tomb is made; meaning,
  that henceforward, there will be no security for him, in this rocky
  wilderness. Most persons pay a trifling contribution, rather than have
  their graves made before their eyes; there were, however, several
  tombs of this description dispersed over the plain.’”

-----

“The _Bahr bela Ma_ spread out before us, glittering in the hot sun.
About a mile to the eastward lay (apparently) a lake of blue water.
Reeds and water-plants grew on its margin, and its smooth surface
reflected the rugged outline of the hill beyond. The waterless river is
about two miles in breadth, and appears to have been at one time the bed
of a large stream. It crosses all the caravan routes in the desert, and
is supposed to extend from the Nile to the Red sea. It may have been the
outlet for the river, before its waters forced a passage through the
primitive chains which cross its bed at Assouan and Kalabshee. A
geological exploration of this part of Africa could not fail to produce
very interesting results. Beyond the _Bahr bela Ma_ extends the broad
central plateau of the desert, fifteen hundred feet above the sea. It is
a vast reach of yellow sand, dotted with low, isolated hills, which in
some places are based on large beds of light-gray sandstone of an
unusually fine and even grain. Small towers of stone have been erected
on the hills nearest the road, in order to guide the couriers who travel
by night. Near one of them the guide pointed out the grave of a
merchant, who had been murdered there two years previous, by his three
slaves. The latter escaped into the desert, but probably perished, as
they were never heard of afterward. In the smooth, loose sand, I had an
opportunity of reviving my forgotten knowledge of trackography, and soon
learned to distinguish the feet of hyenas, foxes, ostriches, lame camels
and other animals. The guide assured me that there were devils in the
desert; but one only sees them when he travels alone.

“On this plain the mirage, which first appeared in the _Biban_,
presented itself under a variety of wonderful aspects. Thenceforth, I
saw it every day, for hours together, and tried to deduce some rules
from the character of its phenomena. It appears on all sides, except
that directly opposite to the sun, but rarely before nine in the
morning, or after three of the afternoon. The color of the apparent
water is always precisely that of the sky, and this is a good test to
distinguish it from real water, which is invariably of a deeper hue. It
is seen on a gravelly as well as a sandy surface, and often fills with
shining pools the slight depressions in the soil at the bases of the
hills. Where it extends to the horizon there is no apparent line, and it
then becomes an inlet of the sky, as if the walls of heaven were melting
down and flowing in upon the earth. Sometimes a whole mountain chain is
lifted from the horizon and hung in the air, with its reflected image
joined to it, base to base. I frequently saw, during the forenoon, lakes
of sparkling blue water, apparently not a quarter of a mile distant.[9]
The waves ripple in the wind; tall reeds and water-plants grow on the
margin, and the desert rocks behind cast their shadows on the surface.
It is impossible to believe it a delusion. You advance nearer, and
suddenly, you know not how, the lake vanishes. There is a grayish film
over the spot, but before you have decided whether the film is in the
air or in your eyes, that too disappears, and you see only the naked
sand. What you took to be reeds and water-plants probably shows itself
as a streak of dark gravel. The most probable explanation of the mirage
which I could think of, was, that it was actually a reflection of the
sky upon a stratum of heated air, next the sand.

-----

Footnote 9:

  In a previous chapter, Taylor says: “Before returning on board, we saw
  a wonderful _mirage_. Two lakes of blue water, glittering in the sun,
  lay spread in the yellow sands, apparently not more than a mile
  distant. There was not the least sign of vapor in the air; and as we
  were quite unacquainted with the appearance of the mirage, we decided
  that the lakes were Nile water, left from the inundation. I pointed to
  them, and asked the Arabs, ‘Is that water?’ ‘No, no!’ they all
  exclaimed; ‘that is no water; that is _Bar Shaytan_,’ a river of the
  devil!”

-----

“I found the desert life not only endurable but very agreeable. No
matter how warm it might be at midday, the nights were always fresh and
cool, and the wind blew strong from the north-west, during the greater
part of the time. The temperature varied from fifty or fifty-five
degrees at six in the morning, to eighty or eighty-five degrees at two
in the afternoon. The extremes were forty-seven and a hundred degrees.
So great a change of temperature every day was not so unpleasant as
might be supposed. In my case, Nature seemed to make a special provision
in order to keep the balance right. During the hot hours of the day I
never suffered inconvenience from the heat, but up to eighty-five
degrees felt sufficiently cool. I seemed to absorb the rays of the sun,
and as night came on and the temperature of the air fell, that of my
skin rose, till at last I glowed through and through, like a live coal.
It was a peculiar sensation, which I never experienced before, but was
rather pleasant than otherwise. My face, however, which was alternately
exposed to the heat radiated from the sand, and the keen morning wind,
could not accommodate itself to so much contraction and expansion. The
skin cracked and peeled off more than once, and I was obliged to rub it
daily with butter. I mounted my dromedary with a ‘shining morning face,’
until, from alternate buttering and burning, it attained the hue and
crispness of a well-basted partridge.

“I soon fell into a regular daily routine of travel, which, during all
my later experiences of the desert, never became monotonous. I rose at
dawn every morning, bathed my eyes with a handful of the precious water,
and drank a cup of coffee. After the tent had been struck and the camels
laden, I walked ahead for two hours, often so far in advance that I lost
sight and hearing of the caravan. I found an unspeakable fascination in
the sublime solitude of the desert. I often beheld the sun rise, when,
within the wide ring of the horizon, there was no other living creature
to be seen. He came up in awful glory, and it would have been a natural
act, had I cast myself upon the sand and worshiped him. The sudden
change in the coloring of the landscape, on his appearance, the lighting
up of the dull sand into a warm golden hue, and the tintings of purple
and violet on the distant porphyry hills, was a morning miracle, which I
never beheld without awe. The richness of this coloring made the desert
beautiful; it was too brilliant for desolation. The scenery, so far from
depressing, inspired and exhilarated me. I never felt the sensation of
physical health and strength in such perfection, and was ready to shout
from morning till night, from the overflow of happy spirits. The air is
an elixir of life, as sweet and pure and refreshing as that which the
first man breathed, on the morning of creation. You inhale the
unadulterated elements of the atmosphere, for there are no exhalations
from moist earth, vegetable matter, or the smokes and steams which arise
from the abodes of men, to stain its purity. This air, even more than
its silence and solitude, is the secret of one’s attachment to the
desert. It is a beautiful illustration of the compensating care of that
providence which leaves none of the waste places of the earth without
some atoning glory. Where all the pleasant aspects of nature are
wanting; where there is no green thing, no fount for the thirsty lip,
scarcely the shadow of a rock to shield the wanderer in the blazing
noon; God has breathed upon the wilderness his sweetest and tenderest
breath, giving clearness to the eye, strength to the frame, and the most
joyous exhilaration to the spirits.

“Achmet always insisted on my taking a saber as a protection against the
hyenas, but I was never so fortunate as to see more than their tracks,
which crossed the path at every step. I saw occasionally the footprints
of ostriches, but they, as well as the giraffe, are scarce in this
desert. Toward noon, we made a halt in the shadow of a rock, or if no
rock was at hand, on the bare sand, and took our breakfast. One’s daily
bread is never sweeter than in the desert. The rest of the day I jogged
along patiently beside the baggage camels, and at sunset halted for the
night. A divan on the sand, and a well-filled pipe, gave me patience
while dinner was preparing, and afterward I made the necessary entries
in my journal. I had no need to court sleep, after being rocked all day
on the dromedary. Until noon of the fourth day we journeyed over a vast
plain of sand, interrupted by low reefs of black rock. Soon after midday
the plain was broken by low ranges of hills, and we saw in front and to
the east of us many blue mountain-chains. Our road approached one of
them, a range, several miles in length, the highest peak of which
reached an altitude of a thousand feet. The sides were precipitous and
formed of vertical strata, but the crests were agglomerations of loose
stones, as if shaken out of some enormous coal-scuttle. The glens and
gorges were black as ink; no speck of any other color relieved the
terrible gloom of this singular group of hills. Their aspect was much
more than sterile: it was infernal. The name given to them by the guide
was _Djilet e’ Djindee_, the meaning of which I could not learn. At
their foot I found a few thorny shrubs, the first sign of vegetation
since leaving Korosko. We encamped half an hour before sunset on a
gravelly plain, between two spurs of the savage hills, in order that our
camels might browse on the shrubs, and they were only too ready to take
advantage of the permission. They snapped off the hard, dry twigs,
studded with cruel thorns, and devoured them as if their tongues were
made of cast-iron. We were now in the haunts of the gazelle and the
ostrich, but saw nothing of them.

“On the fifth day we left the plain, and entered a country of broken
mountain-ranges. In one place the road passed through a long, low hill
of slate rock, by a gap which had been purposely broken. The strata were
vertical, the laminæ varying from one to four inches in thickness, and
of as fine a quality and smooth a surface as I ever saw. A long wady, or
valley, which appeared to be the outlet of some mountain-basin, was
crossed by a double row of stunted doum-palms, marking a water-course
made by the summer rains. Eyoub pointed it out to me, as the half-way
station between Korosko and Abou-Hammed. For two hours longer we
threaded the dry wadys, shut in by black, chaotic hills. It was now
noonday, I was very hungry, and the time allotted by Eyoub for reaching
_Bir Mûrr-hàt_ had passed. He saw my impatience and urged his dromedary
into a trot, calling out to me to follow him. We bent to the west,
turned the flank of a high range, and after half an hour’s steady
trotting, reached a side-valley or _cul-de-sac_, branching off from the
main wady. A herd of loose camels, a few goats, two black camel’s-hair
tents, and half a dozen half-naked Ababdehs, showed that we had reached
the wells. A few shallow pits, dug in the center of the valley,
furnished an abundance of bitter, greenish water, which the camels
drank, but which I could not drink. The wells are called by the Arabs
_el morra_, ‘the bitter.’ Fortunately, I had two skins of Nile-water
left, which, with care, would last to Abou-Hammed. The water was always
cool and fresh, though in color and taste it resembled a decoction of
old shoes. We left Mûrr-hàt at sunrise, on the morning of the sixth day.
I walked ahead, through the foldings of the black mountains, singing as
I went, from the inspiration of the brilliant sky and the pure air. In
an hour and a half, the pass opened on a broad plain of sand, and I
waited for my caravan, as the day was growing hot. On either side, as we
continued our journey, the blue lakes of the mirage glittered in the
sun. Several isolated pyramids rose above the horizon, far to the east,
and a purple mountain-range in front, apparently two or three hours
distant, stretched from east to west. ‘We will breakfast in the shade of
those mountains,’ I said to Achmet, but breakfast-time came and they
seemed no nearer, so I sat down in the sand and made my meal. Toward
noon we met large caravans of camels, coming from Berber. Some were
laden with gum, but the greater part were without burdens, as they were
to be sold in Egypt. In the course of the day upward of a thousand
passed us. The afternoon was intensely hot, the thermometer standing at
one hundred degrees, but I felt little annoyance from the heat, and used
no protection against it. The sand was deep and the road a weary one for
the camels, but the mountains which seemed so near at hand in the
morning were not yet reached. We pushed forward; the sun went down, and
the twilight was over before we encamped at their base. The tent was
pitched by the light of the crescent moon, which hung over a
pitchy-black peak. I had dinner at the fashionable hour of seven. Achmet
was obliged to make soup of the water of Mûrr-hàt, which had an
abominable taste. I was so drowsy that before my pipe was finished, I
tumbled upon my mattress, and was unconscious until midnight, when I
awoke with the sensation of swimming in a river of lava.

“The tent was struck in the morning starlight, at which time the
thermometer stood at fifty-five degrees. I walked alone through the
mountains, which rose in conical peaks to the hight of near a thousand
feet. The path was rough and stony until I reached the outlet of the
pass. On leaving the mountain, we entered a plain of coarse gravel,
abounding with pebbles of agate and jasper. Another range, which Eyoub
called Djebel Dighlee, appeared in front, and we reached it about noon.
The day was again hot, the mercury rising to ninety-five degrees. It
took us nearly an hour to pass Djebel Dighlee, beyond which the plain
stretched away to the Nile, interrupted here and there by a distant
peak. Far in advance of us lay Djebel Mokràt, the limit of the next
day’s journey. From its top, said Eyoub, one may see the palm-groves
along the Nile. We encamped on the open plain, not far from two black
pyramidal hills, in the flush of a superb sunset. The ground was
traversed by broad strata of gray granite, which lay on the surface in
huge bowlders. Our camels here found a few bunches of dry, yellow grass,
which had pierced the gravelly soil. To the south-east was a mountain
called by the Arabs _Djebel Nogàra_, (the mountain of the Drum,)
because, as Eyoub declared, a devil who had his residence among its
rocks, frequently beat a drum at night, to scare the passing caravans.

“The stars were sparkling freshly and clearly when I rose, on the
morning of the eighth day, and Djebel Mokràt lay like a faint shadow on
the southern horizon. The sun revealed a few isolated peaks to the right
and left, but merely distant isles on the vast, smooth ocean of the
desert. It was a rapture to breathe air of such transcendent purity and
sweetness. I breakfasted on the immense floor, sitting in the sun, and
then jogged on all day, in a heat of ninety degrees, toward Djebel
Mokràt, which seemed as far off as ever. The sun went down, and it was
still ahead of us. ‘That is a _Djebel Shaytan_,’ I said to Eyoub; ‘or
rather, it is no mountain; it is an afrite.’ ‘O effendi!’ said the old
man, ‘don’t speak of afrites here. There are many in this part of the
desert, and if a man travels alone here at night, one of them walks
behind him and forces him to go forward and forward, until he has lost
his path.’ We rode on by the light of the moon and stars; and two hours
after sunset, we _killed_ Djebel Mokràt, as the Arabs say: that is,
turned its corner. The weary camels were let loose among some clumps of
dry, rustling reeds, and I stretched myself out on the sand, after
twelve hours in the saddle. Our water was nearly exhausted by this time,
and the provisions were reduced to hermits’ fare, bread, rice and dates.
I had, however, the spice of a savage appetite, which was no sooner
appeased, than I fell into a profound sleep. I could not but admire the
indomitable pluck of the little donkeys owned by the Kenoos. These
animals not only carried provisions and water for themselves and their
masters, the whole distance, but the latter rode them the greater part
of the way; yet they kept up with the camels, plying their little legs
as ambitiously the last day as the first. I doubt whether a horse would
have accomplished as much under similar circumstances.

“The next morning we started joyfully, in hope of seeing the Nile; and
even Eyoub, for the first time since leaving Korosko, helped to load the
camels. In an hour we passed the mountain of Mokràt, but the same
endless plain of yellow gravel extended before us to the horizon. Eyoub
had promised that we should reach Abou-Hammed in half a day, and even
pointed out some distant blue mountains in the south, as being beyond
the Nile. Nevertheless, we traveled nearly till noon without any change
of scenery, and no more appearance of river than the abundant streams of
the mirage, on all sides. I drank my last cup of water for breakfast,
and then continued my march in the burning sun, with rather dismal
spirits. Finally, the desert, which had been rising since we left the
mountain, began to descend, and I saw something like round granite
bowlders lying on the edge of the horizon. ‘Effendi, see the
doum-trees!’ cried Eyoub. I looked again: they _were_ doum-palms, and so
broad and green that they must certainly stand near water. Soon we
descended into a hollow in the plain, looking down which I saw to the
south a thick grove of trees, and over their tops the shining surface of
the Nile. ‘Ali,’ I called to my sailor-servant, ‘look at that great
_bahr shaytan_!’ The son of the Nile, who had never before, in all his
life, been more than a day out of sight of its current, was almost
beside himself with joy. ‘Wallah, master,’ he cried; ‘that is no river
of the devil: it is the real Nile, the water of Paradise.’ It did my
heart good to see his extravagant delight. ‘If you were to give me five
piasters, master,’ said he, ‘I would not drink the bitter water of
Mûrr-hàt.’ The guide made me a salutation, in his dry way, and the two
Nubians greeted me with ‘A great welcome to you, O effendi!’ With every
step the valley unfolded before me; such rich deeps of fanlike foliage,
such a glory in the green of the beans and lupines, such radiance beyond
description in the dance of the sunbeams on the water! The landscape was
balm to my burning eyes, and the mere sight of the glorious green
herbage was a sensuous delight, in which I rioted for the rest of the
day.”


                          SANDS OF THE DESERT.

         “Now o’er their head the whizzing whirlwinds breathe,
         And the live desert pants and heaves beneath;
         Tinged by the crimson sun, vast columns rise
         Of eddying sands, and war amid the skies,
         In red arcades the billowy plain surround,
         And stalking turrets dance upon the ground.”—DARWIN.

In the pathless desert, high mounds of sand, shifting with every change
of wind, surround the traveler on every side, and conceal from his view
all other objects. There the wind is of a surprising rapidity; and the
sand is so extremely fine, that it forms on the ground waves which
resemble those of the sea. These waves rise up so fast, that in a very
few hours a hill of from twenty to thirty feet high is transported from
one place to another. The shifting of these hills, however, does not
take place on a sudden, as is generally believed, and is not by any
means capable of surprising and burying a caravan while on the march.
The mode in which the transposition of the hills takes place is not
difficult of explanation. The wind sweeping the sand from the surface
continually, and that with an astonishing rapidity, the ground lowers
every moment: but the quantity of sand in the air increasing as quickly
by successive waves, can not support itself there, but falls in heaps,
and forms a new hill, leaving the place it before occupied level, and
with the appearance of having been swept.

It is necessary to guard the eyes and mouth against the quantity of sand
which is always flying about in the air; and the traveler has to seek
the right direction, to avoid being lost in the windings made in the
middle of the hills of sand which bound the sight, and which shift from
one spot to another so often, as not to leave anything to be seen
besides the sky and sand, without any mark by which the position can be
known. Even the deepest footstep in the sand of either man or horse
disappears the moment the foot is raised. The immensity, the swiftness,
and the everlasting motion of these waves when the wind is blowing,
disturb the sight both of men and beasts, so that they are almost
continually marching as if in the dark. The camel gives here a proof of
his great superiority; his long neck, perpendicularly erected, removes
his head from the ground, and from the thick part of the waves; his eyes
are well defended by thick eye-lids, largely provided with hair, and
which he keeps half shut; the construction of his feet, broad and
cushion-like, prevents his treading deep into the sand; his long legs
enable him to pass the same space with only half the number of steps of
any other animal, and therefore with less fatigue. These advantages give
him a solid and easy gait, on a ground where all other animals walk with
slow, short, and uncertain steps, and in a tottering manner. Hence the
camel, intended by nature for these journeys, affords a new motive of
praise to the Creator, who in his wisdom has given the camel to the
African, as he has bestowed the reindeer on the Laplander.

Lieutenant Pottinger, in his travels in Beloochistan, a province of
India, gives the following interesting account of those curious
phenomena. He had to pass over a desert of red sand, the particles of
which were so light, that when taken in the hand they were scarcely more
than palpable, the whole being thrown by the winds into an irregular
mass of waves, principally running east and west, and varying in hight
from ten to twenty feet. The greater part of them rose perpendicularly
on the opposite side to that from which the prevailing north-west wind
blew, and might readily have been fancied, at a distance, to resemble a
new brick wall. The side facing the wind sloped off with a gradual
declivity toward the base of the next windward wave, and then again
ascended in a straight line, in the same extraordinary manner as above
described, so as to form a hollow or path between them. Our traveler
kept as much in these paths as the direction he had to take would allow;
but it was not without great difficulty and fatigue that the camels were
urged over the waves, when it was requisite to do so, and more
particularly when they had to clamber up the leeward or perpendicular
face of them, in attempting which they were often defeated. On the
oblique or shelving side they ascended pretty well, their broad feet
saving them from sinking deeper than did the travelers themselves; and
the instant they found the top of the wave giving way from their weight,
they most expertly dropped on their knees, and in that posture gently
slid down with the sand, which was luckily so unconnected, that the
leading camel usually caused a sufficient breach for the others to
follow on foot. The night was spent under shelter of one of these sand
waves, the surrounding atmosphere being uncommonly hot and close.

On the following day, in crossing a desert of the same description, the
like impediments occurred; but these were trifling compared with the
distress suffered, not only by our traveler and his people, but also by
the camels, from the floating particles of sand; a phenomenon for which
he confesses himself at a loss to account. When he first observed it, in
the morning, the desert appeared to have, at the distance of half a mile
or less, an elevated and flat surface from six to twelve inches higher
than the summits of the sand waves. This vapor appeared to recede as he
advanced, and once or twice completely encircled his party, limiting the
horizon to a very confined space, and conveying a most gloomy and
unnatural sensation to the mind of the beholders, who were at the same
moment imperceptibly covered with innumerable atoms of small sand, which
getting into the eyes, mouth and nostrils, caused excessive irritation,
attended by an extreme thirst, which was increased in no small degree by
the intense heat of the sun. This annoyance is supposed by the natives
to originate in the solar beams causing the dust of the desert, as they
emphatically call it, to rise and float through the air; a notion which
appears to be in a great measure correct, this sandy ocean being only
visible during the hottest part of the day. The following simple theory
of these moving sands is submitted by the author. When the violent
whirlwinds which prevail in the desert, terminate in gusts of wind, they
usually expand over several square miles of surface, raging with
irresistible force, and bearing upward an immense body of sand, which
descends as the current of air that gave it action dies away, thus
creating the extraordinary appearance in question. If it should be asked
what prevents the sand from subsiding altogether, when it has so far
accomplished this as to rest apparently on the waves, the answer is,
that all the grosser particles do settle, but that the more minute ones
become rarefied to such a degree by the heat produced by the burning
sand on the red soil, that they remain as it were in an undecided and
undulating state, until the returning temperature restores their
specific gravity; when, by an undeviating law of nature, they sink to
the earth. This in some measure coincides with the opinion of the native
Brahoes; but, conformably to their notion, it is evident that the
floating sands would be apparent at all periods of excessive solar
influence; which not being the case, it becomes necessary to find a
primary cause for the phenomenon. To remove any suspicion of his having
been deceived in the reality of this floating vapor of sand, he adds
that he has seen this phenomenon, and the _shurab_, or watery illusion
so frequent in deserts, called by the French _mirage_, in opposite
quarters at the same moment, each of them being to his sight perfectly
distinct. While the former had a cloudy and dim aspect, the latter was
luminous, and could not be mistaken for water. To corroborate what he
has here advanced, he states that he was afterward joined by a faquir
from Kaboul, who informed him that he had witnessed the moving sands, in
passing through the desert from Seistan, to a much greater degree than
has been described; and, what is scarcely credible, he spoke of having
been forced to sit down, in consequence of the density of the cloud in
which he was enveloped.

Our traveler next proceeds to a curious description of the pillars or
columns of sand formed in the deserts. He experienced a violent tornado,
or gust of wind, which came on so suddenly, that, if he had not been
apprised of its strength by the guide, it might have been disastrous to
his party, in whom it would have been an act of temerity to have
endeavored to sit on the camels during its impetuous fury. Before it
began, the sky was clear, save a few small clouds in the north-west
quarter; and the only warnings it afforded, were the oppressive
sultriness of the air, and a vast number of whirlwinds springing up on
all sides. These whirlwinds, he observes, might perhaps be more
correctly expressed by some other name; but as the wind issued from them
he adopts the term. They are vast columns of sand, which begin by a
trifling agitation, with a revolving motion on the surface of the
desert, and gradually ascend and expand, until their tops are lost to
the view. In this manner they move about with every breath of wind, and
are observed, thirty or forty of them at the same time, of different
dimensions, apparently from one to twenty yards in diameter. Those who
have seen a waterspout at sea, may exactly conceive the same formed of
sand on shore. The moment the guide saw the whirlwinds disperse, which
they did as if by magic, and a cloud of dust approaching, he advised the
party to dismount, which they had hardly time to do, and lodge
themselves snugly behind the camels, when a storm burst upon them with a
furious blast of wind, the rain falling in huge drops, and the air being
so completely darkened, that they were unable to discern any object at
the distance of even five yards.

The following is Bruce’s account of this singular phenomenon, which he
represents as one of the most magnificent spectacles imaginable, and by
which he and his companions were at once surprised and terrified. Having
reached the vast expanse of desert which lies to the west and north-west
of Chendi, they saw a number of prodigious pillars of sand at different
distances, at times moving with great celerity, and at others stalking
on with a majestic slowness. At intervals the party thought they should
be overwhelmed by these sand-pillars; and small quantities of sand did
actually more than once reach them. Again, they would retreat so as to
be almost out of sight, their summits reaching the very clouds. There
the tops often separated from the bodies; and these once disjointed,
dispersed in the air, and did not appear more. They were sometimes
broken near the middle, as if struck by a large cannon-shot. About noon
they began to advance with considerable swiftness upon the party, the
wind being very strong at north. Eleven of them ranged alongside, at
about the distance of three miles from them; and at this interval the
greatest diameter of the largest of them appeared to Mr. Bruce to be
about ten feet. They retired with a wind at south-east, leaving an
impression on our traveler’s mind, to which he could give no name,
though assuredly one of its ingredients was fear, blended with a
considerable portion of wonder and surprise. It was in vain to think of
fleeing: the swiftest horse, or fastest sailing ship, would have been of
no use in rescuing him from his danger. The full persuasion of this
riveted him as it were to the spot where he stood, and he allowed the
camels to gain on him so much, that it was with difficulty he could
overtake them. On a subsequent occasion, an assemblage of these moving
pillars of sand, more numerous, but less in size than the former,
approached Mr. Bruce’s party soon after sunrise, and appeared like a
thick wood. They almost darkened the sun, the rays of which, shining
through them for nearly an hour, gave them an appearance of pillars of
fire. His people became desperate, some saying it was the day of
judgment, and others, that the world was on fire.

Dr. Clarke, in his travels in Egypt, thus describes this phenomenon.
“One of those immense columns of sand, mentioned by Bruce, came rapidly
toward us, turning upon its base as upon a pivot: it crossed the Nile so
near us, that the whirlwind by which it was carried, placed our vessel
upon its beam-ends, bearing its large sail quite into the water, and
nearly upsetting the boat. As we were engaged in righting the vessel,
the column disappeared. It is probable that those columns do not fall
suddenly upon any particular spot, so as to be capable of overwhelming
an army or a caravan; but that, as the sand, thus driven, is gradually
accumulated, it becomes gradually dispersed, and the column, diminishing
in its progress, at length disappears. A great quantity of sand is no
doubt precipitated, as the effect which gathers it becomes weaker; but,
from witnessing such phenomena upon a smaller scale, it does not seem
likely that the whole body of the sand is at once abandoned.”


              -------------------------------------------


                            WONDERS OF ART.


                  ------------------------------------


                         THE PYRAMIDS OF EGYPT.

From the _natural_ wonders of the desert, let us next pass to some of
the _wonders of art_ which attract the attention of the traveler in
lands that once were as flourishing and powerful, as now they are
degraded and depressed. Most of these monuments are, indeed, in ruins;
but many of them still stand in all their original grandeur, and all are
enduring and faithful witnesses to the wealth and greatness of nations
that have now passed away forever.

The pyramids of Egypt are familiar, by name, to every intelligent
reader, not to say to every child. The largest of these stupendous
monuments, equally famous for their enormous size and their remote
antiquity, are those of Djiza, or (as now spelled) Gizeh, so called from
a village of that name, on the bank of the Nile, some three or four
miles above Cairo. The three which perhaps most attract the attention of
travelers, stand near each other, on the west side of the river, almost
opposite Cairo, and not far from the site of the ancient Memphis. A view
of them, and of the celebrated sphinx, which is spoken of hereafter, is
given in the engraving on the next page. When seen from a distance,
peering above the horizon, they display the fine distinct appearance so
often remarked by travelers in the various objects seen through the
clear, transparent atmosphere of the Egyptian climate. M. Savary, having
approached to within three leagues of them, in the nighttime, while the
full moon shone bright upon them, describes them as appearing to him,
under this particular aspect, like two points of rock crowned by the
clouds. On a nearer approach, their sloping and angular forms disguise
their real hight, and lessen it to the eye; independently of which, as
whatever is regular is great or small by comparison, and as these masses
of stone eclipse in magnitude every surrounding object, at the same time
that they are inferior to a mountain, to which alone the imagination can
successfully compare them, a degree of surprise is excited on finding
the first impression produced by a distant view so much diminished in
drawing near to them. On attempting, however, to measure any one of
these gigantic works of art by some known and determinate scale, it
resumes its immensity to the mind; since, on drawing near to the
opening, the persons who stand beneath it appear so small that they can
scarcely be taken for men.

[Illustration: THE SPHINX AND PYRAMIDS.]

The base of the great pyramid of Cheops, so named after a king of Egypt,
is estimated by Denon at seven hundred and twenty feet, and its hight at
four hundred and forty-eight feet, calculating the base by the mean
proportion of the length of the stones, and the hight by the sum of that
of each of the steps or stages. Its construction required so many years,
and employed such a multitude of laborers, that the expenditure for
garlic and onions alone, for their consumption, is said to have amounted
to one thousand and sixty talents, or more than twelve hundred thousand
dollars. Its interior is thus accurately described by the above
traveler.

“The entrance of the first gallery is concealed by the general outer
covering which invests the whole of the pyramid. It is, however,
probable, that the attention of the earlier searchers was by some
particular appearance directed to this spot. This gallery goes toward
the center of the edifice, in a direction sloping downward to the base:
it is sixty paces in length; and at the further end are two large blocks
of granite, an obstacle which caused some uncertainty in the digging. A
horizontal passage has been made for some distance into the mass of
stone; but this undertaking was afterward abandoned.

“Returning to the extremity of the first gallery, and working upward by
the side of the two granite blocks, you come to the beginning of the
first sloping staircase, which proceeds in an oblique direction upward,
for a hundred and twenty feet. You mount the steep and narrow gallery,
helping your steps by notches cut in the ground, and by resting your
hands against the sides. At the top of this gallery, which is formed of
a calcareous stone cemented with mortar, you find a landing-place about
fifteen feet square, within which, to the right of the entrance, is a
perpendicular opening called the well. This appears, from its
irregularity, to have been the result of a fruitless attempt at a
search, and has a diameter of about two feet by eighteen inches. There
were no means of descending it; but by throwing down a stone, it was
ascertained that its perpendicular direction could not be very
considerable. On a level with the landing is a horizontal gallery, a
hundred and seventy feet in length, running directly toward the center
of the pyramid; and at the extremity of this gallery is a small room,
called the queen’s chamber. This is an oblong square of eighteen feet
and two inches, by fifteen feet and eight inches; but the hight is
uncertain, the floor having been turned up by the avidity of the
searchers. One of the side walls has also been worked into, and the
rubbish left on the spot. The roof, which is formed of a fine calcareous
stone, very nearly brought together, has the form of an angle nearly
equilateral, but contains neither ornament, hieroglyphic, nor the
smallest trace of a sarcophagus. Whether it was intended to contain a
body, is uncertain; but, in this case, the pyramid must have been built
with a view of containing two bodies, and would not therefore have been
closed at once. If the second tomb was really that of the queen, the two
blocks of granite at the end of the first gallery, must have been
finally reserved to close all the interior chambers of the pyramid.

“Returning again from the queen’s chamber to the landing-place, you
ascend a few feet, and immediately find yourself at the bottom of a
large and magnificent staircase, or rather inclined plane, one hundred
and eighty feet in length, taking a direction upward, and still bearing
toward the center of the edifice. It is six and a half feet in breadth,
in which are to be included two parapets, each nineteen inches in
diameter, and pierced every three and a half feet, by oblong holes
twenty-two inches by three. The sarcophagus must have ascended this
passage, and the series of holes must have been intended to receive a
machine of some description, to assist in raising so heavy a mass as the
sarcophagus up so steep an ascent.

“The side walls of this ascending gallery rise perpendicularly for
twelve feet, and then form a sloping roof of an excessively high pitch,
not by a regular angle, but by eight successive projections, each of
them six feet in hight, rising above the other, and approaching nearer
to the corresponding projection on the opposite side, till the roof is
entirely shut in. The hight of this singularly contrived vault may be
estimated at sixty feet from the part of the floor immediately beneath.
The ascent of the staircase is facilitated by pretty regular but modern
footings cut in the floor; and at the top is a small platform, in which
is a thick block of granite, resembling an immense chest, imbedded in
the solid building, and hollowed out so as to leave alternate
projections and retirings, into which are let blocks of the same
material, with corresponding grooves and projections, intended forever
to conceal and protect the entrance to the principal chamber which is
behind them. It must have required immense labor to construct this part
of the edifice, and not less to have broken an opening through; so that
the zeal of superstition has here been opposed to the eagerness of
avarice, and the latter has prevailed. After mining through thirteen
feet of solid granite, a door three feet and three inches square, has
been discovered, which is the entrance to the principal chamber. This is
a long square, sixteen feet by thirty-two, and eighteen in hight. The
door is in the angle facing the gallery, corresponding to the door of
the queen’s chamber, below. When it is said that the tomb is a single
piece of granite, half-polished, and without cement, all that is
remarkable in this strange monument, which exhibits such rigid
simplicity in the midst of the utmost magnificence of human power, will
have been described. The only broken part is an attempt at a search at
one of the angles, and two small holes nearly round and breast high.
Such is the interior of this immense edifice, in which the work of the
hand of man appears to rival the gigantic forms of nature.”

To the above account by the accurate Denon, we subjoin the following
pleasing one by the celebrated Dr. Clarke. The impression made by these
monuments, when viewed at a distance, can never, he observes, be
obliterated from his mind.

“By reflecting the sun’s rays, they appeared as white as snow, and of
such surprising magnitude, that nothing we had previously conceived in
our imagination had prepared us for the spectacle we beheld. The sight
instantly convinced us that no power of description, no delineation, can
convey ideas adequate to the effect produced in viewing these stupendous
monuments. The formality of their structure is lost in their prodigious
magnitude: the mind, elevated by wonder, feels at once the force of an
axiom, which, however disputed, experience confirms—that in vastness,
whatsoever be its nature, there dwells sublimity!

“Having arrived at the bottom of a sandy slope, leading up to the
principal pyramid, a band of Bedouin Arabs, who had assembled to receive
us upon our landing, were much amused by the eagerness excited in our
whole party, to prove who should first set his foot upon the summit of
this artificial mountain. As we drew near its base, the effect of its
prodigious magnitude, and the amazement caused in viewing the enormous
masses used in its construction, affected every one of us; but it was an
impression of awe and fear rather than of pleasure. In the observations
of travelers who had recently preceded us, we had heard the pyramids
described as huge objects which gave no satisfaction to the spectator,
on account of their barbarous shape, and formal appearance: yet to us it
appeared hardly possible that persons susceptible of any feeling of
sublimity could behold them unmoved. With what amazement did we survey
the vast surface that was presented to us, when we arrived at this
stupendous monument, which seemed to reach the clouds? Here and there
appeared some Arab guides upon the immense masses above us, like so many
pigmies, waiting to show the way up to the summit. Now and then we
thought we heard voices, and listened; but it was the wind in powerful
gusts, sweeping the immense ranges of stone. Already some of our party
had begun the ascent, and were pausing at the tremendous depth which
they saw below. One of our military companions, after having surmounted
the most difficult part of the undertaking, became giddy in consequence
of looking down from the elevation he had attained; and being compelled
to abandon the project, he hired an Arab to assist him in effecting his
descent. The rest of us, more accustomed to the business of climbing
hights, with many a halt for respiration, and many an exclamation of
wonder, pursued our way toward the summit. The mode of ascent has been
frequently described; and yet, from the questions which are often
proposed to travelers, it does not appear to be generally understood.
The reader may imagine himself to be upon a staircase, every step of
which, to a man of middle stature, is nearly breast high; and the
breadth of each step is equal to its hight; consequently, the footing is
secure; and although a retrospect, in going up, be sometimes fearful to
persons unaccustomed to look down from any considerable elevation, yet
there is little danger of falling. In some places, indeed, where the
stones are decayed, caution may be required; and an Arab guide is always
necessary, to avoid a total interruption; but, upon the whole, the means
of ascent are such that almost every one may accomplish it. Our progress
was impeded by other causes. We carried with us a few instruments; such
as our boat-compass, a thermometer, a telescope, &c.: these could not be
trusted in the hands of Arabs, and they were liable to be broken every
instant. At length we reached the topmost tier, to the great delight and
satisfaction of all the party. Here we found a platform, thirty-two feet
square, consisting of nine large stones, each of which might weigh about
a tun; although they are much inferior in size to some of the stones
used in the construction of this pyramid.

“The view from the summit of the pyramid amply fulfilled our
expectations; nor do the accounts which have been given of it, as it
appears at this season of the year, (in the month of August,) exaggerate
the novelty and grandeur of the sight. All the region toward Cairo and
the delta resembled a sea covered with innumerable islands. Forests of
palm-trees were seen standing in the water; the inundation spreading
over the land where they stood, so as to give them an appearance of
growing in the flood. To the north, as far as the eye could reach,
nothing could be discerned, but a watery surface thus diversified by
plantations and by villages. To the south we saw the pyramids of
Sakkara; and, upon the east of these, smaller monuments of the same
kind, nearer to the Nile. An appearance of ruins might indeed be traced
the whole way from the pyramids of Gizeh to those of Sakkara; as if they
had been once connected, so as to constitute one vast cemetery. Beyond
the pyramids of Sakkara we could perceive the distant mountains of the
Said; and upon an eminence near the Libyan side of the Nile appeared a
monastery of considerable size. Toward the west and south-west, the eye
ranged over the great Libyan desert, extending to the utmost verge of
the horizon, without a single object to interrupt the dreary horror of
the landscape, except dark floating spots, caused by the shadows of
passing clouds upon the sand.

“The stones of the platform upon the top, as well as most of the others
used in constructing the decreasing ranges from the base upward, are of
soft limestone. Those employed in the construction of the pyramids, are
of the same nature as the calcareous rock on which they stand, and which
was apparently cut away to form them. Herodotus says, however, that they
were brought from the Arabian side of the Nile.

“The French attempted to open the smallest of the three principal
pyramids; and having effected a very considerable chasm in one of its
sides, have left this mark behind them, as an everlasting testimony of
their curiosity and zeal. The landing of our army in Egypt put a stop to
their labor. Had it not been for this circumstance, the interior of that
mysterious monument would probably be now submitted to the inquiry which
has long been an object among literary men.

“Having collected our party upon a soft platform before the entrance of
the passage leading to the interior, and lighted a number of tapers, we
all descended into the dark mouth of the larger pyramid. The impression
made upon every one of us, in viewing the entrance, was this: that no
set of men whatever could thus have opened a passage, by uncovering
precisely the part of the pyramid where the entrance was concealed,
unless they had been previously acquainted with its situation; and for
these reasons. First, because its position is almost in the center of
one of its planes, instead of being at the base. Secondly, that not a
trace appears of those dilapidations which must have been the result of
any search for a passage to the interior; such as now distinguish the
labors of the French upon the smaller pyramid, which they attempted to
open. The persons who undertook the work, actually opened the pyramid in
the only point, over all its vast surface, where, from the appearance of
the stones inclined to each other above the mouth of the passage, any
admission to the interior seems to have been originally intended. So
marvelously concealed as this was, are we to credit the legendary story
of an Arabian writer, who, discoursing of the wonders of Egypt,
attributed the opening of this pyramid to Almamon, a caliph of Babylon,
about nine hundred and fifty years since?

“Proceeding down this passage, which may be compared to a chimney about
a yard wide, we presently arrived at a very large mass of granite: this
seems to have been placed on purpose to choke up the passage; but a way
has been made round it, by which we were enabled to ascend into a second
channel, sloping, in a contrary direction, toward the mouth of the
first. Having ascended along this channel, to the distance of one
hundred and ten feet, we came to a horizontal passage, leading to a
chamber with an angular roof, in the interior of the pyramid. In this
passage we found, upon our right hand, the mysterious well, which has
been so often mentioned. Pliny makes the depth of it equal to one
hundred and twenty-nine feet; but Greaves, in sounding it with a line,
found the plummet rest at the depth of twenty feet.

“We threw down some stones, and observed that they rested at about the
depth which Greaves has mentioned; but being at length provided with a
stone nearly as large as the mouth of the well, and about fifty pounds
in weight, we let this fall, listening attentively to the result from
the spot where the other stones rested: we were agreeably surprised by
hearing, after a length of time which must have equaled some seconds, a
loud and distinct report, seeming to come from a spacious subterraneous
apartment, accompanied by a splashing noise, as if the stone had been
broken in pieces, and had fallen into a reservoir of water at an amazing
depth. Thus does experience always tend to confirm the accounts left us
by the ancients; for this exactly answers to the description given by
Pliny of this well.

“After once more regaining the passage whence these ducts diverge, we
examined the chamber at the end of it, mentioned by all who have
described the interior of this building. Its roof is angular; that is to
say, it is formed by the inclination of large masses of stone leaning
toward each other, like the appearance presented by those masses which
are above the entrance to the pyramid. Then quitting the passage
altogether, we climbed the slippery and difficult ascent which leads to
what is called the principal chamber. The workmanship, from its
perfection, and its immense proportions, is truly astonishing. All about
the spectator, as he proceeds, is full of majesty, and mystery, and
wonder. Presently we entered that ‘glorious roome,’ as it is justly
called by Greaves, where, ‘as within some consecrated oratory, art may
seem to have contended with nature.’ It stands ‘in the very heart and
center of the pyramid, equidistant from all its sides, and almost in the
midst between the basis and the top. The floor, the sides, the roof of
it, are all made of vast and exquisite tables of Thebaick marble.’ So
nicely are these masses fitted to each other upon the sides of the
chamber, that, having no cement between them, it is really impossible to
force the blade of a knife within the joints. This has been often
related before; but we actually tried the experiment, and found it to be
true. There are only six ranges of stone from the floor to the roof,
which is twenty feet high; and the length of the chamber is about twelve
yards. It is also about six yards wide. The roof or ceiling consists of
only nine pieces, of stupendous size and length, traversing the room
from side to side, and lying, like enormous beams, across the top.”

Mr. Salt, the traveler, having paid a later visit to the principal
pyramid, in company with a British officer, ascertained that the short
descending passage at its entrance, which afterward ascends to the two
chambers, is continued in a straight line through the base of the
pyramid into the rock on which it stands. This new passage, a view of
which is given in the cut below, after joining what was formerly called
the well, is continued forward in a horizontal line, and terminates in a
well, ten feet in depth, exactly beneath the apex of the pyramid, and at
the depth of one hundred feet beneath its base. Mr. Salt’s companion
likewise discovered an apartment immediately above the king’s chamber,
exactly of the same size, and of the same fine workmanship, but only
four feet in hight.

[Illustration: ENTRANCE TO ONE OF THE PYRAMIDS OF GIZEH.]

The base of the pyramid of Cephrenes, the next in magnitude, of the
pyramids of Gizeh, to that of Cheops, is estimated at six hundred and
fifty-five feet, and its hight at three hundred and ninety-eight. The
pyramid of Mycerinus has a base of two hundred and eighty feet, and an
elevation of one hundred and sixty-two. But, as well suggested by
Thompson, in his “Egypt Past and Present,” no mere detail of figures and
statistics, can convey an idea of the size of these vast bodies as they
impress us when we stand before them. “No idea,” he says, “can be given
of the great pyramid, by the statement that it covers an area of nearly
five hundred and fifty thousand square feet, measures seven hundred and
fifty feet upon each of its four sides at the base, and is four hundred
and sixty feet in hight, or that it would fill the whole length of
Washington square in New York, and exceed its breadth by half, and would
rise nearly two hundred feet higher than the spire of Trinity church.
The mass of masonry is what impresses you. Eighty-five million cubic
feet of solid masonry, gives you no very definite idea of the mass of
stone here piled together with such mathematical precision that
astronomical calculations could be based upon its angles and shadows.
No, you must see the mass itself, not now smooth and polished, as when
originally completed, but stripped of its outer casing, and showing tier
on tier of huge stones squared and fitted at mathematical angles, and
now forming a series of rude steps, each from two to four feet high,
extending to the very top. That top is now a platform about thirty feet
square; and the view from its elevation is unparalleled in the world!
Before you is Cairo, with its lofty minarets, and its overhanging
citadel, the mountains of Mokuttam skirting its rear; the green valley
of the Nile is spread out for miles northward and southward; at your
feet are the mounds of sand that cover the ancient Memphis; southward is
the whole range of pyramids to Sakkara; behind you are fragments of
other pyramids, the Libyan mountains, and the wide waste of the great
desert. But the present is lost in the associations of the past. You are
standing upon a monument that is known to have stood within a score of
four thousand years; that was as old as are our associations of Plymouth
rock, when Abraham came into Egypt, and journeyed to Memphis to enjoy
the favor of the king. He looked with wondering eyes upon this self-same
monument, and heard the _then_ dim tradition of the tyrant, who, having
built it for his own sepulcher by the sweat and blood of half a million
of his subjects, was compelled to beg of his friends to bury him
privately in some secret place, lest after his death, his body should be
dragged by the people from the hated tomb!”

The pyramids of Sakkara, which are numerous, are interesting on account
of the peculiarities of their structure. The largest of them is of an
irregular form, the line of the terminating angle being sloped like a
buttress reversed. Another, of a middling size, is composed of stages
rising one above another. The smaller ones are greatly decayed; but the
whole occupy an extent of two leagues. This multitude of pyramids
scattered over the district of Sakkara, Denon observes, prove that this
territory was the necropolis (city of the dead) to the south of Memphis,
and that the village opposite to this, in which the pyramids of Gizeh
are situated, was another necropolis, which formed the northern
extremity of Memphis. The extent of that ancient city may thus be
measured.

To these interesting accounts of this group of the pyramids, may be
subjoined the graphic sketch of Bayard Taylor, who visited them so
recently as 1851. “When we threw open the latticed blinds of our cabin,
before sunrise the next morning, the extraordinary purity of the air
gave rise to an amusing optical delusion on the part of my friend. ‘See
that wall!’ said he, pointing to a space between two white houses; ‘what
a brilliant color it is painted, and how those palms and these white
houses are relieved against it!’ He was obliged to look twice before he
perceived that what he had taken for a wall close at hand, was really
the sky, and rested upon a far-off horizon. Our donkeys were in
readiness on the bank, and taking Achmet with us, we rode off gayly
among the mud hovels and under the date-trees of Gizeh, on our way to
the pyramids. The rising sun shone redly upon them, as we rode out on
the broad harvest land of the Nile. The black unctuous loam was still
too moist from the inundation to be plowed, except in spots, here and
there, but even where the water had scarce evaporated, millions of germs
were pushing their slender blades up to the sunshine. In that prolific
soil, the growth of grain is visible from day to day. The Fellahs were
at work on all sides, preparing for planting, and the ungainly buffaloes
drew their long plows slowly through the soil. Where freshly turned, the
earth had a rich, soft luster, like dark-brown velvet, beside which the
fields of young wheat, beans and lentils, glittered with the most
brilliant green. The larks sang in the air and flocks of white pigeons
clustered like blossoms on the tops of the sycamores. There, in
November, it was the freshest and most animating picture of spring. The
direct road to the pyramids was impassable, on account of the water, and
we rode along the top of a dike, intersected by canals, to the edge of
the Libyan desert, a distance of nearly ten miles. The ruptures in the
dike obliged us occasionally to dismount, and at the last canal, which
cuts off the advancing sands from the bounteous plain on the other side,
our donkeys were made to swim, while we were carried across on the
shoulders of two naked Arabs. They had run out in advance to meet us,
hailing us with many English and French phrases, while half a dozen
boys, with earthen bottles which they had just filled from the slimy
canal, crowded after them, insisting, in very good English, that we
should drink at once and take them with us to the pyramids.

“Our donkeys’ hoofs now sank deep in the Libyan sands, and we looked up
to the great stone-piles of Cheops, Cephrenes and Mycerinus, not more
than half a mile distant. Our sunrise view of the pyramids on leaving
Gizeh, was sufficient, had I gone no further; and I approached them,
without the violent emotion which sentimental travelers experience, but
with a quiet feeling of the most perfect satisfaction. The form of the
pyramid is so simple and complete, that nothing is left to the
imagination. Those vast, yellowish-gray masses, whose feet are wrapped
in the silent sand, and whose tops lean against the serene blue heaven,
enter the mind and remain in the memory with no shock of surprise, no
stir of unexpected admiration. The impression they give and leave, is
calm, grand and enduring as themselves.

“The sun glared hot on the sand as we toiled up the ascent to the base
of Cheops, whose sharp corners were now broken into zigzags by the
layers of stone. As we dismounted in his shadow, at the foot of the path
which leads up to the entrance, on the northern side, a dozen Arabs
beset us. They belonged to the regular herd who have the pyramids in
charge, and are so renowned for their impudence that it is customary to
employ the janissary of some consulate in Cairo, as a protection. I took
three of them and commenced the ascent, leaving Achmet and my friend
below. Two boys followed us, with bottles of water. At first, the way
seemed hazardous, for the stones were covered with sand and fragments
which had fallen from above, but after we had mounted twenty courses,
the hard, smooth blocks of granite formed broader and more secure steps.
Two Arabs went before, one holding each of my hands, while the third
shoved me up from the rear. The assistance thus rendered was not slight,
for few of the stones are less than four feet in hight. The water-boys
scampered up beside us with the agility of cats. We stopped a moment to
take breath, at a sort of resting-place half-way up, an opening in the
pyramid, communicating with the uppermost of the interior chambers. I
had no sooner sat down on the nearest stone, than the Arabs stretched
themselves at my feet and entertained me with most absurd mixture of
flattery and menace. One, patting the calves of my legs, cried out, ‘Oh,
what fine, strong legs! how fast they came up: nobody ever went up the
pyramid so fast!’ while the others added, ‘Here you must give us
backsheesh: everybody gives us a dollar here.’ My only answer was, to
get up and begin climbing, and they did not cease pulling and pushing
till they left me breathless on the summit. The whole ascent did not
occupy more than ten minutes.

“The view from Cheops has been often described. I can not say that it
increased my impression of the majesty and grandeur of the pyramid, for
that was already complete. My eyes wandered off from the courses of
granite, broadening away below my feet, to contemplate the glorious
green of the Nile-plain, barred with palm-trees and divided by the
gleaming flood of the ancient river; the minarets of Cairo; the purple
walls of the far Arabian mountains; the pyramid groups of Sakkara and
Dashoor, overlooking disinterred Memphis in the south; and the arid
yellow waves of the Libyan desert, which rolled unbroken to the western
sky. The clear, open heaven above, which seemed to radiate light from
its entire concave, clasped in its embrace and harmonized the different
features of this wonderful landscape. There was too much warmth and
brilliance for desolation. Everything was alive and real; the pyramids
were not ruins, and the dead Pharaohs, the worshipers of Athor and Apis,
did not once enter my mind.

“My wild attendants did not long allow me to enjoy the view quietly. To
escape from their importunities for backsheesh I gave them two piasters
in copper coin, which instantly turned their flatteries into the most
bitter complaints. It was insulting to give so little, and they
preferred having none; if I would not give a dollar, I might take the
money back. I took it without more ado, and put it into my pocket. This
rather surprised them, and first one, and then another, came to me and
begged to have it again, on his own private account. I threw the coins
high into the air, and as they clattered down on the stones, there
ensued such a scramble as would have sent any but Arabs over the edge of
the pyramid. We then commenced the descent, two seizing my hands as
before, and dragging me headlong after them. We went straight down the
side, sliding and leaping from stone to stone without stopping to take
breath, and reached the base in five or six minutes. I was so excited
from the previous aggression of the Arabs, that I neither felt fatigue
nor giddiness on the way up and down, and was not aware how violent had
been my exertions. But when I touched the level sand, all my strength
vanished in an instant. A black mist came over my eyes, and I sank down
helpless and nearly insensible. I was scarcely able to speak, and it was
an hour before I could sit upright on my donkey. I felt the pyramid in
all my bones, and for two or three days afterward moved my joints with
as much difficulty as a rheumatic patient.

“In returning, in about an hour and a half we reached the ruined
pyramids of Abousir, where our path turned southward into the desert.
After seeing Cheops and Cephrenes, these pyramids are only interesting
on account of their dilapidated state and the peculiarity of their
forms, some of their sides taking a more obtuse angle at half their
hight. They are buried deep in the sand, which has so drifted toward the
plain, that from the broad hollow lying between them and the group of
Sakkara, more than a mile distant, every sign of vegetation is shut out.
Vast, sloping causeways of masonry lead up to two of them, and a large
mound, occupying the space between, suggests the idea that a temple
formerly stood there. The whole of the desert promontory, which seemed
to have been gradually blown out on the plain, from the hills in the
rear, exhibits traces here and there of ruins beneath the surface. My
friend and I, as we walked over the hot sand, before our panting
donkeys, came instinctively to the same conclusion, that a large city
must have once occupied the space between, and to the southward of the
two groups of pyramids. It is not often that amateur antiquarians find
such sudden and triumphant confirmation of their conjectures, as we did.

“On the way, Achmet had told us of a Frenchman who had been all summer
digging in the sand, near Sakkara. After we had crawled into the
subterranean dépôt of mummied ibises, and nearly choked ourselves with
dust in trying to find a pot not broken open; and after one of our
donkeymen went into a human mummy pit and brought out the feet and legs
of some withered old Egyptian, we saw before us the residence of this
Frenchman; a mud hut on a high sand-bank. It was an unfortunate
building, for nearly all the front wall had tumbled down, revealing the
contents of his kitchen. One or two Arabs loitered about, but a large
number were employed at the end of a long trench which extended to the
hills. Before reaching the house a number of deep pits barred our path,
and the loose sand, stirred by our feet, slid back into the bottom, as
if eager to hide the wonders they disclosed. Pavements, fresh as when
first laid; basement-walls of white marble, steps, doorways, pedestals
and fragments of pillars glittered in the sun, which, after the lapse of
more than two thousand years, beheld them again. I slid down the side of
the pit and walked in the streets of Memphis. The pavement of bitumen,
which once covered the stone blocks, apparently to protect them and
deaden the noise of horses and chariots, was entire in many places. Here
a marble sphinx sat at the base of a temple, and stared abstractedly
before her; there a sculptured cornice, with heavy moldings, leaned
against the walls of the chamber into which it had fallen; and over all
were scattered fragments of glazed and painted tiles and sculptured
alabaster. The principal street was narrow, and was apparently occupied
by private dwellings, but at its extremity were the basement-walls of a
spacious edifice. All the pits opened on pavements and walls, so fresh
and cleanly cut, that they seemed rather the foundations of a new city,
laid yesterday, than the remains of one of the oldest capitals of the
world.

“We approached the workmen, where we met the discoverer of Memphis, Mr.
Auguste Mariette. On finding we were not Englishmen, (of whose visits he
appeared to be rather shy,) he became very courteous and communicative.
He apologized for the little he had to show us, since on account of the
vandalism of the Arabs, he was obliged to cover up all his discoveries,
after making his drawings and measurements. The Egyptian authorities are
worse than apathetic, for they would not hesitate to burn the sphinxes
for lime, and build barracks for filthy soldiers with the marble blocks.
Besides this, the French influence at Cairo was then entirely
overshadowed by that of England, and although M. Mariette was supported
in his labors by the French academy, and a subscription headed by Louis
Napoleon’s name, he was forced to be content with the simple permission
to dig out these remarkable ruins and describe them. He could neither
protect them nor remove the portable sculptures and inscriptions, and
therefore preferred giving them again into the safe keeping of the sand.
Here they will be secure from injury, until some more fortunate period,
when, possibly, the lost Memphis may be entirely given to the world, as
fresh as Pompeii, and far more grand and imposing.

“I asked M. Mariette what first induced him to dig for Memphis in that
spot, since antiquarians had fixed upon the mounds near Mitrahenny (a
village in the plain below, and about four miles distant,) as the former
site of the city. He said that the tenor of an inscription which he
found on one of the blocks quarried out of these mounds, induced him to
believe that the principal part of the city lay to the westward, and
therefore he commenced excavating in the nearest sand-hill in that
direction. After sinking pits in various places he struck on an avenue
of sphinxes, the clue to all his after discoveries. Following this, he
came upon the remains of a temple, (probably the _Serapeum_, or temple
of Serapis, mentioned by Strabo,) and afterward upon streets,
colonnades, public and private edifices, and all other signs of a great
city. The number of sphinxes alone, buried under these high sand-drifts,
amounted to two thousand, and he had frequently uncovered twenty or
thirty in a day. He estimated the entire number of statues, inscriptions
and reliefs, at between four and five thousand. The most remarkable
discovery was that of eight colossal statues, which were evidently the
product of Grecian art. During thirteen months of assiduous labor, with
but one assistant, he had made drawings of all these objects and
forwarded them to Paris. In order to be near at hand, he had built an
Arab house of unburnt bricks, the walls of which had just tumbled down
for the third time. His workmen were then engaged in clearing away the
sand from the dwelling of some old Memphian, and he intended spreading
his roof over the massive walls, and making his residence in the exhumed
city. The man’s appearance showed what he had undergone, and gave me an
idea of the extraordinary zeal and patience required to make a
successful antiquarian. His face was as brown as an Arab’s, his eyes
severely inflamed, and his hands as rough as a bricklayer’s. His manner
with the native workmen was admirable, and they labored with a hearty
good-will which almost supplied the want of the needful implements. All
they had were straw baskets, which they filled with a sort of rude
shovel, and then handed up to be carried off on the heads of others.

“Strabo states that Memphis had a circumference of seventeen miles, and
therefore both M. Mariette and the antiquarians are right. The mounds of
Mitrahenny probably mark the eastern portion of the city, while its
western limit extended beyond the pyramids of Sakkara, and included in
its suburbs those of Abousir and Dashoor. The space explored by M.
Mariette is about a mile and a half in length, and somewhat more than
half a mile in breadth. He was then continuing his excavations westward,
and had almost reached the first ridge of the Libyan hills, without
finding the termination of the ruins. The magnitude of his discovery
will be best known when his drawings and descriptions are given to the
world. A few months after my visit, his labors were further rewarded by
finding thirteen colossal sarcophagi of black marble, and he has
recently added to his renown by discovering an entrance to the Sphinx.
Yet at that time, the exhumation of the lost Memphis, second only in
importance to that of Nineveh, was unknown in Europe, except to a few
_sarans_ in Paris, and the first intimation which some of my friends in
Cairo and Alexandria had of it, was my own account of my visit, in the
newspapers they received from America. But M. Mariette is a young man,
and will yet see his name inscribed beside those of Burckhardt, Belzoni
and Layard.

“We had still a long ride before us, and I took leave of Memphis and its
discoverer, promising to revisit him on my return from Khartoum. As we
passed the brick pyramid of Sakkara, which is built in four terraces of
equal hight, the dark, grateful green of the palms and harvest-fields of
the Nile appeared between two sand-hills, a genuine balm to our heated
eyes. We rode through groves of the fragrant mimosa to a broad dike, the
windings of which we were obliged to follow across the plain, as the
soil was still wet and adhesive. It was too late to visit the beautiful
pyramids of Dashoor, the first of which is more than three hundred feet
in hight, and from a distance has almost as grand an effect as those of
Gizeh. Our tired donkeys lagged slowly along to the palm-groves of
Mitrahenny, where we saw mounds of earth, a few blocks of red granite
and a colossal statue of Remeses II., (Sesostris,) which until now were
supposed to be the only remains of Memphis. The statue lies on its face
in a hole filled with water. The countenance is said to be very
beautiful, but I could only see the top of Sesostris’s back, which bore
a faint resemblance to a crocodile. Through fields of cotton in pod and
beans in blossom, we rode to the Nile, dismissed our donkeys and their
attendants, and lay down on some bundles of cornstalks to wait the
arrival of our boat. But there had been a south wind all day, and we had
ridden much faster than our men could tow. We sat till long after sunset
before the stars and stripes, floating from the mizzen of the Cleopatra,
turned the corner below Bedrasheyn. When, at last, we sat at our
cabin-table, weary and hungry, we were ready to confess that the works
of art produced by our cook, were more marvelous and interesting than
Memphis and the pyramids.”


                         THE TOMBS AT SAKKARA.

The prediction of Taylor, quoted above, “that M. Mariette, though a
young man, would yet see his name inscribed beside those of Burckhardt,
Belzoni and Layard,” is in a fair way for fulfillment; for the finding
of the wonderful tombs of Sakkara, and their magnificent sarcophagi, is,
perhaps, the greatest discovery which has been made relative to the
antiquities of Egypt, since the days of Belzoni himself. The tomb, a
view of the entrance to which is given in the cut below, is situated in
the desert near Sakkara, to the north-west of and near the pyramid,
about four or five hours’ ride from Cairo, by way of Toura, where the
Nile must be crossed. Monsieur Mariette, to whose knowledge and research
this discovery is due, is employed by the French government. A passage
in Strabo having led him to infer that a line of sphinxes led to the
Serapeum, he commenced his search, under a firman from the viceroy of
Egypt, about two years and a half since, in the moving sand-hills of
Sakkara. He discovered the line of sphinxes, one of which had been found
in 1832, by Signor Marucchi; but they not being in a straight direction,
and turning abruptly at the entrance of the Serapeum, it was with
difficulty they were traced. They were one hundred and forty in number,
and sixteen feet apart. The whole avenue proved eleven hundred and
twenty feet in length. At the termination were eleven Greek statues of
Homer, Pindar, Solon, Lycurgus, Aristotle, and other poets,
philosophers, and lawgivers of Greece. One sphinx, having the name of
Apis inscribed upon it, was met with under a depth of sixty or seventy
feet of sand: stone peacocks nine feet high, and colossal lions, were
also found here. The tomb of Apis was now sought for, and discovered,
after a whole year of labor, on the twelfth of November, 1851. From the
avenue a mastaba, or bench, and passage two hundred and ninety feet
long, leads to a pylon, the entrance of the great temple. The tomb runs
from south to north, and the great gallery from east to west. This is
about five hundred and twenty yards in length, and from four to five
yards wide. The chambers are not formed throughout the whole length of
the gallery, and some passages are altogether without them. The
hieroglyphic inscriptions on the tomb are, in one instance, if not more,
unfinished; and the doors erected at the entrance are too small to have
allowed the passage of the sarcophagi, and must, therefore, have been
built after the latter were introduced. The chambers are not opposite
each other, but arranged alternately, in the usual manner of Egyptian
places of sepulture. The appearance of this long gallery, when lighted
up by numerous candles, receding in dim perspective into gloom—the
massive sarcophagi, of polished granite, each in its chamber, looking
tranquillity, is an imposing sight, as may be seen in the next following
cut. They are of enormous size and weight: one, and that not the
largest, has been estimated to weigh, including the lid, upward of sixty
tuns. To have moved these and lowered them into their receptacles, which
are some six feet below the floor of the gallery, in so confined a
space, must have required a considerable amount of mechanical skill and
power. In the walls are holes, apparently for the introduction of the
ends of beams. The chambers may, however, have been filled with sand,
the sarcophagus pushed in and gradually lowered by abstracting the sand.
The under side of one of the sarcophagi is rounded, and it was kept
steady by wooden blocks on each side. When these are removed it can be
rocked by the hand. A groove, about two feet broad and two or three
inches in depth, runs down the middle of the gallery. A wooden capstan
was found near the tombs, and is supposed to have been used for moving
the stones. The entrance is inclined. The tombs are excavated in a soft
friable limestone, containing numerous small veins of gypsum, about half
an inch in thickness. To prevent the roof from falling, it has been
coated with flagstones, cemented to it by a gypseous cement; but, either
by the hand of violence, or that of time, these have been detached, and
have fallen to the ground, encumbering, and partially choking the
galleries and rooms. The mortar, however, still adheres in several
places to the walls, and projects where the joints of the stones have
been. In one chamber is a self-sustained stone arch; another proof, if
any were now necessary, that its construction was known to the ancients.
This chamber contains a small sarcophagus, in which, probably, were the
bones of a young bull. The bones of bulls have been found in several
sarcophagi; but every one had been opened, and some heaped with stones;
an eastern mark of contempt, probably the work of the Persians. At the
entrance were numerous _ex voto_ offerings of inscribed tablets inserted
in small recesses in the walls. There are also inscriptions, in the
Demotic character, on the outer doorway. In some chambers are large
recesses to the right and left of the tomb, which in one instance
contained a large granite tablet with hieroglyphics. The number of
sarcophagi already discovered is twenty-five.

[Illustration: ENTRANCE TO THE TOMBS OF SAKKARA.]

These tombs merit the visit of all antiquaries and travelers passing
through Egypt; and M. Mariette’s work describing them is looked for with
anxiety by all _savans_. To his kindness and courtesy, which, as well as
his hospitality, are well known, the public are indebted for the greater
portion of this information. Near to Sakkara, on the site of Memphis,
Hekekyan Bey has been making excavations connected with the geological
investigations of the Nile valley, instituted at the request of Mr.
Leonard Horner and the Geological Society of London, by the viceroy, who
has very recently received from the English government, through Mr.
Murray, a letter of thanks for his liberal aid to the cause of science.

A view of the great gallery of these tombs, as it appears when lighted
up, is given on the next page.


                              THE SPHINX.

Before passing to the pyramids and ruins of Meroë in Ethiopia, let us
notice the celebrated Sphinx, which stands near the great pyramids of
Gizeh, and the enormous bulk of which attracts the attention of every
traveler. Of all the monuments of Egypt, this, in many respects, is the
most mysterious and impressive. It is cut out of the solid rock, and by
some is supposed to have been the sepulcher of Amasis. It is more than
sixty feet from the ground to the crown of the head; more than a hundred
feet around the forehead; and nearly one hundred and fifty feet in
length. The nose has been shamefully mutilated. “Though its proportions
are colossal, its outline,” says Denon, “is pure and graceful; the
expression mild, gracious, and tranquil; the character is African; but
the mouth, the lips of which are thick, has a softness and delicacy of
execution truly admirable; it seems real life and flesh. Art must have
been at a high pitch when this monument was executed; for, if the head
is deficient in what is called _style_, that is, in the straight and
bold lines which give expression to the figures under which the Greeks
have designated their deities, yet sufficient justice has been rendered
to the fine simplicity and character of nature displayed in this
figure.”

[Illustration: GREAT GALLERY OF THE TOMBS OF SAKKARA.]

Thus far the description of Denon. But Taylor, who says of this monument
that “there is nothing like it in the world,” adds, that “those
travelers who pronounce its features to be negro in their character, are
certainly very hasty in their conclusions. That it is an Egyptian head,
is plainly evident, notwithstanding its mutilation. The type, however,
is rather fuller and broader than is usual in Egyptian statues.” Who
reared it, and for what purpose, and by what mighty enginery, is utterly
unknown. But there it stands, “on the verge of the desert whose sands
are heaped around it, and in advance of the three vast pyramids that
form an immovable phalanx as if to guard it from destruction, looking
out in unfathomable silence over the empty plain where once stood
Memphis in the pride of the earlier Pharaohs, and where Cambyses
battered down that pride with the recklessness of a barbarian invader.
Once an altar stood before it, and a _dromos_ of crouching lions and
other figures formed a fit approach to the gigantic symbol of Egypt
deified. But now the sands drift in perpetually to hide all but the
head, whose sublime repose neither the war-club of the Persian, nor tho
fury of the sirocco has ever disturbed.”


                      RUINS AND PYRAMIDS OF MEROË.

Passing up the Nile to its great fork in about latitude seventeen
degrees, we come to the wonderful ruins and pyramids of Meroë, in
Ethiopia. “The discovery of these ruins,” says the well known traveler
last quoted, “is of comparatively recent date; and it is only within a
very short time that their true place and character in Ethiopian history
have been satisfactorily established. Hoskins, Cailliaud and Ferlini
were the first to direct the attention of antiquarians to this quarter,
and the later and more complete researches of Lepsius leave room for
little more to be discovered concerning them. It is remarkable that both
Bruce and Burckhardt, who traveled by land from Berber to Shendy, failed
to see the ruins, which must have been visible from the road they
followed. The former, in fact, speaks of the broken pedestals, carved
stones and pottery which are scattered over the plain, and sagely says,
‘It is impossible to avoid risking a guess that this is the ancient city
of Meroë;’ but he does not mention the groups of pyramids which are so
conspicuous a feature in the landscape. Our path led over a plain
covered with thorny shrubs at first, but afterward hard black gravel,
and we had not gone more than a mile before the raïs pointed out the
pyramids of the ancient Ethiopian city. I knew it only from its mention
in history, and had never read any description of its remains;
consequently I was surprised to see before me, in the vapory morning
air, what appeared to be the ruins of pylæ and porticos, as grand and
lofty as those of Karnak. Rising between us and the mountains, they had
an imposing effect, and I approached them with excited anticipations. As
advanced, however, and the morning vapors melted away, I found that they
derived much of their apparent hight from the hill upon which they are
built, and that, instead of being the shattered parts of one immense
temple, they were a group of separate pyramids, standing amid the ruins
of others which have been completely destroyed.

“We reached them after a walk of about four miles. They stand upon a
narrow, crescent-shaped hill, which rises forty or fifty feet from the
plain, presenting its convex front to the Nile, while toward the east
its hollow curve embraces a small valley lying between it and the
mountain range. Its ridge is crowned with a long line of pyramids,
standing so close to each other that their bases almost meet, but
presenting no regular plan or association, except in the direction of
their faces. None of them retains its apex, and they are all more or
less ruined, though two are perfect to within a few courses of the top.
I climbed one of the highest, from which I could overlook the whole
group, as well as another cluster, which crowned the summit of a low
ridge at the foot of the mountains opposite. Of those among which I
stood, there were sixteen, in different degrees of ruin, besides the
shapeless stone-heaps of many more. They are all built of fine red
sandstone, in regular courses of masonry, the spaces of which are not
filled, or cased, as in the Egyptian pyramids, except at the corners,
which are covered with a narrow hem or molding, in order to give a
smooth outline. The stones are about eighteen inches high, and the
recession of each course varies from two to four inches, so that the
hight of the structure is always much greater than the breadth of the
base. A peculiarity of these pyramids is, that the sides are not
straight but curved lines, of different degrees of convexity, and the
breadth of the courses of stone is adjusted with the utmost nicety, so
as to produce this form. They are small, compared with the enormous
piles of Gizeh and Dashoor, but singularly graceful and elegant in
appearance. Not one of the group is more than seventy feet in hight, nor
when complete could have exceeded one hundred. All, or nearly all, have
a small chamber attached to the exterior, exactly against the center of
their eastern sides, but no passage leading into the interior; and from
the traces of Dr. Lepsius’s labors, by which I plainly saw that he had
attempted in vain to find an entrance, it is evident that they are
merely solid piles of masonry, and that, if they were intended tombs,
the bodies were deposited in the outer chambers. Some of these chambers
are entire, except the roof, and their walls are profusely sculptured
with hieroglyphics, somewhat blurred and worn down, from the effect of
the summer rains. Their entrances resembled the doorways of temples, on
a miniature scale, and the central stones of two of them were sculptured
with the sacred winged globe. I saw on the jamb of another, a figure of
the god Horus. The chambers were quite small, and not high enough to
allow me to stand upright. The sculptures have a very different
character from those in the tombs of Thebes, and their resemblance to
those of the Ptolemaic period was evident at the first glance. The only
cartouches of monarchs which I found were so obliterated that I could
not identify them; but the figure of one of the kings, grasping in one
hand the hair of a group of captives, while with the other he lifts a
sword to slay them, bears a striking resemblance to that of Ptolemy
Euergetes, on the pylon of the temple at Edfou. Many of the stones in
the vast heaps which lie scattered over the hills, are covered with
sculptures. I found on some the winged globe and scarabeüs, while others
retained the scroll or fillet which usually covers the sloping corners
of a pylon. On the northern part of the hill I found several blocks of
limestone, which exhibited a procession of sculptured figures
brilliantly colored.

“The last structure on the southern extremity of the hill, is rather a
tower than a pyramid, consisting of a high base or foundation, upon
which is raised a square building, the corners presenting a very slight
slope toward the top, which is covered with ruins, indicating that there
was originally another and narrower story upon it. When complete, it
must have borne considerable resemblance to the Assyrian towers, the
remains of which are found at Nineveh. On this part of the hill there
are many small detached chambers, all facing the east, and the remains
of a large building. Here Lepsius appears to have expended most of his
labors; and the heaps of stone and rubbish he has left behind him,
prevent one from getting a very clear idea of the original disposition
of the buildings. He has quarried one of the pyramids down to its base,
without finding any chamber within or pit beneath it. My raïs, who was
at a loss to comprehend the object of my visit, spoke of Lepsius as a
great Frank astrologer, who had kept hundreds of the people at work for
many days, and at last found in the earth a multitude of chickens and
pigeons, all of solid gold. He then gave the people a great deal of
backsheesh and went away, taking the golden fowls with him. The most
interesting object he has revealed is a vaulted room, about twenty feet
long, which the raïs pointed out as the place where the treasures were
found. It is possible that he here referred to the discoveries made
about twenty years ago by Ferlini, who excavated a great quantity of
rings and other ornaments, Greek and Roman, as well as Ethiopian, which
are now in the museum at Berlin. The ceiling of this vault is on the
true principle of the arch, with a keystone in the center, which
circumstance, as well as the character of the sculptures, would seem to
fix the age of the pyramids at a little more than two thousand years. I
took a sketch of this remarkable cluster of ruins from their northern
end, and afterward another from the valley below, whence each pyramid
appears distinct and separate, no one covering the other. The raïs and
sailors were puzzled what to make of my inspection of the place, but
finally concluded that I hoped to find a few golden pigeons, which the
Frank astrologer had not carried away. I next visited the eastern group,
which consists of ten pyramids, more or less dilapidated, and the ruined
foundations of six or eight more. The largest, which I ascended,
consists of thirty-five courses of stone, and is about fifty-three feet
in hight, eight or ten feet of the apex having been hurled down. Each
side of the apex is seventeen paces, or about forty-two feet long, and
the angle of ascent is consequently much greater than in the pyramids of
Egypt. On the slope of the hill are the substructions of two or three
large buildings, of which sufficient remains to show the disposition of
the chambers and the location of the doorways. Toward the south, near
where the valley inclosed between the two groups opens upon the plain,
are the remains of other pyramids and buildings, and some large,
fortress-like ruins are seen on the summits of the mountains to the
east. I would willingly have visited them, but the wind was blowing
fresh, and the raïs was impatient to get back to his vessel. Many of the
stones of the pyramids are covered with rude attempts at sculpturing
camels and horses; no doubt by the Arabs, for they resemble a
school-boy’s first drawings on a slate; straight sticks for legs,
squares for bodies, and triangles for humps.

“Leaving the ruins to the company of the black goats that were browsing
on the dry grass, growing in bunches at their eastern base, I walked to
another group of pyramids, which lay a mile and a half to the
south-west, toward the Nile. As we approached them, a herd of beautiful
gray gazelles started from among the stones and bounded away into the
desert. ‘These were the tents of the poor people,’ said the raïs,
pointing to the pyramids; ‘the Frank found no golden pigeons here.’ They
were, in fact, smaller and more dilapidated than the others. Some had
plain burial chambers attached to their eastern sides, but the
sculptures were few and insignificant. There were sixteen in all, more
or less ruined. Scattering mounds, abounding with fragments of bricks
and building stones, extended from these ruins nearly to the river’s
bank, a distance of more than two miles; and the foundations of many
other pyramids might be seen among them. The total number of pyramids in
a partial state of preservation, (some being nearly perfect, while a few
retained only two or three of the lower courses,) which I counted on the
site of Meroë, was _forty-two_. Besides these, I noticed the traces of
forty or fifty others, which had been wholly demolished. The entire
number, however, of which Meroë could boast, in its prime, was _one
hundred and ninety-six_. The mounds near the river, which cover an
extent of between one and two miles, point out the site of the city, the
capital of the old hierarchy of Meroë, and the pyramids are no doubt the
tombs of its kings and priests. It is rather singular that the city has
been so completely destroyed, as the principal spoilers of Egypt, the
Persians, never penetrated into Ethiopia, and there is no evidence of
the stones having been used to any extent by the Arabs, as building
materials.

“The examination of Meroë has solved the doubtful question of an
Ethiopian civilization anterior to that of Egypt. Hoskins and Cailliaud,
who attributed a great antiquity to the ruins, were misled by the fact,
discovered by Lepsius, that the Ethiopian monarchs adopted as their own,
and placed upon their tombs the nomens of the earlier Pharaohs. It is
now established beyond a doubt, that, so far from being the oldest,
these are the _latest_ remains of Egyptian art; their inferiority
displays its decadence, and not the rude, original type, whence it
sprang. Starting from Memphis, where not only the oldest Egyptian, but
the oldest human records yet discovered, are found, the era of
civilization becomes later, as you ascend the Nile. In Nubia, there are
traces of Thothmes and Amunoph III., or about fifteen centuries before
the Christian era; at Napata, the ancient capital of Ethiopia, we can
not get beyond King Tirhaka, eight centuries later; while at Meroë,
there is no evidence which can fix the date of the pyramids earlier than
the first, or at furthest, the second century before Christ. Egypt,
therefore, was not civilized from Ethiopia, but Ethiopia from Egypt. The
sculptures at Meroë also establish the important fact that the ancient
Ethiopians, though of a darker complexion than the Egyptians, (as they
are in fact represented, in _Egyptian_ sculpture,) were, like them, an
offshoot of the great Caucasian race. Whether they were originally
emigrants from northern India and the regions about Cashmere, as the
Egyptians are supposed to have been, or, like the Beni Koreish at a
later period, crossed over from the Arabian peninsula, is not so easily
determined. The theory of Pococke and other scholars, based on the
presumed antiquity of Meroë, that here was the first dawning on African
soil of that earliest Indian civilization, which afterward culminated at
Memphis and Thebes, is overthrown but we have what is of still greater
significance, the knowledge that the highest civilization, in every age
of the world, has been developed by the race to which we belong.

“I walked slowly back to the boat, over the desolate plain, striving to
create from those shapeless piles of ruin the splendor of which they
were once a part. The sun, and the wind, and the mountains, and the
Nile, were what they had ever been; but where the kings and priests of
Meroë walked in the pomp of their triumphal processions, a poor,
submissive peasant knelt before me with a gourd full of goat’s milk; and
if I had asked him when that plain had been inhabited, he would have
answered me, like Chidhar, the prophet: ‘As thou seest it now, so has it
been forever!’”


                     PYRAMIDS AND RUINS OF MERAWE.

There are other pyramids and ruins in Ethiopia that would be worthy of
extended notice, but that they are so far surpassed in number and
magnificence by those already described. The principal of these are
found at Merawe, the former capital of Darshygeea, to the north-west of
Meroë, where the Nile, flowing south-west, reaches the frontier of
Dongola. This Merawe must not be confounded with Meroë, the ruins of
which have just been described. The identity of the sounds of the names,
did, indeed, at first deceive antiquarians, who supposed the temples and
pyramids in this neighborhood to have belonged to the capital of the old
hierarchy of Meroë; but it is now satisfactorily established that they
mark the site of Napata, the capital of Ethiopia up to the time of the
Cæsars. It was the limit of the celebrated expedition of the Roman
soldiers, under Petronius. Djebel Berkel, at whose base the principal
remains are found, is in latitude eighteen degrees, thirty-five minutes,
or thereabouts.

As the traveler already quoted, rose in the morning, to go over to the
mountain and the ruins at its base, “I was,” says he, “enchanted with
the picture which the shores presented. The air was filled with a light,
silvery vapor, (a characteristic of sultry weather in Africa,) softening
the deep, rich color of the landscape. The eastern bank was one bower of
palms, standing motionless, in perfect groups, above the long, sloping
banks of beans in blossom. Such grace and glory, such silence and
repose, I thought I had never before seen in the vegetable world.
Opposite, the ruined palaces of the old Shygheean kings, and the mud and
stone hovels of modern Merawe, rose in picturesque piles above the river
bank and below the red sandstone bluffs of the Nubian desert, which
overhung them and poured the sand through deep rents and fissures upon
their very roofs. The mosque, with a tall, circular minaret, stood
embowered in a garden of date-palms, under one of the highest bluffs. Up
the river, which stretched glittering into the distance, the forest of
trees shut out the view of the desert, except Djebel Berkel, which stood
high and grand above them; the morning painting its surface with red
lights and purple shadows. Over the misty horizon of the river rose a
single conical peak, far away. The sky was a pale, sleepy blue, and all
that I saw seemed beautiful dream-pictures, everywhere grace, beauty,
splendor of coloring, steeped in elysian repose. It is impossible to
describe the glory of that passage across the river. It paid me for all
the hardships of the desert.

“When we touched the other shore and mounted the little donkeys we had
taken across with us, the ideal character of the scene disappeared, but
left a reality picturesque and poetic enough. We rode under a cluster of
ruined stone buildings, one of which occupied considerable space, rising
pylon-like, to the hight of thirty feet. The shekh informed me that it
had been the palace of a Shygheean king, before the Turks got possession
of the country. It was wholly dilapidated, but a few Arab families were
living in the stone dwellings which surround it. These clusters of
shattered buildings extend for more than a mile along the river, and are
all now known as Merawe. Our road led between fields of ripening wheat,
rolling in green billows before the breeze, on one side, and on the
other, not more than three yards distant, the naked sandstone walls of
the desert, where a blade of grass never grew. Over the wheat, along the
bank of the Nile, rose a long forest of palms, so thickly ranged that
the eye could scarcely penetrate their dense, cool shade; while on the
other hand the glaring sand-hills showed their burning shoulders above
the bluffs. It was a most violent contrast, and yet, withal, there was a
certain harmony in these opposite features. We now approached the
mountain, which is between three and four miles from the town. It rises
from out the sands of the Nubian desert, to the hight of five hundred
feet, presenting a front completely perpendicular toward the river. It
is inaccessible on all sides except the north, which in one place has an
inclination of forty-five degrees. Its scarred and shattered walls of
naked sandstone stand up stern and sublime in the midst of the hot and
languid landscape. As we approached, a group of pyramids appeared on the
brow of a sand-hill to the left, and I discerned at the base of the
mountain several isolated pillars, the stone-piles of ruined pylons, and
other remains of temples. The first we reached was at the south-eastern
corner of the mountain. Amid heaps of sandstone blocks and disjointed
segments of pillars, five columns of an exceedingly old form still point
out the court of a temple, whose adyta are hewn within the mountain.
They are not more than ten feet high and three in diameter, circular,
and without capital or abacus, unless a larger block, rudely sculptured
with the outlines of a Typhon-head, may be considered as such. The
doorway is hurled down and defaced, but the cartouches of kings may
still be traced on the fragments. There are three chambers in the rock,
the walls of which are covered with sculptures, for the most part
representing the Egyptian divinities. The temple was probably dedicated
to Typhon, or the Evil Principle, as one of the columns is still faced
with a caryatid of the short, plump, big-mouthed and bat-eared figure,
which elsewhere represents him. Over the entrance is the sacred winged
globe, and the ceiling shows the marks of brilliant coloring. The temple
is not remarkable for its architecture, and can only be interesting in
an antiquarian point of view. It bears some resemblance in its general
style to the temple-palace of Goorneh, at Thebes.

“The eastern base of the mountain, which fronts the Nile, is strewn with
hewn blocks, fragments of capitals, immense masses of dark bluish-gray
granite, and other remains, which prove that a large and magnificent
temple once stood there. The excavations made by Lepsius and others have
uncovered the substructions sufficiently to show the general plan of two
buildings. The main temple was at the north-eastern corner of the
mountain, under the highest point of its perpendicular crags. The
remains of its small propylons stand in advance, about two hundred yards
from the rock, going toward which, you climb the mound formed by the
ruins of a large pylon, at the foot of which are two colossal ram-headed
sphinxes of blue granite, buried to their necks in the sand. Beyond this
is a portico and pillared court, followed by other courts and labyrinths
of chambers. Several large blocks of granite, all more or less broken
and defaced, lie on the surface or half quarried from the rubbish. They
are very finely polished and contain figures of kings, evidently
arranged in genealogical order, each accompanied with his name. The
shekh had a great deal to tell me of the Franks, who dug up all the
place, and set the people to work at hauling away the lions and rams,
which they carried off in ships. I looked in vain for the celebrated
pedestal; it has probably become the spoil of Lepsius.

“It was now noon, and only the pyramids remained to be seen on that side
of the river. The main group is about a third of a mile from the
mountain, on the ridge of a sand-hill. There are six pyramids, nearly
entire, and the foundations of others. They are almost precisely similar
to those of the real Meroë, each having a small exterior chamber on the
eastern side. Like the latter, they are built of sandstone blocks, only
filled at the corners, which are covered with a hem or molding; the
sides of two of them are convex. On all of them the last eight or ten
courses next the top have been smoothed to follow the slope of the side.
It was no doubt intended to finish them all in this manner. One of them
has also the corner molding rounded, so as to form a scroll, like that
on the cornice of many of the Egyptian temples. They are not more than
fifty feet in hight, with very narrow bases. One of them, indeed, seems
to be the connecting link between the pyramid and the obelisk. Nearer
the river is an older pyramid, though no regular courses of stone are to
be seen any longer. These sepulchral remains, however, are much inferior
to those of Meroë. The oldest names found at Napata are those of Amenoph
III. and Remeses II. (1630 B. C. and 1400 B. C.) both of whom subjected
Nubia to their rule. The remains of Ethiopian art, however, go no
further than King Tirkaka, 730 B. C.—the Ethiopian monarch, who, in the
time of Hezekiah, marched into Palestine to meet Sennacherib, king of
Assyria. Napata, therefore, occupies an intermediate place in history,
between Thebes and Meroë, showing the gradual southward progress of
Egyptian art and civilization. It is a curious fact that the old
religion of Egypt should have been here met face to face, and
overthrown, by Christianity, which, starting in the mountains of
Abyssinia, followed the course of the Nile northward. In the sixth
century of our era, Ethiopia and Nubia were converted to Christianity
and remained thus until the fourteenth century, when they fell beneath
the sword of Islam.

“The next morning, the shekh proposed going with me to the remains of a
temple, half an hour distant, on the eastern bank of the river. After
walking a mile and a half over the sands, which have here crowded the
vegetation to the very water’s edge, we came to a broad mound of stones,
broken bricks and pottery, with a foundation wall of heavy limestone
blocks, along the western side. There were traces of doors and niches,
and on the summit of the mound the pedestals of columns similar to those
of El Berkel. From this place commenced a waste of ruins, extending for
nearly two miles toward the north-west, while the breadth, from east to
west, was about equal. For the most part, the buildings were entirely
concealed by the sand, which was filled with fragments of pottery and
glass, and with shining pebbles of jasper, agate and chalcedony. Half a
mile further, we struck on another mound, of greater extent, though the
buildings were entirely level with the earth. The foundations of pillars
were abundant, and fragments of circular limestone blocks lay crumbling
to pieces in the rubbish. The most interesting object was a mutilated
figure of blue granite, of which only a huge pair of wings could be
recognized. The shekh said that all the Frank travelers who came there
broke off a piece and carried it away with them. I did not follow their
example. Toward the river were many remains of crude brick walls, and
the ground was strewn with pieces of excellent hard-burnt bricks. The
sand evidently conceals many interesting objects. I saw in one place,
where it had fallen in, the entrance to a chamber, wholly below the
surface. The Arabs were at work in various parts of the plain, digging
up the sand, which they filled in baskets and carried away on donkeys.
The shekh said it contained salt, and was very good to make wheat grow,
whence I inferred that the earth is nitrous. We walked for an hour or
two over the ruins, finding everywhere the evidence that a large capital
had once stood on the spot. The bits of water-jars which we picked up
were frequently painted and glazed with much skill. The soil was in many
places wholly composed of the debris of the former dwellings. This was,
without doubt, the ancient Napata, of which Djebel Berkel was only the
necropolis. Napata must have been one of the greatest cities of ancient
Africa, after Thebes, Memphis and Carthage. I felt a peculiar interest
in wandering over the site of that half-forgotten capital, whereof the
ancient historians knew little more than we. That so little is said by
them in relation to it is somewhat surprising, notwithstanding its
distance from the Roman frontier.”


                    EGYPTIAN TEMPLES AND MONUMENTS.

Returning from Ethiopia to Egypt, we find not a few of its monuments and
temples worthy of our notice as wonderful testimonies to the art and
wealth of their ancient builders.


                POMPEY’S PILLAR AND CLEOPATRA’S NEEDLE.

Passing out, toward the south, from modern Alexandria, one of the first
objects that greets the eye of the traveler, is Pompey’s pillar, which
rears its stupendous mass of polished granite in solitary grandeur, a
monument of buried empires and of nations that have passed away. Though
it now stands alone, it is supposed to have been but one of the four
hundred stately columns of the Serapeum as it once stood in all its
grandeur. “This pillar,” says Thompson, “is the one solitary monument of
the old city upon its southern front, and answers to the one standing
obelisk that is its solitary monument on the north. Of its origin,
history is as silent as the mummy of Belzoni’s tomb; but there is no
doubt that ‘_Pompey’s_ pillar is really a misnomer;’ for the inscription
‘shows it to have been erected by Publius, the prefect of Egypt, in
honor of Diocletian,’ who subdued a revolt at Alexandria by capturing
the city, A. D. 296. But whether it was then first hewn from the quarry,
or was transported from some decaying temple up the Nile, the Greek
lettering does not inform us. If the latter, (which, considering the
decline of art and the pilfering propensities of the Romans, is
probable,) then this now lonely sentinel, an Egyptian column with a
Greek inscription to a Roman emperor, has witnessed in turn the decay of
Egypt, of Greece, and of Rome, upon the soil where it still disputes
with Time the empire of the past. To the reader of Gibbon, it may seem
strange that a monument should have been reared at Alexandria in honor
of a conqueror, who, during a siege of eight months, wasted the city by
the sword and by fire, and who, when it finally capitulated and implored
his clemency, caused it to feel ‘the full extent of his severity,’ and
destroyed ‘thousands of its citizens in a promiscuous slaughter.’ The
fact may serve to show the worthlessness of such monuments as
testimonials to character, or as expressions of public esteem. But
whatever may be its history or its associations, one can not look upon
this column without a feeling of astonishment and awe. Outside of the
modern city walls and some six hundred yards to the south of them, away
from the present homes of men, but on an eminence that overlooks the
entire city, and in striking contrast with the meager, attenuated style
of its present architecture, stands this stupendous column of red
granite, ninety-nine feet in hight by thirty in circumference, its shaft
an elegant monolith measuring seventy-three feet between the pedestal
and the capital. It marks the site of an ancient stadium, and as some
conjecture, of the gymnasium, which was surrounded with majestic
porticos of granite.”

[Illustration: CLEOPATRA’S NEEDLE.]

From Pompey’s pillar, to Cleopatra’s needles, is a distance of about a
mile through the city in a north-easterly direction. “These obelisks,”
says Thompson, “have no more relation to Cleopatra, than the pillar has
to Pompey. Their hieroglyphics, according to Wilkinson and Lepsius, date
back as far as the exodus from Egypt; and they were brought to
Alexandria from the city of Heliopolis, or _On_, about a hundred miles
to the south. Each ‘_needle_’ is a solid block of red granite, about
seventy feet high, and nearly eight feet in diameter at the base. How
such huge blocks were cut from the quarry, transported hundreds of
miles, and erected upon their pedestals, is a mystery not solved by
anything yet discovered of ancient mechanic arts. Only one of the
obelisks is standing. The other was taken down to be transported to
England, but now lies half buried in the mud and sand. On one side of
the standing obelisk the hieroglyphics are distinctly legible, but on
the northern or seaward side they are much defaced by the action of the
weather. It stands upon the edge of the great harbor, in a line with the
rock of Pharos that forms the extreme northern point of the horseshoe
port.

“Besides the pillar and the needles nothing remains to testify the
former splendor of Alexandria; a capital that once vied with Rome,
containing a population equal to that of New York, (three hundred
thousand freemen and as many slaves,) and that so late as the seventh
century, according to the testimony of Amrou, its Saracenic conqueror,
contained ‘four thousand palaces, four thousand baths, four hundred
theaters, twelve thousand shops for the sale of vegetables, and forty
thousand tributary Jews.’ A few ruins are pointed out, but these are
fast disappearing with the ravages of time. Its name is the only
memorial of its founder; and the long range of catacombs along the shore
to the west of the city, the sole vestige of its ancient population. So
rapid was the growth of the city, that at the commencement of the
Christian era, it was ‘second only to Rome itself,’ and ‘comprehended a
circumference of fifteen miles’ within its walls. It was a great seat of
commerce. ‘Idleness was unknown. Either sex, and every age, was engaged
in the pursuits of industry;’ the blowing of glass, the weaving of
linen, manufacturing the papyrus, or conducting the lucrative trade of
the port. Alexander, fresh from the conquest of Tyre, boasted that he
would here build an emporium of commerce surpassing that which he had
ruined, and thus would recreate in his own image the world he had
destroyed. The site of Alexandria, more felicitous than that of Tyre,
promised to realize his ambitious dream. Its gates ‘looked out on the
gilded barges of the Nile, on fleets at sea under full sail, on a harbor
that sheltered navies, and a light-house that was the mariner’s star,
and the wonder of the world.’ But neither the felicity of its location,
nor the enterprise of its Ptolemaic rulers, nor the wealth of its
commerce, nor the learning that gathered to its schools the students of
art, of philosophy, of medicine, of science, and of religion, could
withstand the march of empire from Asia to Europe, nor the laws of trade
that followed in its track.”

The present population of Alexandria is less than a hundred thousand; a
mixture of all the oriental races, with many Europeans and Jews. In
passing through its narrow and dirty streets, now occupied with a motley
and poverty-stricken populace; in traversing the villages of hovels
within its walls, where the Arab lies down with his sheep, his goat, his
dog, and his donkey, all in the mud inclosure of a few feet square,
which must be entered by stooping; and in climbing the huge mounds that
are said to cover the ancient capital, it is difficult to realize that
here once dwelt the hundred thousand Jews, for whom the seventy made
their celebrated Greek version of the Old Testament; that here the
eloquent Apollos was born, and the learned Athanasius conducted his
theological controversies; that here Theodosius, by imperial edict,
destroyed the temple of Serapis, and publicly established Christianity
in place of the outcast divinities of the Egyptian Greeks; that here was
a school to which the sages of Greece resorted for instruction in
philosophy, science and letters, and where Jewish rabbins and Christian
apologists vied with Greek dialecticians in the various pursuits of
learning; and that here was a library of seven hundred thousand
manuscript volumes, a British museum or a Smithsonian institute,
boasting the originals or the duplicates of many of the most valuable
works of the then current literature, and which, after the accidental
destruction of a part of it in the insurrection against Julius Cæsar,
and the willful destruction of another portion in the sanguinary
religious wars under Theodosius, yet contained enough of written papyrus
to heat for six months the four thousand baths of the city, under the
summary decree of Omar: “If these writings of the Greeks agree with the
book of God, they are useless, and need not be preserved; if they
disagree, they are pernicious, and ought to be destroyed.” It is
difficult amid such surroundings, to realize that here Cæsar and Antony
dallied with the charms of Cleopatra. It is difficult to realize that
where now bigotry, fanaticism and superstition hold sway over an
ignorant and degraded people, were schools of theology, and learned
fathers, and astute controversialists of the early Christian church;
that here Christianity triumphed over paganism in popular tumults backed
by imperial decrees; that here Mark preached the gospel of the kingdom
where the Ethiopian eunuch had preceded him with the tidings of the
great salvation. And yet that old Alexandria, which began to be in the
fourth century before Christ, and of all whose palaces and temples and
monuments only two columns are now standing, was the youngest of
Egyptian cities, and was built by the conqueror of Egypt when Thebes,
and Memphis, and the university city of Heliopolis, were already in
their decline. Such is the antiquity that meets us at the threshold of
the land of the Nile.


                      THE CATACOMBS OF ALEXANDRIA.

In connection with Alexandria, it is in place to speak of its _cryptæ_
or catacombs, a range of primeval sepulchers, on which a prodigious
amount of labor must have been bestowed. They are situated about half a
league along the shore, to the westward of the modern city; and their
intricacy is such, that formerly the guides would not enter them without
a clew of thread, which they unwound as they went in, so that by
following it on their return, they might secure their safe retreat. Dr.
Clarke is very particular in his description of these subterranean
abodes of the dead; and from his interesting narrative the following
particulars have been gathered.

The original entrance to them is now closed, and is externally concealed
from observation. The only place by which admittance to the interior is
practicable, is a small aperture made through the soft and sandy rock,
barely large enough to admit a person upon his hands and knees. Here,
sometimes, the traveler has encountered jackals, escaping from the
interior when alarmed by any person approaching; on which account, a gun
or pistol used often to be discharged before entering, to prevent any
sally of this kind. “Having passed this aperture,” says Dr. Clarke,
“with lighted tapers, we arrived, by gradual descent, in a square
chamber, almost filled with earth: to the right and left of this are
smaller apartments, chiseled in the rock; each of these contains on
either side of it, except that of the entrance, a _soros_ for the
reception of a mummy; but, owing to the accumulation of sand in all of
them, this part of the catacombs can not be examined without great
difficulty. Leaving the first chamber, we found a second of still larger
dimensions, having four cryptæ with _soroi_, two on either side, and a
fifth at its extremity toward the south-east. From hence, penetrating
toward the west, we passed through another forced aperture, which
conducted us into a square chamber, without any receptacles for dead
bodies; thence, pursuing a south-western course, we persevered in
effecting a passage, over heaps of sand, from one chamber to another,
admiring everywhere the same extraordinary effects of labor and
ingenuity, until we found ourselves bewildered with so many passages,
that our clew of thread became of more importance than we at first
believed it would prove to be. At last we reached the stately
antechamber of the principal sepulcher, which had every appearance of
being intended for a regal repository. It was of a circular form,
surmounted by a beautiful dome, hewn out of the rock, with exquisite
perfection, and the purest simplicity of workmanship. In a few of the
chambers we observed pilasters, resembling, in their style of
architecture, the Doric, with architraves, as in some of the most
ancient sepulchers near Jerusalem; but they were all integral parts of
the solid rock. The dome covering the circular chamber was without
ornament; the entrance to it being from the north-west. Opposite to this
entrance was a handsome square crypt with three _soroi_; and to the
right and left were other cryptæ, similarly surrounded with places for
the dead. Hereabouts we observed the remarkable symbol, sculptured in
relief, of an orb with extending wings, evidently intended to represent
the subterraneous sun, or _sol inferus_, as mentioned by Macrobius. We
endeavored to penetrate further toward the south-west and south, and
found that another complete wing of the vast fabric extended in those
directions, but the labor of the research was excessive.

“The cryptæ upon the south-west side corresponded with those which we
have described toward the north-east. In the middle, between the two, a
long range of chambers extended from the central and circular shrine
toward the north-west; and in this direction appears to have been the
principal and original entrance. Proceeding toward it we came to a large
room in the middle of the fabric, between the supposed Serapeum and the
main outlet, or portal, toward the sea. Here the workmanship was very
elaborate; and to the right and left were chambers, with receptacles
ranged parallel to each other. Further on, in the same direction, is a
passage with galleries and spacious apartments on either side; probably
the chambers for embalming the dead, or those belonging to the priests,
who constantly officiated in the Serapeum. In the front is a kind of
vestibulum, or porch; but it is exceedingly difficult to ascertain
precisely the nature of the excavation toward the main entrance, from
the manner in which it is now choked with earth and rubbish. If this
part were laid open, it is possible that something further would be
known as to the design of the undertaking; and, at all events, one of
the most curious of the antiquities of Egypt would then be exposed to
the investigation it merits. Having passed about six hours in exploring,
to the best of our ability, these gloomy mansions, we regained, by means
of our clew, the aperture by which we had entered, and quitted them
forever.”


                          BATHING IN THE EAST.

Before leaving Alexandria, it may be interesting to glance at the
process and luxury of oriental bathing, so often described by travelers
in Turkey and Egypt. The narrative is from Taylor, who, though deceived
by his dragoman as to the excellence of the bath compared with others
which he might have visited, gives us a vivid picture of the process the
bather undergoes, and the full comfort that follows it. He says, “The
bath to which he conducted us, he declared was the finest in Alexandria,
the most superb in all the orient, but it did not at all accord with our
ideas of eastern luxury. Moreover, the bath-keeper was his intimate
friend, and would bathe us as no Christians were ever bathed before. One
fact Ibrahim kept to himself, which was, that his intimate friend and he
shared the spoils of our inexperience. We were conducted to a one-story
building, of very unprepossessing exterior. As we entered the low,
vaulted entrance, my ears were saluted with a dolorous, groaning sound,
which I at first conjectured to proceed from the persons undergoing the
operation, but which I afterward ascertained was made by a wheel turned
by a buffalo, employed in raising water from the well. In a sort of
basement hall, smelling of soap-suds, and with a large tank of dirty
water in the center, we were received by the bath-keeper, who showed us
into a room containing three low divans with pillows. Here we disrobed,
and Ibrahim, who had procured a quantity of napkins, enveloped our heads
in turbans and swathed our loins in a simple Adamite garment. Heavy
wooden clogs were attached to our feet, and an animated bronze statue
led the way through gloomy passages, sometimes hot and steamy, sometimes
cold and soapy, and redolent of anything but the spicy odors of Araby
the blest, to a small vaulted chamber, lighted by a few apertures in the
ceiling. The moist heat was almost suffocating; hot water flowed over
the stone floor, and the stone benches we sat upon were somewhat cooler
than kitchen stoves. The bronze individual left us, and very soon,
sweating at every pore, we began to think of the three Hebrews in the
furnace. Our comfort was not increased by the groaning sound which we
still heard, and by seeing, through a hole in the door, five or six
naked figures lying motionless along the edge of a steaming vat, in the
outer room. Presently our statue returned with a pair of coarse
hair-gloves on his hands. He snatched off our turbans, and then, seizing
one of my friends by the shoulder as if he had been a sheep, began a
sort of rasping operation upon his back. This process, varied
occasionally by a dash of scalding water, was extended to each of our
three bodies, and we were then suffered to rest awhile. A course of
soap-suds followed, which was softer and more pleasant in its effect,
except when he took us by the hair, and holding back our heads, scrubbed
our faces most lustily, as if there were no such things as eyes, noses
and mouths. By this time we had reached such a salamandrine temperature
that the final operation of a dozen pailfuls of hot water poured over
the head, was really delightful. After a plunge in a seething tank, we
were led back to our chamber and enveloped in loose muslin robes.
Turbans were bound on our heads and we lay on the divans to recover from
the languor of the bath. The change produced by our new costume was
astonishing. The stout German became a Turkish mollah, the young
Smyrniote a picturesque Persian, and I—I scarcely know what, but, as my
friends assured me, a much better Moslem than Frank. Cups of black
coffee and pipes of inferior tobacco completed the process, and in spite
of the lack of cleanliness and superabundance of fleas, we went forth
lighter in body, and filled with a calm content which nothing seemed
able to disturb.”



                    EGYPTIAN TEMPLES, MONUMENTS, &C.

The ruins of the temple of _Hermopolis_, or the great city of Mercury,
which were thought wonderful till the later discoveries in Egypt threw
them comparatively in the shade, give some idea of the great range and
high perfection the arts had attained in that country. Many parts of
these ruins have preserved their original position, without having been
altered or deformed by the works of modern times, and have remained
untouched for well nigh four thousand years. They are of freestone, of
the fineness of marble, and have neither cement, nor any other means of
union, except the perfect fitting of the respective parts. The colossal
proportions of the edifice, evince the power the Egyptians possessed to
raise such enormous masses. The portico is one hundred and twenty feet
long, and its hight sixty feet. Not a spring of an arch remains, to
throw light on the dimensions of the whole extent of the temple, or of
the nave. The architecture is still richer than the Doric order of the
Greeks. The shafts of the pillars represent _fasciæ_, or bundles; and
the pedestal, the stem of the lotus. Under the roof between the two
middle columns, are winged globes; and all the roofs are ornamented with
a wreath of painted stars, of an aurora color on a blue ground.

The temple of _Apollinopolis Magna_ is described by Denon as surpassing
in extent, majesty, magnificence, and high preservation, whatever he had
seen in Egypt, or elsewhere. This building is a long suite of pyramidal
gates, of courts decorated with galleries, of porticos, and of covered
naves, constructed, not with common stones, _but with entire rocks_.
This superb edifice is situated on a rising ground, so as to overlook,
not only its immediate vicinity, but the whole valley. On the right is
the principal gate, placed between two huge mounds of buildings, on the
walls of which are three orders of hieroglyphic figures, increasing in
their gigantic dimensions, insomuch that the last have a length of
twenty-five feet. The inner court is decorated with a gallery of
columns, bearing two terraces, which come out at two gates, through
which is the passage to the stairs, leading to the platform of the
mounds. Behind the inner portico are several apartments, and the
sanctuary of the temple. A wall of circumvallation is decorated both
within and without with innumerable hieroglyphics, executed in a very
finished and laborious style. This magnificent temple appears to have
been dedicated to the evil genius, the figure of Typhon being
represented in relief on the four sides of the plinth which surmounts
each of the capitals. The entire frieze, and all the paintings within,
are descriptive of Isis, defending herself against the attacks of that
monster.


                          THE RUINS OF THEBES.

The ruins of the ancient city of Thebes, which Homer has characterized
by the single expression of _the city with a hundred gates_, are of so
immense an extent as to convince the spectator that fame has not
exaggerated its size. For, as if the diameter of old Egypt was not
sufficient to contain it, its monuments rest on two chains of contiguous
mountains, while its tombs occupy the valleys toward the west,
stretching off into the desert. The large temple on the eastern side is
between two and three leagues distant from Medeenet Abou, where the most
western temple is situated; and the modern village of Karnak is built on
a small part of the site of a single temple, which is half a mile in
circumference. Of the remains of this temple, Denon tells us, that “of
the hundred columns of the portico alone, the smallest are seven feet
and a half in diameter, and the largest twelve. The space occupied by
the circumvallation of the temple contains lakes and mountains. In
short, to be enabled to form a competent idea of so much magnificence,
the reader ought to fancy what is before him to be a dream, as he who
views the objects themselves rubs his eyes to know whether he is awake.
The avenue leading from Karnak to Luxor, a space nearly half a league in
extent, contains a constant succession of sphinxes and other chimerical
figures to the right and left, together with fragments of stone walls,
of small columns, and of statues.”

The village of Luxor, Denon describes “as also built on the side of the
ruins of a temple, not so large as that of Karnak, but in a better state
of preservation, the masses not having as yet fallen through time, and
by the pressure of their own weight. The most colossal parts consist of
fourteen columns of nearly eleven feet in diameter, and of two statues
in granite, at the outer gate, buried up to the middle of the arms, and
having in front of them the two largest and best preserved obelisks
known. The French, when in Egypt, deemed their means insufficient, not
to hew out, but merely to transport these two monuments, which are not
more than a fragment of one of the numerous edifices of the astonishing
city of Thebes. They are of rose-color granite, are still seventy feet
above the ground, and to judge by the depth to which they are supposed
to be covered with sand, are believed to be at least one hundred feet in
hight. Their preservation is perfect, and the hieroglyphics with which
they are covered being cut deep, and in relief at the bottom, show the
bold hand of a master, and a beautiful finish. The chisels which could
cut such hard materials must have been of an admirable temper; and the
machines to drag such enormous blocks from the quarries, to transport
them thither, and to set them upright, together with the time required
for the labor, surpass all conception!” In speaking of the gate of the
temple, which is now that of the village of Luxor, Denon remarks as
follows. “Nothing can be more grand, and at the same time more simple,
than the small number of objects of which this entrance is composed. No
city whatever makes so proud a display at its approach as this wretched
village, the population of which consists of two or three thousand
souls, who have taken up their abode on the roofs and beneath the
galleries of this temple, which has, nevertheless, the air of being in a
manner uninhabited.”

The tombs of the kings of Thebes are grottos consisting of a regular
double gallery supported by pillars, behind which is a row of chambers,
often double. In proportion as the hight of these grottos increases,
they become more richly decorated; and the spectator is soon convinced,
by the magnificence both of the paintings and sculptures, and of the
subjects they represent, that he is among the tombs of great men or
heroes. Those which appear to have belonged to the ancient kings, are
only distinguished from the others by the magnificence of the
sarcophagi, and the mysterious solitude of their situation; the others
immediately overlooking the great buildings in the city. The sculpture
in all is incomparably more labored and more highly finished than that
of the temples, and displays a high perfection of the art. The lines of
the hieroglyphics have been cut with a firmness of touch, and a
precision, of which marbles offer but few examples; and the figures have
a particular elegance and correctness of contour. Small subjects taken
from nature are introduced; and in these the groups of persons are given
in perspective; and cut in deep relief, in simple and natural attitudes.
Several of these subjects bear but little analogy to the spot in which
they are immured; for bass-reliefs are seen representing games, such as
rope-dancing, and asses taught to play tricks and rear on their hind
legs, sculptured with all the traits of genuine nature and simplicity.
The plan of these excavations is singular; and many are so vast and
complicated, that they might be mistaken for labyrinths, or
subterraneous temples. After passing the elegant apartments described
above, long and gloomy galleries present themselves, winding backward
and forward in numerous angles, and seeming to occupy a great extent of
ground. They are melancholy, repulsive, and without any decoration; but
open from time to time into other chambers covered with hieroglyphics,
and branch out into narrow paths, leading to deep perpendicular pits. At
the bottom of these pits are other adorned chambers; and lower still a
new series of perpendicular pits and horizontal chambers, until at
length, ascending a long flight of steps, the visitor reaches an open
place on a level with the chambers he first entered.

Thus far we have followed the brief outline given by Denon, and the
earlier travelers. But our ideas of these wonderful ruins will become
much more enlarged, as well as accurate, by perusing the descriptions of
more recent tourists and explorers; such for example as Taylor and
Thompson. The former, before beginning the recital of his visit, gives
an outline of the topography of Thebes. “The course of the Nile,” he
says, “is here nearly north, dividing the site of the ancient city into
two almost equal parts. On approaching it from Kenneh, the mountain of
Goorneh which abuts on the river, marks the commencement of the western
division. This mountain, a range of naked limestone crags, terminating
in a pyramidal peak, gradually recedes to the distance of three miles
from the Nile, which it again approaches further south. Nearly the whole
of the curve, which might be called the western wall of the city, is
pierced with tombs, among which are those of the queens, and the grand
priestly vaults of the Assasseef. The valley of the kings’ tombs lies
deep in the heart of the range, seven or eight miles from the river.
After passing the corner of the mountain, the first ruin on the western
bank is that of the temple-palace of Goorneh. More than a mile further,
at the base of the mountain, is the Memnonium, or temple of Remeses the
Great, between which and the Nile the two Memnonian colossi are seated
on the plain. Nearly two miles to the south of this is the great temple
of Medeenet Abou, and the fragments of other edifices are met with,
still further beyond. On the eastern bank, nearly opposite Goorneh,
stands the temple of Karnak, about half a mile from the river. Eight
miles eastward, at the foot of the Arabian mountains, is the small
temple of Medamot, which, however, does not appear to have been included
in the limits of Thebes. Luxor is directly on the bank of the Nile, a
mile and a half south of Karnak, and the plain extends several miles
beyond it, before reaching the isolated range, whose three conical peaks
are the landmarks of Thebes to voyagers on the river. These distances
convey an idea of the extent of the ancient city, but fail to represent
the grand proportions of the landscape, so well fitted, in its simple
and majestic outlines, to inclose the most wonderful structures the
world has ever seen. The green expanse of the plain; the airy coloring
of the mountains; the mild, solemn blue of the cloudless Egyptian sky:
these are a part of Thebes, and inseparable from the remembrance of its
ruins.

“At sunrise we crossed to the western bank and moored our boat opposite
Goorneh. It is advisable to commence with the tombs, and close the
inspection of that side with Medeenet Abou, reserving Karnak, the
grandest of all for the last. The most unimportant objects in Thebes are
full of interest when seen first, whereas Karnak, once seen, fills one’s
thoughts to the exclusion of everything else. There are Arab guides for
each bank, who are quite familiar with all the principal points, and who
have a quiet and unobtrusive way of directing the traveler; and with one
of them, we set off on a stirring gallop for the temple of Goorneh and
the valley of the kings’ tombs, leaving Achmet to follow with our
breakfast, and the Arab boys with their water bottles. The temple of
Goorneh was built for the worship of Amun, the Theban Jupiter, by Osirei
and his son, Remeses the Great, the supposed Sesostris, nearly fourteen
hundred years before the Christian era. It is small, compared with the
other ruins, but interesting from its rude and massive style, a remnant
of the early period of Egyptian architecture. The two pylons in front of
it are shattered down, and the dromos of sphinxes has entirely
disappeared. The portico is supported by a single row of ten columns,
which neither resemble each other, nor are separated by equal spaces.
What is most singular, is the fact that notwithstanding this
disproportion, which is also observable in the doorways, the general
effect is harmonious. We tried to fathom the secret of this, and found
no other explanation than in the lowness of the building, and the rough
granite blocks of which it is built. One seeks no proportion in a
natural temple of rock, or a cirque of Druid stones. All that the eye
requires is rude strength, with a certain approach to order. The effect
produced by this temple is of a similar character, barring its
historical interest. Its dimensions are too small to be imposing, and I
found, after passing it several times, that I valued it more as a
feature in the landscape, than for its own sake.

“The sand and pebbles clattered under the hoofs of our horses, as we
galloped up the gorge of _Biban el Molook_, the ‘gates of the kings.’
The sides are perpendicular cliffs of yellow rock, which increased in
hight, the further we advanced, and at last terminated in a sort of
basin, shut in by precipices several hundred feet in hight and broken
into fantastic turrets, gables and pinnacles. The bottom is filled with
huge heaps of sand and broken stones, left from the excavation of the
tombs in the solid rock. There are twenty-one tombs in this valley, more
than half of which are of great extent and richly adorned with paintings
and sculptures. Some have been filled with sand or otherwise injured by
the occasional rains which visit this region, while a few are too small
and plain to need visiting. Sir Gardner Wilkinson has numbered them all
in red chalk at the entrances, which is very convenient to those who use
his work on Egypt as a guide. I visited ten of the principal tombs, to
the great delight of the old guide, who complained that travelers are
frequently satisfied with four or five. The general arrangement is the
same in all, but they differ greatly in extent and in the character of
their decoration.

“The first we entered was the celebrated tomb of Remeses I., discovered
by Belzoni. From the narrow entrance, a precipitous staircase, the walls
of which are covered with columns of hieroglyphics, descends to a depth
of forty feet, where it strikes a horizontal passage leading to an
oblong chamber, in which was formerly a deep pit, which Belzoni filled.
This pit protected the entrance to the royal chamber, which was also
carefully walled up. In the grace and freedom of the drawings, and the
richness of their coloring, this tomb surpasses all others. The subjects
represented are the victories of the monarch, while in the sepulchral
chamber he is received into the presence of the gods. The limestone rock
is covered with a fine coating of plaster, on which the figures were
first drawn with red chalk, and afterward carefully finished in colors.
The reds, yellows, greens and blues are very brilliant, but seem to have
been employed at random, the gods having faces sometimes of one color,
sometimes of another. In the furthest chamber, which was left
unfinished, the subjects are only sketched in red chalk. Some of them
have the loose and uncertain lines of a pupil’s hand, over which one
sees the bold and rapid corrections of the master. Many of the figures
are remarkable for their strength and freedom of outline. I was greatly
interested in a procession of men, representing the different nations of
the earth. The physical peculiarities of the Persian, the Jew and the
Ethiopian are therein as distinctly marked as at the present day. The
blacks are perfect counterparts of those I saw daily upon the Nile, and
the noses of the Jews seem newly painted from originals in New York. The
burial-vault, where Belzoni found the alabaster sarcophagus of the
monarch, is a noble hall, thirty feet long by nearly twenty in breadth
and hight, with four massive pillars forming a corridor on one side. In
addition to the light of our torches, the Arabs kindled a large bonfire
in the center, which brought out in strong relief the sepulchral figures
on the ceiling, painted in white on a ground of dark indigo hue. The
pillars and walls of the vault glowed with the vivid variety of their
colors, and the general effect was unspeakably rich and gorgeous. This
tomb has already fallen a prey to worse plunderers than the Medes and
Persians. Belzoni carried off the sarcophagus, Champollion cut away the
splendid jambs and architrave of the entrance to the lower chambers, and
Lepsius has finished by splitting the pillars and appropriating their
beautiful paintings for the museum at Berlin. At one spot, where the
latter has totally ruined a fine doorway, some indignant Frenchman has
written in red chalk, ‘_Meurtre commis par Lepsius._’ In all the tombs
of Thebes, wherever you see the most flagrant and shameless spoliations,
the guide says, ‘Lepsius.’ Who can blame the Arabs for wantonly defacing
these precious monuments, when such an example is set them by the vanity
of European antiquarians?

“Bruce’s tomb, which extends for four hundred and twenty feet into the
rock, is larger than Belzoni’s, but not so fresh and brilliant. The main
entrance slopes with a very gradual descent, and has on each side a
number of small chambers and niches, apparently for mummies. The
illustrations in these chambers are somewhat defaced, but very curious,
on account of the light which they throw upon the domestic life of the
ancient Egyptians. They represent the slaughtering of oxen, the
preparation of fowls for the table, the kneading and baking of bread and
cakes, as well as the implements and utensils of the kitchen. In other
places the field laborers are employed in leading the water of the Nile
into canals, cutting dourra, threshing and carrying the grain into
magazines. One room is filled with furniture, and the row of chairs
around the base of the walls would not be out of place in the most
elegant modern drawing-room. The illustrated catalogue of the London
exhibition contains few richer and more graceful patterns. In a chamber
nearer the royal vault, two old, blind minstrels are seen, playing the
harp in the presence of the king, whence this is sometimes called the
harper’s tomb. The pillars of the grand hall, like those of all the
other tombs we visited, represent the monarch, after death, received
into the presence of the gods, stately figures, with a calm and serious
aspect, and lips, which, like those of the Sphinx, seemed closed upon
some awful mystery. The absurdity of the coloring does not destroy this
effect, and a blue-faced Isis, whose hard, black eyeball stares from a
brilliant white socket, is not less impressive than the same figure, cut
in sandstone or granite. The delicacy and precision of the
hieroglyphics, sculptured in intaglio, filled me with astonishment. In
the tomb of Amunoph III., which I visited the next day, they resembled
the ciphers engraved upon seals in their exquisite sharpness and
regularity. Only the principal tombs, however, are thus beautified. In
others the figures are either simply painted, or apparently sunken in
the plaster, while it was yet fresh, by prepared patterns. The latter
method accounts for the exact resemblance of long processions of
figures, which would otherwise require a most marvelous skill on the
part of the artist. In some unfinished chambers I detected plainly the
traces of these patterns, where the outlines of the figures were blunt,
and the grain of the plaster bent, and not cut. The family likeness in
the faces of the monarchs is also too striking, unfortunately, for us to
accept them all as faithful portraits. They are all apparently of the
same age, and their attributes do not materially differ. This was
probably a flattery on the part of the artists, or the effect of a royal
vanity, which required to be portrayed in the freshness of youth and the
full vigor of body and mind. The first faces I learned to recognize were
those of Remeses II., the supposed Sesostris, and Amunoph III.

“The tomb of Memnon, as it was called by the Romans, is the most elegant
of all, in its proportions, and is as symmetrical as a Grecian temple.
On the walls of the entrance are several inscriptions of Greek tourists,
who visited it in the era of the Ptolemies, and spent their time in
carving their names, like Americans nowadays. The huge granite
sarcophagus in which the monarch’s mummy was deposited, is broken, as
are those of the other tombs, with a single exception. This is the tomb
of Osirei I., the grandfather of Sesostris, and the oldest in the
valley. I visited it by crawling through a hole barely large enough to
admit my body, after which I slid on my back down a passage nearly
choked with sand, to another hole, opening into the burial chamber. Here
no impious hand had defaced the walls, but the figures were as perfect
and the coloring as brilliant as when first executed. In the center
stood an immense sarcophagus, of a single block of red granite, and the
massive lid, which had been thrown off, lay beside it. The dust in the
bottom gave out that peculiar mummy odor perceptible in all the tombs,
and in fact long after one has left them, for the clothes become
saturated with it. The guide, delighted with having dragged me into that
chamber, buried deep in the dumb heart of the mountain, said not a word,
and from the awful stillness of the place and the phantasmagoric gleam
of the wonderful figures on the walls, I could have imagined myself a
neophyte, on the threshold of the Osirian mysteries. We then rode to the
western valley, a still deeper and wider glen, containing tombs of the
kings of the foreign dynasty of Atin-Re. We entered the two principal
ones, but found the paintings rude and insignificant. There are many
lateral passages and chambers, and in some places deep pits, along the
edge of which we were obliged to crawl. In the last tomb a very long and
steep staircase descends into the rock. As we were groping after the
guide, I called to my friend to take care, as there was but a single
step, after making a slip. The words were scarcely out of my mouth
before I felt a tremendous thump, followed by a number of smaller ones,
and found myself sitting in a heap of sand, at the bottom, some twenty
or thirty feet below. Fortunately, I came off with but a few slight
bruises.

[Illustration: THE TWO COLOSSI.]

“Returning to the temple of Goorneh, we took a path over the plain,
through fields of wheat, lupines and lentils, to _the two colossi_,
which we had already seen from a distance. These immense sitting
figures, fifty-three feet above the plain, which has buried their
pedestals, overlook the site of vanished Thebes and assert the grandeur
of which they and Karnak are the most striking remains. They were
erected by Amunoph III., and though the faces are totally disfigured,
the full, round, beautiful proportions of the colossal arms, shoulders
and thighs do not belie the marvelous sweetness of the features which we
still see in his tomb. Except the head of Antinous, I know of no ancient
portrait so beautiful as Amunoph. The long and luxuriant hair, flowing
in a hundred ringlets, the soft grace of the forehead, the mild serenity
of the eye, the fine thin lines of the nostrils, and the feminine
tenderness of the full lips, triumph over the cramped rigidity of
Egyptian sculpture, and charm you with the lightness and harmony of
Greek art. In looking on that head, I can not help thinking that the
subject overpowered the artist, and led him to the threshold of a truer
art. Amunoph, or Memnon, was a poet in soul, and it was meet that his
statue should salute the rising sun with a sound like that of a
harp-string. Modern research has wholly annihilated this beautiful
fable. Memnon now sounds at all hours of the day, and at the command of
all travelers who will pay an Arab five piasters to climb up into his
lap. We engaged one, who threw off his garments, hooked his fingers and
toes into the cracks of the polished granite, and soon hailed us with
‘salaam’ from the knee of the statue. There is a certain stone on
Memnon’s lap, which, when sharply struck, gives out a clear, metallic
ring. Behind it is a small square aperture, invisible from below, where
one of the priests no doubt stationed himself to perform the daily
miracle. Our Arab rapped on the arms and body of the statue, which had
the usual dead sound of stone, and rendered the musical ring of the
sun-smitten block the more striking.” And Thompson tells us, that while
he and his associates sat before it on their donkeys, they saw “a boy of
fifteen, with a solitary rag round his waist, scrambling up the side of
the statue, and presently he was completely hidden in its lap, just
where the sly priest used to hide himself over night. Then striking with
a hammer the hollow, sonorous stone, it emitted a sharp, clear sound,
like the striking of brass,” though it was “not sunrise, but the middle
of a scorching afternoon.” “An avenue of sphinxes,” continues Taylor,
“once led from these colossi to a grand temple, the foundations of which
we found about a quarter of a mile distant. On the way are the fragments
of two other colossi, one of black granite. The enormous substructions
of the temple and the pedestals of its columns, have been sufficiently
excavated to show what a superb edifice has been lost to the world. A
crowd of troublesome Arabs, thrusting upon our attention newly baked
cinerary urns, newly roasted antique wheat, and images of all kinds
fresh from the maker’s hand, disturbed our quiet examination of the
ruins, and in order to escape their importunities, we rode to the
Memnonium. This edifice, the temple-palace of Remeses the Great, is
supposed to be the Memnonium, described by Strabo. It is built on a
gentle rise of land at the foot of the mountain, and looks eastward to
the Nile and Luxor. The grand stone pylon which stands at the entrance
of its former avenue of sphinxes, has been half leveled by the fury of
the Persian conquerors; and the colossal granite statue of Remeses, in
the first court of the temple, now lies in enormous fragments around its
pedestal. Mere dimensions give no idea of this immense mass, the weight
of which, when entire, was nearly nine hundred tuns. How poor and
trifling appear the modern statues which we call colossal, when measured
with this, one of whose toes is a yard in length; and how futile the
appliances of modern art, when directed to its transportation for a
distance of one hundred and fifty miles! The architrave at each end of
the court was upheld by four caryatides, thirty feet in hight. Though
much defaced, they are still standing, but are dwarfed by the mighty
limbs of Remeses. It is difficult to account for the means by which the
colossus was broken. There are no marks of any instruments which could
have forced such a mass asunder, and the only plausible conjecture I
have heard is, that the stone must have been subjected to an intense
heat and afterward to the action of water. The statue, in its sitting
position, must have been nearly sixty feet in hight, and is the largest
in the world, though not so high as the rock-hewn monoliths of
Aboo-Simbel. The Turks and Arabs have cut several mill-stones out of its
head, without any apparent diminution of its size. The Memnonium differs
from the other temples of Egypt in being almost faultless in its
symmetry, even when measured by the strictest rules of art. I know of
nothing so exquisite as the central colonnade of its grand hall—a double
row of pillars, forty-five feet in hight and twenty-three in
circumference, crowned with capitals resembling the bell-shaped blossoms
of the lotus. One must see them to comprehend how this simple form,
whose expression is all sweetness and tenderness in the flower, softens
and beautifies the solid majesty of the shaft. In spite of their
colossal proportions, there is nothing massive or heavy in their aspect.
The cup of the capital curves gently outward from the abacus on which
the architrave rests, and seems the natural blossom of the columnar
stem. On either side of this perfect colonnade are four rows of Osiride
pillars, of smaller size, yet the variety of their form and proportions
only enhances the harmony of the whole. This is one of those enigmas in
architecture which puzzle one on his first acquaintance with Egyptian
temples, and which he is often forced blindly to accept as new laws of
art, because his feeling tells him they are true, and his reason can not
satisfactorily demonstrate that they are false.

“We waited till the yellow rays of sunset fell on the capitals of the
Memnonium, and they seemed, like the lotus flowers, to exhale a vapory
light, before we rode home. All night we wandered in dreams through
kingly vaults, with starry ceilings and illuminated walls; but on
looking out of our windows at dawn, we saw the red saddle-cloths of our
horses against the dark background of the palm grove, as they came down
to the boat. No second nap was possible, after such a sight, and many
minutes had not elapsed before we were tasting the cool morning air in
the delight of a race up and down the shore. Our old guide, however, was
on his donkey betimes, and called us off to our duty. We passed Goorneh,
and ascended the eastern face of the mountain to the tombs of the
priests and private citizens of Thebes. For miles along the mountain
side, one sees nothing but heaps of sand and rubbish, with here and
there an Arab hut, built against the face of a tomb, whose chambers
serve as pigeon-houses and stalls for asses. The earth is filled with
fragments of mummies, and the bandages in which they were wrapped; for
even the sanctity of death itself, is here neither respected by the
Arabs nor the Europeans whom they imitate. The first tomb we entered
almost cured us of the desire to visit another. It was that called the
Assasseef, built by a wealthy priest, and it is the largest in Thebes.
Its outer court measures one hundred and three by seventy-six feet, and
its passages extend between eight and nine hundred feet into the
mountain. We groped our way between walls as black as ink, through long,
labyrinthine suites of chambers, breathing a deathlike and oppressive
odor. The stairways seemed to lead into the bowels of the earth, and on
either hand yawned pits of uncertain depth. As we advanced, the ghostly
vaults rumbled with a sound like thunder, and hundreds of noisome bats,
scared by the light, dashed against the walls and dropped at our feet.
We endured this for a little while, but on reaching the entrance to some
darker and deeper mystery, were so surrounded by the animals, who struck
their filthy wings against our faces, that not for ten kings’ tombs
would we have gone a step further. My friend was on the point of vowing
never to set his foot in another tomb, but I persuaded him to wait until
we had seen that of Amunoph. I followed the guide, who enticed me by
flattering promises into a great many snakelike holes, and when he was
tired with crawling in the dust, sent one of our water-carriers in
advance, who dragged me in and out by the heels.

“The temple of Medeenet Abou is almost concealed by the ruins of a
Coptic village, among which it stands, and by which it is partially
buried. The outer court, pylon, and main hall of the smaller temple,
rise above the mounds and overlook the plain of Thebes, but scarcely
satisfy the expectation of the traveler, as he approaches. You first
enter an inclosure surrounded by a low stone wall, and standing in
advance of the pylon. The rear wall, facing the entrance, contains two
single pillars, with bell-shaped capitals, which rise above it and stand
like guards before the doorway of the pylon. Here was another enigma for
us. Who among modern architects would dare to plant two single pillars
before a pyramidal gateway of solid masonry, and then inclose them in a
plain wall, rising to half their hight? Yet here the symmetry of the
shafts is not injured by the wall in which they stand, nor oppressed by
the ponderous bulk of the pylon. On the contrary, the light columns and
spreading capitals, like a tuft of wild roses hanging from the crevice
of a rock, brighten the rude strength of the masses of stone with a
gleam of singular loveliness. What would otherwise only impress you by
its size, now endears itself to you by its beauty. Is this the effect of
chance, or the result of a finer art than that which flourishes in our
day? I will not pretend to determine, but I must confess that Egypt, in
whose ruins I had expected to find only a sort of barbaric grandeur, has
given me a new insight into that vital beauty which is the soul of true
art. We devoted little time to the ruined court and sanctuaries which
follow the pylon, and to the lodges of the main temple, standing beside
them like watch-towers, three stories in hight. The majestic pylon of
the great temple of Remeses III. rose behind them, out of heaps of
pottery and unburnt bricks, and the colossal figure of the monarch in
his car, borne by two horses into the midst of the routed enemy,
attracted us from a distance. We followed the exterior wall of the
temple, for its whole length of more than six hundred feet, reading the
sculptured history of his conquests. The entire outer wall of the temple
presents a series of gigantic cartoons, cut in the blocks of sandstone,
of which it is built. Remeses is always the central figure,
distinguished from subjects and foes, no less by his superior stature,
than by the royal emblems which accompany him. Here we see heralds
sounding the trumpet in advance of his car, while his troops pass in
review before him; there, with a lion walking by his side, he sets out
on his work of conquest. His soldiers storm a town, and we see them
climbing the wall with ladders, while a desperate hand-to-hand conflict
is going on below. In another place, he has alighted from his chariot
and stands with his foot on the neck of a slaughtered king. Again, his
vessels attack a hostile navy on the sea. One of the foreign craft
becomes entangled and is capsized, yet while his spearmen hurl their
weapons among the dismayed enemy, the sailors rescue those who are
struggling in the flood. After we have passed through these strange and
stirring pictures, we find the monarch reposing on his throne, while his
soldiers deposit before him the hands of the slaughtered, and his
scribes present to him lists of their numbers, and his generals lead to
him long processions of fettered captives. Again, he is represented as
offering a group of subject kings to Amun, the Theban Jupiter, who says
to him: ‘Go, my cherished and chosen, make war on foreign nations,
besiege their forts and carry off their people to live as captives.’ On
the front wall, he holds in his grasp the hands of a dozen monarchs,
while with the other hand he raises his sword to destroy them. Their
faces express the very extreme of grief and misery, but he is cold and
calm as fate itself. We slid down the piles of sand and entered by a
side-door into the grand hall of the temple. Here, as at Dendera, a
surprise awaited us. We stood on the pavement of a magnificent court,
about one hundred and thirty feet square, around which ran a colonnade
of pillars, eight feet square and forty feet high. On the western side
is an inner row of circular columns, twenty-four feet in circumference,
with capitals representing the papyrus blossom. The entire court, with
its walls, pillars and doorways, is covered with splendid sculptures and
traces of paint, and the ceiling is blue as the noonday sky, and studded
with stars. Against each of the square columns facing the court once
stood a colossal caryatid, upholding the architrave of another colonnade
of granite shafts, nearly all of which have been thrown from their bases
and lie shivered on the pavement. This court opens toward the pylon into
another of similar dimensions, but buried almost to the capitals of its
columns in heaps of rubbish. The character of the temple is totally
different from that of every other in Egypt. Its hight is small in
proportion to its great extent, and it therefore loses the airy
lightness of the Memnonium and the impressive grandeur of Dendera. Its
expression is that of a massive magnificence, if I may use such a
doubtful compound: no single epithet suffices to describe it.”

The visit to this temple ended our traveler’s survey of the western
division of Thebes, “two long days of such experience,” he remarks, “as
the contemplation of a lifetime can not exhaust;” and at sunset they
crossed over the Nile, to


                         LUXOR AND ITS TEMPLE.

The temple of Luxor is imbedded in the modern village, and only the
front of the pylon, facing toward Karnak, and part of the grand central
colonnade, are free from its hovels and their accessories. For this
reason, though of much grander proportions than the Memnonium, its
effect is less agreeable and impressive. “Its plan, however,” says
Taylor, “is easily traced; and having been built by only two monarchs,
Remeses the Great and Amunoph III., or, to use their more familiar
titles, Sesostris and Memnon, it is less bewildering, in a historical
point of view, to the unstudied tourist, than most of the other temples
of Egypt. The sanctuary, which stands nearest the Nile, is still
protected by the ancient stone quay, though the river has made rapid
advances, and threatens finally to undermine Luxor as it has already
undermined the temples of Antæopolis and Antinoë. I rode into what were
once the sacred chambers, but the pillars and sculptures were covered
with filth, and the Arabs had built in, around and upon them, like the
clay nests of the cliff-sparrow. The peristyle of majestic Osiride
pillars, in front of the portico, as well as the portico itself, are
buried to half their depth, and so surrounded by hovels, that to get an
idea of their arrangement you must make the tour of a number of
hen-houses and asses’ stalls. The pillars are now employed as
drying-posts for the buffalo dung which the Arabs use as fuel.
Proceeding toward the entrance, the next court, which is tolerably free
from incumbrances, contains a colonnade of two rows of lotus-crowned
columns, twenty-eight feet in circumference. They still uphold their
architraves of giant blocks of sandstone, and rising high above the
miserable dwellings of the village, are visible from every part of the
plain of Thebes. The English vice-consul occupies a house between two of
these pillars. He gave us the agreeable news that the consul was
endeavoring to persuade the pasha to have Karnak cleared of its rubbish
and preserved from further spoliation. If I possessed despotic power,
(and I then wished it for the first time,) I should certainly make
despotic use of it, in tearing down some dozens of villages and setting
some thousands of Copts and Fellahs at work in exhuming what their
ancestors have mutilated and buried. The world can not spare these
remains. Tear down Roman ruins if you will; level Cyclopean walls; build
bridges with the stones of Gothic abbeys and feudal fortresses; but lay
no hand on the glory and grandeur of Egypt! We ascended the great pylon
of the temple, on the face of the towers of which the victories of
Remeses are sculptured; but his colossi, solid figures of granite, which
sit on either side of the entrance, have been much defaced. The lonely
obelisk, which stands a little in advance, on the left hand, is more
perfect than its Parisian mate. From this stately entrance, an avenue of
colossal sphinxes once extended to the Ptolemaic pylon of Karnak, a
distance of a mile and a half. The sphinxes have disappeared, and the
modern Arab road leads over its site, through fields of waste grass.”


                         KARNAK AND ITS RUINS.

“And now we galloped forward, through a long procession of camels,
donkeys, and desert Arabs armed with spears, toward Karnak, the greatest
ruin in the world, the crowning triumph of Egyptian power and Egyptian
art. Except a broken stone here and there protruding through the soil,
the plain is as desolate as if it had never been conscious of a human
dwelling; and only on reaching the vicinity of the mud hamlet of Karnak,
can the traveler realize that he is in Thebes. Here the camel-path drops
into a broad excavated avenue, lined with fragments of sphinxes and
shaded by starveling acacias. As you advance, the sphinxes are better
preserved and remain seated on their pedestals, but they have all been
decapitated. Though of colossal proportions, they are seated so close to
each other, that it must have required _nearly two thousand_ to form the
double row to Luxor. The avenue finally reaches a single pylon, of
majestic proportions, built by one of the Ptolemies, and covered with
profuse hieroglyphics. Passing through this, the sphinxes lead you to
another pylon, followed by a pillared court and a temple built by the
later Remesides. This, I thought, while my friend was measuring the
girth of the pillars, is a good beginning for Karnak, but it is
certainly much less than I expect. ‘_Tāāl min hennee!_’ (come this way!)
called the guide, as if reading my mind, and led me up the heaps of
rubbish to the roof and pointed to the north. Ah, there was Karnak! Had
I been blind up to this time, or had the earth suddenly heaved out of
her breast the remains of the glorious temple? From all parts of the
plain of Thebes I had seen it in the distance—a huge propylon, a
shattered portico, and an obelisk, rising above the palms. Whence this
wilderness of ruins, spreading so far as to seem a city rather than a
temple; pylon after pylon, tumbling into enormous cubes of stone, long
colonnades, supporting fragments of Titanic roofs, obelisks of red
granite, and endless walls and avenues, branching out to isolated
portals? Yet they stood as silently amid the accumulated rubbish of
nearly four thousand years, and the sunshine threw its yellow luster as
serenely over the despoiled sanctuaries, as if it had never been
otherwise since the world began. Figures are of no use, in describing a
place like this, but since I must use them, I may say that the length of
the ruins before us, from west to east, was twelve hundred feet, and
that the total circumference of Karnak, including its numerous pylæ, or
gateways, is a mile and a half.

“We mounted and rode with fast-beating hearts to the western or main
entrance, facing the Nile. The two towers of the propylon (pyramidal
masses of solid stone) are three hundred and twenty-nine feet in length,
and the one which is least ruined, is nearly one hundred feet in hight.
On each side of the sculptured portal connecting them, is a tablet left
by the French army, recording the geographical position of the principal
Egyptian temples. We passed through, and entered an open court, more
than three hundred feet square, with a corridor of immense pillars on
each side, connecting it with the towers of a second pylon, nearly as
gigantic as the first. A colonnade of lofty shafts, leading through the
center of the court, once united the two entrances, but they have all
been hurled down, and lay as they fell, in long lines of disjointed
blocks, except one, which holds its solitary lotus-bell against the sky.
Two mutilated colossi of red granite still guard the doorway, whose
lintel-stones are forty feet in length. Climbing over the huge fragments
which have fallen from above and almost blocked up the passage, we
looked down into the grand hall of the temple. I knew the dimensions of
this hall, beforehand; I knew the number and size of the pillars, but I
was no more prepared for the reality than those will be, who may read
this account of it and afterward visit Karnak for themselves. It is the
great good luck of travel that many things must be seen to be known.
Nothing could have compensated for the loss of that overwhelming
confusion of awe, astonishment, and delight, which came upon me like a
flood. I looked down an avenue of twelve pillars, six on each side, each
of which was thirty-six feet in circumference and nearly eighty feet in
hight. Crushing as were these ponderous masses of sculptured stone, the
spreading bell of the lotus-blossoms which crowned them, clothed them
with an atmosphere of lightness and grace. In front, over the top of
another pile of colossal blocks, two obelisks rose sharp and clear, with
every emblem legible on their polished sides. On each side of the main
aisle are seven other rows of columns, _one hundred and twenty-two_ in
all; each of which is about fifty feet high and twenty-seven in
circumference. They have the Osiride form, without capitals, and do not
range with the central shafts. In the efforts of the conquerors to
overthrow them, two have been hurled from their places and thrown
against the neighboring ones, where they still lean, as if weary with
holding up the roof of massive sandstone. I walked alone through this
hall, trying to bear the weight of its unutterable majesty and beauty.
That I had been so oppressed by Dendera, seemed a weakness which I was
resolved to conquer, and I finally succeeded in looking on Karnak with a
calmness more commensurate with its sublime repose; but not by daylight.
My next visit was at night, at the time of the full moon. There was a
wan haze in the air, and a pale halo around the moon, on each side of
which appeared two faint mock-moons. It was a ghostly light, and the
fresh north wind, coming up the Nile, rustled solemnly in the
palm-trees. We trotted silently to Karnak, and leaped our horses over
the fragments until we reached the foot of the first obelisk. Here we
dismounted and entered the grand hall of pillars. There was no sound in
all the temple, and the guide, who seemed to comprehend my wish, moved
behind me as softly as a shadow, and spoke not a word. It needs this
illumination to comprehend Karnak. The unsightly rubbish has
disappeared: the rents in the roof are atoned for by the moonlight they
admit; the fragments shivered from the lips of the mighty capitals are
only the crumpled edges of the flower; a maze of shadows hides the
desolation of the courts, but every pillar and obelisk, pylon and
propylon is glorified by the moonlight. The soul of Karnak is soothed
and tranquillized. Its halls look upon you no longer with an aspect of
pain and humiliation. Every stone seems to say: ‘I am not fallen, for I
have defied the ages. I am a part of that grandeur which has never seen
its peer, and I shall endure forever, for the world has need of me.’ I
climbed to the roof, and sat looking down into the hushed and awful
colonnades, till I was thoroughly penetrated with their august and
sublime expression. I should probably have remained all night, an
amateur colossus, with my hands on my knees, had not the silence been
disturbed by two arrivals of romantic tourists, an Englishman and two
Frenchmen. We exchanged salutations, and I mounted my restless mare
again, touched her side with the stirrup, and sped back to Luxor. The
guide galloped beside me, occasionally hurling his spear into the air
and catching it as it fell, delighted with my readiness to indulge his
desert whims. I found the captain and sailors all ready and my friend
smoking his pipe on deck. In half an hour we had left Thebes.”

Such is a faint view of these ruins of forty centuries, the remains of
that splendid city, Thebes, in comparison with which New York is but an
infant to the mighty giant! “Yes, proud upstart of _this_ nineteenth
century,” says Thompson, “the so-called Empire city, commercial emporium
of the west, great metropolis of the new world, if thy rivers should
sweep over and bury thee, not all the stone of the Croton reservoir, and
the city hall, and the Astor house, and of a hundred churches forsooth,
would make one pile like Karnak; nor could any of these furnish a single
stone for the lintels of its gates. Yet Karnak, which began to be in
that _other_ nineteenth century _before_ Christ, is not yet a ruin! Its
gateways stand; its grand hall stands, its columns nearly all unbroken,
and not one spire of grass, or tuft of moss, or leaf of ivy, hides its
speaking sculptures. Only the sand has covered them; and when this is
removed, they are as fresh as yesterday.”

“Such is the skeleton of Thebes, as we can reconstruct it of such
materials and from such localities as yet mark its site. But what was
Thebes when, resting upon the Lybian mountains on the west and the
Arabian on the east, with the Nile flowing through its center, it filled
a circuit of twenty-five miles in a plain of twice that area, teeming
with fertility! What was Thebes when she could pour forth twenty
thousand chariots of war, and when the grand triumphal procession of
priests, and officers of state, and soldiers, and captives, swept
through these colossal avenues to grace the conqueror’s return! What was
Thebes when, by the way of the Red sea, Arabia and the Indies poured all
their commerce into her lap, and the Nile brought her the spoils of
Ethiopia and of the great sea! What was Thebes when she possessed
wealth, and mechanic arts, and physical force, to rear such monuments
even in the midst of war, and sometimes more than one in the reign of a
single monarch! What was Thebes, with all the arts and inventions of
civilized life that are sculptured upon the tombs of her kings to mark
the progress of their day; from building arches and bridges, to
glass-blowing and porcelain manufactures, to the making of umbrellas,
fans, chairs, and divans, fine linens, and all the appurtenances of a
modern drawing-room! What was Thebes when all merchants resorted thither
from Persia, from Ethiopia, from Lybia, and the Levant! What was Thebes
when the artists and scholars of infant Greece and Rome went thither to
school! Was not Egypt the mother of nations? Where is the art of Greece
or Rome that was not tutored in Egypt; that has not simply graced
Egyptian forms—nor always this? Where is the philosophy of Greece or
Rome that was not borrowed from Egypt? Even the divine Plato, who only
waited for the true Logos, learned at Egypt’s shrine. Egypt gave birth
to art, gave birth to thought, before Greece and Rome were born. She was
the grand repository of human power; the originator of all great forms
of human development; the originator, the inventor, the great prototype
of the world’s history, here laid up in her hieroglyphic archives. In
all material things, yes, and in all great intellectual forms, in
poetry, in art, in philosophy, in science, and in the religion of
nature, this nineteenth century is but the recipient of the mighty past.
Whatever she has of these, she but inherits through Rome and Greece from
their old mother Egypt. What she has better than these, she has by gift
divine, through that Christianity which purifies, enfranchises, and
ennobles man, reforms society, and makes free the state. If she hold
fast by this, she will become resplendent with a glory that Egypt never
knew; but if she slight this, and sell her birthright for luxury and
power, the meanest grave at Thebes would suffice to bury this nineteenth
century with its boasted inventions.“


                      THEBES, AS SEEN IN HISTORY.

All the mere ruins of Thebes, however, immense and magnificent as they
are, fail to give us true views of her greatness, till we go back to her
origin, and trace up her history; and this is so graphically done by
Thompson, in his “Egypt, Past and Present,” that we quote from it, what
he so appropriately calls “_Dissolving Views: Panorama of Karnak._” “In
order,” he says, “to a complete view of Thebes, past and present, one
should reproduce its sculptured story, and make it witness for itself.
The temple of Karnak, in its several parts, marks the rise, the growth,
the decline, and the fall of Egypt. This temple had a growth of
twenty-five hundred years, from a small sanctuary to ‘a city of
temples.’ Every principal era of the national history is represented in
this stupendous pile; and as we go leisurely around it, and translate
into our own language, or vivify into present actual scenes, the
processions, the battles, the ceremonies, the religious offerings, and
the state displays, sculptured on its walls and columns, and for the
most part still legible, we behold all Egypt move before us _as in a
panorama_, whose scenes and actors are instinct with life. This animated
reproduction of the sculptures, which I attempted when on the ground, I
would hope to convey to the reader by following in course the histories
here written on the stone.

“I stood in Karnak, under the light of the full moon. It was an hour for
silence, and we enjoined this upon each other, and gave ourselves to
solitary musing. The cuckoo, that had wooed us with his note as we
reposed under the great pillars in the sultry noon, had gone to nestle
with his mate; and the myriad birds that by day had fluttered along the
corridors, had hid themselves in the crevices of the capitals. Even the
owl that hooted as we entered, was still. Only the moon was there,
threading the avenues with silver footsteps, and holding her clear light
that we might read the sculptured chronicles of kings. We sat down in
the center of the grand avenue. Twelve majestic pillars, on either hand,
towered along its length, and seemed, as of old, to support an arch of
azure studded with stars. The dismantled towers of the grand entrance,
whose bases stand like pyramids truncated to sustain the firmament, grew
more gigantic in the shadow of the columns, while their once massive
gates, uncovered by the hand of time, seemed only to have lifted up
their heads to let the King of Glory in. In the avenue that crossed
beside our seat, (one of twelve, having each ten columns of huge
dimensions,) at either extremity, a column had fallen crosswise against
its neighbor, carrying with it its fragment of the stone roof, and there
it hung almost ethereal in the still moonlight, a symbol of the struggle
between man and time. Under the corridors, darkness brooded over the
fragments of sculptured stone; but beyond the other portal, the yet
perfect obelisk stood in pensive majesty among its fallen mates, and
from its clear, hard face projected in the moonbeams the symbols of the
power that built these halls, and of the worship that sustained them.
The spell of Egypt was complete. For two months I had lived under its
deepening power. At length, in the sepulchers of its kings, and on the
walls and pillars of its temples, I had seen the Egypt of forty
centuries revived as in a panorama fresh from the artist’s pencil, and
had lived in the Egypt that the Nile _then_ watered, as in the so-called
Egypt that it waters now. And here I had come to bid it farewell, to
take a last look at its grave; and yet the witching moonlight made it
_live_ again. The breath of the south fanning the columns that in their
fourth decade of centuries wear no ivied wreath of age, warmed their
still grandeur into life, and with Memnon’s charm they sang to the moon
the great epic of the past. As I listened, all art, all learning, all
religion, all poetry, all history, all empire, and all time, swept
through my wondering soul. Leaving my companions, I wandered over the
fragments of columns and sphinxes and colossi, till, gaining a mound
that half buries the front area of the temple, I clambered up the steps
worn by age in its stupendous wall, and standing in their foremost
tower, looked back on Karnak. But no change of place, nor sight of
fallen columns and decaying walls, could break the spell. I had walked
over the grave of Egypt, I had stumbled against the fragments of its
sepulcher, yet Egypt stood before me.

“First came the second son of Ham, with a long retinue of camels and of
servants, lured southward by the fertile valley of the Nile, till, where
the mountains widen their embrace around the well-watered plain, he
pitches his tent, and founds an infant city. Generations pass, and the
son who in this plain inherits the patriarchal wealth and power, greedy
of the patrimony of his brethren to the north, wages a fratricidal war,
and seizing upon all Mizr or ‘the land of Ham,’ effaces from it the name
of his ancestors, and, investing it with his own, gives _Egypt_ (Copt or
Gurt) a name and a power in the newly divided earth. Other generations
pass, and the first _king_ of Egypt comes with barbaric pomp, from the
capital he has founded at the north, to visit his native _Theba_, the
real ‘_head_’ or capital, and here offers to its divinity the rude
shrine whose traces linger behind yonder obelisk. Ages roll on. The
swelling Nile pours out increasing fatness on the land. The earth brings
forth by handfuls. Fat-fleshed, well-favored cattle come up out of the
river and feed in the meadow. There is great plenteousness for man and
beast. But with all the plenty there is no waste. In every city huge
granaries are built, and in these the grain is piled, as the sand of the
sea, without measure. There is a strange wisdom near the throne of
Pharaoh. Again, the east wind blows, and the scorching sands of the
Arabian desert are heaped upon the fertile Nile. In the mountains of
Ethiopia there is no rain. The river shrinks away. The plain of Thebes
is dry. The people cry for bread, but the keys of the great storehouses
are in the hand of the ruler of the land. They bring to him their money;
they bring to him their cattle; they sell to him their land: they sell
to him their very selves for bread. Again, the east wind ceases; the
rains fall, the river rises; the desert retreats; the land revives. And
now the great Pharaoh, whom the counsel of a captive Jew has made
possessor of all the treasure and all the land of Egypt, moved by a
religious sentiment but half enlightened, would make a votive offering
to his god. A fleet of barges covers the bosom of the Nile, which with
waving banners and gorgeous emblems and increasing music, have borne the
monarch from his northern to his southern capital. With solemn pomp the
procession of priests and soldiers and chief officers of state, with the
uplifted monarch in the midst, files from the river to the rude
sanctuary of _Menes_, which the skill of masons and of sculptors has
already surrounded with columns of rich red granite, and chambers of
polished stone, and with colossal statues of the king—the offering he
brings to the divinity, whom he adores as the preserver of the land; and
while the monarch bows before the god, the sound of trumpets, and the
fragrance of incense, and the chanting of the priests, announce to the
multitude that _Amun_ accepts the gift, and will be henceforth worshiped
in their temple. _Osirtasen_ the Great passes away.

“The ages roll. A native Theban usurps the throne of the northern
Pharaohs, and succeeds to the power they had consolidated through the
counsel of the Hebrew, vouchsafed to them through fourscore years. But
Joseph is dead; embalmed and coffined in a royal sarcophagus; and Amosis
the usurper knows him not. Oppression fills the land, and falls most
heavily upon the seed of Joseph. Another Theban Pharaoh mounts the
throne, and to preserve the power that the wisdom of a Hebrew gave,
determines to cut off the issue of the Hebrews from the land. Yet in his
own house, even as a son, in all the learning of his schools, amid all
the splendors of his court, is nurtured a young Hebrew who yet shall
desolate the land that Joseph blessed. But just now this rising terror
has fled into the desert, and the first _Thothmes_ comes in peaceful
pomp to offer to the divinity of Thebes the gigantic obelisks that bear
his name. He plants them yonder in the area before the sanctuary of
Osirtasen. The third Thothmes is on the throne. There is groaning
throughout the land of Egypt; there is deep sorrow in the land of
Goshen. The monarch would make his name immortal by the temples, the
palaces, and the monuments he rears in every city, from the great sea to
the cataracts of Nubia. He adorns his native capital upon its western
bank with a new sanctuary added to the temple of his father, and with
another temple inclosed with brick, that bear in hieroglyphics his own
initials; and here at Karnak, he builds behind the sanctuary, a thousand
feet from where I stand, the grand edifice of fifty columns that
surpasses all the royal architecture yet seen in Thebes. In its adytum
he enshrines a colossal figure of the deified hawk that he worships. He
is the great architect of Egypt, and he will fill the land with the
memorials of his reign. Heliopolis and Noph, Zoan and Sin, attest his
grandeur. But the voice of another God now thunders in his ear. The
exiled Hebrew has returned. The land is filled with plagues, frogs,
lice, flies, blood, murrain, hail, locusts, darkness, death. The king
has gone from Thebes to Zoan, his most northern seat, where these
judgments overtake him. The land of Goshen, that had sweltered under his
exactions, breathes more freely, and he lets the people go. But
gathering his chariots of war in mad haste, he pursues them, and hems
them in between the mountains and the sea. Eager for his prey, he
plunges into the channel God has made for them, and the proud architect
of Egypt returns not, even to occupy the gorgeous tomb he had prepared
for himself at Thebes.

“The ages roll on, and a mighty conqueror sits on the throne of Egypt.
With his myriad chariots he sweeps Ethiopia on the south, and Canaan on
the north, and gathering all the forces of the Nile, he shakes Lebanon
with his tread, and scatters the hosts of Syria on the plains of the
Euphrates. And now there is an unwonted stir in Thebes. From all Egypt
the priests and the great men are gathered to greet the conqueror’s
return. In the distance, amid clouds of infantry, is seen the chariot of
the king. Bound to his chariot wheels are the captive princes he has
taken in his wars. Behind him are his son, and the royal scribe who
bears the record of his victories. A long line of captives, bound about
the necks with cords, follow in his train. The cortege moves from temple
to temple through the city, till it reaches that of Karnak. Here,
alighting from his chariot, the monarch enters the temple of Amunre, to
present his captives and booty to the protecting deity of Thebes; then
laying his captives on the block, with a ponderous club he dashes out
their brains as a sacrifice to the god, and amid the acclamations of the
people, is borne like a god to his own palace. And now the conqueror,
reposing on his laurels, gives himself to the work of enriching the
capital with new and more splendid edifices for the honor of its
divinities, and the commemoration of his reign. From all Egypt are
summoned the masons and sculptors, the painters and artificers and
‘cunning workmen;’ and the army that had stormed the hights of Lebanon
now levies from the mountains of the Arabian desert their tribute of
limestone and sandstone and granite of various hues, of syenite and
porphyry and alabaster, to construct these temples, and to adorn these
avenues. The grand hall of Karnak rises in its majestic proportions, a
fit approach to the sanctuary of Amun. Its gates lift up their heads.
Its tenfold avenues rear their massive, lofty, graceful pillars—each a
single stone hewn into a rounded, swelling shaft, with a wreathed or
flowered capital—and with their roof of solid stone, compose the portico
that there in the moonlight, restored to its original perfection, stands
confessed the wonder of the world. The chisel sculptures on its walls
and columns the battle scenes of the king and his offerings to the god,
and the name of _Osirei_ passes into history. His son succeeds to his
victories and to his glory. For, on the far off plains of Asia, the
great Sesostris breaks the power of the Assyrian hosts, and leads their
captive chiefs in chains. Babylon bows to Egypt. There is another day of
exultation in the capital; but the pomp of the returning Osirei pales
before the national ovation to his son. The priests, in their sacred
vestments, go forth to meet him, bearing aloft the figures of his
illustrious ancestors, from Menes to Osirei. The king, alighting from
his chariot, mounts the triumphal car prepared for his reception, whose
fiery steeds are led by liveried grooms. His fan-bearers wave the
flabella over his head, and the priests and the chief men of the nation
kneel in homage at his throne. And now the grand procession forms to
enter the city. Trumpeters herald its approach, and bands of music, with
choristers, form the van. In long line the priests and officers of state
precede the monarch, bearing scepters, arms, and other insignia, and the
cushioned steps of the throne. The statues of his ancestors head the
royal column, and after these is borne a statue of the god upon men’s
shoulders under a gilded canopy. The sacred bull, adorned with garlands,
is led by members of the sacerdotal order. The monarch is attended by
his scribes, who exhibit proudly the scroll of his achievements. Behind
his car are dragged the captives, their chained hands uplifted for
mercy, and their cries and lamentations mingling wildly with the bursts
of music and the shouts of the multitude. These are followed by the
spoils of war—oxen, chariots, horses, and sacks of gold; and beyond, a
corps of infantry in close array, flanked by numerous chariots, bring up
the rear. The vast throng sweep from temple to temple, and rend the air
with acclamations. At length the divinity, that had been taken from its
shrine to welcome the victor, is brought before its own adytum. Here the
high-priest offers incense to the monarch, who, in turn, alights from
his throne and burns incense to the god. And now the horrid sacrifice of
war is made to the patron deity. The wretched captives are beaten in the
presence of the king; their right hands are cut off, and being counted
by the scribes, are retained as trophies: their persons are horribly
mutilated; their heads are severed by the sword or mangled by the mace,
and the gorgeous, barbarous scene is closed.

“There is peace in Egypt; and the king builds, on yonder western bank,
the majestic and beautiful Memnonium, covers its walls with the story of
his victories, and sets before its gate the stupendous statue of
himself, the symbol of the grandeur and the power of Egypt, enthroned in
a sublime and an immortal repose. He builds the vast area of Luxor, with
its massive gates and towers, and before these plants colossal statues
of himself and lofty obelisks, and lines with huge symbolic sculptures
the avenue to Karnak. Here he lays up before the shrine of Amun, as
depicted on the walls, a gorgeous barge overlaid with gold without, and
with silver within, a tribute from the spoils of war. He enriches the
walls of the grand hall by adding to the sculptured story of his
father’s reign the battle scenes of his own, and before the portico
constructs this area of a hundred thousand square feet, surrounded with
its covered corridor, and adorned with sphinxes and a central avenue of
tufted columns, and faced with these stupendous towers. He throws around
the whole a massive wall, and Karnak stands complete in the glory of the
great Remeses. Then follows the resplendent dynasty of all the Osirei
and the Remeses, and Egypt culminates to its meridian splendor. Her
schools rise with her temples, and the epic bard of Scio sings the
‘hundred gates of Thebes,’ while the priests and the philosophers of
young Greece resort to the mother of mythology and of letters, and
Grecian sculptors come to study the forms and creations of the mother of
art. The king of Israel, whose fame for wisdom and for wealth is known
in all the earth, wooes the daughter of the king of Egypt, and she whom
‘the sun had looked upon’ on the confines of Ethiopia, shines in the
golden palace at Jerusalem, ‘beautiful as Tirzeh, and comely as the
tents of Kedar.’

“But again the hosts of Egypt are marshaled for battle; again they sweep
the borders of the north; again is heard the shout of victory; again
Thebes is astir for the conqueror’s return. Now _Shishak_ brings to the
temple of Amun the treasures of the house of Jehovah at Jerusalem; the
golden shields of Solomon, and the treasures of the palace he had built.
Twelve hundred chariots, and sixty thousand horsemen, and footmen
without number, swell the train of the victorious king. Nailing the
heads of his wretched captives to the block of the executioner, he whets
his sword to sacrifice them to the god; and the blood of Israel once
more cries to God from the land of Egypt. From afar the voice of the
prophet speaks the answer of Jehovah to that cry: ‘Behold, I am against
Pharaoh king of Egypt, and will break his arms; and I will cause the
sword to fall out of his hand. Howl ye; woe, woe the day! For the day is
near, even the day of the Lord is near, a cloudy day. The sword shall
come upon Egypt; and the pride of her power shall come down.’ Again a
mighty host, sweeping from the north, hovers upon the plain of Thebes.
The idols are moved in their temples, the cry of the people is in the
streets. But it is not now the return of her victorious king that stirs
the royal city. The great _ram_ from the plains of Persia, pushing
westward and southward, gores Egypt with his horns, overthrows her
temples and her statues, treads Memnon and Remeses in the dust, drinks
up the river and devours the valley. There is sorrow and groaning in the
land of Egypt for a hundred years, when lo! again the dust of mighty
hosts sweeps from the north. The _he-goat_ from the west, moved with
choler at the ram, that drinks up the great rivers, rushes upon him in
the fury of his power, and casts him down and stamps upon him. The
Persian conqueror of Thebes retires before the Macedonian conqueror of
Persia. Greece, though a conqueror, pays homage to Egypt as her
mistress. New cities are built; temples and monuments are restored. Upon
the plain of Thebes, new works of art unite the sculptured records of
the Ptolemies with the broken tablets of the Pharaohs. Karnak itself
opens new portals, and revives its ancient splendor. Again the schools
of Egypt are visited from Greece. And where Homer drank his inspiration,
and Herodotus pored over the hieroglyphics, and the papyrus records, and
the dim traditions of the _then_ old world, Plato comes to ponder the
great mysteries of the soul’s existence, and its relations to the
infinite.

“But the doom of Egypt is not yet fulfilled. Her resurrection can not
now come. The gigantic _horn_ that sweeps the stars, trails the young
Egypt of Alexander in the dust. Again she lifts her head and wooes her
conqueror to repose awhile in the lap of luxury. Beauty usurps the
dominion of power; and the golden barge of Cleopatra sweeps up the Nile
with silken sails perfumed with sweetest odors, or moves with silver
oars attuned to the soft melody of lutes. Rome adds her tamer art to the
great majesty of Egypt, and restores yet further what the Persian had
destroyed. Yet Egypt may not rise. A new power enters to possess the
land. Under the Roman name, the religion that had visited the land with
Abraham, with Joseph, and with Moses, comes to enshrine itself in these
old temples, emptied of their gods and broken in their forms. The voice
of prayer and praise to the God of Israel is heard in the temple built
by their oppressor, and the name of the infant whom Egypt sheltered, is
spoken with reverence and adoration in all her holy places. Yonder, in
the furthest temple of this mighty pile, a Christian church assembles;
there, in the court of Luxor, stands another Christian altar, while,
across the river, the colonnade of Medeenet Abou encompasses the lesser
columns of a Christian temple built within its folds. But the spirit of
the old temple lingers in its form, and with it embraces the new. Again
the liveried priests march through the corridors, bearing mysterious
symbols, and chanting unknown strains. Again the pomp of state is
blended with the pomp of worship, and the pictured saint but plasters
over the sculptured deity. The religion and the empire of Rome are alike
_effete_, and can give no life to Egypt. And now barbaric hordes from
the east pour in upon the land, and sweep these both away. The sword of
the Moslem, hacking the plastered walls, writes there in blood the
forgotten truth, _there is one God_, though it add thereto the
stupendous lie, that makes the other cardinal of his religion. The wild
man of the desert pitches his tent upon the plain where Mizraim halted
centuries before, or hides himself under the cover of broken tombs and
temples. He hardly moves from his retreat, when the imperious Turk, his
brother Moslem, proclaims himself master of Egypt and Arabia by the will
of God. And now here sits the Arab on this luxurious plain, among these
crumbling giants of the past, startled at his own shadow, without the
spirit to fight either for himself against his tyrant, or for his
country in that tyrant’s service. Here he sits, where Osirei and Remeses
and Shishak have chronicled their names and deeds beside their own
gigantic portraits. Here he sits, where moved in royal state the
conqueror of Ethiopia, of Judah, of Syria, and of Babylon. Here he sits,
where the fierce Cambyses dealt his retribution; where Alexander moved
with a pomp that none but he could boast; where Cæsar followed in the
train of mighty men—yet owned the greater might of woman. Here he
sits—‘_Il faut descendre_,’ said my guide, who had tortured his Arabic
gutturals into a rude French; ‘_il faut descendre_,’ (it is necessary to
go down.) _Il faut descendre_, repeated I, as I looked over upon the
tombs of the kings, all drear and ghostly in the moonlight; and looked
where Memnon stood, and all was desolate; and looked toward Luxor, where
the moonlight stole faintly through its broken towers; and turned and
looked at Karnak, as the meridian moon now shone upon heaps of rubbish,
and broken columns, and crumbling walls. _Il faut descendre_, IT MUST GO
DOWN; and, turning to descend, I stumbled over an Arab hovel, plastered
upon the very top of the tower of Sesostris, and heard the yelping of
the dogs from the huts that bury the side temple of the conqueror of
Babylon. The spell was broken; and Egypt was a dream. Riding back, amid
barking dogs and shivering, shrinking Arabs, over the dusty plain to
Luxor, I lay down upon the divan where, two months before, I had dreamed
of Egypt, when, entering the Nile, I felt her resistless spell. But no
dream of Egypt came. Egypt herself had vanished. _As a dream when one
awaketh, so, O Lord, when thou awakedst, thou didst despise her image._”


                       OTHER RUINS IN EGYPT, &C.

There are in Egypt and the valley of the Nile, numerous other ruins,
relics and monuments of the mighty past, on which it would be most
interesting and instructive to dwell, were they not overshadowed by the
wonderful structures we have been considering. Some of these, however,
ought not to be passed without notice.


                         THE TEMPLE OF DENDERA.

The temple of Dendera (formerly Tentyra) is on the western bank of the
Nile, nearly opposite Kenneh. Passing from the latter place, the path of
the traveler leads through a palm grove, where the lofty shafts of the
date and the vaulted foliage of the doum-palm, blend in the most
picturesque groupage, and in contrast with the lace-like texture of the
flowering mimosa, and the cloudy boughs of a kind of gray cypress.
Crossing the meadows to Dendera, leagues of rank grass roll away toward
the desert in shining billows, while the wind wafts the rich and mingled
odors of the various flowers on the traveler’s course. In the midst of
this beautiful plain, rise the earthy mounds of Dendera; and the portico
of the temple, almost buried beneath them, stands like a beacon, marking
the boundary of the desert. “We galloped our animals along the dike,”
says a late traveler, “and dismounted at a small pylon, which stands two
or three hundred paces in front of the temple. The huge jambs of
sandstone, covered with sharply cut hieroglyphics and figures of the
Egyptian gods, and surmounted by a single block, bearing the mysterious
winged globe and serpent, detained us but a moment, and we hurried down
what was once the dromos of the temple, now represented by a double wall
of unburnt bricks. The portico, more than a hundred feet in length, and
supported by six columns, united by screens of masonry, no stone of
which, or of the columns themselves, is unsculptured, is massive and
imposing, but struck me as being too depressed to produce a very grand
effect. What was my astonishment, on arriving at the entrance, to find
that I had approached the temple on a level with half its hight, and
that the pavement of the portico was as far below as the scrolls of its
cornice were above me. The six columns I had seen, covered three other
rows, of six each, all adorned with the most elaborate sculpture and
exhibiting traces of the brilliant coloring which they once possessed.
The entire temple, which is in an excellent state of preservation,
except where the hand of the Coptic Christian has defaced its
sculptures, was cleaned out by order of Mohammed Ali, and as all its
chambers, as well as the roof of enormous sandstone blocks, are entire,
it is considered one of the most complete relics of Egyptian art. I find
my pen at fault, when I attempt to describe the impression produced by
the splendid portico. The twenty-four columns, each of which is sixty
feet in hight, and eight feet in diameter, crowded upon a surface of one
hundred feet by seventy, are oppressive in their grandeur. The dim
light, admitted through the half closed front, which faces the north,
spreads a mysterious gloom around these mighty shafts, crowned with the
fourfold visage of Athor, still rebuking the impious hands that have
marred her solemn beauty. On the walls, between columns of
hieroglyphics, and the cartouches of the Cæsars and the Ptolemies,
appear the principal Egyptian deities, the rigid Osiris, the stately
Isis and the hawk-headed Orus. Around the bases of the columns spring
the leaves of the sacred lotus, and the dark-blue ceiling is spangled
with stars, between the wings of the divine emblem. The sculptures are
all in raised relief, and there is no stone in the temple without them.
I can not explain to myself the unusual emotion I felt while
contemplating this wonderful combination of a simple and sublime
architectural style with the utmost elaboration of ornament. My blood
pulsed fast and warm on my first view of the Roman forum, but in Dendera
I was so saddened and oppressed, that I scarcely dared speak for fear of
betraying an unmanly weakness. The portico opens into a hall, supported
by six beautiful columns, of smaller proportions, and lighted by a
square aperture in the solid roof. On either side are chambers connected
with dim and lofty passages, and beyond is the sanctuary and various
other apartments, which receive no light from without. We examined their
sculptures by the aid of torches, and our Arab attendants kindled large
fires of dry corn-stalks, which cast a strong red light on the walls.
The temple is devoted to Athor, the Egyptian Venus, and her image is
everywhere seen, receiving the homage of her worshipers. Even the dark
staircase, leading to the roof, up which we climbed over heaps of sand
and rubbish, is decorated throughout with processions of symbolical
figures. The drawing has little of that grotesque stiffness which I
expected to find in Egyptian sculptures, and the execution is so
admirable in its gradations of light and shade, as to resemble, at a
little distance, a monochromatic painting. The antiquarians view these
remains with little interest, as they date from the comparatively recent
era of the Ptolemies, at which time sculpture and architecture were on
the decline. We, who had seen nothing else of the kind, were charmed
with the grace and elegance of this sumptuous mode of decoration. Part
of the temple was built by Cleopatra, whose portrait, with that of her
son Cæsarion, may still be seen on the exterior wall. The face of the
colossal figure has been nearly destroyed, but there is a smaller one,
whose soft, voluptuous outline is still sufficient evidence of the
justness of her renown. The profile is exquisitely beautiful. The
forehead and nose approach the Greek standard, but the mouth is more
roundly and delicately curved, and the chin and cheek are fuller. Were
such an outline made plastic, were the blank face colored with a pale
olive hue, through which should blush a faint, rosy tinge, lighted with
bold black eyes and irradiated with the lightning of a passionate
nature, it would even now ‘move the mighty hearts of captains and of
kings.’ Besides the temple, there are also the remains of a chapel of
Isis, with a pylon, erected by Augustus Cæsar, and a small temple,
nearly whelmed in the sand, supposed to be one of the _mammeisi_, or
lying-in houses of the goddess Athor, who was honored in this form, on
account of having given birth to the third member of the divine triad.”


                 THE TEMPLES OF HERMONTIS AND OF ESNEH.

Passing up the Nile, on the same side of it, and nearly opposite Luxor
and Karnak, is the village of Erment, the ancient _Hermontis_, which is
still graced with a small temple to the goddess Reto. “The group of
pillars in the outer court,” says Taylor, “charmed us by the richness
and variety of their designs. No two capitals are of similar pattern,
while in their combinations of the papyrus, the lotus and the palm-leaf,
they harmonize one with another and as a whole. The abacus, between the
capital and the architrave, is so high as almost to resemble a second
shaft. In Karnak and the Memnonium it is narrow, and lifts the ponderous
beam just enough to prevent its oppressing the lightness of the capital.
I was so delighted with the pillars of Hermontis that I scarcely knew
whether to call this peculiarity a grace or a defect. I have never seen
it employed in modern architecture, and judge therefore that it has
either been condemned by our rules or that our architects have not the
skill and daring of the Egyptians. We reached Esneh the same night, but
were obliged to remain all the next day in order to allow our sailors to
bake their bread. We employed the time in visiting the temple, the only
remnant of the ancient Latopolis, and the palace of Abbas Pasha, on the
bank of the Nile. The portico of the temple, half buried in rubbish,
like that of Dendera, which it resembles in design, is exceedingly
beautiful. Each of its twenty-four columns is crowned with a different
capital, so chaste and elegant in their execution that it is impossible
to give any one the preference. The designs are mostly copied from the
doum-palm, the date-palm, and the lotus, but the cane, the vine, and
various water-plants are also introduced. The building dates from the
time of the Ptolemies, and its sculptures are uninteresting. We devoted
all our time to the study of the capitals, a labyrinth of beauty, in
which we were soon entangled. The governor of Esneh, a most friendly and
agreeable Arab, accompanied us through the temple, and pointed out all
the fishes, birds and crocodiles he could find, to him the most
interesting things in it.” The same day they also visited the rock tombs
of El-Kab, the ancient Eleuthyas, which are among the most curious in
Egypt. “There are a large number of these, but only two are worth
visiting, on account of the light which they throw on the social life of
the Egyptians. The owner of the tomb and his wife, a red man and a
yellow woman, are here seen, receiving the delighted guests. Seats are
given them, and each is presented with an aromatic flower, while the
servants in the kitchen hasten to prepare savory dishes. In other
compartments, all the most minute processes of agriculture are
represented with wonderful fidelity. So little change has taken place in
three thousand years, that they would answer, with scarcely a
correction, as illustrations of the Fellah agriculture of modern Egypt.”

The northern part of Nubia abounds in Egyptian remains, such, for
example, as the temples of Dabod, Kalabshee, Dakkeh, Dendoor, Sebooa,
&c., &c.; and the whole valley of the Nile is filled with the ruins of
cities whose names have hardly survived their overthrow. Noticing but
two or three more of these ruins, we will then pass on to other themes.


                   ABYDOS, AND THE TEMPLE OF MEMNON.

Abydos was the reputed burial-place of Osiris, one of the most sacred
gods of ancient Egypt. According to Strabo, it formerly held the next
rank to Thebes, and judging from its ruins, Wilkinson thinks it yielded
to few cities in upper Egypt in size and magnificence. Going toward it
from Girgeh, says Thompson, “we came upon a mound of sand and dust, and
broken bricks and pottery, strewed over with bleaching human bones, and
ascending this for several rods, and to an elevation of about sixty
feet, we came out upon the massive blocks of stone that form the _roof_
of the old temple-palace of Memnon. Here, crawling upon our hands and
knees, we got under the roof far enough to see that it covers two large
halls supported by rows of massive columns, whose capitals are in the
form of the lotus bud, still distinctly preserved. The walls, as far as
could be seen, are covered with sculptures, among which the ibis
frequently recurs; there are also ceremonial processions and battle
scenes, such as are usually depicted in the sculptures of Egyptian
temples. No doubt, if this temple should be excavated, it would be one
of the most remarkable monuments in Egypt. It dates back nearly fourteen
hundred years before Christ. The formation of the roof was peculiar.
Large blocks of stone were laid endwise from one row of columns to the
other, and then an arch was hollowed out of this solid masonry, still
leaving a roof two feet in thickness at its center. The stones were so
nicely adjusted, that they fitted closely without cement. The ceiling
was studded with stars, and with sculptures beautifully colored. I have
not seen in Egypt more exquisite workmanship. Yet the visitor is doomed
to disappointment through the great difficulty of access to the temple,
in consequence of the drifting in of the sand from the desert and the
neighboring mountains. Near by is another temple, also inaccessible, the
temple of Osiris, built by the great Remeses, and enriched with
alabaster walls, some fragments of which may yet be found. The
neighboring mountains are filled with tombs, some of which are nearly
four thousand years old. Everything indicates that here was the site of
a great city, a city of wealth, population and power, enriched with
trophies of conquest and monuments of religion. But these buried temples
alone remain, and the Arabs, who now squat in their rags upon the top of
the splendid sanctuary of Osiris, have given to the place the expressive
name of ‘_The Buried_.’”


                      THE TEMPLES OF ABOU SIMBEL.

Passing up the Nile to about latitude twenty-two degrees, on its west
side, nearly up to the second cataract, we come to the temples of Abou
Simbel. Reaching the bank of the river about midnight, the traveler we
have so often quoted tells us: “As I was awakened from a deep sleep by
the shock of the boat striking the shore, I saw a huge wall of rock
before me, against which six enormous statues leaned as they looked from
deep niches cut in its front. Their solemn faces were touched by the
moon, which shone full on the cliff, and only their feet were wrapped in
shadow. The lines of deep-cut hieroglyphics over the portal of this
rocky temple were also filled with shadow, and painted legibly on the
gray, moonlit rock. Below them yawned the door, a square of complete
darkness. A little to the left, over a long drift of sand that sloped
from the summit of the cliff nearly to the water’s edge, peered the
mitered head of a statue of still more colossal proportions. I gazed on
this broad, dim, and wonderful picture for a moment, so awed by its
majesty that I did not ask myself where nor what it was. This is some
grand Egyptian dream, was my first thought, and I closed my eyes for a
few seconds, to see whether it would vanish. But it stood fast and
silent as ever, and I knew it to be _Abou Simbel_. My servants all
slept, and the raïs and boys noiselessly moored the boat to the shore,
and then lay down and slept also. Still I lay, and the great statues
looked solemnly down upon me, and the moon painted their kingly nomens
and banners with yet darker distinctness on the gray rock. In the
morning, I found that we lay at the foot of the smaller temple. I
quietly waited for my cup of coffee, for the morning reality was
infinitely less grand than my vision of the night. I then climbed to the
door and entered. The interior is not large nor imposing, after one has
seen the temples of Egypt. The exterior, however, is on such a colossal
scale, that, notwithstanding the want of proportion in the different
statues, the effect is very striking. The largest ones are about
thirty-five feet high, and not identical, as are those of the great
temple. One, who stands with one leg advanced, while he holds a sword
with the handle pressed against his breast, is executed with much more
spirit than is usually met with in statues of this period. The
sculptures of the interior are interesting, and being of the time of
Remeses the Great, whose history they illustrate, are executed with much
skill and labor. The head of the goddess Athor, on the face of the
columns in the hall, is much less beautiful than that of the same
goddess at Dendera. It is, in fact, almost broad and distorted enough to
represent the genius Typhon.

“The front of the great temple is not parallel to that of the other, nor
does it face the river, which here flows in a north-east course. The
line of the cliff is broken between the two, so that the figures of the
great Remeses, seated on each side of the door, look to the east, the
direction of the line of the face being nearly north. Through the gap in
front, the sands have poured down from the desert behind, almost wholly
filling up the space between the two cliffs; and though since the temple
was first opened, in 1817, it has been cleared nearly to the base more
than once, the rapid accumulation of sand has again almost closed the
entrance. The southern colossus is only buried about half-way to the
knee, but of the two northern ones there is little else to be seen
except the heads. Obscured as is the effect of this grand front, it is
still without parallel in the world. I had not thought it possible that
in statues of such enormous magnitude there could be such singular
beauty of expression. The face of Remeses, the same in each, is
undoubtedly a portrait, as it resembles the faces of the statues in the
interior, and those of the king in other places. Besides, there is an
individuality in some of the features which is too marked to represent
any general type of the Egyptian head. The fullness of the drooping
eyelid, which yet does not cover the large, oblong Egyptian eye; the
nose, at first slightly inclining to the aquiline, but curving to the
round, broad nostrils; the generous breadth of the calm lips, and the
placid, serene expression of the face, are worthy of the conqueror of
Africa and the builder of Karnak and Medeenet Abou. The statue next the
door, on the southern side, has been shivered to the throne on which it
is seated, and the fragments are not to be seen, except a few which lie
upon the knees. The great doorway of the temple is so choked up with
sand, that I was obliged to creep in on my knees. The sun by this time
had risen exactly to the only point where it can illumine the interior;
and the rays, taking a more yellow hue from the rock and sand on which
they fell, shone down the long drift between the double row of colossal
statues, and lighted up the entrance to the second hall of the temple. I
sat down in the sand, awed and half frightened by the singular
appearance of the place. The sunshine, falling obliquely on the sands,
struck a dim reflection against the sculptured roof, and even lighted up
the furthest recesses of the grand hall sufficiently to show its
imposing dimensions. Eight square pillars, four on either side of the
central aisle, seem to uphold the roof, and on their inner sides, facing
each other, are eight statues of the king. The features of all are
preserved, and have something of the grace and serenity, though not the
majesty, of the great statues outside. They look into each other’s eyes,
with an eternal question on their fixed countenances, but none can give
answer. There was something so stern and strange in these eight faces,
that I felt a shudder of fear creep over me. The strong arms are all
crossed on their breasts, and the hands hold various sacred and regal
symbols, conspicuous among which is something resembling a flail, which
one sees often in Egyptian sculpture. I thought of a marvelous story I
once read, in which a genie, armed with a brazen flail, stands at the
entrance of an enchanted castle, crushing with the stroke of his
terrible weapon all who come to seek the treasure within. For a moment
the childish faith in the supernatural was as strong as ever, and I
looked at the gloomy entrance beyond, wishing to enter, but fearing the
stony flails of the terrible Remesi on either hand. The faces were once
partially colored, and the black eyeball, still remaining on the blank
eye of stone, gives them an expression of stupor, of death in life,
which accounted to me for the nervous shock I experienced on entering.

“There is nothing in Egypt which can be likened to the great temple of
Abou-Simbel. Karnak is grander, but its grandeur is human. This belongs
rather to the superhuman fancies of the East—the halls of the Afrites—or
to the realm of the dethroned Titans, of early Greek mythology. This
impression is not diminished, on passing the second hall and corridor,
and entering the adytum, or sacred chamber of the temple. There the
granite altar yet stands in the center, before the undestroyed figures
of the gods, who, seated side by side, calmly await the offerings of
their worshipers. The peculiar individuality of each deity is strikingly
shown in these large statues, and their attitude is much less
constrained than in the sitting statues in the tombs of Thebes. These
look as if they _could_ rise, if they would. The walls are covered with
sculptures of them and of the contemplar deities, in the grand, bold
style of the age of Remeses. Some visitors had left a supply of dry
palm-branches near the entrance, and of these I made torches, which
blazed and crackled fiercely, flaring with a rich red light on the
sculptured and painted walls. There was sufficient to enable me to
examine all the smaller chambers, of which there are eight or nine, cut
laterally into the rock, without any attempt at symmetry of form, or
regularity of arrangement. Several of them have seats running around
three sides, exactly like the divans in modern Egyptian houses. They
were probably designed for the apartments of the priests or servants
connected with the temple. The sculptures on the walls of the grand hall
are, after those of Medeenet Abou, and on the exterior wall of Karnak,
the most interesting I have seen in Egypt. On the end wall, on either
side of the entrance, is a colossal bass-relief, representing Remeses
slaying a group of captive kings, whom he holds by the hair of their
heads. There are ten or twelve in each group, and the features, though
they are not colored, exhibit the same distinction of race as I had
previously remarked in Belzoni’s tomb, at Thebes. There is the negro,
the Persian, the Jew, and one other form of countenance which I could
not make out, all imploring with uplifted hands the mercy of the
conqueror. On the southern wall, the distinction between the negro and
the Egyptian is made still more obvious by the coloring of the figures.
In fact, I see no reason whatever to doubt that the peculiar
characteristics of the different races of men were as strongly marked in
the days of Remeses as at present. The sculptures on the side walls of
the temple represent the wars of Remeses, who, as at Medeenet Abou,
stands in a chariot which two horses at full speed whirl into the ranks
of the enemy. The king discharges his arrows against them, and directly
in front of him a charioteer, mortally wounded, is hurled from his
overthrown chariot. The groups are chiseled with great spirit and
boldness; the figures of the king and his horses are full of life.
Towering over all, as well by his superior proportions as by the majesty
and courage of his attitude, Remeses stands erect and motionless amid
the shock and jar and riot of battle. There is no exultation in his
face; only the inflexible calmness of destiny. I spent some time
contemplating these grand and remarkable memorials of the greatest age
of Egypt, and left with my feeling for Egyptian art even stronger than
before.”


                            THE RIVER NILE.

                              “With annual pomp,
      Rich king of floods! o’erflows the swelling Nile!”—THOMPSON.

Though the river Nile is properly to be classified with the wonders of
nature, rather than with those of art, yet as it is so intimately and
constantly associated with the wonderful ruins that everywhere line its
banks, it may be well to notice it before passing from the wonders of
Egypt and of the regions south of it. This celebrated river, which
divides Egypt into two parts, and passes on south through Nubia,
Ethiopia, &c., is formed mainly by two streams, the Blue Nile and the
White Nile. The Blue Nile, the sources of which were discovered by
Bruce, rises near latitude eleven degrees north, in the mountains of
Godjam, on the south-western frontier of Abyssinia, and flows with a
winding course some eight hundred miles to Khartoum, where it unites
with the western branch of the river, thus forming the main stream. The
sources of the White Nile (so called from the light brown, muddy color
of its waters, as the Blue is from the dark bluish-green of its stream)
are as yet undiscovered. Twelve hundred miles above its junction, and
thirty-three hundred above the Mediterranean, it is still a broad and
powerful stream, of whose source even the tribes that dwell in those far
off regions are ignorant. Taylor is confident, that when its hidden
fountains shall at last be reached, and the problem of twenty centuries
solved, the entire length of the Nile will be found to be not less than
_four thousand miles_, and that it will take rank with the Mississippi
and the Amazon, as one of the three great streams of the world. In some
respects, he says, “there is a striking resemblance between the Nile and
the former river. The Missouri is the true Mississippi, rolling the
largest flood, and giving its color to the mingled streams. So the White
Nile, which is broad and turbid, pollutes the clear blue flood that has
usurped his name and dignity. In spite of what geographers may say, and
they are still far from being united on the subject, the Blue Nile is
not the true Nile. There, at the point of junction, his volume of water
is greater, but he is fresh from the mountains and constantly fed by
large, unfailing affluents, while the White Nile has rolled for more
than a thousand miles on nearly a dead level, through a porous, alluvial
soil, in which he loses more water than he brings with him.” The two
rivers meet at right angles, but do not mingle their waters till they
have rolled some eight or ten miles in their common bed. Both rivers are
of about the same breadth at the point of confluence, but the current of
the Blue branch is the strongest. On this account, the native boatmen
speak of the Blue river as _he_, and of the White as _she_. And it is
remarkable that the name Nile, which is never heard in Egypt, (where the
river is called _el-bahr_, “the sea,”) is retained in Ethiopia, and
there applied to the Blue Nile, probably for the same reason.

The White Nile has been traced up by Dr. Knoblecher and his associates
further than by any one before him. In January, 1850, he passed the
furthest point reached by any previous expedition; and on the sixteenth
of that month reached the village of Logwek, which takes its name from a
solitary granite peak about six hundred feet high, which stands on the
left bank of the Nile. This is in latitude four degrees and ten minutes
north, and is the most southern point which has yet been reached on the
White Nile. Dr. Knoblecher ascended the mountain, which commanded a view
of almost the entire Bari country. Toward the south-west the river wound
out of sight between the mountains Rego and Kidi, near which is the
mountain of Kereg, containing rich iron mines which are worked by the
natives; and to the south, on the very verge of the horizon, rose a long
range of hills, whose forms could not be observed with exactness, owing
to the great distance. Beyond the Logwaya range, which appeared in the
east, dwell the Berri tribes, whose language is distinct from the Baris,
and who are neighbors of the Gallas, that warlike race, whose domain
extends from Abyssinia to the wilds of Mozambique, along the great
central plateau of Uniamesi. The natives of Logwek knew nothing whatever
of the country to the south. The furthest mountain range was probably
under the parallel of latitude three degrees north, so that the White
Nile has now been traced nearly to the equator. At Logwek, it was about
six hundred and fifty feet wide, and from five to eight feet deep, at
the time of Dr. Knoblecher’s visit, which was during the dry season.
Such an abundance of water allows us to estimate with tolerable
certainty the distance to its unknown sources, which must undoubtedly
lie beyond the equator. The great snow mountain of Kilimandjarò,
discovered in 1850 by Dr. Krapf, the German missionary, on his journey
inland from Mombas, on the coast of Zanzibar, has been located by
geographers in latitude three degrees south. It is therefore most
probable that the source of the White Nile will be found in the range of
mountains, of which Kilimandjarò is the crowning apex. The geographer
Berghaus, in a long and labored article, endeavors to prove that the
Gazelle river is the true Nile, and makes it rise in the great lake
N’Yassi, in latitude thirteen degrees south. Dr. Knoblecher, however,
who examined the Bahr el-Ghazàl at its mouth, says it is an unimportant
stream, with a scarcely perceptible current. He considers the White Nile
as being, beyond all question, the true river.

[Illustration: THE NILOMETER.]

Following the river on to its mouth, the greater part of lower Egypt is
contained in a triangular island, formed by the Mediterranean sea, and
the two great branches of the Nile, which dividing itself five or six
miles from Old Cairo, flows on the one side to the north-east, falling
into the sea at Damietta; while the other branch runs to the north-west,
and enters the sea at Rosetta. What is called the Delta, resembling the
Greek letter of that name, and constituting a triangle, is thus formed.
The water of the Nile is here, for the most part, thick and muddy, more
particularly when the river is swollen by the heavy rains which
constantly fall within the tropics in the beginning of the summer
season, and which are doubtless the principal cause of its overflowing
the low lands of Egypt. A similar phenomenon is found in the Ganges; and
it is the same with all the rivers which have either their rise or
course within the tropics: they annually break their bounds, and cover
the lands for many miles on each side, before they reach the sea. They
likewise leave prolific mud, which, like that of the Nile, fertilizes
the land; beside which, the north winds prevailing about the latter end
of May, drive in the waters from the sea, and keep back those of the
river, in such a manner as considerably to assist the swell. The
Egyptians, and the Copts more especially, are persuaded that the Nile
always begins to rise on the same day of the year; as, indeed, it
generally commences about the same time in June. Its rise was observed
for three successive years by Dr. Pococke, who found it to ascend during
the first five days from five to ten inches; and it thus continued
rising till it had attained the hight of nine feet, when the canal of
Cairo was cut. It then rose from three to five inches only in the day;
for, having spread over the land and entered the canal, although more
water might have descended than before, its rise was less considerable.
The other canals were now laid open at stated times, and those which
water the lower grounds the last. These canals are carried along the
highest parts of the country, so that from their elevation the water may
be conveyed to the valleys. So important is this matter of the rise and
fall of the river to the whole country, that a thin column or pillar,
called the _Nilometer_, has been erected, to mark the elevation or
depression of its waters. A view of it is given in the cut following. It
is situated in the middle of a round tower, on the island of Rhoda, not
far from Cairo, in the middle of the river. In this tower is a marble
cistern, through which the Nile flows; its bottom and the bottom of the
river being on the same level. From the center of this cistern rises a
slender pillar, as seen in the engraving, marked off into twenty
divisions of twenty inches each; the entire space marked on the column
being somewhat more than thirty-six feet. This column is of the greatest
interest to the people, as connected with their prospects of a harvest;
and of the greatest importance to the government, as enabling it to fix
the tribute, or tax, according to the hight of the inundation. The tower
in which it is placed, is lighted by some eighteen or twenty windows,
which form a belt around the base of the dome; and beneath these, and
above the cistern, are rooms or apartments for those who come to see the
hight of the waters, from which rooms a flight of some thirty stone
steps leads to the marble pavement in the center of which the cistern
and Nilometer are placed. As soon as the attendants ascertain that the
overflow will be such as to fertilize all the land, the large canals are
all opened with great ceremony and rejoicing. And as soon as the waters
retire again from the fields, they are sown with all kinds of grain, so
that in a short space of time the whole face of the country is
variegated with the rich hues of the flowering plants and the ripening
grain.

The Nile has one peculiar characteristic. Other rivers being supplied by
rivulets, the ground is lowest near their banks; but as no water flows
into the Nile in its passage throughout Egypt, and as it is necessary
that this river should overflow the land, the country is generally lower
at a distance from, than near to it; and, in most parts, the land has a
gradual descent from the river to the foot of the hills, which terminate
the sandy plains most benefited by the irrigation. Among other
remarkable appearances, the celebrated Bruce notices a very singular one
attendant on the inundation of the Nile. In Abyssinia, the early part of
the morning is constantly clear in that season, with a fine sunshine.
About nine, a small cloud, not above four feet in apparent breadth,
appears in the east, whirling violently round as if on an axis; but
having approached nearly to the zenith, it first abates its motion, and
then loses its form, extending itself greatly, and seeming to call up
vapors from all the opposite quarters. The clouds thus formed having
attained nearly the same hight, rush against each other with great
violence, and remind the spectator of Elisha foretelling rain on Mount
Carmel. The air being impelled before the heaviest mass, or swiftest
mover, makes an impression of its form on the collection of clouds
opposite; and the moment it has taken possession of the space made to
receive it, the most violent thunder possible to be conceived follows
instantly, attended by rain. After some hours the sky again clears, with
a wind at north; and it is always disagreeably cold when the thermometer
is below sixty-three degrees.

Dr. Clarke, in his travels, draws the following elegant picture of this
most interesting river.

“Here we were unexpectedly greeted with an astonishing view of the Nile,
the Delta, and the numerous groves in the neighborhood of Rosetta. The
scene is beyond description. The sudden contrast it offers, opposed to
the desert we had traversed, the display of riches and abundance poured
forth by the fertility of this African paradise, with all the local
circumstances of reflection excited by an extensive prospect of the
Nile, and of the plains of Egypt, render it one of the most interesting
sights in the world. The beautiful boats of the Nile, with their large,
wide-spreading sails, were passing up and down the river. Unable to quit
the spot, we dismissed our guides, and remained some time contemplating
the delightful picture. Afterward, descending on foot, close by the
superb mosque of Abu-Mandur, we continued our walks along the bank of
the river, through gardens richer than imagination can portray, beneath
the shade of enormous overhanging branches of sycamore and fig trees,
amid bowers of roses, and through groves of date, citron, lime and
banana trees, to Rosetta.”


                 THE BARRAGE, OR GREAT DAM OF THE NILE.

We end our sketches of Egypt, and the Nile, by a notice of the
_barrage_, or great dam, at the northern part of the Delta, just below
where the river divides into the two great streams which empty
themselves at Rosetta on the west, and Damietta on the east. This
immense work, which is hardly heard of out of Egypt, is one of the
greatest undertakings of modern times. It is nothing less than a damming
of the Nile, so as to hold back its waters and keep them in reserve,
till, by letting them out, at the proper seasons, two inundations may be
produced each year, and so the crops doubled throughout the Delta. This
great work is not only projected, but far advanced toward completion.
Each branch of the river is to be spanned by sixty-two arches, besides a
central gateway ninety feet in breadth, and flanked by lofty stone
towers. The point of the Delta, between the two dams, is protected by a
curtain of solid masonry, and the abutments which it joins are fortified
by towers sixty or seventy feet in hight. The piers have curved
breakwaters on the upper side, while the opposite parapet of the arches
rises high above them, so that the dam consists of three successive
terraces, and presents itself like a wedge, against the force of such an
immense body of water. The material is brick, faced with stone. When
complete, it is intended to close the side arches during low water,
leaving only the central gateway open. By this means sufficient water
will be gained to fill all the irrigating canals, while a new channel,
cut through the center of the Delta, will render productive a vast tract
of fertile land. The project is a grand one, and the only obstacle to
its success is the light, porous character of the alluvial soil on which
the piers are founded. The undertaking was planned and commenced by M.
Linant, and has been continued by other engineers. “The Egyptian
boatmen,” says Taylor, “have reason to complain of the _barrage_. The
main force of the river is poured through the narrow space wherein the
piers have not yet been sunk, which can not be passed without a strong
north wind. Forty or fifty boats were lying along the shore, waiting the
favorable moment. We obtained permission from the engineer to attach our
boat to a large government barge, which was to be drawn up by a
stationary windlass. As we put off, the wind freshened, and we were
slowly urged against the current to the main rapid, and at last reached
smoother water, and sailed off gaily for Cairo.”


                        THE AFRICAN BIRDS’ NEST.

Before passing to the ruins of some of the cities of antiquity, we would
here, by way of variety, briefly describe the wonderful and curious nest
of the “_sociable weavers_,” as they are called, which abound in some
parts of Africa; a view of which is given in the engraving below.
Hundreds of these birds, in one community, join to form a structure of
interwoven grass, containing various apartments, all covered by a
sloping roof, which is extended, from year to year, as the increase of
their numbers may require. A traveler, having examined one of these huge
nests, found it to consist mainly of grass, without any mixture, but so
firmly basketed together as to be impenetrable to the rain, and
extending like a canopy over all the particular nests built by the
individual birds. The one he examined contained no less than three
hundred and twenty cells.

[Illustration: AFRICAN BIRDS’ NEST.]

Returning from this digression, we now pass to the notice of some of the
ruins of the cities of antiquity; and first to the


                           RUINS OF PALMYRA.

This noble city of ancient Syria, also called Tadmor, is of uncertain
date and origin, but is thought by some to have been the “Tadmor in the
wilderness” built by Solomon. The first view of the city is exceedingly
magnificent, the snow-white appearance of the innumerable columns and
buildings, contrasting strikingly with the yellow sand of the desert.
Its ruins are not to be compared, as to the size of the gates, columns
and temples, with those of Balbec or Thebes; but they are more
remarkable for their vast extent, and are less encumbered with modern
fabrics than most ancient remains. They consist of temples, palaces,
gateways and porticos of Grecian architecture, scattered over an extent
of several miles. One of the most remarkable of them is the _temple of
the Sun_, the ruins of which extend over a square of more than two
hundred yards. The temple itself, which points north and south, is
thirty-three yards in length and about fourteen in width. At its center,
on the west side, is a magnificent entry, on the remains of which vines
and clusters of grapes are carved in a bold and masterly imitation of
nature. Over the door is a pair of wings, extending the whole breadth.
Its north extremity is adorned with curious fret-work and bass-relief,
and in the center is a dome, or cupola, about ten feet in diameter, of
solid stone. To the north of this is an obelisk of seven large stones,
which probably once supported a statue; and about a quarter of a mile
distant are others similar to it, as if forming originally part of a
continued row.

About one hundred paces from the middle obelisk, straight forward, is a
magnificent entry to a piazza, forty feet in breadth and more than half
a mile in length, inclosed with two rows of marble pillars twenty-six
feet high, and eight or nine feet in compass. Of these there still
remain one hundred and twenty-nine; and by a moderate computation, there
could not have been originally less than five hundred and sixty. At the
west side of this piazza are several apertures for gates into the court
of the palace, each of them ornamented with four porphyry pillars, not
standing in a line with those of the wall, but placed by couples in the
front of the gate facing the palace, two on each side. Two of these only
remain entire, and one only standing in its place. They are thirty feet
in length, and nine in circumference. On the east side of the piazza
stand a great number of marble pillars, some perfect, but the greater
part mutilated. In one place eleven of them are ranged in a square, the
space they inclose being paved with broad flat stones, but without any
remains of a roof. At a little distance are the remains of a small
temple, also without a roof, and having its walls much defaced. Before
the entry, which faces the south, is a piazza supported by six pillars,
two on each side of the door, and one at each end. The pedestals of
those in front have been filled with inscriptions, both in the Greek and
Palmyrene languages, which are become totally illegible. Among these
ruins are many sepulchers, ranged on each side of a hollow way toward
the north part of the city, and extending more than a mile; some being
mere heaps of rubbish; others half fallen, exposing their shattered
chambers; while one or two remain almost entire. They are built in the
shape of square towers, from three to four stories in hight, each
forming a sepulchral chamber, with recesses divided into compartments
for the reception of the bodies. Some of the chambers are beautifully
ornamented with Corinthian pilasters and sculptures, almost in perfect
preservation, executed in bold relief; the walls are of white stucco,
and the ceilings are divided into diamond-shaped compartments,
delicately ornamented with white stars on a blue ground; while over the
doorways are inscriptions both in the Greek and Palmyrene languages. The
outsides are of common stone; but the floors and partitions of each
story are of marble. A walk crosses the center of this range of
buildings, and the space on each side is subdivided by thick walls, into
six partitions, the space between which is wide enough to receive the
largest corpse. In these niches six or seven are piled on one another.


                            RUINS OF BALBEC.

Baal-bec, or Balbec, is supposed by many to be the same as Baal-ath,
built by Solomon in Lebanon, as mentioned in the eighth chapter of the
second book of Chronicles. Its magnificent ruins are described by Mr.
Bruce as even surpassing what he had seen at Palmyra. He was
particularly struck by the splendid vestiges of the great temple,
supposed to have been dedicated to the sun. The castle of Balbec, or
tower of Lebanon, is described by Leander, a Carmelite monk, in his
interesting travels, as a surprising monument of antiquity, built
according to the tradition of the natives, by Solomon. His relation is
as follows. “Balbec is distant from Damascus, toward the north, about
fifty miles, and on the southern side is watered by springs and
rivulets, brought thither, no doubt, to fill the ditches by which it was
to have been surrounded for defense, but which were not completed. It is
situated on the lofty summit of a hill, in approaching which the façade
of the castle is seen, having two towers at its right angles, between
which is a great portico, resembling the mouth of a vast cave, and
provided with very strong walls. That on the right hand, by which the
portico is attached to the tower, from the west to the north, is
composed of four stones only, the fifth, which was to have completed the
fabric, being deficient. The length of each of these stones is not less
than sixty-two feet, and their breadth and hight thirteen. They are so
artfully brought together, without any cement, that they appear to be
only one solid block. The remainder of the wall to the left is of hewn
stones, well cemented with quick-lime, the smallest of which are six
feet in length, and four feet and six inches in hight: there are many
which are upward of fifteen feet in length, but the hight of all of them
is the same.

“Having entered the cavern by the grand portico, the traveler proceeds
in obscurity to the distance of eighteen paces, when he at length
perceives a ray of light proceeding from the aperture of the door which
conducts to the center. At each of the sides, and within this grand
portico, is a flight of stone steps which leads to the subterraneous
prisons. Their aspect is horrid, and they were formerly dangerous, being
frequented by banditti and robbers, who would plunder, kill, and here
bury such wretched travelers as were imprudently led by their curiosity
to penetrate, and risk the descent without being well escorted.
Following the road above, by the cavern, to the extent of fifty paces,
an ample area of a spherical figure presents itself, surrounded by
majestic columns of granite, some of them of a single piece, and others
formed of two pieces, the whole of them of so large a dimension, that
two men can with difficulty girt them. They are of the Ionic order of
architecture, and are placed on bases of the same stone, at such
distances from each other that a coach and six might commodiously turn
between them. They support a flat tower or roof, from which projects a
cornice wrought with figures of matchless workmanship: these rise above
the capitals with so nice an union, that the eye can not distinguish the
place where they are joined. At the present time the greater part of
this colonnade is destroyed, the western part alone remaining perfect
and upright. This fabric has an elevation of five hundred feet, and is
four hundred feet in length. In its exterior, and behind, it is flanked
by two other towers similar to those of the first façade, the whole
projecting from the wall, which within is provided with loop-holes, to
keep off the enemy, in case of necessity, by the means of stones, fire,
&c. It also surrounds the colonnade, more particularly in the part which
looks toward the east. At the left flank rises a temple, which tradition
says was the hall of audience of Solomon, in hight at least eighty feet,
and long and large in proportion. Its stones are all sculptured with
bass-reliefs, similar to those which ornament Trajan’s column at Rome,
representing many triumphs and naval engagements. Several of these
bass-reliefs have been defaced by the Saracens, who are the decided
enemies of all sculptures. Without this grand hall is an avenue of the
same size and breadth, where the traveler admires a large portal
constructed with three stones only, attached to which, in the middle
part, serving as an architrave, is seen, in a garland of laurel
interwoven with flowers, a large eagle admirably sculptured in
bass-relief. At the sides of the portal are placed two columns, in one
of which, although formed of a single stone, is a winding staircase by
which to ascend to the architrave: the passage is however very narrow.
There is in the vicinity another temple, of an octangular shape, with a
portico of superb architecture, and having three windows on the side
opposite to the former.”

Three times Leander returned to visit this splendid vestige of
antiquity; and on the last of these occasions, being well escorted, he
proceeded to the distance of about a mile, to the foot of the mountains
of Damascus, whence the stones employed in its construction were
brought. He measured the stone which remained there, and which has
already been noticed as having been intended for the fifth in the
construction of the wall: it had been hewn out on all sides, was lying
on the ground, and was simply attached to the rock at the lower part.
Its length and dimensions were such that he could not conceive how it
would have been possible to detach it, and still less with what machines
to move, transport, and raise it to the hight at which other stones are
placed, more especially as the sites, the roads, and the masses of rock
are such, as to exceed in roughness and difficulty whatever the
imagination can picture to itself. In the vicinity of the cave whence
the stones were drawn is a very beautiful sepulcher supported by columns
of porphyry, over which is a dome of the finest symmetry, and of great
beauty.


                           RUINS OF BABYLON.

The ruins of Babylon are deeply interesting, not only on account of
their great antiquity, but from the associations connected with them.
They have been visited and described by Mr. Rich, resident for the East
India company at Bagdad; and the result of his researches is given by
the Rev. Mr. Maurice, author of “Indian Antiquities,” and assistant
librarian to the British museum, in his elaborate work entitled
“Observations connected with Astronomy and Ancient History, Sacred and
Profane, on the Ruins of Babylon.”

[Illustration: TOWER NEAR BABYLON.]

Babylon was situated in a plain of vast extent, and bisected by the
noble river Euphrates. Over this river was thrown a bridge of massive
masonry, strongly compacted with iron and lead, by which the two sides
of the city were connected; and the embankments on each side, to
restrain its current, were lofty, and formed of the same durable
materials as the walls of the city. The city itself is represented by
Herodotus to have been a perfect square, inclosed by a wall in
circumference four hundred and eighty furlongs. It is stated to have
abounded in houses three or four stories in hight, and to have been
regularly divided into streets, running parallel to each other, with
tranverse avenues occasionally opening to the river. It was surrounded
with a wide and deep trench, the earth dug out of which was formed into
square bricks and baked in a furnace. With these, cemented together with
heated bitumen, intermixed with reeds to bind the viscid mass, the sides
of the trenches were lined; and of the same solid materials the walls of
the vast dimensions above described were formed. At certain regular
distances on them, watch-towers were erected; and below they were
divided and adorned with a hundred immense gates of brass. As you float
down the river from Bagdad, you pass a plain that hears the name of
Dura, which tradition says, is the very place where Nebuchadnezzar set
up the golden image, and commanded all to bow down and worship it: it is
now a wilderness, with here and there a shapeless mound, the remains of
some ancient habitation. And still further down, as you approach the
city, is a tower, some two hundred feet high, on the east bank of the
river, with an ascending way winding round it on the outside, like the
spiral of a screw, as seen in the cut below, reminding the traveler of
the common ideal pictures of the tower of Babel. It marks the site of
the ancient city of Samarrah, where the Roman army under Jovian rested
after marching and fighting a long summer’s day. It was afterward the
capital of the eighth caliph of the Abbasside dynasty.

In the center of each of the grand divisions of the city itself, a
stupendous public fabric was erected. In one (the eastern side) stood
the temple of Belus, and in the other, (or western division,) in a large
or strongly fortified inclosure, the royal palace, intended, doubtless,
for defense as well as for ornament. The temple of Belus was a square
pile, on each side of the extent of two furlongs. The tower erected in
its center was a furlong in breadth, and as much in hight, the latter of
which (taking the furlong at only five hundred feet) is enormous, being
higher, by twenty feet, than the great pyramid of Memphis. On this
tower, as a base, seven other lofty towers were erected in regular
succession; and the whole was crowned, we are told by Diodorus, with a
brazen statue of Belus, forty feet high! The palace, intended also as a
citadel, was erected on an area a mile and a half square, and was
surrounded with three vast circular walls, which, as we are informed by
Diodorus Siculus, were ornamented with sculptured animals resembling
life, richly painted in their natural colors on the bricks of which they
were composed, and afterward burnt in. This may be mentioned as nearly
the earliest specimen of enameling on record. Indeed, it was scarcely
possible for a nation, who were so well practiced in the burning of
bricks even to a vitreous hardness, to have been ignorant of this fine
art; and that they could also engrave upon them, is evident, as we may
soon see, from the characters at this day sculptured upon those that
have been dug up and brought to Europe, many of which are preserved in
the British museum. On the far-famed hanging gardens, and the
subterraneous vault or tunnel constructed by Semiramis, or Nitocris, or
the founder of Babylon, whoever he was, there is no necessity to dilate,
as every trace of them, except what the idle fancy of travelers has
surmised, must long since have disappeared; but such, in its general
outline, was the _mighty Babylon_—BABYLON THE GREAT.

Mr. Rich, whose residence at the court of Bagdad, with the powerful
protection of the pacha, afforded him every facility for comprehensive
investigation, describes the whole country between Bagdad and Hella, a
distance of forty-eight miles, as a perfectly flat, and, for the greater
part, uncultivated waste; though it is evident, from the number of
canals by which it is traversed, and the immense ruins that cover its
surface, that it must formerly have been both well peopled and
cultivated. About two miles above Hella, the more prominent ruins
commence, among which, at intervals, are discovered, in considerable
quantities, burnt and unburnt bricks and bitumen: two vast mounds in
particular attract attention from their size, and these are situated on
the eastern bank of the Euphrates. At the time of his visit, there were
scarcely any remains of ruins visible, immediately opposite on the
western bank, but there were some of stupendous magnitude on that side,
about six miles to the south-west of Hella.

The first grand mass of ruins described by Mr. Rich, extends one
thousand one hundred yards in length, and eight hundred in its greatest
breadth, its figure nearly resembling that of a quadrant; its hight is
irregular; but the most elevated part may be about fifty or sixty feet
above the level of the plain, and it has been dug into for the purpose
of procuring bricks. On the north is a valley of five hundred and fifty
yards in length, the area of which is covered with tussocks of rank
grass, and crossed by a line of ruins of very little elevation. To this
succeeds the second grand heap of ruins, the shape of which is nearly a
square, seven hundred yards in length and breadth, and having its
south-west angle connected with the north-west angle of the mounds of
Amran, by a ridge of considerable hight, and nearly one hundred yards in
breadth. This he thought the most interesting part of the ruins of
Babylon; every vestige discoverable in it declaring it to have been
composed of buildings far superior to all the rest which had left traces
in the eastern quarter: the bricks were of the finest description; and,
notwithstanding this was the grand storehouse of them, and that the
greatest supplies had been and then were constantly drawn from it, they
appeared still to be abundant. But the operation of extracting the
bricks had caused great confusion, and contributed much to increase the
difficulty of deciphering the original design of this mound, as, in
search of them, the workmen had pierced into it in every direction,
hollowing out deep ravines and pits, and throwing up the rubbish in
heaps on the surface. In some places they had bored into the solid mass,
forming winding caverns and subterraneous passages, which, from their
being left without adequate support, sometimes fell and buried the
workmen in the rubbish. In all these excavations, walls of burnt brick,
laid in lime mortar of a very good quality, are seen; and, in addition
to the substances generally strewed on the surfaces of all these mounds,
here are found fragments of alabaster vessels, fine earthenware, marble,
and great quantities of varnished tiles, the glazing and coloring of
which are surprisingly fresh. In a hollow near the southern part, Mr.
Rich found a sepulchral urn of earthenware, which had been broken in
digging, and near it lay some human bones, which pulverized with the
touch.

“Not more than two hundred yards,” he says, “from the northern extremity
of the above mound is a ravine hollowed out by those who dig for bricks,
in length nearly a hundred yards, and thirty feet wide, by forty or
fifty deep. On one side of it, a few yards of wall remain standing, the
face of which is very clean and perfect, and which appears to have been
the front of some building. The opposite side is so confused a mass of
rubbish, that it would seem as if the ravine had been worked through a
solid building. Under the foundations at the southern end an opening is
made, which discovers a subterraneous passage seven feet in hight, and
winding to the south, floored and walled with large brick, laid in
bitumen and covered over with pieces of sandstone, a yard thick, and
several yards long, on which the whole pressure is so great as to have
given a considerable degree of obliquity to the side walls of the
passage. The superstructure is cemented with bitumen, other parts of the
ravine with mortar, and the bricks all have writing on them. The
northern end of the ravine appears to have been crossed by an extremely
thick wall of yellowish brick, cemented with a brilliant white mortar,
which has been broken through in hollowing it out; and a little to the
north is sculptured a lion of colossal dimensions, standing on a
pedestal, of a coarse kind of gray granite, and of rude workmanship; in
the mouth is a circular aperture, into which a man may introduce his
fist.”

The next considerable mass to that of Amran is the Kasr, or palace, as
it is called by the natives, and it is thus described by Mr. Rich.

“It is a very remarkable ruin, which, being uncovered, and in part
detached from the rubbish, is visible from a considerable distance, but
so surprisingly fresh in its appearance, that it was only after a minute
inspection I was satisfied of its being in reality a Babylonian remain.
It consists of several walls and piers, (which face the cardinal
points,) eight feet in thickness, in some places ornamented with niches,
and in others, strengthened by pilasters and buttresses, built of fine
burnt brick, (still perfectly clean and sharp,) laid in lime cement, of
such tenacity, that those whose business it is have given up working, on
account of the extreme difficulty of extracting them whole. The tops of
these walls are broken, and may have been much higher. On the outside,
they have in some places been cleared nearly to the foundations; but the
internal spaces, formed by them, are yet filled with rubbish, in some
parts almost to their summit. One part of the wall has been split into
three parts, and overthrown, as if by an earthquake; some detached walls
of the same kind, standing at different distances, show what remains to
have been only a small part of the original fabric; indeed, it appears
that the passage in the ravine, together with the wall which crosses its
upper end, were connected with it. There are some hollows underneath, in
which several persons have lost their lives; so that no one will now
venture into them, and their entrances have become choked up with
rubbish. Near this ruin is a heap of rubbish, the sides of which are
curiously streaked by the alternation of its materials, the chief part
of which, it is probable, was unburnt brick, of which I found a small
quantity in the neighborhood; but no reeds were discoverable in the
interstices.

“A mile to the north of the Kasr, or full five miles distant from Hella,
and nine hundred and fifty yards from the river bank, is the last ruin
of this series, which has been described by Pietro Della Valle, who
determines it to have been the tower of Belus, an opinion adopted by
Rennel. The natives call it Mukallibe, or, according to the vulgar Arab
pronunciation of these parts, Mujelibe, meaning _overturned_; they
sometimes also apply this term to the mounds of the Kasr. It is of an
oblong shape, irregular in its hight and the measurement of its sides,
which face the cardinal points; the northern side being two hundred
yards in length, the southern two hundred and nineteen, the eastern one
hundred and eighty-two, and the western one hundred and thirty-six; the
elevation of the south-east, or highest angle, one hundred and forty-one
feet. The western face, which is the least elevated, is the most
interesting, on account of the appearance of building it presents. Near
the summit of it appears a low wall, with interruptions, built of
unburnt bricks, mixed up with chopped straw or reeds, and cemented with
clay-mortar of great thickness, having between every layer a layer of
reeds; and on the north side are, also, some vestiges of a similar
construction. The south-west angle is crowned by something like a
turret, or lantern: the other angles are in a less perfect state, but
may originally have been ornamented in a similar manner. The western
face is lowest and easiest of ascent, the northern the most difficult.
All are worn into furrows by the weather; and in some places, where
several channels of rain have united together, these furrows are of
great depth, and penetrate a considerable way into the mound. The summit
is covered with heaps of rubbish, in digging into some of which, layers
of broken burnt brick, cemented with mortar, are discovered, and whole
bricks, with inscriptions on them, are here and there found. The whole
is covered with innumerable fragments of pottery, brick, bitumen,
pebbles, vitrified brick, or scoria, and even shells, bits of glass, and
mother of pearl.”

Mr. Rich, having now finished his observations on the ruins of the east
bank of the Euphrates, enters upon the examination of what, on the
opposite west bank, have been by some travelers supposed (and their
suppositions have been adopted by Major Rennel) to be the remains of
this great city. Those, however, which Mr. Rich describes, are of the
most trifling kind, scarcely exceeding one hundred yards in extent, and
wholly consisting of two or three insignificant mounds of earth,
overgrown with rank grass. The country, too, being marshy, he doubts the
possibility of there having been any buildings of considerable magnitude
erected in that spot, and, much less, buildings of the astonishing
dimensions of those described by the classical writers of antiquity. He
then opens to our view a new and almost unexplored remain of ancient
grandeur, in the following passage.

“But, although there are not any ruins in the immediate vicinity of the
river, by far the most stupendous and surprising mass of all the remains
of Babylon is situated in the desert about six miles to the south-west
of Hella. It is called by the Arabs _Birs Nimrod_, by the Jews,
Nebuchadnezzar’s prison. It is a mound of an oblong figure, the total
circumference of which is seven hundred and sixty-two yards. At the
eastern side it is cloven by a deep furrow, and is not more than fifty
or sixty feet high; but at the western it rises in a conical figure to
the elevation of one hundred and ninety-eight feet; and on its summit is
a solid pile of brick, thirty-seven feet high by twenty-eight in
breadth, diminishing in thickness to the top, which is broken and
irregular, and rent by a large fissure extending through a third of its
hight. It is perforated by small square holes, disposed in rhomboids.
The fine burnt bricks of which it is built have inscriptions on them;
and so admirable is the cement, which appears to be lime-mortar, that,
though the layers are so close together that it is difficult to discern
what substance is between them, it is nearly impossible to extract one
of the bricks whole. The other parts of the summit of this hill are
occupied by immense fragments of brick-work, of no determinate figure,
tumbled together and converted into solid vitrified masses, as if they
had undergone the action of the fiercest fire, or been blown up with
gunpowder, the layers of the bricks being perfectly discernible; a
curious fact, and one for which I am utterly incapable of accounting.
Round the Birs are traces of ruins to a considerable extent. To the
north is the canal which supplies Mesjiid Ali with water, which was dug
at the expense of the Nuwaub Shujahed Doulah, and called after his
country, Hindia. We are informed that, from the summit of the Birs, in a
clear morning, the gilt dome of Mesjiid Ali may be seen.”

Before passing on to a brief notice of the later discoveries at Babylon,
a word may be said on the subject of the


                           BABYLONIAN BRICKS.

One of the ancient methods of writing, was on stone or brick, of which,
as the earliest example on record, if allowable to be cited, may be
adduced that of the two pillars of Seth, the one of brick and the other
of stone, said by Josephus to have been erected before the deluge, and
to have contained the history of antediluvian arts and sciences. However
disputable this account may be, that of the tables of stone on which the
decalogue was written by the finger of the Deity, and delivered to Moses
on Mount Sinai, can admit of no doubt, no more than can the hieroglyphic
characters in the most ancient periods, engraved on the marbles of
Egypt, at present so abundant in the collections of Europe, and which
remain to this day, and will be, for centuries to come, a lasting proof
of the high advance in the engraving art, as well as in chemical
science, of a nation, who, at that early period, could fabricate
instruments to cut them so deep and indelibly on the almost impenetrable
granite.

In countries destitute of stone, like Chaldea, an artificial substance,
clay, intermixed with reeds, and indurated by fire, was made use of for
that purpose. Of this substance, formed into square masses, covered with
mystic characters, the walls and palaces of Babylon were, for the most
part, constructed: and it has been seen in the accounts of travelers who
have visited these ruins, examined the bricks, and observed those reeds
intermingled with their substance, how durable, through a vast
succession of ages, those bricks, with their inscribed characters, have
remained. Their real meaning, or that of the Persepolitan arrow-headed
obelistical characters, and the still more complicated hieroglyphics of
Egypt, however partially deciphered by the labors of the learned, will,
perhaps, never be fathomed in its full extent, by the utmost ingenuity
of man.

Of the bitumen with which these Babylonian bricks were cemented
together, and which was plentifully produced in the neighborhood of
Babylon, it may be proper in this place to remark, that it binds
stronger than mortar, and in time becomes harder than the brick itself.
It was also impenetrable to water, as was formerly well known, for both
the outside and the inside of the ark was incrusted with it. Gen. vi.
14. It may be proper to add here, that the bitumen, to deprive it of its
brittleness, and render it capable of being applied to the brick, must
be boiled with a certain proportion of oil, and that it retains its
tenacity longest in a humid situation. Mr. Rich informs us, that it is
“at present principally used for calking boats, coating cisterns, baths,
and other places which usually come in contact with water. The fragments
of it scattered over the ruins of Babylon are black, shining and
brittle, somewhat resembling pit-coal in substance and appearance.” It
will not be forgotten, that the custom above alluded to, of mixing straw
or reeds with bricks baked in the sun, in order to bind them closer, and
so make them more firm and compact, was also used in Egypt, as may be
inferred from Exodus v. 7, where Pharaoh commands the taskmasters of the
oppressed Israelites “not to give them straw to make bricks,” in order
to multiply their vexations and increase their toil.

Speaking of the Babylonian bricks, and their variety in respect to size,
color, hardness, &c., Mr. Rich tells us, that the general size of the
kiln-burnt brick is thirteen inches square, by three thick; and that
some are of about half these dimensions, and a few of different shapes
for particular purposes, such as rounding corners, &c. They are of
different colors: _white_, with a yellowish tinge, like what are called
fire-brick; _red_, like our ordinary brick, which are the coarsest of
all; and some _blackish_, and very hard. The sun-dried brick are
generally the largest, and more or less mixed with chopped straw, for
the obvious purpose of binding them; and some even of the fire-burnt
bricks seem to have been made of the same material. In the palace, or
Kasr, Mr. Rich found far finer specimens of art than the mere brick-work
affords; for in addition to the substances usually strewed on the
surfaces of all these mounds, he saw fragments of alabaster vessels,
fine earthen-ware, marble, and great quantities of varnished tiles, the
glazing and coloring of which was surprisingly fresh. The process from
making pottery to molding figures in clay, was not difficult; but the
designs in brass, and the grouping of figures, must have required much
greater skill and labor.


                     LATER DISCOVERIES AT BABYLON.

As the traveler approaches very near to Babylon, from the north, the
first great ruin, as we have already said, is the “mound of Babel,”
better known as the Mujelibé, or the “overturned,” a vast mound, from
the top of which rises a solitary mass of brick-work, and beyond which
are long undulating heaps of earth, bricks and pottery. On all sides are
fragments of glass, marble, earthen-ware, and inscribed brick, mingled
with that peculiar nitrous and blanched soil, which, bred from the
remains of ancient habitations, checks or destroys vegetation, and
renders the site of Babylon a naked and hideous waste, fit only for the
abode of owls and jackals. Southward from this spot, for nearly three
miles, there is an almost uninterrupted line of mounds, the ruins of the
vast edifices which once formed part of the city. Mr. Layard commenced
his excavations in one of these mounds, finding arrow-heads of iron and
bronze, glass bottles, colored and ribbed, and of various forms and
sizes, &c., &c., &c. On going deeper, the workmen soon reached solid
piers and walls of brick masonry, many of the bricks bearing the usual
superscription of Nebuchadnezzar; and the remains of similar buildings
were found in various places. But though Mr. Layard’s discoveries of
this kind were numerous, few things were brought to light materially
different from what had been found and described by others before him.

About the year 1850, however, the French government sent out three
gentlemen to make scientific and artistic researches in Media,
Mesopotamia, and Babylon. One, M. Jules Oppert, has just returned to
Paris, (1854,) and it appears, from his report, that he and his
colleagues thought it advisable to begin by confining themselves to the
exploration of ancient Babylon. This task was one of immense difficulty,
and it was enhanced by the excessive heat of the sun, by privations of
all kinds, and by the incessant hostility of the Arabs. After a while M.
Oppert’s two colleagues fell ill, so that all the labors of the
expedition devolved on him. He first of all made excavations of the
ruins of the famous suspended gardens of Babylon, which are now known by
the name of the hall of Amran-ibn-Ali; and obtained in them a number of
curious architectural and other objects, which are destined to be placed
in the Louvre at Paris. He next, in obedience to the special orders of
his government, took measures for ascertaining the precise extent of
Babylon, a matter which the reader is aware has always been open to
controversy. He has succeeded in making a series of minute surveys, and
in drawing up detailed plans of the immense city. His opinion is, that
even the largest calculations as to its vast extent are not exaggerated;
and he puts down that extent at the astounding figure of five hundred
square kilometres, French measure, (the square kilometre is eleven
hundred and ninety-six square yards.) This is very nearly eighteen times
the size of Paris. But, of course, he does not say that this enormous
area was occupied, or anything like it: it comprised within the walls
huge tracts of cultivated lands and gardens, for supplying the
population with food in the event of a siege. M. Oppert has discovered
the Babylonian and Assyrian measures, and by means of them has
ascertained exactly what part of the city was inhabited, and what part
was in fields and gardens. On the limits of the town, properly so
called, stands at present the flourishing town of Hillah. This town,
situated on the banks of the Euphrates, is built with bricks from the
ruins, and many of the household utensils, and personal ornaments of its
inhabitants, are taken from them also. Beyond this town is the vast
fortress, strengthened by Nebuchadnezzar, and in the midst of it is the
royal palace, itself almost as large as a town. M. Oppert says, that he
was also able to distinguish the ruins of the famous tower of Babel;
they are most imposing, and stand on a site formerly called Borsippa, or
the tower of languages. The royal town, situated on the two banks of the
Euphrates, covers a space of nearly seven square kilometres, and
contains most interesting ruins. Amongst them are those of the royal
palace, the fortress, and the suspended gardens. In the collection of
curiosities which M. Oppert has brought away with him, is a vase, which
he declares to date from the time of one of the Chaldean sovereigns
named Narambel, that is, somewhere about sixteen hundred years before
Christ; also a number of copies of cuneiform inscriptions which he has
every reason to believe that he will be able to decipher. It may not be
out of place, to add, here, that in the excavations recently made in
Persia, it is said that the palace of Shushan and the tomb of Daniel
have probably been found; and also the very pavement described in Esther
i. 6, “of red, and blue, and white, and black marble.” On the tomb is
the sculptured figure of a man bound hand and foot, with a huge lion in
the act of springing upon him to devour him. No history could speak more
graphically the story of Daniel in the lion’s den. Various other
discoveries have also been made, all of which bear out the statements of
the Old Testament history as to the times of the prophet, and the nation
of which he speaks.


                           RUINS OF NINEVEH.

Nineveh, famous in the ancient world, as the splendid capital of the
Assyrian empire, had been hidden some two thousand years in its unknown
grave, when a French _savant_ and a wandering English scholar sought out
the seat of that once mighty power, and throwing off its shroud of sand
and ruin, revealed to the astonished world its temples, palaces, and
idols, the representations of the wars of the ancient Assyrians, and
their triumphs in civilization and art. Niebuhr was one of the first to
give attention to these ruins, and especially to stimulate the curiosity
and enterprise of others. And after him Rich, Botta, and others, and
especially and above all, Layard, carried on investigations which have
brought to light the wonderful remains of this long-buried city. The
earliest successful excavations were made by Botta at Khorsabad, in
1843; and by these he was led on to the discovery of an immense monument
worthy to be compared in richness and ornament to the most sumptuous
productions bequeathed us by ancient Egypt. The first discovery was of
the remains of a chamber, which evidently was but part of a large
building buried in the mound, the walls of which were covered with
bass-reliefs. And next, finding a bronze lion, and the heads and wings
of the winged bulls, M. Botta was satisfied that the whole space was
full of ancient remains. After various difficulties and obstacles, which
were at length overcome, in 1844, he had three hundred laborers at work
making excavations, while an artist copied the bass-reliefs and
inscriptions as fast as they were uncovered. These, with the most
remarkable and best preserved pieces of sculpture, were sent to Paris,
where they arrived in 1846, and where they now form one of the greatest
attractions in the noble museum of the Louvre.

The last and most important, however, of the laborers in the field of
Assyrian antiquities, is Austen Henry Layard, who visited this region in
1840, and again in 1842. In 1845, under the patronage, and through the
assistance of Sir Stratford Canning, he again went to Assyria, and
commencing his excavations, first discovered the long wished for
bass-reliefs on the twenty-eighth of November. Soon afterward he dug up
a gigantic human head, much to the terror of the Arabs, who believed it
to be the head of Nimrod himself. Next, he came upon a rich collection
of sculptures, in an excellent state of preservation, among which were
kings, priests, griffins, eunuchs, symbolic trees, &c., &c. Another
discovery was that of a vaulted chamber, in the center of a wall some
fifty feet thick, and fifteen feet below the surface of the mound, the
top of which was as regularly arched as any modern room could be.
Tubular drain-tiles for carrying off the water that fell from the roofs
of buildings, and thin layers of bitumen under the floors and slabs, to
keep them from the dampness of the ground beneath, were also discovered
in various places. The gigantic lions which M. Botta had seen, were also
examined by Mr. Layard; and new chambers, covered with bass-reliefs of
battles, sieges, victories, triumphs, banquetings, sacrifices, &c., were
explored. A large obelisk of black marble was shipped for England; and
from some twenty chambers explored within about four months, numerous
articles were gathered and sent forward to the same country.

As a specimen of the wonderful sculptures brought to light by the
indefatigable labors of Layard, we may mention the _colossal winged
bull_, represented in the cut on page 584. The features of the face, the
cap on the head, and the arrangement of the hair and beard, are Persian.
The wings extend over the back. The figure is supposed to represent one
of the Assyrian deities, as the attributes of intelligence, strength,
and swiftness, are typified by the head of a man, the body of a bull,
and the wings of an eagle. Somewhat similar to this was another large
sculpture of a _colossal winged lion_, on a slab nine feet square. The
countenance of this figure is noble and benevolent in expression; the
features being of a true Persian type. It wears an egg-shaped cap, with
a cord round the base of it. The hair at the back of the head has seven
ranges of curls; the beard being divided into three ranges of curls,
with intervals of wavy hair. The elaborately sculptured wings extend
over the back of the animal to the very verge of the slab. All the flat
surface is covered with what is termed a cuneiform inscription. Round
the loins is a succession of numerous cords, which are drawn into four
separate knots; at the extremities are fringes, forming as many distinct
tassels. The strength of the lion is admirably delineated in the
sculpture, showing that the artist had a complete acquaintance with the
details of its figure and anatomy. Both these huge sculptures were sent
to England, though only with immense labor and expense; and they are now
in the British museum.

[Illustration: COLOSSAL WINGED BULL FROM NINEVEH.]

In the brief space which can be allotted to the ruins of Nineveh, it
would be impossible to give more than a glance at all the wonderful
discoveries made there. A mere outline is all that will be attempted,
while for the complete description, the reader is referred to the
published volumes of Layard himself. The platform of Khorsabad, for
example, was in somewhat the shape of the letter T; and the latter, or
south-eastern end of this was nine hundred and seventy-five feet wide,
by four hundred and twenty deep; and here some of the principal
monuments were found. The great portal to the building, forming the
center of the façade, consisted, on each side, of three colossal bulls,
with human heads and eagles’ wings, and a gigantic figure of a man, each
formed of a single block of alabaster. Passing through this gateway, we
come to a court three hundred and forty by one hundred and fifty-seven
feet, the entrance of which is guarded by symbolic figures which are
combinations of the man, the bull, and the eagle, bearing a general
resemblance to those spoken of above. Near by is a gigantic figure,
supposed to be intended for Nimrod himself; and also another of a winged
man, or divinity, with four wings, offering a pine cone with one hand,
and holding a basket in the other. In the different chambers, are
bass-reliefs of the great king and his officers, in their various
appropriate dresses; the sword, the sandals, the bracelets, the
ear-rings, and even the fly-flappers of the attending eunuchs, all being
perfectly distinct as if carved but yesterday. Not far from these, are
seen the king’s cup-bearers, and his grooms leading horses; a
representation of the building of a port, or road, and ships bringing
timber and other materials to be used in the work; and then come
sea-monsters and various inhabitants of the deep, among which are the
shell-fish which furnished the famous Tyrian dye. In another apartment,
the gate of which was fastened by a huge wooden lock, are seen the
figures of tribute-bearers from the various conquered nations, the
governors of provinces, &c., bringing their offerings; and in another,
priests, and the eagle-headed divinity, the king himself, and images of
baked clay, of frightful aspect, which seem to have been teraphim or
idols of some kind. In still other apartments, are the symbolic trees;
sieges of highly fortified places, with battering-rams and other
instruments of war; manacled prisoners; bow-men and spear-men; eunuchs
engaged, in one place in weighing spoil, and in another in hewing a
prisoner to pieces; the magi, and philosophers; courts of justice;
prisoners bound for trial or punishment; the king putting out the eyes
of a captive; full illustrations of the pleasures of the table and the
chase; the king and his sons engaged in hunting, and also in shooting at
a target; various kinds of birds and animals; full historical pictures
of various events; the burning of forts and besieged cities; chairs,
altars, chariots, horses, tables, vases, &c.: in a word, almost
everything connected with the daily life, or social customs, or civil
history of the people. The king’s court, the historical chamber, the
inner chamber, the divining-chamber, the hall of judgment, the hall of
historical records, the chamber of audience, the presence-chamber, the
banqueting-hall, the retiring-chamber—all these are but a part of the
names of apartments in this single palace, each of which abounds in the
sculptures and bass-reliefs which are naturally suggested by their
respective titles.

A large number of these wonderful sculptures have been transported to
England, and are now in the British museum. The great winged lion and
bull are there, to fix the attention and excite the wonder of every
visitor; and with these, more than a hundred other sculptures or
bass-reliefs representing scenes like those already described. Many of
these are from Nimroud, where have been found some representations not
mentioned above, such, for example, as various forms of chariots;
mummers dancing; stables, and horses being curried; the interior of the
royal kitchen; birds of prey, picking at the dead and dying on the
battle-field; troops crossing rivers; the siege of Damascus; lion and
bull hunts; Parthian bow-men; the felling of trees; elephants, camels,
and monkeys, &c., &c., all in a style of both art and sculpture quite
different from those at Khorsabad, and apparently less ancient than the
latter. And in addition to all these things, the sculptures relating to
costume and dress are quite numerous in many of the apartments of these
ruins. The head-dress, the mode of wearing the beard and hair, vases,
rings, bracelets, umbrellas, bronzes, the arrangement of funerals, ivory
caskets and ornaments, carved heads of various animals, (used as
ornaments,) and many other kinds of curiosities, have been found in
great numbers.

Among the more recent discoveries, made so lately as 1850, Mr. Layard
thinks he has found, in the Nimroud mound, the very throne on which the
reigning monarch of some three thousand years ago sat in his splendid
palace. It is composed of metal and ivory; the former being richly
wrought, and the latter most beautifully carved. It seems to have been
separated from the state apartments by means of a large curtain, the
rings by which this was drawn and undrawn being still preserved. No
human remains have been found, and everything indicates the destruction
of the palace by fire; the throne itself being partially fused, as if by
great heat. Beautifully engraved copper vessels have been found at
Nimroud; and in Nineveh, a large assortment of slabs illustrative of the
rule, conquests, domestic life, and arts of the ancient Assyrians; and
apparently there can be no limit to the number of such discoveries, if
they are but prosecuted for a sufficient length of time, and with a
sufficient number of laborers. In 1852, Mr. Layard was appointed to an
important official post at home, by the British government, so that his
personal attention to the researches he had so long carried on, was of
course suspended. But since that date, the French explorers have been
able to examine the whole palace of Khorsabad and its dependencies; in
doing which, they have obtained proof that the Assyrians were not
ignorant of any of the principles or resources of architecture. Among
their discoveries, is a gate twelve feet high, apparently one of the
entrances to the city; several constructions in marble, beautifully
wrought; the cellar of the palace, with regular rows of wine jars, which
have at the bottom the violet-colored deposit from the evaporated wine,
&c. And in the adjoining mounds and hills within a few leagues of
Khorsabad, they have found monuments, tombs, jewelry, articles of gold
and stone, colossal figures and bass-reliefs, and last, but far from
least, _a series of full length portraits of the kings of Assyria_! All
these discoveries, as soon as made, are copied by the photographic
process, and sent to Paris, so that ere long, doubtless, all will be
able to see how they appear when reproduced by the skill of the
engraver.


                        THE RUINS OF PERSEPOLIS.

The most striking feature, on a first approach to these splendid ruins,
is the staircase and its surrounding walls, and the tall slender columns
which stand out so prominently to view. Two grand flights of stairs,
facing each other, lead to the principal platform. To their right is an
immense wall of the finest masonry, and of the most massive stones; to
the left, are other walls, equally well built, but not so imposing. On
arriving at the summit of the staircase, the first objects which present
themselves directly facing the platform, are four vast portals and two
columns. Two portals first, then the columns, and then two portals
again. On the front of each are represented, in bass-relief, figures of
animals, which, for want of a better name, may be called sphinxes. The
two sphinxes on the first portals face outwardly, _i. e._, toward the
plain and the front of the building. The two others, on the second
portals, face inwardly, _i. e._, toward the mountain. From the first,
(to the right, on a straight line,) at the distance of fifty-four paces,
is a staircase of thirty steps, the sides of which are ornamented with
bass-reliefs, originally in three rows, but now partly reduced by the
accumulation of earth beneath, and by mutilations above. This staircase
leads to the principal compartment of the whole ruins, which may be
called a small plain, thickly studded with columns, sixteen of which are
now erect. Having crossed this plain, on an eminence are numerous
stupendous remains of frames, both of windows and doors, formed by
blocks of marble of sizes most magnificent. These frames are ranged in a
square and indicate an apartment the most royal that can be conceived.
On each side of the frames are sculptured figures, and the marble still
retains a polish which, in its original state, must have vied with the
finest mirrors. On each corner of this room are pedestals, of an
elevation much more considerable than the surrounding frames: one is
formed of a single block of marble. The front of this apartment seems to
have been to the south-west, for few marks of masonry are to be seen on
that exposure, and the base of that side is richly sculptured and
ornamented. This front opens upon a square platform, on which no
building appears to have been raised. But on the side opposite to the
room just mentioned, there is the same appearance of a corresponding
apartment, although nothing but the bases of some small columns, and the
square of its floor, attest it to have been such. The interval between
these two rooms, (on those angles which are the most distant from the
grand front of the building,) is filled up by the base of a sculpture,
similar to the bases of the two rooms, excepting that the center of it
is occupied by a small flight of steps. Behind, and contiguous to these
ruins, are the remains of another square room, surrounded on all sides
by frames of doors and windows. On the floor are the bases of columns:
from the order in which they appear to have stood, they formed six rows,
each of six columns. A staircase, cut into an immense mass of rock,
leads into the lesser and inclosed plain below. Toward the plain are
also three smaller rooms, or rather one room and the bases of two
closets. Everything on this part of the building indicates rooms of rest
or retirement.

In the rear of the whole of these remains, are the beds of aqueducts,
which are cut into the solid rock. They occur in every part of the
building, and are probably, therefore, as extensive in their course, as
they are magnificent in their construction. The great aqueduct is to be
discovered among a confused heap of stones, not far behind the buildings
described above, on that quarter of the palace, and almost adjoining to
a ruined staircase. Its bed in some places is cut ten feet into the
rock. This bed leads east and west; to the eastward its descent is
rapid, about twenty-five paces; it there narrows, but again enlarges, so
that a man of common hight may stand upright in it. It terminates by an
abrupt rock.

Proceeding from this toward the mountains, situated in the rear of the
great hall of columns, stand the remains of a magnificent room. Here are
still left walls, frames and porticos, the sides of which are thickly
ornamented with bass-reliefs of a variety of compositions. This hall is
a perfect square. To the right of this, and further to the southward,
are more fragments, the walls and component parts apparently of another
room. To the left of this, and therefore to the northward of the
building, are the remains of a portal, on which are to be traced the
features of a sphinx. Still toward the north, in a separate collection,
is the ruin of a column, which, from the fragments about it, must have
supported a sphinx. In a recess of the mountain, to the northward, is a
portico. Almost in a line with the center of the hall of columns, on the
surface of the mountain, is a tomb. To the southward of that is another,
in like manner on the mountain’s surface; between both, and just on the
point where the ascent from the plain commences, is a reservoir of
water. These, according to Mr. Morier, in the account of his embassy to
Persia, constitute some of the principal objects among the ruins of
Persepolis; and this is confirmed by Sir Robert Ker Porter, who gives
still more copious accounts of these ruins, as may be seen in the very
interesting narrative of his travels.


                        ROYAL PALACE OF ISPAHAN.

The palaces of the king are inclosed in a fort of lofty walls, which is
estimated to have a circumference of three miles. The palace of the
Chehel Sitoon, or ‘forty pillars,’ is situated in the middle of an
immense square, which is intersected by various canals, and planted in
different directions by the beautiful chenar tree. In front is an
extensive square basin of water, from the furthest extremity of which
the palace is beautiful beyond either the power of language or the
correctness of pencil to delineate. The first saloon is open toward the
garden, is supported by eighteen pillars, all inlaid with mirrors, and,
the glass being in a much greater proportion than the wood, appears at a
distance to be formed of glass only. Each pillar has a marble base,
which is carved into the figures of four lions placed in such attitudes,
that the shaft seems to rest on their four united backs. The walls,
which form its termination behind, are also covered with mirrors placed
in such a variety of symmetrical positions, that the mass of the
structure appears to be of glass, and when new must have glittered with
most magnificent splendor. The ceiling is painted in gold flowers, which
are still fresh and brilliant. Large curtains are suspended on the
outside, which are occasionally lowered to lessen the heat of the sun.


                          THE TEMPLE OF MECCA.

This magnificent temple, to which pilgrims resort from every quarter of
the globe where the religion of Islamism is practiced, is known by the
Mussulmans under the name of El Haram, or the temple of excellence. It
is situated nearly in the middle of the city, which is built in a
valley, having a considerable slope from the north to the south. It is
composed of the house of God, Beit Allah, or as it is called also, La
Kaaba; of the well of Zemzem, Bir Zemzem; of the Cobba, or place of
Abraham, Makham Ibrahim; of the places of the four orthodox rites, Makam
Hhaneffi, Makam Shaffi, Makam Maleki, and Makam Hhanbeli; of two Cobbas,
or chapels, El-Cobbatain; of an arch, called Babes-selem, (in the same
style as a triumphal arch,) near the place of Abraham; of El-Monbar or
the tribune for the priest; of the wooden staircase, Daureh, which leads
to the saloon of the house of God; of an immense court, surrounded by a
triple row of arches; of two smaller courts, surrounded with elegant
piazzas; of nineteen doors; and of seven towers, or minarets, five of
which adhere to the edifice, and the other two are placed between the
neighboring houses out of the inclosure.

La Kaaba, Beit Allah, or the house of God, is a quadrilateral tower, the
sides and angles of which are unequal, so that its plan forms a true
trapezium. The size of the edifice, and the black cloth which covers it,
make this irregularity disappear, and give to it the figure of a perfect
square. The black stone, Hhajera el Assouad, or heavenly stone, which
all true Mussulmans believe to have been brought thither by the angel
Gabriel, is raised forty-two inches above the surface, and is bordered
all round with a large plate of silver, about a foot broad. The part of
the stone that is not covered by the silver at the angle is almost a
semicircle, six inches in hight, by about eight inches diameter at its
base. El Bir Zemzem, or the well of Zemzem, is situated fifty-one feet
distant to the north-east of the black stone. It is about seven feet and
eight inches in diameter, and fifty-six feet deep to the surface of the
water. The brim is of fine white marble, five feet high. Tradition says
that this well was miraculously opened by the angel of the Lord for
Hagar, when she was nearly perishing from thirst in the desert with her
son Ishmael, after having been sent from Abraham’s house. The Kaaba, and
the stones of Ishmael, are situated nearly in the center of the temple,
and occupy the middle of an oval or irregular elliptical surface, which
forms a zone of thirty-nine feet wide round the edifice, upon which the
pilgrims make their tours round the Kaaba. It is paved with fine marble,
and is situated upon the lowest plane of the temple.


              -------------------------------------------


                             THE HOLY LAND.


                  ------------------------------------


The entire country known as _Palestine_, or _Judea_, or the _Holy Land_,
is full of interest, and associated to our minds with the wonders and
miracles connected with the advent of Christ to our world. Time would
fail to notice all the localities of this country, on which the mind
loves to linger; but a few of them will be alluded to. One of these, a
view of which is given in the cut below, is

[Illustration: JACOB’S WELL.]


                             JACOB’S WELL.

This was near to Shechem, one of the most ancient cities of Canaan,
which was the capital of the kingdom of Israel in the time of Jeroboam,
and was associated with some of the most interesting events of
patriarchal times, as well as with the discourse of Christ to the woman
of Samaria, which resulted in the conversion of several of the
Samaritans to the true faith. “I found this well,” says a late traveler,
“in the midst of the ruins of a magnificent building that once covered
and adorned it. Hewn stones, blocks of marble, and fragments of granite
columns, were to be seen amid the general wreck. The narrow mouth of the
well was stopped up with large loose stones, at which we all tugged
until I nearly broke my back; but one of them defied our utmost
endeavors. I kneeled down and peeped into the arched chamber, from the
floor of which the well proper is sunk into the living rock some hundred
feet or more. A little, gray-headed old Arab held my horse; the younger
men stood around and looked on, while I sat down at the indubitable well
of the patriarch, and read: ‘Jesus, therefore, being wearied with his
journey, sat thus on the well: and it was about the sixth hour. There
cometh a woman of Samaria to draw water. Jesus saith unto her, Give me
to drink. (For his disciples had gone away unto the city to buy meat.)
Then saith the woman unto him, How is it that thou, being a Jew, askest
drink of me, who am a woman of Samaria? (for the Jews have no dealings
with the Samaritans.) Jesus answered and said unto her, If thou knewest
the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink,
thou wouldst have asked of him, and he would have given thee living
water. The woman saith unto him, Sir, thou hast nothing to draw with,
and the well is deep; from whence, then, hast thou that living water?
Art thou greater than our father Jacob, who gave us the well and drank
thereof himself, and his children, and his cattle? Jesus answered and
said unto her, Whosoever drinketh of this water shall thirst again; but
whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never
thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of
water springing up into everlasting life.’ Here I closed the book, and
with a gush of unutterable joy, exclaimed,

      ‘Spring up, O well, I ever cry, spring up within MY soul!’”


                               BETHLEHEM.

Bethlehem, celebrated throughout the world as the birthplace of the
Redeemer, is situated at the distance of six miles south-west from
Jerusalem, in a fine country, blest with a salubrious air, and abundant
fertility. The water is conveyed in a low aqueduct which formerly passed
to Jerusalem. The _fons signatus_ is a charming spring, yielding a
constant supply of water to three large cisterns, one of which is still
in good preservation. At a small distance from these, a beautiful
rivulet called the _deliciæ Solomonis_, laves the herbage of the valley,
and fertilizes several fine gardens, while the circumjacent soil is
richly clothed with an elegant assemblage of fig-trees, vines and
olives.

Bethlehem received its name, which signifies the _house of bread_, from
Abraham; and it was surnamed _Ephratah_, the fruitful, after Caleb’s
wife, to distinguish it from another Bethlehem, in the tribe of Zebulon.
It belonged to the tribe of Judah, and also went by the name of the city
of David, that monarch having there been born, and tended sheep in his
childhood. Elimelech, Obed, Jesse, and Boaz, were, like David, natives
of Bethlehem, and here must be placed the scene of the admirable eclogue
of Ruth. Matthew, the apostle, was also born in the village of
Bethlehem.

The convent now at Bethlehem is connected with the church by a court
inclosed with lofty walls. This court leads by a small side door into
the church. The edifice is certainly of high antiquity, and though often
destroyed and as often repaired, it still retains marks of its Grecian
origin. On the pavement at the foot of the altar, you observe a marble
star, which corresponds, as tradition would have us believe, with the
point of the heavens where the miraculous star that conducted the three
kings became stationary. The Greeks occupy the choir of the Magi, as
well as the two other naves formed by the transform of the cross. These
last are empty, and without altars. Two spiral staircases, each composed
of fifteen steps, open on the sides of the outer church, and conduct to
the subterraneous church situated beneath this choir. At the further
extremity of the crypt, on the east side, is the spot where tradition
reports that the Redeemer of mankind was born. This spot is marked by a
white marble, incrusted with jasper, and surrounded by a circle of
silver, having rays resembling those with which the sun is represented.
Around it are inscribed these words:

                       HIC DE VIRGINE MARIA
                       JESUS CHRISTUS NATUS EST.

At the distance of seven paces toward the south, after you have passed
the foot of one of the staircases leading to the upper church, you find
what is called “the Manger.” You go down to it by two steps, for it is
not upon a level with the rest of the crypt. It is a low recess, hewn
out of the rock. A block of white marble, raised about a foot above the
floor, and hollowed in the form of a manger, indicates the spot where
tradition says our Saviour was laid upon straw. Two paces further,
opposite to the manger, stands an altar, which, the same tradition would
teach, occupies the place where Mary sat when she presented the Child of
Sorrow to the adoration of the Magi.

Nothing can be more pleasing to the view than this subterraneous church.
It is adorned with pictures of the Italian and Spanish schools. These
pictures represent the mysteries of the place, the Virgin and Child,
after Raphael, the annunciation, the adoration of the wise men, the
coming of the shepherds, and all those miracles of mingled grandeur and
innocence. The ornaments of the manger are of blue satin embroidered
with silver. Incense is continually smoking before the cradle of the
Saviour. The grotto of the Nativity leads to the subterraneous chapel,
where tradition places the sepulcher of the Innocents: “Herod sent forth
and slew all the children that were in Bethlehem, and in all the coasts
thereof, from two years old and under. Then was fulfilled that which was
spoken by Jeremiah the prophet, saying: In Rama was there a voice
heard,” &c.


                               NAZARETH.

The village of Nazareth is situated in a long valley, surrounded by
lofty hills, between which a road leads to the neighboring plain of
Esdraelon, and to Jerusalem. The convent is situated in the lower part
of the village; and the church belonging to it, a very handsome edifice,
is erected over the grotto, or cave, in which (tradition says) the
Virgin Mary took up her residence. The other objects of interest in
Nazareth are, the synagogue, where Christ is said to have read the
Scriptures to the Jews, at present a church; a precipice without the
town, where, they say, the Jews endeavored to cast Christ down after his
speech in the synagogue; and a church called “the church of the
Annunciation,” erected, as they say, on the spot where Mary, the mother
of our Lord, received the divine message. It is the most magnificent
church in the land except that of the Holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem.


                    THE HOLY SEPULCHER AT JERUSALEM.

The church of the Holy Sepulcher, a view of which is given on the next
page, is very irregular, owing to the nature and situation of the places
which it was designed to comprehend. It is nearly in the form of a
cross, being one hundred and twenty paces in length, exclusive of the
descent to what is called the place of the discovery of the Holy Cross,
and seventy in breadth. It has three domes, of which that covering the
Holy Sepulcher serves for the nave of the church. It is thirty feet in
diameter, and is covered at the top like the rotunda at Rome. There is
not any cupola, the roof being supported by large rafters, brought from
Mount Lebanon. On entering the church, you come to the “stone of
unction,” on which tradition says the body of our Lord was anointed with
myrrh and aloes, before it was laid in the sepulcher. Some say, that it
is of the same rock as Mount Calvary; and others assert, that it was
brought to this place by Joseph and Nicodemus, secret disciples of Jesus
Christ, who performed this pious office, and that it is of a greenish
color. Be that as it may, on account of the indiscretion of certain
pilgrims, who broke off pieces, it was found necessary to cover it with
white marble, and to surround it with an iron railing, lest people
should walk over it. This stone is eight feet, wanting three inches, in
length, and two feet, wanting one inch, in breadth: and above it, eight
lamps are kept continually burning.

[Illustration: CHURCH OF THE HOLY SEPULCHER.]

The Holy Sepulcher, as it is called, is thirty paces from this stone,
exactly in the center of the great dome: it resembles a small closet,
hewn out of the solid rock. The entrance, which faces the east, is only
four feet high, and two feet and a quarter broad. The interior of the
sepulcher is nearly square. It is six feet, wanting an inch, in length,
and six feet, wanting two inches, in breadth, and from the floor to the
roof, eight feet and one inch. There is a solid block of the same stone,
which was left in excavating the other part: this is two feet, four
inches and a half high, and occupies half of the sepulcher, for it is
six feet, wanting one inch, in length, and two feet and five-sixths
wide. On this table, tradition says, the body of our Lord was laid, with
the head toward the west, and the feet to the east; but, on account of
the superstitious devotion of the Orientals, who imagine that, if they
leave their hair upon this stone, God will never forsake them, and also,
because the pilgrims broke off pieces, it has received a covering of
white marble, on which mass is now celebrated. Forty-four lamps are
constantly burning in this sacred place, and three holes have been made
in the roof for the emission of the smoke. The exterior of the sepulcher
is also faced with slabs of marble, and adorned with several columns,
having a dome above.

The Holy Sepulcher is composed of three churches: that of the Holy
Sepulcher, properly so called; that of Calvary; and the church of the
Discovery of the Holy Cross. The first is built in the valley at the
foot of Calvary, on the spot where tradition reports that the body of
Christ was deposited. This church was in the form of a cross, the chapel
of the Holy Sepulcher constituting, in fact, the nave of the edifice. It
is circular, like the Pantheon at Rome, and is lighted only by a dome,
beneath which is the sepulcher. Sixteen marble columns adorn the
circumference of this rotunda: they are connected by seventeen arches,
and support an upper gallery, likewise composed of sixteen columns and
seventeen arches, of smaller dimensions than those of the lower range.
Niches, corresponding with the arches, appear above the frieze of the
second gallery, and the dome springs from the arch of these niches.

The origin of the church of the Holy Sepulcher is of high antiquity. The
author of the “Epitome of the Holy War” asserts, that forty-six years
after the destruction of Jerusalem by Vespasian and Titus, the
Christians obtained permission of Adrian to build, or rather rebuild, a
church over the tomb of their Lord, and to inclose, in the new city, the
other places venerated by the Christians. This church, he adds, was
greatly enlarged and repaired by Helena, the mother of Constantine.


                              MOUNT TABOR.

This remarkable mountain, a view of which is given in the cut on the
next page, is on the confines of Zebulon and Naphthali, on the
north-east border of the plain of Esdraelon, about six miles south of
Nazareth. It is graceful and picturesque in its outlines, presenting
different appearances as viewed from different points, which accounts
for the diversities in the pictorial representations we have of it. From
the north it has the appearance of the segment of a sphere, and appears
beautifully wooded on the summit, affording retreats to the animals for
whom “the net was spread on Tabor.” (Hosea v. 1.) From the west it is
like a truncated cone, appearing much steeper and higher, with the
southern side almost destitute of trees. But on all sides it is a marked
and prominent object, as the prophet intimates when he says, “as Tabor
is among the mountains.” (Jeremiah xlvi. 18.) The view from the summit
is truly beautiful. The foundations of ancient buildings, and the
remains of water-tanks, in which cool water is still collected from the
drippings of the rocks, are still to be seen on the top of Tabor. On
this mountain was the encampment of Barak’s army on the eve of its
battle with the hosts of Sisera. (Judges iv. 6, 14.) Tradition indicates
this as the scene of Christ’s transfiguration. This may well be doubted,
owing to the distance of this mountain from Cæsarea Philippi, near which
place our Lord left the nine disciples the day before. Besides, this
mountain was at the time occupied by a fortified town, and thus did not,
as well as some other hights, answer the description of “a high mountain
apart,” or solitary. (Matthew xvii. 1.) No doubt the name of the
mountain was concealed by design, to avoid giving occasion to the
superstitious observances of place, which our Lord foresaw would be
practiced, in after ages, by many calling themselves after his name. The
Arab name of Tabor is Jebel-Tur. There was a Levitical city on Tabor of
the same name. (1 Chronicles vi. 77.) The Tabor mentioned in 1 Samuel x.
3, was not Mount Tabor, but a place in the vicinity of the territory of
Benjamin.

[Illustration: MOUNT TABOR.]


                          THE MOUNT OF OLIVES.

The following descriptions of some of the spots in the Holy Land which
excite a more particular interest, are extracted from Dr. Clarke’s very
valuable “Travels in Europe, Asia, and Africa.”

“As we advanced, our journey led through an open campaign country,
until, upon our right, the guides showed us the mount where it is
believed that Christ preached to his disciples that memorable sermon,
concentrating the sum and substance of every Christian virtue. We left
our route to visit this elevated spot; and, having attained the highest
point of it, a view was presented, which, for its grandeur,
independently of the interest excited by the different objects contained
in it, has no parallel in the Holy Land. From this situation we
perceived that the plain, over which we had been so long riding, was
itself very elevated. Far beneath appeared other plains, one lower than
the other, and extending to the surface of the sea of Tiberias, or sea
of Galilee. This immense lake, almost equal, in the grandeur of its
appearance, to that of Geneva, spreads its waters over all the lower
territory, extending from the north-east toward the south-west, and then
bearing east of us. Its eastern shores present a sublime scene of
mountains, extending toward the north and south, and seeming to close it
in at either extremity, both toward Chorazin, where the Jordan enters,
and the Aulon, or Campus-magnus, through which it flows to the Dead sea.
The cultivated plains reaching to its borders, which we beheld at an
amazing depth below our view, resembled, by the various hues their
different produce exhibited, the motley pattern of a vast carpet. To the
north appeared snowy summits, towering, beyond a series of intervening
mountains, with unspeakable greatness. We considered them as the summits
of Libanus; but the Arabs belonging to our caravan called the principal
eminence Jebel el Sieh, saying it was near Damascus; probably,
therefore, a part of the chain of Libanus. This summit was so lofty,
that the snow entirely covered the upper part of it; not lying in
patches, as I have seen it, during summer, upon the tops of very
elevated mountains, (for instance, upon that of Ben Nevis, in Scotland,)
but investing all the higher part with that perfect white and smooth,
velvet-like appearance which snow exhibits when it is very deep; a
striking spectacle in such a climate, where the beholder, seeking
protection from a burning sun, almost considers the firmament to be on
fire.”


                          OTHER REVERED SITES.

“As we rode toward the sea of Tiberias, the guides pointed to a sloping
spot from the hights upon our right, whence we had descended, as the
place where the miracle was accomplished by which our Saviour fed the
multitude: it is therefore called the _Multiplication of Bread_; as the
mount above, where the sermon was preached to his disciples, is called
the _Mountain of Beatitudes_, from the expressions used in the beginning
of that discourse. The lake now continued in view upon our left. The
wind rendered its surface rough, and called to mind the situation of our
Saviour’s disciples, when, in one of the small vessels which traverse
these waters, they were tossed in a storm, and saw Jesus in the fourth
watch of the night, walking to them upon the waves. Often as this
subject has been painted, combining a number of circumstances adapted
for the representation of sublimity, no artist has been aware of the
uncommon grandeur of the scenery, memorable on account of the
transaction. The lake of Genesareth is surrounded by objects well
calculated to highten the solemn impression made by such a picture; and,
independent of the local feelings likely to be excited in its
contemplation, affords one of the most striking prospects in the Holy
Land. Along the borders of this lake may still be seen the remains of
those ancient tombs, hewn by the earliest inhabitants of Galilee, in the
rocks which face the water. Similar works were before noticed among the
ruins of Telmessus. They were deserted in the time of our Saviour, and
had become the resort of wretched men, afflicted by diseases, and made
outcasts of society; for in the account of the cure performed by our
Saviour upon a maniac in the country of the Gadarenes, these tombs are
particularly alluded to; and their existence to this day, (although they
have been neither noticed by priests nor pilgrims, and have escaped the
ravages of the empress Helena, who would undoubtedly have shaped them
into churches,) offers strong internal evidence of the accuracy of the
evangelist who has recorded the transaction: ‘There met him _out of the
tombs_ a man with an unclean spirit, who had his dwelling _among the
tombs_.’”


                             MOUNT CARMEL.

Mount Carmel is a tall promontory, forming the termination of a range of
hills, in the northern part of Palestine, and toward the sea. It is
fifteen hundred feet high, and is famous for its caverns, which are said
to be more than a thousand in number. Most of them are in the western
part of it. Here also was the cave of the prophet Elijah. Both Elijah
and Elisha used to resort to this mountain, and here it was that the
former opposed the prophets of Baal with such success. Here it was, too,
that this prophet went up, when he told his servant to look forth toward
the sea yet seven times, and the seventh time he saw a cloud coming from
the sea “like a man’s hand;” when the prophet knew the promised rain was
at hand, and girded up his loins and ran before Ahab’s chariot even to
the gates of Jezreel. (See 1 Kings xviii. 4-46.)


                             MOUNT ARARAT.

This mountain, which is highly worthy of our notice as the one on which
the ark rested, is, by the general consent of western Asia and of
Europe, decided to be the mountain of Ara Dagh in Armenia; and that this
opinion is correct, would seem plain from the statement of the Bible
that Ararat _was_ in Armenia, taken in connection with the fact, that in
all that country there is no mountain comparable to this. It is in all
respects a most noble mountain, and one of the finest in the world.
“When our eyes first beheld it,” says Kitto, “we had already seen the
loftiest and most remarkable mountains of the old world; but yet the
effect of the view of _this_ mountain was new and surprising. The reason
appeared to be this, that most of the loftiest mountains of the world
are but peaks of the uppermost ridge of mountain chains; but Ararat,
though not so high as many of these, is far more grand and impressive,
because it is not merely the summit of a ridge, but a whole and perfect
mountain.” “Nothing,” as Mr. Morier well remarks, “can be more beautiful
than its shape, or more awful than its hight; all the surrounding
mountains sink into insignificance when compared with it. It is perfect
in all its parts; having no hard, rugged features, and no unnatural
prominences; but everything is in harmony, and all combines to render it
one of the sublimest objects of nature.” It rises from the valley of the
river Aras, the ancient _Araxes_, gradually towering from its broad
base, till it reaches the region of perpetual snow, (which is about
one-third below its summit,) when it becomes more conical and steep, and
is surmounted with a crown of ice which glitters in the sun with
peculiar brightness. And near to this peak, and rising from the same
broad base, is another almost exactly like it, but smaller, which is
doubtless the reason why the sacred text speaks of “the _mountains_ of
Ararat,” rather than of a single mountain. The tallest of the two is
seventeen thousand, seven hundred and fifty, and the lowest thirteen
thousand, four hundred and twenty feet above the level of the sea, which
is some three thousand feet lower than the plain on which Ararat stands.
The top of the mountain, it is said, was never reached till 1829, when
Mr. Parrot, a German, succeeded in climbing to it, and there found a
slightly convex, and almost circular plain, some two hundred and twenty
feet in diameter, declining steeply on all sides; from which some
suppose, that the ark must have rested on the lesser Ararat, as it would
have been difficult for its inmates, including heavy cattle, to have
descended from the higher summit.


              -------------------------------------------


                        WONDERS OF ART RESUMED.


                  ------------------------------------


                          THE MOSQUE OF OMAR.

Dr. Clarke, on viewing this mosque, observes, that “the sight was so
grand, that he did not hesitate to pronounce it the most magnificent
piece of architecture in the Turkish empire, and considered it,
externally, far superior to the mosque of St. Sophia, in
Constantinople.” By the sides of the spacious area in which it stands,
are certain vaulted remains, which plainly denote the masonry of the
ancients; and he thinks that evidence may be adduced to prove, that they
belonged to the foundations of Solomon’s temple. He observed also that
reticulated stucco, which is commonly considered as an evidence of Roman
work. Phocas believed the whole space surrounding this building to be
the ancient area of the temple; and Golius, in his notes upon the
Astronomy of Alferganes, says that the whole foundation of the original
edifice remained. As to the mosque itself, there is no building at
Jerusalem that can be compared with it, either in beauty or riches. The
lofty Saracenic pomp so nobly displayed in the style of the building;
its numerous arcades; its capacious dome, with all the stately
decorations of the place; its extensive area, paved and variegated with
the choicest marbles; the extreme neatness observed in every avenue
toward it; and, lastly, the sumptuous costume observable in the dresses
of all the eastern devotees, passing to and from the sanctuary, make it
altogether one of the finest sights the Mohammedans have to boast.


                MOSQUE OF ST. SOPHIA AT CONSTANTINOPLE.

The dome of this celebrated structure is one hundred and thirteen feet
in diameter, and is built on arches, sustained by vast pillars of
marble. The pavement and staircase are also of marble. There are two
rows of galleries supported by pillars of party-colored marble, and the
entire roof is of fine mosaic work. In this mosque is the superb tomb of
the emperor Constantine, for which the Turks have the highest
veneration.

Beside the above, two other mosques attract the particular notice of
travelers who visit the Turkish capital. That of the Valide-Sultan,
founded by the mother of Mohammed IV., is the largest, and is built
entirely of marble. Its proportions are stupendous; and it boasts the
finest symmetry. The mosque of Sultan Solyman is an exact square, with
four line towers in the angles; in the center is a noble cupola,
supported by beautiful marble pillars. Two smaller ones at the
extremities are supported in the same manner. The pavement and gallery
surrounding the mosque are of marble; and under the great cupola is a
fountain, adorned with such finely colored pillars, that they can
scarcely be deemed of natural marble. On one side is the pulpit, of
white marble; and on the other the little gallery for the grand
seignior. A fine staircase leads to it; and it is built up with gilt
lattices. At the upper end is a kind of altar, on which the name of God
is inscribed: and before it stand two candlesticks, six feet in hight,
with wax candles in proportion. The pavement is spread with fine
carpets, and the mosque illuminated by a vast number of lamps. The court
leading to it is very spacious, with galleries of marble, supported by
green columns, and covered by twenty-eight leaden cupolas on the sides,
with a fine fountain in the center.

The mosque of Sultan Selim I. at Adrianople, is another surprising
monument of Turkish architecture. It is situated in the center and most
elevated part of the city, so as to make a very noble display. The first
court has four gates, and the innermost three; both being surrounded by
cloisters, with marble pillars of the Ionic order, finely polished, and
of very lively colors: the entire pavement is of white marble, and the
roof of the cloisters is divided into several cupolas or domes,
surmounted with gilt balls. In the midst of each court are fine
fountains of white marble; and, before the grand entrance, is a portico,
with green marble pillars, provided with five gates. The body of the
mosque is one prodigious dome, adorned with lofty towers, whence the
_imaums_, or priests, call the people to prayers. The ascent to each of
these towers is very artfully contrived: there is but one door, which
leads to three different staircases, going to three different stories of
the tower, in such a manner, that three priests may ascend and descend,
by a spiral progress, without meeting each other. The walls of the
interior are inlaid with porcelain, ornamented with small flowers and
other natural objects, in very lively colors. In the center hangs a vast
lamp of gilt silver, besides which there are at least two thousand
smaller ones: the whole, when lighted, have a very splendid effect.


                           RUINS OF CARTHAGE.

The remains of the grandeur and magnificence of Carthage, the rival of
Rome, and one of the most commercial cities of the ancient world, are
not so striking as might be expected; and, at a little distance, can
scarcely be distinguished from the ground on which they lie. The
vestiges of triumphal arches, of superb specimens of Grecian
architecture, of columns of porphyry or granite, or of curious
entablatures, are no longer discernible: all are vanished; and thus will
it be in future ages with the most renowned cities now on earth!

To discover these ruins requires some method. Leaving Tunis, the
traveler rides along the shore in an east-north-east direction, and
reaches, in about half an hour, the salt-pits, which extend toward the
west, as far as a fragment of wall, very near to the “great reservoirs.”
Passing between these salt-pits and the sea, jetties are seen running
out to a considerable distance under water. The sea and the jetties are
on his right; on his left he perceives a great quantity of ruins, upon
eminences of unequal hight; and below these ruins a basin of a circular
form, and of considerable depth, which formerly communicated with the
sea by means of a canal, traces of which are still to be seen. This
basin appears to have been the “Cothon,” or inner port of Carthage. The
remains of the immense works discernible in the sea, in this case
indicate the site of the outer mole. Some piles of the dam said to have
been constructed by Scipio, for the purpose of blocking up the port, may
be still distinguished. A second inner canal is conjectured to have been
the cut made by the Carthaginians, when they opened a new passage for
their fleet.

The greater part of Carthage was built on three hills. On a spot which
overlooks the eastern shore is the area of a spacious room, with several
smaller ones adjoining: some of them have tesselated pavements; and in
all are found broken pieces of columns of fine marble and porphyry. They
are conjectured to have been summer apartments beneath one of the
palaces, such as the intense heat of the climate must have required. In
rowing along the shore, the common sewers are still visible, and are but
little impaired by time. With the exception of these, the cisterns have
suffered the least. Besides such as belong to private houses, there are
two sets for the public use of the Tunisians. The largest of these was
the grand reservoir, and received the water of the aqueduct. It lay near
the western wall of the city, and consisted of upward of twenty
contiguous cisterns, each about one hundred feet in length, and thirty
in breadth. They form a series of vaults, communicating with each other,
and are bordered throughout their whole length by a corridor. The
smaller reservoir has a greater elevation, and lies near the Cothon or
inner port.

The ruins of the noble aqueduct which conveyed the water into the larger
cisterns, may be traced as far as Zawan and Zungar, at least fifty miles
distant. This must have been a truly magnificent, and at the same time,
a very expensive work. That part of it which extends along the peninsula
was beautifully faced with stone. At Arriana, a village to the north of
Tunis, are several entire arches each seventy feet high, and supported
by piers sixteen feet square. The water-channel is vaulted over, and
plastered with a strong cement. A person of an ordinary hight may walk
upright in it; and at intervals are apertures, left open, as well for
the admission of fresh air, as for the convenience of cleansing it. The
water-mark is nearly three feet high; but it is impossible to determine
the quantity daily conveyed to Carthage by this channel, without knowing
the angle of descent, which, in its present imperfect state, can not be
ascertained.

Temples were erected at Zawan and Zungar, over the fountains by which
this aqueduct was supplied. That at Zungar appears to have been of the
Corinthian order, and terminates very beautifully in a dome with three
niches, probably intended for the statues of the divinity of the spring.


                           THE PLAIN OF TROY.

According to Homer’s description of the Trojan territory, it combined
certain prominent and remarkable features, not likely to be affected by
any lapse of time. Of this nature was the Hellespont; the island of
Tenedos; the plain itself; the river by whose inundations it was
occasionally overflowed; and the mountain whence that river issued. The
following is an abstract of Dr. Clarke’s accurate account of the
vestiges of high antiquity contained in this truly classic spot.

“We entered an immense plain, in which some Turks were engaged in
hunting wild-boars. Peasants were also employed in plowing a deep and
rich soil of vegetable earth. Proceeding toward the east, and round the
bay distinctly pointed out by Strabo as the harbor in which the Grecian
fleet was stationed, we arrived at the sepulcher of Ajax, upon the
ancient Rhœtean promontory. The view here afforded of the Hellespont and
the plain of Troy is one of the finest the country affords. From the
_Aianteum_ we passed over a heathy country to Halil Elly, a village near
the Thymbrius, in whose vicinity we had been instructed to seek the
remains of a temple once sacred to the Thymbrean Apollo. The ruins we
found were rather the remains of ten temples than of one. The earth to a
very considerable extent was covered by subverted and broken columns of
marble, granite, and of every order in architecture. Doric, Ionic and
Corinthian capitals lay dispersed in all directions, and some of these
were of great beauty. We observed a bass-relief representing a person on
horseback pursued by a winged figure; also a beautiful representation,
sculptured after the same manner, of Ceres in her car drawn by two scaly
serpents.

“At the town or village of Tchiblack, we noticed very considerable
remains of ancient sculpture, but in such a state of disorder and ruin,
that no precise description of them can be given. The most remarkable
are upon the top of a hill called Beyan Mezaley, near the town, in the
midst of a beautiful grove of oak-trees, toward the village of Callifat.
Here the ruins of a Doric temple of white marble lay heaped in the most
striking manner, mixed with broken stelæ, cippi, sarcophagi, cornices
and capitals of very enormous size, entablatures and pillars. All of
these have reference to some peculiar sanctity by which this hill was
anciently characterized. We proceeded hence toward the plain; and no
sooner reached it, than a tumulus of very remarkable size and situation
drew our attention, for a short time, from the main object of our
pursuit. This tumulus, of a high conical form and very regular
structure, stands altogether insulated. Of its great antiquity no doubt
can be entertained by persons accustomed to view the everlasting
sepulchers of the ancients. On the southern side of its base is a long
natural mound of limestone: this, beginning to rise close to the
artificial tumulus, extends toward the village of Callifat, in a
direction nearly from north to south across the middle of the plain. It
is of such hight that an army encamped on the eastern side of it, would
be concealed from all observation of persons stationed on the coast, by
the mouth of the Mender. If the poems of Homer, with reference to the
plain of Troy, have similarly associated an artificial tumulus and a
natural mound, a conclusion seems warranted, that these are the objects
to which he alludes. This appears to be the case in the account he has
given of the _tomb of Ilus_ and the _mound of the plain_. From this tomb
we descended into the plain, when our guides brought us to the western
side of it, near its southern termination, to notice a tumulus, less
considerable than the last described, about three hundred paces from the
mound, almost concealed from observation by being continually
overflowed, upon whose top two small oak-trees were then growing.

“We now came to an elevated spot of ground, surrounded on all sides by a
level plain, watered by the Callifat Osmack, and which there is every
reason to believe the _Simoisian_. Here we found, not only the traces,
but also the remains of an ancient citadel. Turks were then employed
raising enormous blocks of marble, from foundations surrounding the
place; possibly the identical works constructed by Lysimachus, who
fenced New Ilium with a wall. All the territory within these foundations
was covered by broken pottery, whose fragments were parts of those
ancient vases now held in such high estimation. Many Greek medals had
been discovered in consequence of the excavations made there by the
Turks. As these medals, bearing indisputable legends to designate the
people by whom they were fabricated, have also, in the circumstances of
their discovery, a peculiar connection with the ruins here, they may be
considered as indicating, with tolerable certainty, the situation of the
city to which they belonged. These ruins evidently appear to be the
remains of New Ilium; whether we regard the testimony afforded by their
situation, as accordant with the text of Strabo, or the discovery there
made of medals of the city.”

The conclusions relative to Troas, drawn by this learned writer, are as
follows. “That the river Mender is the Scamander of Homer, Strabo, and
Pliny. The _amnis navigabilis_ of Pliny flows into the archipelago, to
the south of Sigeum. That the Aianteum, or tomb of Ajax, still remains,
answering the description given of its situation by ancient authors, and
thereby determining also the exact position of the naval station of the
Greeks. That the Thymbrius is yet recognized, both in its present
appellation _Thymbreck_, and in its geographical position. That the
spacious plain lying on the north-eastern side of the Mender, and
watered by the Callifat Osmack, is the Simoisian, and that stream the
Simois. That the ruins of Palaio Callifat are those of the Ilium of
Strabo. Eastward is the Throsmos, or mound of the plain. That Udjek Tepe
is the tomb of Æsyetes. The other tombs mentioned by Strabo, as at
Sigeum, are all in the situation he describes. That the springs of
Bonarbashy may possibly have been the ‘_Doiai Pelai_’ of Homer; but they
are not sources of the Scamander. They are, moreover, _warm_ springs.
That the source of the Scamander is in Gargarus, now called _Kasdaghy_,
the highest mountain of all the Idæan chain. That the altars of Jupiter,
mentioned by Homer, and by Eschylus, were on the hill called Kuchunlu
Tepe, at the foot of Gargarus; where the ruins of the temple now remain.
That Palae Scepsis is yet recognized in the appellation Esky Skupshu;
that Æna is the Ainei of Strabo; and Æne Tepe, perhaps, the tomb of
Æneas. That the extremity of the Adramyttian gulf inclines round the
ridge of Gargarus, toward the north-east; so that the circumstance of
Xerxes having this mountain upon his left, in his march from Antandrus
to Abydus, is thereby explained. And lastly, that Gargarus affords a
view, not only of all the plain of Troy, but of all the district of
Troas, and a very considerable portion of the rest of Asia Minor.”


                                ATHENS.

The approach to this celebrated city by sea, presents a spectacle, which
was viewed by Dr. Clarke and his companions with great transports of
joy. It was no sooner descried, than its lofty edifices, catching the
sun’s rays, rendered the buildings in the Acropolis visible at the
distance of fifteen miles.

“The reflected light gave them a white appearance. The Parthenon
appeared first, above a long chain of hills in the front; presently we
saw the top of Mount Anchesmus, to the left of the temple; the whole
being backed by a lofty mountainous ridge, which we supposed to be
Parnes. As we drew near to the walls, we beheld the vast Cecropian
citadel, crowned with temples that originated in the veneration once
paid to the memory of the illustrious dead, surrounded by objects
telling the same theme of sepulchral grandeur, and now monuments of
departed greatness, gradually moldering in all the solemnity of ruin. So
paramount is this funeral character in the approach to Athens from the
Piræeus, that, as we passed the hill of the Museum, which was, in fact,
an ancient cemetery of the Athenians, we might have imagined ourselves
to be among the tombs of Telmessus, from the number of the sepulchers
hewn in the rock, and from the antiquity of the workmanship, evidently
not of later date than anything of the kind in Asia Minor. In other
respects the city exhibits nearly the appearance so briefly described by
Strabo eighteen centuries before our coming; and, perhaps, it wears a
more magnificent aspect, owing to the splendid remains of Adrian’s
temple of Olympian Jove, which did not exist when Athens was visited by
the disciple of Xenarchus. The prodigious columns belonging to this
temple appeared full in view between the citadel and the bed of the
Ilissus: high upon our left rose the Acropolis, in the most impressive
grandeur: an advanced part of the rock upon the western side of it is
the hill of the Areopagus, a view of which is given in the cut on the
next page, where St. Paul preached to the Athenians, and where their
most solemn tribunal was held. Beyond all, appeared the beautiful plain
of Athens, bounded by Mount Hymettus. We rode toward the craggy rock of
the citadel, passing some tiers of circular arches at the foot of it;
these are the remains of the Odeum of Herodes Atticus, built in memory
of his wife Regilla. Thence continuing to skirt the base of the
Acropolis, the road winding rather toward the north, we saw also, upon
our left, scooped in the solid rock, the circular sweep on which the
Athenians were wont to assemble to hear the plays of Eschylus, and where
the theater of Bacchus was afterward constructed.

[Illustration: THE AREOPAGUS.]

“We proceeded toward the east, to ascend Mount Anchesmus, and to enjoy
in one panoramic survey the glorious prospect presented from its summit,
of all the antiquities and natural beauties in the Athenian plain. We
ascended to the commanding eminence of the mount, once occupied by a
temple of Anchesmian Jupiter. The pagan shrine has, as usual, been
succeeded by a small Christian sanctuary: it is dedicated to St. George.
Of the view from this rock, even Wheeler could not write without
emotion. ‘Here,’ said he, ‘a Democritus might sit and laugh at the pomps
and vanities of the world, whose glories so soon vanish; or a Heraclitus
weep over its manifold misfortunes, telling sad stories of the various
changes and events of fate.’ The prospect embraces every object,
excepting only those upon the south-west side of the castle. The
situation of the observer is north-east of the city; and the reader may
suppose him to be looking, in a contrary direction, toward the
Acropolis, which is in the center of this fine picture; thence regarding
the whole circuit of the citadel, from its north-western side, toward
the south and cast, the different parts of it occur in the following
order, although to a spectator they all appear to be comprehended in one
view. The lofty rocks of the Acropolis, crowned with its majestic
temples, the Parthenon, Erectheum, &c., constitute the central object.
In the foreground is displayed the whole of the modern city of Athens,
with its gardens, ruins, mosques, and walls, spreading into the plain
beneath the citadel. On the right, or north-west wing, is the temple of
Theseus; and on the left, or south-west wing, the temple of Jupiter
Olympius. Proceeding from the west to the south and east, the view
beyond the citadel displays the Areopagus, the Pnyx, the Ilissus, the
site of the temple of Ceres in Agræ, the fountain Callirhoe, the Stadium
Panthenaium, the site of the Lyceum, &c. In a parallel circuit, with a
more extended radius, are seen the hills and defile of Daphne, or the
Via Sacra, the Piræeus, Munychia and Phalerum, Salmais, Ægina, the more
distant isles, and Hymettus. A similar circuit, but still more extended,
embraces Parnes, the mountains beyond Elusis and Megara, the Acropolis
of Corinth, the Peloponnesian mountains, and the Ægean and distant
islands. And lastly, immediately beneath the eye, lies the plain of
Athens.”

[Illustration: TEMPLE OF JUPITER OLYMPIUS.]

Of the many ruins without the city of Athens, the tourist notices with
peculiar interest those of the temple of Jupiter Olympius, as it was the
first conceived and the last executed of all the sacred monuments of
Athens. It was begun by Pisistratus, but was not finished till the time
of the Roman emperor Adrian, which was some seven hundred years
afterward. All that remains of this once magnificent building, is seen
in the cut on the previous page. Originally there were one hundred and
twenty columns supporting this noble temple; but of all these, only some
sixteen remain; standing in their silent and solitary grandeur to
testify of the triumphs of ancient art, and to the power of Time the
destroyer.


                         TEMPLES OF ELEPHANTA.

The island of Elephanta, distant about two leagues from Bombay, has a
circumference of about three miles, and consists of two rocky mountains,
covered with trees and brushwood. Near the landing-place is the figure
of an elephant, as large as life, shaped out of a rock, and supposed to
have given its name to the island. Having ascended the mountain by a
narrow path, the visitor reaches the excavation which has so long
excited the attention of the curious, and afforded such ample scope for
the discussion of antiquarians. With the strongest emotions of surprise
and admiration, he beholds four rows of massive columns cut out of the
solid rock, uniform in their order, and placed at regular distances, so
as to form three magnificent avenues from the principal entrance to the
grand idol which terminates the middle vista; the general effect being
hightened by the blueness of the light, or rather gloom, peculiar to the
situation. The central image is composed of three colossal heads,
reaching nearly from the floor to the roof, a hight of fifteen feet. It
represents the triad deity in the Hindoo mythology, Brama, Vishnu, and
Siva, in the characters of the creator, preserver, and destroyer. The
middle face displays regular features, and a mild and serene character;
the towering head-dress is much ornamented, as are those on each side,
which appear in profile, lofty, and richly adorned with jewels. The
countenance of Vishnu has the same mild aspect as that of Brama; but the
visage of Siva is very different: severity and revenge, characteristic
of his destroying attribute, are strongly depicted; one of the hands
embraces a large _cobra de capello_; while the others contain fruit,
flowers, and blessings for mankind, among which the lotus and
pomegranate are readily distinguishable. The former of these, the lotus,
so often introduced into the Hindoo mythology, forms a principal object
in the sculpture and paintings of their temples, is the ornament of
their sacred lakes, and the most conspicuous beauty in their flowery
sacrifices.

On either side of the Elephanta triad, is a gigantic figure leaning on a
dwarf, an object frequently introduced in these excavations. The giants
guard the triple deity, and separate it from a large recess filled with
a variety of figures, male and female, in different attitudes: they are
in tolerable proportion, but do not express any particular character of
countenance: one conspicuous female, like the Amazons, is
single-breasted; the rest, whether intended for goddesses or mortals,
are generally adorned, like the modern Hindoo women, with bracelets and
rings for the ankles; the men have bracelets only. The intervening space
between these figures is occupied by small aerial beings, hovering about
them in infinite variety. The larger images in these groups are in
alto-relievo, and most of the smaller in basso-relievo, brought
sufficiently forward from the rock to produce a good effect. The sides
of the temple are adorned with similar compositions, placed at regular
distances, and terminating the avenues formed by the colonnades, so that
only one group is seen at a time, except on a near approach; and the
regularity and proportion of the whole are remarkably striking. The
figures are in general in graceful attitudes; but those of herculean
stature do not indicate any extraordinary muscular strength. Among many
thousands of them, few of the countenances express any particular
passion, or mark a decided character: they have generally a sleepy
aspect, and bear a greater resemblance to the tame sculpture of Egypt
than to the animated works of the Grecian chisel. From the right and
left avenues of the principal temple are passages to smaller excavations
on each side: that on the right is much decayed, and very little of the
sculpture remains entire. A pool of water penetrates from it into a dark
cavern far under the rock; but whether natural or artificial, has not
been decided. A small corresponding temple on the left side, contains
two baths, one of them elegantly finished: the front is open, and the
roof supported by pillars of a different order from those in the large
temple; the sides are adorned with sculpture, and the roof and cornice
painted in mosaic patterns; some of the colors are still bright. The
opposite bath, of the same proportions, is less ornamented; and between
them is a room detached from the rock, containing a colossal
representation of the _lingam_, or symbol of Siva. Several small caves
branch out from the grand excavations.

An anecdote is related by Mr. Forbes, in his “Oriental Memoirs,”
relative to these sculptured monuments. He accompanied an eminent
English artist on his first visit to the Elephanta. “After the glare of
a tropical sun, during the walk from the landing-place, it was some time
before the eye had accommodated itself to the gloom of these
subterraneous chambers, sufficiently to discriminate objects in that
somber light. We remained for several minutes without speaking, or
looking particularly at each other: at length, when more familiarized to
the cavern, my companion still remaining silent, I expressed some fear
of having been too warm in my description, and that like most other
objects, the reality fell short of the anticipated pleasure. He soon
relieved my anxiety by declaring, that however highly I had raised his
imagination, he was so absorbed in astonishment and delight, on entering
this stupendous scene, as to forget where he was. He had seen the most
striking objects of art in Italy and Greece; but never anything which
filled his mind with such extraordinary sensations.” So enraptured was
this artist with the spot, that after staying until a late hour, he
quitted it most reluctantly. The caves of the isle of Elephanta can not
be sufficiently admired, when the immensity of such an undertaking, the
number of artificers employed, and the extraordinary genius of its
projector, are considered, in a country until lately accounted rude and
barbarous by the now enlightened nations of Europe. Had this work been
raised from a foundation, like other structures, it would have excited
the admiration of the curious; but when the reflection is made, that it
is hewn inch by inch in the hard and solid rock, how great must the
astonishment be at the conception and completion of the enterprise!


                          TEMPLES OF SALSETTE.

The excavations of the island of Salsette, also contiguous to Bombay,
are hewn in the central mountains. The great temple is excavated at some
distance from the summit of a steep mountain, in a commanding situation.
This stupendous work is upward of ninety feet long, thirty-eight wide,
and of a proportionate hight, hewn out of the solid rock, and forming an
oblong square, with a fluted concave roof. The area is divided into
three aisles by regular colonnades, similar to the ancient basilic, a
pile of building twice as long as it was wide, and one of the
extremities of which terminated in a hemicycle, two rows of columns
forming a spacious area in the center, and leaving a narrow walk between
the columns and the wall. In these _basilici_ the Roman emperors of the
east frequently administered justice. This magnificent excavation at
Salsette appears to be on the same plan, although, doubtless, intended
for a place of worship. Toward the termination of the temple, fronting
the entrance, is a circular pile of solid rock, nineteen feet high, and
forty-eight in circumference, most probably a representation of the
_lingam_, the symbol already alluded to in the description of the
temples of Elephanta. In this temple there are not any images, nor any
kind of sculpture, except on the capitals of the pillars, which are in
general finished in a very masterly style, and are little impaired by
time. Several have been left in an unfinished state; and on the summit
of others is something like a bell, between elephants, horses, lions,
and animals of different kinds.

The lofty pillars and concave roof of the principal temple at Salsette
present a much grander appearance than the largest excavation at the
Elephanta, although that is much richer in statues and bass-reliefs. The
portico at Salsette, of the same hight and breadth as the temple, is
richly decorated: on each side a large niche contains a colossal statue,
well executed; and facing the entrance are small single figures, with
groups in various attitudes, all of them in good preservation. The outer
front of the portico, and the area before it, corresponding in grandeur
with the interior, are now injured by time, and the moldering sculpture
intermingled with a variety of rock-plants. On the square pillars at the
entrance are long inscriptions, the characters of which are obsolete,
and which modern ingenuity has not as yet succeeded in deciphering.
Further up the mountain, a flight of steps, hewn in the rock, and
continued to the summit, leads, by various intricate paths, to smaller
excavations, most of which consist of two rooms, a portico and benches,
cut in the rock. To each is annexed a cistern of about three cubic feet,
also hewn in the rock, for the preservation of rain-water. Some of these
excavations are larger and better finished than others; and a few,
although inferior in size and decoration, in their general effect
resemble the principal temple.

The whole appearance of this excavated mountain indicates it to have had
a city hewn in its rocky sides, capable of containing many thousand
inhabitants. The largest temple was, doubtless, their principal place of
worship; and the smaller, on the same plan, inferior ones. The rest were
appropriated as dwellings for the inhabitants, differing in size and
accommodation according to their respective ranks in society; or, as it
is still more probable, these habitations were the abode of religious
Bramins, and of their pupils, when India was the nursery of art and
science, and the nations of Europe were involved in ignorance and
barbarism.


                        MAUSOLEUM OF HYDER ALI.

This splendid monument of oriental grandeur is situated at the western
extremity of the great garden of Seringapatam, a city of Hindoostan, and
capital of the Mysore territory. It is surrounded by a grove of
beautiful cypress-trees, and was erected by Tippoo Saib in honor of the
deceased sovereign, his father. Beneath tombs of black marble, elevated
about eighteen inches from the ground, lie the bodies of Hyder Ali, his
consort, and Tippoo Saib. They are covered with rich cloths, and have
canopies over them. The whole of this sumptuous edifice is, together
with its dome, supported by brilliantly polished black marble columns.
It is surrounded by a magnificent area, within which the faquirs have
cells allotted to them; and on an elevated platform are the tombs of
several faithful servants. The mosque annexed to it is flanked by two
towers. The moulahs stationed there still publicly read the Koran; and
three pagodas are daily distributed in charity at the mausoleum.


                            THE TAJE MAHAL.

This grand mausoleum, which stands due north and south, on the southern
bank of the river Jumna, was built by command of the emperor Shah Jehan
for the interment of his favorite sultana Momtaz-mehl, or Montazal
Zumani, the “preëminent in the seraglio,” or “paragon of the age,” and
at his death his remains were also here deposited, by order of his son
Aurungzebe. This building, in point of design and execution, is one of
the most extensive, elegant, commodious, and perfect works ever
undertaken and finished by one man. To this celebrated architect Shah
Jehan gave the title of Zerreer-dust, or “jewel-handed,” to distinguish
him from all other artists. It is built entirely of pure white marble,
on an immense square platform of the same material, having a lofty
minaret of equal beauty at every corner. On each side and behind the
imperial mausoleum, is a suite of elegant apartments, also of white
marble, highly decorated with colored stones. The tombs and other
principal parts of this vast fabric are inlaid with wreaths of flowers
and foliage in their natural colors, entirely composed of carnelians,
onyxes, verd-antique, _lapis lazuli_, and a variety of agates, so
admirably finished as to have the appearance of an ivory model set with
jewels. It was commenced in the fifth year of the reign of the emperor
Shah Jehan, and the whole completed in sixteen years, four months, and
twenty-one days. It cost ninety-eight lacs, or nine million, eight
hundred and fifteen thousand rupees, equal to more than six million
dollars, although the price of labor then was, and still continues to
be, very reasonable in India.


                          GREAT WALL OF CHINA.

This stupendous wall, a view of which is given in the cut below, extends
across the northern boundary of the Chinese empire, and is deservedly
ranked among the grandest labors of art. It is conducted over the
summits of high mountains, several of which have an elevation of over
five thousand feet, across deep valleys and over wide rivers, by means
of arches: in many parts it is doubled or trebled, to command important
passes; and at the distance of nearly every hundred yards is a tower or
massive bastion. Its extent is computed at fifteen hundred miles; but in
some parts, where less danger is apprehended, it is not equally strong
or complete, and toward the north-west consists merely of a strong
rampart of earth. Near Kookpekoo it is twenty-five feet in hight, and
the top about fifteen feet thick: some of the towers, which are square,
are forty-eight feet high, and about forty feet in width. In its
strongest parts, and for hundreds of miles in extent, this wall is so
thick as to allow six men on horseback to ride upon it. The structure
consists of two parallel walls of solid masonry, filled in between with
earth; the top is paved with stone. The stone employed in the
foundations, angles, &c., is a strong gray granite; but the materials
for the most part consist of bluish bricks, and the mortar is remarkably
pure and white. The amount of materials used in constructing this wall,
is immense. In a lecture on China, given a year or two since in England,
Dr. Bowring said it had been calculated, that if all the bricks, stones
and masonry of Great Britain were gathered together, they would not be
able to furnish materials enough for the wall of China; and that all the
buildings in London put together would not make the towers and turrets
which adorn it.

[Illustration: GREAT WALL OF CHINA.]

The area of the construction of this great barrier, which has been and
will continue to be the wonder and admiration of ages, is considered by
Sir George Staunton as having been absolutely ascertained; and he
asserts that it has existed for two thousand years. In this assertion he
appears to have followed Du Halde, who informs us that “this prodigious
work was constructed two hundred and fifteen years before the birth of
Christ, by order of the first emperor of the family of Tsin, to protect
three large provinces from the irruptions of the Tartars.” However, in
the history of China, contained in his first volume, he ascribes this
erection to the second emperor of the dynasty of Tsin, named Chi Hoang
Ti; and the date immediately preceding the narrative of this
construction is the year 137 before the birth of Christ. Hence
suspicions may arise, not only concerning the epoch when this work was
undertaken, but also as to the purity and precision of the Chinese
annals in general. Mr. Bell, who resided some time in China, and whose
travels are deservedly esteemed for the accuracy of their information,
assures us that this wall was built somewhere about the year 1160, by
one of the emperors, to prevent the frequent incursions of the Monguls,
whose numerous cavalry used to ravage the provinces, and effect their
escape before an army could be assembled to oppose them. Renaudot
observes that this wall is not mentioned by any oriental geographer
whose writings boast a higher antiquity than three hundred years; and it
is surprising that it should have escaped Marco Paulo, who, admitting
that he entered China by a different route, can hardly be supposed,
during his long residence in the north of China, and in the country of
the Monguls, to have remained ignorant of so stupendous a work. Amid
these difficulties, it may be reasonably conjectured, that similar modes
of defense had been adopted in different ages; and that the ancient rude
barrier, having fallen into decay, was replaced by the present erection,
which, even from its state of preservation, can scarcely aspire to a
very remote antiquity.

[Illustration: PORCELAIN TOWER AT NANKIN.]


                       PORCELAIN TOWER AT NANKIN.

This elegant and commodious building, a very correct idea of which may
be formed from the cut on the preceding page, may be regarded as a fine
specimen of the oriental pagodas. The tower is about two hundred feet in
hight, and derives its name from its having a porcelain coating. The
Portuguese were the first to bestow on these superb edifices the title
of pagodas, and to attribute them to devotional purposes. There can be
little doubt, however, that in many instances they have been rather
erected as public memorials or ornaments, like the columns of the Greeks
and Romans. Mr. Ellis, in his “Journal of the Embassy to China,” relates
that, in company with three gentlemen of the embassy, he succeeded in
passing completely through the uninhabited part of the city of Nankin,
and in reaching the gateway visible from the Lion hill. The object of
the party was to have penetrated through the streets to the porcelain
tower, apparently distant two miles. To this, however, the soldiers who
accompanied them, and who from their willingness in allowing them to
proceed thus far, were entitled to consideration, made so many
objections, that they were forced to desist, and to content themselves
with proceeding to a temple on a neighboring hill, from which they had a
complete view of the city. From this station the porcelain tower
presented itself as a most magnificent object.


                         THE SHOEMADOO AT PEGU.

The object in Pegu that most attracts and most merits notice, says Mr.
Symes in his “Embassy to Ava,” is the noble edifice of Shoemadoo, or the
Golden Supreme. This extraordinary pile of buildings is erected on a
double terrace, one raised upon another. The lower and greater terrace
is about ten feet above the natural level of the ground, forming an
exact parallelogram: the upper and lesser terrace is similar in shape,
rising about twenty feet above the lower terrace, or thirty above the
level of the country. Mr. Symes judged a side of the lower terrace to be
thirteen hundred and ninety-one feet; of the upper, six hundred and
eighty-four. The walls that sustained the sides of the terrace, both
upper and lower, are in a ruinous state; they were formerly covered with
plaster, wrought into various figures; the area of the lower is strewed
with the fragments of small decayed buildings, but the upper is kept
free from filth, and is in tolerable good order. There is reason to
conclude that this building and the fortress are coeval, as the earth of
which the terraces are composed appears to have been taken from the
ditch; there being no other excavation in the city, or in its
neighborhood, that could have afforded a tenth part of the quantity.

The terraces are ascended by flights of stone steps, which are now
broken and neglected. On each side are dwellings of the Rhahaans, raised
on timbers four or five feet from the ground: these houses consist only
of a large hall; the wooden pillars that support them are turned with
neatness; the roofs are covered with tiles, and the sides are made of
boards; and there are a number of bare benches in every house, on which
the Rhahaans sleep; but we saw no other furniture.

The Shoemadoo is a pyramidal building composed of brick and mortar,
without excavation or aperture of any sort; octagonal at the base, and
spiral at the top: each side of the base measures one hundred and
sixty-two feet; this immense breadth diminishes abruptly, and a similar
building has not unaptly been compared in shape to a large
speaking-trumpet. Six feet from the ground there is a wide projection
that surrounds the base, on the plane of which are fifty-seven small
spires of equal size, and equidistant; one of them measured twenty-seven
feet in hight, and forty in circumference at the bottom. On a higher
ledge there is another row consisting of fifty-three spires of similar
shape and measurement. A great variety of moldings encircle the
building; and ornaments somewhat resembling the _fleur de lis_ surround
the lower part of the spire: circular moldings likewise girt it to a
considerable hight, above which there are ornaments in stucco not unlike
the leaves of a Corinthian capital; and the whole is crowned by a _tee_,
or umbrella, of open iron-work, from which rises a rod with a gilded
pennant.

The tee or umbrella is to be seen on every sacred building that is of a
spiral form. The raising and consecration of this last and indispensable
appendage, is an act of high religious solemnity, and a season of
festivity and relaxation. The king himself bestowed the tee that covers
the Shoemadoo. It was made at the capital; and many of the principal
nobility came down from Ummerapoora to be present at the ceremony of its
elevation. The circumference of the tee is fifty-six feet; it rests on
an iron axis fixed in the building, and is further secured by large
chains strongly riveted to the spire. Round the lower rim of the tee are
appended a number of bells, which, agitated by the wind, make a
continual jingling. The tee is gilt, and it was said to be the intention
of the king to gild the whole of the spire. All the lesser pagodas are
ornamented with proportionable umbrellas of similar workmanship, which
are likewise encircled by small bells. The extreme hight of the edifice,
from the level of the country, is three hundred and sixty-one feet, and
above the interior terrace, three hundred and thirty one feet.

On the south-east angle of the upper terrace there are two handsome
saloons, or _kioums_, the roofs of which are composed of different
stages, supported by pillars. Mr. S. judged each to be about sixty feet
in length, and in breadth thirty. The ceiling of one is embellished with
gold leaf, and the pillars are lacquered; the decoration of the other is
not yet completed. They are made entirely of wood; and the carving on
the outside is laborious and minute. Mr. Symes saw several unfinished
figures of animals and men in grotesque attitudes, designed as ornaments
for different parts of the building. Some images of Gaudama, the supreme
object of Birman adoration, lay scattered around. At each angle of the
interior and higher terrace, there is a temple sixty-seven feet high,
resembling, in miniature, the great temple: in front of that, in the
south-west corner, are four gigantic representations, in masonry, of
Palloo, or the evil genius, half beast, half human, seated on their
hams, each with a large club on the right shoulder. The pundit who
accompanied Mr. Symes, said that they resembled the Rakuss of the
Hindoos. These are guardians of the temple. Nearly in the center of the
east face of the area are two human figures in stucco, beneath a gilded
umbrella. One, standing, represents a man with a book before him and a
pen in his hand: he is called Thasiamee, the recorder of mortal merits
and mortal misdeeds. The other, a female figure kneeling, is
Mahasumdera, the protectress of the universe, so long as the universe is
doomed to last; but when the time of general dissolution arrives, by her
hand the world is to be overwhelmed and everlastingly destroyed. A small
brick building near the north-east angle contains an upright marble
slab, four feet high, and three feet wide: there was a long legible
inscription on it. This, Mr. Symes was told, was an account of the
donations of pilgrims of only a recent date.

Along the whole extent of the north face of the upper terrace, there is
a wooden shed for the convenience of devotees who come from distant
parts of the country. On the north side of the temple are three large
bells of good workmanship, suspended near the ground, between pillars;
several deers’ horns lie strewed around: those who come to pay their
devotions first take up one of the horns, and strike the bell three
times, giving an alternate stroke to the ground: this act is to announce
to the spirit of Gaudama the approach of a suppliant. There are several
low benches near the foot of the temple, on which the person who comes
to pray, places his offering, commonly consisting of boiled rice, a
plate of sweetmeats, or cocoa-nut fried in oil: when it is given, the
devotee cares not what becomes of it; the crows and wild dogs often
devour it in presence of the donor, who never attempts to disturb the
animals. Mr. Symes saw several plates of victuals disposed of in this
manner, and understood it to be the case with all that was brought.

There are many small temples on the areas of both terraces, which are
neglected, and suffered to fall into decay. Numberless images of Gaudama
lie indiscriminately scattered around. A pious Birman who purchases an
idol, first procures the ceremony of consecration to be performed by the
Rhahaans; he then takes his purchase to whatever sacred building is most
convenient, and there places it in the shelter of a _kioum_, or on the
open ground before the temple; nor does he ever again seem to have any
anxiety about its preservation, but leaves the divinity to shift for
itself. Some of those idols are made of marble that is found in the
neighborhood of the capital of the Birman dominions, which admits of a
very fine polish; many are formed of wood, and gilded, and a few are of
silver; the latter, however, are not usually exposed and neglected like
the others. Silver and gold are rarely used, except in the composition
of household gods. On both the terraces are a number of white
cylindrical flags, raised on bamboo poles; these flags are peculiar to
the Rhahaans, and are considered as emblematical of purity, and of their
sacred function. On the top of the staff there is a _henza_ or goose,
the symbol both of the Birman and Pegu nations.


                 COLOSSAL FIGURE OF JUPITER PLUVIUS, OR
                         THE APENNINE JUPITER.

Statues above the ordinary size, were named by the ancients, _colossi_,
from a Greek word which signifies “members.” That at Rhodes was the most
famous, executed by Carelus, a pupil of Lysippus. There were several at
Rome; the most considerable was that of Vespasian, in the amphitheater,
that bore the name of Colisæa. Claudius caused a colossal statue of
himself to be raised on a rock exposed to the sea waves, in front of the
port of Ostium. Nero had his person and figure painted on a linen cloth,
one hundred and twenty feet in hight. In the court of the Capitol, and
in the palace Farnesi, &c., are colossi, either entire or mutilated.

[Illustration: JUPITER PLUVIUS, OR THE APENNINE JUPITER.]

The colossal figure of Jupiter Pluvius is found at Pratolino, in Italy.
The space in which it stands is planted round, on all sides, with lofty
fir and beech trees, the trunks of which are hid by a wood of laurel,
wherein niches have been cut for statues. The middle part is a green
lawn, and at a little distance, is a semicircular basin of water, behind
which rises the colossal statue of the Apennine Jupiter. Enchased, as it
were, in the groves, it can only be surveyed in front, and from a point
of view marked by the artist, in the adjoining engraving. Elevated on a
base to appearance irregular, and of itself lofty, at which the
astonished spectator arrives through two balustrades that run round the
basin, this colossus, a view of which is given in the cut above, looks,
at first, like a pyramidal rock, on which the hand of man might have
executed some project analogous to what the statuary Stasicrates had
conceived respecting Mount Athos,[10] and which Alexander nobly
rejected. But soon he recognizes the genius of a pupil and worthy rival
of Michael Angelo.

Footnote 10:

  Stasicrates proposed to Alexander to transform Mount Athos into a
  durable statue of himself, and one that would be most prominent to a
  world of beholders. His left hand to contain a city peopled with ten
  thousand inhabitants, and from the right a great river to flow, its
  waters descending to the sea. The proposition of this gigantesque
  monument was rejected by Alexander, who, in reply to his proposal,
  said, “The passage of Mount Caucasus, the Tanais, and the Caspian,
  which I have forced, shall be my monuments.”

It was, in fact, John of Bologna, who, by an inspiration derived from
the ancients, executed their _beau ideal_ of Jupiter Pluvius. This name
seems more suitable to the figure than that of Father Apennine, which
has been assigned to it. The style, in point of magnitude, is of the
largest, and the character of the head is in perfect conformity to the
subject. His brows and front brave the tempest, and seem the region of
the hoar-frost; his locks descend in icicles on his broad shoulders, and
the flakes of his immense beard resemble stalactites; his limbs seem
covered with hoar-frost, but with no alteration in their contour, or in
the form of the muscles. To add to the extraordinary effect, about the
head is a kind of crown, formed of little jetteaux, that drop on the
shoulders and trickle down the figure, shedding a sort of supernatural
luster, when irradiated by the sun.

It would be difficult to imagine a composition more picturesque and
perfect in all its proportions. The figure harmonizes with the
surrounding objects, but its real magnitude is best shown by comparison
with the groups promenading about the water, and which in comparison, at
a certain distance, resemble pigmies. A nearer approach exhibits a truly
striking proportion of the limbs. A number of apartments have been
fabricated in the interior, and within the head is a beautiful
belvedere, wherein the eyeballs serve for windows. The extremities are
of stone; the trunk is of bricks overlaid with a mortar or cement that
has contracted the hardness of marble, and which, when fresh, it was
easy to model in due forms.

It is related in the life of John of Bologna, that several of his
pupils, unaccustomed to work with the hand, while engaged in this work,
forgot the correct standard of dimensions, both as to the eye and hand,
and that Father Apennine and his enormous muscles made them spoil a
number of statues. The greatest difficulty in the workmanship was to
impress on the mass, the character of monumental durability. The artist
has succeeded in uniting the rules of the statuary with those of
construction, in combining the beauty of the one with the solidity of
the other. All the parts refer to a common center of gravity, and the
members are arranged so as to serve for a scaffolding to the body,
without impairing its dignity or magnitude. The colossal statues of the
ancients may have suggested the idea of this configuration, or as before
hinted, the artist may have aimed to represent the Jupiter Pluvius.
However, it seems probable that Poussin, in his painting of the plains
of Sicily, has, from this, formed his Polyphemus, seated on the summit
of a lofty rock. From the beauty of its proportions, and skill in the
execution, all artists who have to work on colossal figures, ought to
cherish the preservation of this, as an imposing object, that can not be
too profoundly studied.


           THE LEANING, OR HANGING TOWER OF PISA, IN TUSCANY.

This celebrated tower, a view of which is given in the cut below,
likewise called the Campanile, on account of its having been erected for
the purpose of containing bells, stands in a square close to the
cathedral of Pisa. It is built entirely of white marble, and is a
beautiful cylinder of eight stories, each adorned with a round of
columns, rising one above another. It inclines so far on one side from
the perpendicular, that dropping a plummet from the top, which is one
hundred and eighty-eight feet in hight, it falls sixteen feet from the
base. Much pains have been taken by connoisseurs to prove that this was
done purposely by the architect; but it is evident that the inclination
has proceeded from another cause, namely, from an accidental subsidence
of the foundation on that side. The pillars are there considerably sunk;
and this is also the case with the very threshold, which shows that the
position of the building is accidental, caused by the settling of the
ground on one side, and not, as some think, by the ambition of the
architect, endeavoring to show how far he could with safety deviate from
the perpendicular, and thus display a novel specimen of his art; for had
this been his design, he would have shortened the pilasters on that
side, so as to exhibit them entire, without the appearance of sinking.

[Illustration: THE LEANING TOWER AT PISA]

This tower, from its singular appearance and position, has attracted the
notice of all travelers passing near Pisa, who, of course, fail not to
visit it. We give the impressions of two of these: Professor Silliman,
who saw it in 1851; and Mr. Hillard, who was there at a still later
date. The former says, “This structure has excited so much surprise, and
been seen with such deep interest by thousands of travelers for more
than six hundred years, that it is almost universally known, and it is
not difficult for one who has not seen it to form a clear and distinct
conception of it. Still, on approaching the tower, you are strongly
impressed by its grandeur and beauty; and when you ascend it, you obtain
an almost overwhelming conception of its majesty; although it is
perfectly safe; and if you do not feel apprehension that it will fall,
you may not be able to keep that idea quite out of your mind. The hight
of the leaning tower is one hundred and seventy-eight feet, the
thickness of the wall ten feet, and the diameter is fifty feet at the
base. It is composed of eight stories, all adorned by columns and
arches. Its form is slightly conical. It is ascended by three hundred
and thirty very easy steps, very well lighted, and it is a pleasant
journey to the top. There are seven bells in this grand belfry; they
were rung while we were near, and the sound is very soft and musical,
especially of the great bell, which weighs twelve thousand pounds, and
is placed upon the side of the tower, opposite to that which overhangs.
It was this bell which was formerly used to give notice of public
executions. The leaning of the tower of Pisa was evidently caused by
unequal subsidence of the ground; and it is obvious that the architect,
as the work rose, before the tower was half up, perceived it, and he
endeavored to counteract it as far as possible by balancing his
materials. After a particular hight, the columns are higher on the
leaning side, and, of course, shorter on the other. The builder appeared
to be aiming to bring the upper part of the tower into a vertical
position, although he did not succeed. It is about thirteen or fourteen
feet beyond the vertical; but the center of gravity still falls within
the base; and as the blocks of stone, being now firmly united by cement,
can not slide upon each other, they, in fact, form one mass. The walls
are, moreover, fortified by iron bars, and it is not probable that
anything short of an earthquake can produce its downfall. I can not
think with some, that it requires strong nerves to ascend the leaning
tower of Pisa. We ascended with a perfect consciousness of security, and
it is certain that were it filled in every story by an armed host, it
would not quiver or vibrate. The view from the summit of the tower is
most splendid. The beautiful city is at your feet, and you are in the
midst of it. The Mediterranean is in the horizon, Leghorn is visible in
the distance, the Arno shows its windings, here and there, and a rich
plain in full cultivation reaches far inland to the lofty Apennines, in
the vicinity of Lucca. It is said, that, in clear weather, Corsica may
be discerned. This tower is one of the most beautiful objects in Italy,
and one would never be tired with looking at it or from it; so beautiful
is it, that its leaning becomes a mere incident, interesting indeed, but
the tower possesses commanding attractions independently of this
circumstance. We can not descend from it without remembering that here
Galileo made his decisive experiments upon the law of the descent of
falling bodies, and upon the vibration of the pendulum. His great name
is associated with the permanent glory of his country, and will be
honored to the end of time, while his persecutors are remembered only to
be despised and detested.”

Mr. Hillard, the other tourist to whom we have alluded, says, “On a
bright, sunny morning, I first saw the leaning tower of Pisa. This piece
of architectural eccentricity was, and I suppose is, one of the
common-places of geography, and is put into the same educational
state-room with the wall of China, the great tun of Heidelberg, and the
natural bridge of Virginia. I can not recall the time when its name was
not familiar to me; and now, here it was, bodily before me; no vision,
no delusion, but a very decided fact, with a most undeniable inclination
on one side; so much so, that a nervous person would not sleep soundly
in the house that stands under its lee, on a windy night. This singular
structure is simply a campanile, or bell-tower, appurtenant to the
cathedral, as is the general custom in Italy. It is not merely quaint,
but beautiful; that is, take away the quaintness, and the beauty will
remain. It is built of white marble, wonderfully fresh and pure, when we
remember that nearly seven centuries have swept over it. I will not
describe it, nor give its dimensions, for these may be found in every
guide-book, and nearly every book of travels; nor will I condense the
arguments which have been called forth by the question, whether the
inclination be accidental or designed. To one who has been on the spot,
and observed the spongy nature of the soil, as evidenced by the slight
subsidence of the cathedral, there is really no room for argument or
doubt. The ascent is very easy and gradual. The summit is secured by
double rails, and the inclination is less perceptible when on the top
than when it is observed from the ground. There is no peculiar sense of
danger to interfere with the full enjoyment of the beauty of the view,
which embraces mountain and plain, land and sea; a combination at once
varied, extensive and picturesque. This was my first sight of the
Mediterranean, whose blue waters blended in the distant horizon with the
blue of the sky. To the eye, it was but common water reflecting the
universal sky; but a man must be very insensible, not to recognize
peculiar elements in his first view of that many-nationed sea, upon
whose shores so much of the poetry and history of the world has grown.”


                         THE COLISEUM AT ROME.

On approaching the majestic ruins of this vast amphitheater, the most
stupendous work of the kind antiquity can boast, a sweet and gently
moving astonishment is the first sensation which seizes the beholder;
and soon afterward the grand spectacle swims before him like a cloud. To
give an adequate idea of this sublime building, is a task to which the
pen is unequal: it must be seen to be duly appreciated. It is upward of
sixteen hundred feet in circumference, and of such an elevation that it
has been justly observed by a writer, (Ammiamus,) “the human eye
scarcely measures its hight.” Nearly the one-half of the external
circuit still remains, consisting of four tiers of arcades, adorned with
columns of four orders, the Doric, Ionian, Corinthian, and composite.
Its extent, as well as its elevation, may be estimated by the number of
spectators it contained, amounting, according to some accounts, to
eighty thousand, and agreeably to others, to one hundred thousand.

Thirty thousand captive Jews are said to have been engaged by Vespasian,
whose name it occasionally bears, in the construction of this vast
edifice; and they have not discredited their forefathers, the builders
of Solomon’s temple, by the performance. It was not finished, however,
until the reign of his son Titus, who, on the first day of its being
opened, introduced into the arena not less than five thousand, or,
according to Dio Cassius, nine thousand wild beasts, between whom, and
the primitive Christians held captive by the Romans, combats were
fought. At the conclusion of this cruel spectacle the whole place was
put under water, and two fleets, named the Corcyrian and the Corinthian,
represented a naval engagement. To render the vapor from such a
multitude of persons less noxious, sweet-scented water, and frequently
wine mixed with saffron, was showered down from a grated work above, on
the heads of the spectators.

The Roman emperors who succeeded Titus were careful of the preservation
of this superb edifice: even the voluptuous Heliogabalus caused it to be
repaired after a great fire. The rude Goths, who sacked the city of
Rome, were contented with despoiling it of its internal ornaments, but
respected the structure itself. The Christians, however, through an
excess of zeal, have not been satisfied with allowing it gradually to
decay. Pope Paul II. had as much of it leveled as was necessary to
furnish materials for building the palace of St. Mark, and his
pernicious example was imitated by Cardinal Riario, in the construction
of what is now called the Chancery. Lastly, a portion of it was employed
by Pope Paul III. in the erection of the palace Farnese. Notwithstanding
all these dilapidations, there still exists enough of it to inspire the
spectator with awe. Immense masses appear fastened to and upon one
another without any mortar or cement; and these alone, from their
structure, are calculated for a duration of many thousands of years.
Occasionally, where the destroyers have not effectually attained their
object, the half-loosened masses appear to be holden in the air, as if
by some invisible power; for the wide interstices among them leave no
other support than their joints, which seem every moment as if about to
yield unavoidably to the superior force of gravitation. “They will
fall;” “they must fall;” “they are falling;” is, and has been the
language of all beholders during the vast periods through which this
stupendous edifice has thus hung together in the air.

[Illustration: THE COLISEUM AT ROME.]

Silliman, speaking of the Coliseum, says, “It is the most magnificent
and imposing monument of ancient Rome. After all the spoliation it has
suffered for many centuries, by which two-thirds of its materials have
been plundered, to build palaces and other structures, it still stands a
stupendous ruin, solemn, awful, and even in desolation beautiful. Its
position is very near to the forum, and we pass to it through the arch
of Titus. We felicitate ourselves that we saw the almost perfect
amphitheater at Nismes, as from that, and even from the less perfect one
at Arles, we obtained those strong and correct impressions, which have
enabled us more justly to appreciate the gigantic ruin, which still
towers in venerable majesty, above both the Rome of the Cæsars, and the
Rome of the popes. The Coliseum was begun A. D. 73, by Vespasian, and
finished by Titus, A. D. 80, ten years after the conquest of Jerusalem.
Church tradition states that its architect was Gaudentius, a Christian
martyr, and that some twelve thousand captive Jews and Christians were
employed in its construction. It is built chiefly of travertine,
although there are large quantities of bricks and tufa in the structure.
Its form is elliptical: there are four stories adorned by columns: the
lower is Doric, thirty feet high: the second is Ionic, thirty-three feet
high; the third, Corinthian, fifty-four feet, and above this, was the
frieze and cornice. The hight of the outer wall was one hundred and
fifty-seven English feet. The longer axis, walls included, was six
hundred and twenty feet; the shorter, five hundred and thirteen;
circumference, seventeen hundred and seventy feet; the arena, two
hundred and eighty-seven feet long and a hundred and eighty feet broad.
The superficial area was nearly six acres. The arches were numbered,
externally, from one to eighty. One arch is not numbered, and this is
believed to have been the private entrance of the emperor. There were,
within the amphitheater, four groups of seats, corresponding, as at
Nismes, to the different orders of people. The seats could receive
eighty-seven thousand persons, or one hundred and ten thousand,
including those who stood. The interior has been very much despoiled,
and the seats are almost ruined; but a staircase has been constructed,
by which we ascended securely to the top of the building, and enjoyed a
grand view, not only by day, but by a full moon. Byron’s splendid
description in Manfred, does it no more than justice.”

The building, as may be seen in the cut on the preceding page, is much
decayed; and it is, also, “deformed by innumerable holes on the outside,
believed to have been produced by the extraction of the dowels of
bronze, which were originally placed in the joints to keep the stones in
place. At the dedication of the amphitheater by Titus, five thousand, or
according to some, nine thousand wild beasts were slaughtered, and the
savage exhibition went on during one hundred days. On the occasion of
the triumph of Trajan over the Dacians, the shows were continued one
hundred and twenty-three days; eleven thousand animals were slain, and
one thousand gladiators matched against each other. Besides malefactors,
captives and slaves, freeborn citizens, even those of noble birth, hired
themselves as gladiators; and women volunteered on the arena, to exhibit
their skill in murder. The barbarous gladiatorial games were continued
during four hundred years; the last show of the wild beasts was under
Theodoric, and these brutal entertainments were abolished by Honorius.”


                             THE PANTHEON.

The Pantheon, says a late tourist, “is the most perfect, as a whole, of
all the structures which have come down to us from ancient Rome. The
invasion of time alone would not have injured it materially, and,
notwithstanding the spoliations of popes and other depredators, it still
remains a grand and beautiful building. It stands in a dirty,
disagreeable herb market, and the accumulations of earth and rubbish
have almost entirely covered its lofty steps, which were seven in
number, until its floor is now nearly on a level with the street. Its
dome was covered with gilt bronze, and its portico lined with the same
metal, which was plundered to be cast for the pillars and other parts of
the _baldacchino_ in St. Peter’s. On this occasion, four hundred and
fifty thousand pounds were taken. The emperor Constans II. had
previously, in 657, stripped the roof, and plundered the silver from the
interior of the dome. He destined these things for the ornament of his
imperial palace at Constantinople; but being murdered at Syracuse, on
his return, the plunder was borne to Alexandria. It was, originally, the
spoils of Egypt after the battle of Actium, and now returned to Egypt
again. The external facings of polished marble, have also been torn off;
but although thus despoiled, the Pantheon is still magnificent,
notwithstanding that the fires have often heated it, the overflowing
Tiber has deluged its floor, and the rains have poured in at the only
opening, which is in the dome. This is a circular hole in the center of
the dome, twenty-eight feet in diameter, and is said to have been once
glazed. The rich marble facings and magnificent columns of the interior,
still remain. The beautiful columns are of polished granite and
porphyry. The niches, originally filled by the statues of the pagan
gods, have not been disturbed; but they are now occupied by saints, and
virgins, and other symbols of Catholic worship. The interior is one vast
room, one hundred and forty-three feet in diameter, exclusive of the
walls, which are twenty feet thick, and it is of the same hight, one
hundred and forty-three feet: the dome occupies one-half of the hight.
It is not inaptly illustrated by the rotunda of the Capitol at
Washington, which, although smaller, is of the same form. When in the
Roman Pantheon, you look up to its sky-lighted dome, there is an
impression of simple grandeur which even St. Peter’s does not produce:

             “‘Simple, erect, severe, austere, sublime—
             Shrine of all saints, and temple of all gods.’

“An inscription on the frieze records that the Pantheon was erected by
Agrippa, B. C. _anno_ 26; and another inscription on the architrave
records its subsequent restoration by Septimius Severus. In 608,
Boniface obtained from the emperor Phocas permission to consecrate the
Pantheon as a Christian church, which, doubtless, saved it from
destruction. How much is it to be regretted that a similar protection
had not saved the Coliseum and other precious works, whose ruins bear
testimony to the misdirected zeal of the Christian church in early ages.
The portico is one hundred and ten feet long and forty-four deep. It
contains sixteen Corinthian monolithic columns of oriental granite,
forty six and one-half feet high and five feet in diameter, with
capitals and bases of Greek marble. The pediment still shows where the
figures in bass-relief were attached.

“The magnificent bronze doors are thirty-nine feet high, and the entire
opening is nineteen wide. It is believed that they are the original
doors erected by Agrippa. No doubt they would have been used for the
decoration of St. Peter’s, had not the Pantheon been consecrated as a
church. The interior cornice at the bottom of the dome has been
perfectly preserved, with its rich sculptures. The pavement of the
Pantheon is of porphyry, alternating with other polished stones in
geometric figures. Some antiquarians have argued that the Pantheon was
originally an appendage of the baths of Agrippa, and that the portico
was of subsequent construction, when the building was converted into a
temple. However this may be, it is one of the most interesting
structures of ancient or modern times; and had it not been most
shamefully robbed it would have stood to-day perfect in beauty as it was
when Christ died, and when Paul preached and suffered in Rome. We bent
with deep interest over the grave of Raphael, whose remains still
slumber beneath the pavement of the Pantheon, marked only by a humble
slab of marble level with the floor. It is well known that until 1833
his place of interment was only matter of conjecture; in that year,
owing to unexpected evidence, the present grave was opened in presence
of the pope and numerous artists. The skull was of a singularly fine
form; and its discovery spoiled the speculations of the phrenologists on
another skull in the academy of St. Luke’s, which had before been
supposed to be that of the great painter.”


                     ROMAN AMPHITHEATER AT NISMES.

Nismes, anciently Nemausis, was formerly a flourishing colony of Romans,
established by Augustus Cæsar, after the battle of Actium. Among its
splendid monuments of antiquity, the amphitheater, being infinitely
better preserved than those of Rome and Verona, is the finest monument
of the kind now extant. It was built in the reign of Antonius Pius, who
contributed a large sum of money toward its erection. It is of an oval
figure, one thousand and eighty feet in circumference, sufficiently
capacious to contain twenty thousand spectators. The architecture is of
the Tuscan order, sixty feet high, composed of two open galleries, built
one over another, consisting each of sixty arcades. The entrance into
the arena was by four great gates, with porticos; and the seats, of
which there were thirty-two rows, sufficient to contain some twenty-five
thousand people, rising one above another, consisted of great blocks of
stone, many of which still remain. Over the north gate, appear two
bulls, in alto-relievo, extremely well executed, emblems which,
according to the usage of the Romans, signified that the amphitheater
was erected at the expense of the people. In other parts are heads,
busts, and other sculptures in bass-relief.

This magnificent structure stands in the lower part of the city, and
strikes the spectator with awe and veneration. The external architecture
is almost entire in its whole circuit. It was fortified as a citadel by
the Visigoths, in the beginning of the sixth century: they raised within
it a castle, two towers of which are still extant, and surrounded it
with a broad and deep moat, which was filled up in the thirteenth
century. In all the subsequent wars to which the city of Nismes was
exposed, it served as the last refuge of the citizens, and sustained a
great number of successive attacks; so that its fine preservation is
almost miraculous.

Silliman says of this amphitheater, that it gives a very exact idea of
the Coliseum at Rome, though it is of course smaller. “It is built,” he
adds, “of limestone in immense blocks, laid in courses with perfect
regularity and without mortar. Mortise holes in the center of the upper
surface of each block show that the Romans employed the same means still
in use, to raise and handle large masses of stone. The accuracy of the
masonry seems the more remarkable if we consider the elliptical form of
the structure, making all the vertical joints converge to the foci of
the ellipse. In one place we saw a line of light through a joint of this
sort where the wall was at least four feet thick. The passages, of
course, all expand outward also, and thus admit of a speedy evacuation
of the amphitheater through its sixty _vomitoriæ_. The dimensions of
this ellipse are four hundred and thirty-seven by three hundred and
twenty-two feet. By walking deliberately around the structure, these
dimensions are more readily realized than by a numerical statement: the
circuit is a quarter of a mile. The cornice was decorated with carving
and finished with a frieze; except in the portion corresponding to nine
or ten arches, the capping and cornice are complete around the entire
circuit. In the part where the cornice is deficient, the Saracens, more
than eleven hundred years ago, erected two towers, which were destroyed
by Charles Martel, and fire applied by him disfigured the amphitheater.
As it was all of stone he could not destroy it, but the wood placed in
its arches and corridors burned as in a furnace. He wished to destroy
the building, which had often been used as a fortress in the numerous
wars that followed the downfall of the Roman empire. He succeeded only
in blackening it with smoke which remains to this day. The heat,
however, caused some portions of the limestone to flake off; but very
little progress was made toward the destruction of the amphitheater. The
building is national property, and the French government has restored
many of the arches, laid anew the pavements, and has taken precautions
to guard against further dilapidation. The exterior of the building is,
indeed, somewhat corroded by time, but had war and violence been
restrained, this noble monument of antiquity would have remained, an
architectural wonder to all future ages. Many of the rows of marble
seats remain entire, and enable the observer perfectly to understand the
whole arrangement. The emperor and his household entered by a lower and
special corridor, and the vestal virgins by a corresponding opening on
the opposite side. The senators and patricians entered higher up, while
the plebeians, entering still higher, occupied the more elevated
positions, and the slaves the uppermost of all. The police also had
their appointed place.

“Projecting outward from the cornice at regular intervals were stones,
pierced with holes six inches or more in diameter, through which passed
poles to sustain the awning, the lower ends of the poles being sustained
by corbel stones projecting from the wall below. The amphitheater had no
other covering but the awning, and this, on occasions of the use of the
building for public games, was stretched upon ropes crossing from side
to side of the arena. This covering secured the spectators from sun and
rain, while it permitted free ventilation. The gladiators entered on one
side of the arena and the wild beasts on the other, and probably the
same rule prevailed when gladiator was to contend with gladiator. Here
man fought his fellow-man, or with the fierce wild beast, to pamper the
cruel appetite for blood. Strange feelings of awe and grandeur are
excited by seeing the vast space which was so often filled with human
beings, and one’s mind runs wild with excitement when he sees in
imagination, the lion’s eye glancing at the grating until he was
enlarged to spring upon his victim. The weeds and grass now grow among
the seats, and green-sward covers the once ensanguined arena. The little
lizards leap from stone to stone, and their brief generations are now
the sole tenants of these ancient piles.”


                            TRAJAN’S PILLAR.

This historical column was erected at Rome by the emperor Trajan to
commemorate his victories over the Dacians, and is considered the
masterpiece of the splendid monuments of art elevated by that emperor in
the Roman capital. Its celebrity is chiefly owing to the beautifully
wrought bass-reliefs, containing about two thousand figures, with which
it is ornamented. It stands in the middle of a square, to form which, a
hill, one hundred and forty feet in hight, was leveled; and was
intended, as appears by the inscription on its base, both as a tomb for
the emperor, and to display the hight of the hill, which had thus with
incredible labor, been reduced to a plane surface. It was erected in the
year 114 of the Christian era; and the emperor Constantine, two
centuries and a half afterward, regarded it as the most magnificent
structure by which Rome was even at that time embellished. This pillar
is built of white marble, its base consisting of twelve stones of
enormous size, being raised on a socle, or foot of eight steps; and
within it is a staircase illuminated by forty-four windows. Its hight,
equaling that of the hill which had been leveled, to give place to the
large square called the _Forum Romanum_, is one hundred and forty feet,
being thirty-five feet less elevated than the Antonine column.


                          COLUMN OF ANTONINE.

This grand column is one of the most conspicuous monuments of ancient
Rome. It is near the present post-office, in a busy, populous square—the
Piazza Colonna—in the midst of the modern city. The hight of the column
of Antonine is one hundred and sixty-eight feet; diameter, eleven and
one-half; the pedestal is twenty-five feet and eight inches high. It was
erected by the senate and people of Rome to Marcus Aurelius Antoninus,
A. D. 174. Bass-reliefs, as in Trajan’s column, run spirally around the
monument, representing military movements and victories. One of the
reliefs represents Jupiter as dropping rain from his extended arms. This
has been supposed to allude to the effect attributed to the prayers of
the Christian legion from Mytilene, in the army of the emperor, who, at
his request, prayed for rain when there was a great drought. The column
is composed of pieces of white marble, and in the interior are one
hundred and ninety steps lighted by forty-two loopholes. By a strange
incongruity, a statue of St. Paul, ten feet high, has been made to
replace the emperor on the top of the column. This was done by Sixtus V.
It is said that the drawn sword which the apostle holds in his hand
proves a conductor to the lightning, and that the column has been
several times injured.


                        MAISON CARRE, AT NISMES.

If the amphitheater of Nismes strikes the spectator with an idea of
greatness and sublimity, the Maison Carré enchants him with the most
exquisite beauties of architecture and sculpture. This fine structure,
as is evidenced by the inscription discovered on its front, was built by
the inhabitants of Nismes, in honor of Caius Cæsar, and Lucius Cæsar,
grandchildren of Augustus, by his daughter Julia, the wife of Agrippa.
It stands upon a pediment six feet high, is eighty-two feet long,
thirty-five broad, and thirty-seven in hight, without reckoning the
pediment. The body of it is adorned with twenty columns engaged in the
wall; and the peristyle, which is open, with ten detached pillars that
support the entablature. They are all of the Corinthian order, fluted
and embellished with capitals of the most exquisite sculpture: the
frieze and cornice are much admired, and the foliage is esteemed
inimitable. The proportions of the building are so happily blended, as
to give it an air of majesty and grandeur, which the most indifferent
spectator can not behold without emotion. To enjoy these beauties, it is
not necessary to be a connoisseur in architecture: they are indeed so
exquisite that they may be visited with a fresh appetite for years
together. What renders them still more interesting is, that they are
entire, and very little affected, either by the ravages of time, or the
havoc of war. Cardinal Alberoni declared this elegant structure to be a
jewel which deserved a cover of gold to preserve it from external
injuries. An Italian painter, perceiving a small part of the roof
repaired by modern French masonry, tore his hair, and exclaimed in a
rage, “Zounds! what do I see? Harlequin’s hat on the head of Augustus!”
In its general architectural effect, as well as in all its details of
sculpture and ornament, the Maison Carré of Nismes is ravishingly
beautiful, and can not be paralleled by any structure of ancient or
modern times. That which most excites the astonishment of the admiring
spectator, is to see it standing entire, like the effect of enchantment,
after such a succession of ages, subjected as several of them were, to
the ravages of the barbarians who overran the most interesting parts of
Europe.

In the progress of many centuries, the Maison Carré has been used as a
Christian church, and also for many ordinary purposes, some of them of
the lowest character. The fine Corinthian columns of this building have
been much corroded by time, and two that were contiguous, were mutilated
in the flutings to make more room for the passage of a farmer’s cart
when the temple was used as a barn or stable; and, to afford more
accommodations, walls were built up between the columns of the portico.
In the eleventh century it was used as town-house, or _hôtel de ville_.
When attached to the Augustine convent it was employed as a sepulcher;
and in the days of terror, the revolutionary tribunal held its meetings
here. The building is at present occupied as a museum. It contains many
interesting objects, especially Roman antiquities: the pictures are not
remarkable. There is in it a beautiful mosaic pavement taken up entire
from a Roman house. This temple is supposed to have been only the center
of a much larger building, extending with wings and long colonnades to
the right and left, whose foundations have been discovered.


                           THE PONT DU GARD.

This celebrated Roman monument is distant about three leagues from the
city of Nismes. Instead of finding it in a ruinous condition, as he
might reasonably have expected, the traveler, on approaching it, is
agreeably disappointed when he perceives that it looks as fresh as a
modern bridge of a few years’ standing. The climate is either so pure
and dry, or the freestone with which it is built is so hard, that the
very angles of the stones remain as acute as if they had been recently
cut. A few of them have, indeed, dropped out of the arches; but the
whole is admirably preserved, and presents the eye with a piece of
architecture, so unaffectedly elegant, so simple, and, at the same time,
so majestic, that it defies the most phlegmatic spectator to view it
without admiration. It was raised in the Augustan age, by the Roman
colony of Nismes, to convey a stream of water between two mountains, for
the use of that city. By means of it the arena of the amphitheater could
be flooded for the _naumachiæ_. It stands over the river Gardon, a
beautiful pastoral stream, brawling among rocks which form a number of
pretty natural cascades, and overshadowed on each side by trees and
shrubs, which add greatly to the rural beauties of the scene.

This elegant structure consists of three bridges, or tiers of arches,
one above another; the first of six, the second of eleven, and the third
of thirty-six arches. The hight, comprehending the aqueduct on the top,
is one hundred and seventy-four feet and three inches, and the length,
between the two mountains, which it unites, is seven hundred and
twenty-three feet. The order of the architecture is Tuscan; but its
symmetry is inconceivable. By scooping the bases of the pilasters of the
second tier of arches, a passage was made for foot-travelers; but
although the ancients far excelled the moderns in point of beauty and
magnificence, they certainly fell short of them in point of convenience.
The inhabitants of Avignon have, in this particular, improved the Roman
work by a new bridge by apposition, constructed on the same plan with
that of the lower tier of arches, of which indeed it seems to be a part,
affording a broad and commodious passage over the river, to horses and
carriages. The aqueduct for the continuance of which this superb work
was raised, conveyed a stream of pure water from the fountain of Eure,
near the city of Uzes, and extended nearly six leagues in length.

[Illustration: ANCIENT ROMAN AQUEDUCT.]


                      ANCIENT AQUEDUCT NEAR ROME.

In this connection, we may notice an ancient Roman aqueduct, the arches
of which may still be seen by the tourist as he approaches the “eternal
city;” and a view of which is given in the cut on the next page. It
reminds us, in its general outlines, of the Pont du Gard which has just
been described, except that the latter has three tiers of arches while
this has but two; and the styles of architecture in the two are
different. These immense structures, carried for miles over valleys and
through hills, were reared by the ancients at the cost of vast expense
and labor, that they might supply themselves with pure water for
domestic and public uses. And their ruins still bear witness to the
gigantic scale on which such works were planned and completed, at an age
and among a people that we are accustomed to think of as far inferior to
our own.


                            THE ROMAN FORUM.

There has been much discussion as to the form and extent of the Roman
forum, and as to the use of some of the structures whose ruins are found
within its area. Sometimes the word _forum_ was applied to
market-places—_forum boarium_, _fora venalia_, as well as to places
where justice was administered, _fora civilia_. The great Roman Forum at
the foot of the Capitol, and contiguous to the Palatine hill, was, no
doubt, intended by Romulus for the assemblies of the people. It was
adorned with an immense number of Grecian statues, among which were
twelve gilt statues of the principal gods. Numerous relics of its former
grandeur now fill the _campo vaccino_—broken porticos, ruined arches,
single columns, and the remains of temples. To each of these belongs a
story of curious antiquarian research. Without wishing to follow the
beaten path of all travelers, it is impossible to pass these
world-renowned memorials of a by-gone age without some brief notice. One
of these is


                          THE ARCH OF SEVERUS.

The arch of Septimius Severus stands in the Forum, on the eastern front
of the Capitol. The soil and rubbish there accumulated was fifteen feet
deep, but the ground was excavated under Napoleon, and the whole of this
fine monument was thus brought into view. It was erected A. D. 205, by
the senate and people of Rome, in honor of the emperor and his sons, on
account of their conquests of the Parthians and Persians. This is
recorded upon the monument, in an inscription which is still perfectly
legible. The monument was constructed entirely of Grecian marble. There
is a large and lofty middle arch, and there are two lateral arches. In
one of the columns is a staircase of fifty steps, leading to the top, on
which there was originally a car drawn by six horses, containing the
figures of the emperor and of his two sons, Geta and Caracalla. Geta was
murdered by his brother, and the inscription which alluded to both was
mutilated by Caracalla, so as to leave out the name of Geta; this
obliteration is obvious on inspection. There are on the panels many
figures in high relief, representing deeds of war, in which the Romans
so much delighted.


                           THE ARCH OF TITUS.

This, which is one of the most beautiful of the Roman arches, and a view
of which is given in the cut on the next page, was erected to
commemorate the conquest of Jerusalem by Titus. It stands at the eastern
end of the Forum, and the _via sacra_ passes beneath it. It is built of
Grecian marble, and has only a single arch, with fluted columns on each
side. On the side toward the Forum there is a mutilated figure of
Victory standing over the arch. The side toward the Coliseum is the most
perfect; and nearly all the cornice and the antæ are preserved. This
arch has a peculiar interest attached to it, because it illustrates
Scripture history. On one of the bass-reliefs, inside of the arch, a
procession are bearing the spoils of the temple—the golden candlestick
and the silver trumpets—the only authentic representations of those
sacred objects, and perfectly corresponding with the description given
by Josephus. The seven-branched candlestick itself was lost in the
Tiber, and now reposes amidst its yellow sands.

[Illustration: THE ARCH OF TITUS.]


                              THE CAPITOL.

The modern Capitol is erected on the foundation of the ancient. The huge
blocks of peperino stone which underlie the present Capitol rise from
the area of the Forum, far below; and it is quite obvious that the
modern structure is superimposed. The Capitol hill is the highest ground
in old Rome; and the summit of its tower is, as already observed, higher
than any other building in Rome east of the Tiber. We ascend to the
present Capitol from the west, by a series of marble steps. On the right
and left, at the top of the stairs, are antique equestrian and colossal
statues of Castor and Pollux, mounted upon high pedestals. In the middle
of the area, in front of the Capitol, is the colossal equestrian statue
believed to be that of Marcus Aurelius. It is in bronze, and is a most
noble specimen of ancient art. The emperor is truly imperial, and the
horse is admirable; it can not be exceeded in symmetry and grandeur.
This statue, had it not been mistaken for a statue of Constantine, would
have shared the fate of other productions of pagan art. It was
originally gilded, and the gold is still visible upon it here and there.
The head and neck of the horse are copied by modern sculptors, as being
the best specimens of the form of this part of the noble animal in
existence.


                       THE MUSEUM OF THE CAPITOL.

This museum is situated in two wings, on the right and left of the
Capitoline hill. They do not form a part of the same structure. It is
exceedingly instructive, as the statues are very numerous; and we can
not doubt that they exhibit faithfully the persons of the ancient
Romans, with their features and costumes. Many of the most distinguished
Roman emperors, poets, historians, and orators, are represented in
marble or bronze; Trajan, Caligula, Hadrian, Nero, Nerva, Julius Cæsar
and his murderer Brutus, Cicero, Virgil, Caracalla, and a multitude
more. Some of the statues are colossal. There are several parts of an
immense statue of Nero, which was designed to be one hundred and fifty
feet high, and to rival in altitude the Coliseum itself. In crime and
infamy, he was indeed a colossus. His countenance has a groveling,
animal expression, very strongly marked in a bust contained in a private
museum, where, as if to correspond with the blackness of his character,
he is sculptured in basalt, or black marble.

“We saw in the museum of the Capitol,” says Professor Silliman, “the
original of that bust of Cicero, which represents him as a large man
with a full face and round head, the very reverse of the bust formerly
said to be Cicero’s, and which I saw in 1805 in the Earl of Pembroke’s
palace, near Salisbury, England. That bust made Cicero’s features lean,
muscular, and sharp, with a wart on the right cheek, near the nose.
Artists and antiquaries have no doubt, I believe, of the authenticity of
the bust in the Capitol, which bears his name, and was found in a villa
of Mecænas. An excellent copy of this bust, by our countryman, Crawford,
is in the Trumbull gallery in Yale college, along with copies by the
same artist of the busts of Demosthenes and Homer, the originals of
which we saw in the Capitol museum. In this museum is also to be seen
the celebrated Venus of the Capitol, to which a separate saloon is
devoted. The dying Gladiator is in a room with other noble antique
statues. Byron has completely embalmed this figure in his memorable
description in the fifth canto of Childe Harold’s pilgrimage. It is
probable that the artist himself, could he have read the passage, would
have confessed that it expressed his sentiment even more perfectly than
the marble. Any one who has traversed Italy with Byron in his hand, will
readily appreciate not only the wonderful fidelity of his descriptions,
but that all other language seems poverty-stricken and unmeaning when
compared with the masterly touches by which he has painted the various
monuments of antiquity which adorn his pictured page. For example,
besides the passage just alluded to, we have his tomb of Cecilia
Metella, the Thunder-stricken Nurse of Rome! the Coliseum, the Pantheon,
and St. Peter’s, &c. The original bronze wolf, representing the early
nursing of Romulus and Remus, is in the Capitol museum. The little
urchins, also in bronze, are eagerly drawing from the savage wet-nurse
the means of life. This fable affords not an unapt symbol of the
ferocious disposition of Romulus, who slew his brother, and of most of
the Roman people, of whatever rank, to whom human blood seems to have
been a delightful nectar. There has been much discussion as to the
antiquity of this wolf. It appears probable that this is the image
referred to by Cicero; and it bears marks of having been struck by
lightning, according to tradition. There is a large piece of metal torn
out of one of the hind legs of the wolf, and this is stated by tradition
to have happened from a thunder-stroke, (to which, of course, Byron
alludes in his immortal lines,) which fell upon the wolf the moment when
it was announced in the Capitol that Julius Cæsar was dead.”


                          ST. PETER’S OF ROME.

The piazza of this masterpiece of architecture, a view of which as seen
from the Tiber is given in the cut on the next page, is altogether
sublime. The double colonnade on each side, extending in a semicircular
sweep, the stupendous Egyptian obelisk, the two fountains, the portico,
and the admirable façade of the church, form such an assemblage of
magnificent objects, as can not fail to impress the mind with awe and
admiration. The church appears in the background, and on each side is a
row of quadruple arches, resting on two hundred and eighty-four pillars,
and eighty-eight pilasters: these arches support one hundred and
ninety-two statues, twelve feet in hight. The two noble fountains throw
a mass of water to the hight of nine feet, from which it falls in a very
picturesque manner, and adds greatly to the beauty of the scene. In the
center is the fine obelisk.

At the first entrance into St. Peter’s, the effect is not so striking as
might be expected: it enlarges itself, however, insensibly on all sides,
and improves on the eye every moment. The proportions are so accurately
observed, that each of the parts are seen to an equal advantage, without
distinguishing itself above the rest. It appears neither extremely high,
nor long, nor broad, because a just equality is preserved throughout.
Although every object in this church is admirable, the most astonishing
part of it is the cupola. On ascending to it, the spectator is surprised
to find, that the dome which he sees in the church, is not the same with
the one he had examined without doors, the latter being a kind of case
to the other, and the stairs by which he ascends into the ball lying
between the two. Had there been the outward dome only, it would not have
been seen to advantage by those who are within the church; or had there
been the inward one only, it would scarcely have been seen by those who
are without; and had both been one solid dome of so great a thickness,
the pillars would have been too weak to have supported it.

[Illustration: ST. PETER’S AS SEEN FROM THE TIBER.]

It is not easy to conceive a more glorious architectural display than
the one which presents itself to the spectator who stands beneath the
dome. If he looks upward, he is astonished at the spacious hollow of the
cupola, and has a vault on every side of him, which makes one of the
most beautiful vistas the eye can possibly have to penetrate. To convey
an idea of its magnitude, it will suffice to say, that the hight of the
body of the church, from the ground to the upper part of its ceiling, is
four hundred and thirty-two feet, and that sixteen persons may place
themselves, without inconvenience, in the globular top over the dome,
which is annually lighted, on the twenty-ninth of June, by four thousand
lamps and two thousand fire-pots, presenting a most delightful
spectacle. The vestibule of St. Peter’s is grand and beautiful. Over the
second entrance is a fine mosaic from Giotto, executed in the year 1303;
and at the corners, to the right and left, are the equestrian statues of
Constantine and Charlemagne. Of the five doors leading to the church
itself, one, called the holy door, is generally shut up by brick-work,
and is only opened at the time of the jubilee. The middle gate is of
bronze, with bass-reliefs.

Of the one hundred and thirty statues with which this church is adorned,
that of St. Peter is the most conspicuous: it is said to have been
recast from a bronze statue of Jupiter Capitolinus. One hundred and
twelve lamps are constantly burning around the tomb of this saint; and
the high altar close to it, on which the pope alone reads mass, is
overshadowed by a ceiling, which exceeds in loftiness that of any palace
of Rome. The splendid sacristy was built by Pius VI. But by far the
greatest ornaments of the interior are the excellent works in mosaic,
all copied from the most celebrated pictures, which are thus guarded
from oblivion.

The great and truly awful dome of St. Peter’s is only two feet less in
diameter than that of the Pantheon, being one hundred and thirty-seven
feet; but it exceeds the latter in hight by twenty feet, being one
hundred and fifty-nine feet, besides the lantern, the basis pedestal of
the top, the globular top itself, and the cross above it, which,
collectively, measure one hundred and twenty feet. The roof of the
church is ascended by easy steps; and here the visitor seems to have
entered a small town, for he suddenly finds himself among a number of
houses, which either serve as repositories of implements and materials
for repairing the church, or are inhabited by the workmen. The dome, at
the foot of which he now arrives, appears to be the parish church of
this town; and the inferior domes seem as if intended only for ornaments
to fill up the vacuities. Add to this, that he can not see the streets
of Rome, on account of the surrounding high gallery and its colossal
statues, and the singularity of such a scene may be easily conceived. It
is besides said, that a market is occasionally held here for the aerial
inhabitants.

But although the adventurous stranger is now on the roof, he has still a
great hight to ascend before he reaches the summit of the dome.
Previously to his engaging in this enterprise, he is conducted to the
inside gallery of the dome. From this spot the people within the body of
the church appear like children. The higher he goes, the more
uncomfortable he finds himself, on account of the oblique walls over the
narrow staircase; and he is often compelled to lean with his whole body
quite to one side. Several marble plates are affixed in those walls,
containing the names of the distinguished personages who have had the
courage to ascend to the dome, and even to climb up to the lantern, and
the top. The emperor Joseph II. is twice mentioned; and Paul I. as grand
duke. In some parts, where the stairs are too steep, more commodious
steps of wood have been placed. By these the lantern can be reached with
greater facility; and the view which there waits the visitor, is
magnificent beyond description: _it is an immense panorama, bounded by
the sea_.

Silliman, in his late “Visit to Europe,” adds points of interest with
regard to St. Peter’s not given above, which therefore we quote. “The
interior,” he says, “is beyond description rich and magnificent. It is
said to have cost fifty million dollars. The circumference of each of
the four great pillars which support the dome, is two hundred and
thirty-four feet. The diameter of the dome is one hundred and
ninety-five feet; the hight of the dome to the lantern, is four hundred
and five feet; to the top of the cross, is four hundred and thirty-four
feet. The floor is composed entirely of marble of various colors, and
disposed in ornamental forms; indeed, the whole interior of the church,
the columns and pilasters excepted, is faced with the most beautiful
marble, highly polished; while numerous medallions, exquisite monuments,
and splendid mosaic copies of the best pictures, adorn the interior, and
form an integral part of its walls. The roof, or ceiling, is stuccoed in
sunken squares or panels, richly gilt. There is no part which is not
sumptuously decorated. It seems as if ingenuity, art, taste, talent, and
skill, all the resources of wealth, and of Nature herself, through all
her vast storehouse of materials, had been laid under contribution, to
make St. Peter’s the most glorious of the structures reared by man. With
a pure faith, it would be a temple worthy of the God who created all the
materials with which it is built, and who furnished man with all the
faculties, which have enabled him to rear and adorn this unrivaled
structure, a fit abode, like the glorious fane of Jerusalem, for the
habitation of the spiritual influence of Jehovah. St. Peter’s was one
hundred and seventy-six years in building. Indeed, including all its
vicissitudes, the period was three hundred and fifty years, under
forty-three popes. It was finally dedicated by Urban VIII., November
eighteenth, 1626. The vases for holding holy water serve to give an idea
of the immensity of the building. They are supported by cherubs, which,
on first entering the church, appear like children, but on approaching
them they are found to be six feet high. Another illustration is derived
from the mosaic figures of the four evangelists, with their emblems over
the arches. The pen in the hand of St. Mark is six feet long. Upon the
frieze running round the basis of the dome is this inscription, each
letter of which is six feet long, and yet the writing is only
conveniently legible below: TV ES PETRVS ET SVPER HANC PETRAM AEDIFICABO
ECCLESIAM MEAM ET TIBI DABO CLAVES REGNI.”


                           THE SOIL OF ROME.

In leaving the wonders of Rome, and the city itself, we will quote an
interesting extract from Townsend’s “Tour in Italy,” in 1850. “Many
authors,” he says, “have asserted, as their interpretation of some parts
of the Apocalypse, that Rome will be destroyed by fire from heaven, or
swallowed up by earthquakes, or overwhelmed with destruction by
volcanoes, as the visible punishment of the Almighty, for its popery and
its crimes. I am unwilling, having read so many books on the
interpretation of the prophecy, to deduce any argument of this kind from
the prophecies which are unfulfilled; but I behold everywhere—in Rome,
near Rome, and through the whole region from Rome to Naples—the most
astounding proofs, not merely of the possibility, but the probability
that the whole region of central Italy will one day be destroyed by such
a catastrophe. The soil of Rome is _tufa_, with a volcanic subterranean
action still going on. At Naples the boiling sulphur is to be seen
bubbling near the surface of the earth. When I drew a stick along upon
the ground, the sulphurous smoke followed the indentation; and it would
never surprise me to hear of the utter destruction of the southern
peninsula of Italy. The entire country and district is volcanic. It is
saturated with beds of sulphur and the substrata of destruction. It
seems as certainly prepared for the flames as the wood and coal on the
hearth are prepared for the taper which shall kindle the fire to consume
them. I again read the remarks of Dr. Cumming: ‘Rome,’ he believes, ‘is
to be overthrown by judgment; not to be converted by the agency of the
gospel, nor to be exhausted by political assaults. It is literally to be
consumed by fire.’ Whether he is correct in regarding such an event as
the fulfillment of the prophecies, and the demonstration of the anger of
the Creator against the incorrigible assumption of an erring and
influential church, I know not; but the divine hand alone seems to me to
hold the element of fire in check by a miracle as great as that which
protected the cities of the plain, till the righteous Lot had made his
escape to the mountains.”


                         EDDYSTONE LIGHT-HOUSE.

The Eddystone rocks, on which this celebrated light-house is built, are
situated nearly south-south-west from the middle of Plymouth sound,
being distant from the port of Plymouth nearly fourteen miles, and from
the promontory called Ramshead, about ten miles. They are almost in the
line, but somewhat within it, which joins the Start and the Lizard
points; and as they lie nearly in the direction of vessels coasting up
and down the channel, they were necessarily, before the establishment of
a light-house, very dangerous, and often fatal to ships under such
circumstances. Their situation, likewise, relatively to the bay of
Biscay and the Atlantic ocean, is such that they lie open to the swells
of both from all the south-western points of the compass; which swells
are generally allowed by mariners to be very great and heavy in those
seas, and particularly in the bay of Biscay. It is to be observed, that
the soundings of the sea, from the south-west toward the Eddystone, are
from eighty fathoms to forty, and that in every part, until the rocks
are approached, the sea has a depth of at least thirty fathoms; insomuch
that all the heavy seas from the south-west reach them uncontrolled, and
break on them with the utmost fury.

The force and hight of these seas are increased by the fact that the
rocks stretch across the channel, in a direction north and south, to the
length of above one hundred fathoms, and by their lying in a sloping
manner toward the south-west quarter. This _striving_ of the rocks, as
it is technically called, does not cease at low-water, but still goes on
progressively; so that, at fifty fathoms westward, there are twelve
fathoms of water; neither does it terminate at the distance of a mile.
From this configuration it happens, that the seas are swollen to such a
degree, in storms and heavy gales of wind, as to break on the rocks with
the utmost violence. It is not surprising, therefore, that the dangers
to which navigators were exposed by the Eddystone rocks should have made
a great commercial nation desirous to have a light-house erected on
them. The wonder is that any one should have had sufficient resolution
to undertake its construction. Such a man was, however, found in the
person of Mr. Henry Winstanley, of Littleburgh, in Essex, who, being
furnished with the necessary powers to carry the design into execution,
entered on his undertaking in 1696, and completed it in four years. So
certain was he of the stability of his structure, that he declared it to
be his wish to be in it “during the greatest storm which ever blew under
the face of the heavens.” In this wish he was but too amply gratified;
for while he was there with his workmen and light-keepers, that dreadful
storm began, which raged most violently on the night of the twenty-sixth
of November, 1703; and of all the accounts of the kind with which
history has furnished us, no one has exceeded this in Great Britain, nor
has been more injurious or extensive in its devastations. On the
following morning, when the storm was so much abated, that an inquiry
could be made, whether the light-house had suffered from it, nothing was
to be seen standing, with the exception of some of the large irons by
which the work was fixed on the rock; nor were any of the people, nor
any of the materials of the building ever found afterward.

[Illustration: THE EDDYSTONE LIGHT-HOUSE.]

In 1709, another light-house was built of wood, on a very different
construction, by Mr. John Rudyerd, then a silk-mercer on Ludgate hill.
This very ingenious structure, after having braved the elements for
forty-six years, was burned to the ground in 1755. On the destruction of
this light-house, that excellent mechanic and engineer, Mr. Smeaton, was
selected as the fittest person to build another. He found some
difficulty in persuading the proprietors, that a stone building,
properly constructed, would be in every respect preferable to one of
wood; but having at length convinced them, he turned his thoughts to the
shape which would be most suitable to a building so critically situated.
Reflecting on the structure of the former buildings, it seemed to him a
material improvement to procure, if possible, an enlargement of the
base, without increasing the size of the waist, or that part of the
building placed between the top of the rock and the top of the solid
work. Hence he thought a greater degree of strength and stiffness would
be gained, accompanied with less resistance to the acting power. On this
occasion, the natural figure of the waist, or bole of a large spreading
oak, occurred to our sagacious engineer.

With these very enlightened views, as to the proper form of the
superstructure, Mr. Smeaton began the work on the second of April, 1757,
and completed it on the fourth of August, 1759. Its appearance, as
completed, may be seen in the cut on the preceding page. The rock, which
slopes toward the south-west, is cut into horizontal steps, into which
are dovetailed, and united by a strong cement, Portland stone and
granite. The whole to the hight of thirty-five feet from the foundation,
is a solid body of stones, engrafted into each other, and united by
every means of additional strength that could be devised. The building
has four rooms, one over the other, and at the top a gallery and
lantern. The stone floors are flat above, but concave beneath, and are
kept from pressing against the sides of the building by a chain let into
the walls. It is nearly eighty feet in hight, and since its completion
has been assaulted by the fury of the elements, without suffering the
smallest injury. To trace the progress of so vast an undertaking, and to
show with what skill and judgment this unparalleled engineer overcame
the greatest difficulties, would far exceed the limits of this work.


                         BELL ROCK LIGHT-HOUSE.

The Bell rock, or Inch cape, is situated on the north-east coast of
Great Britain, twelve miles south-west from the town of Arbroath, in
Fifeshire, and thirty miles north-east from St. Abb’s head, in the
county of Berwick. It lies in the direct trace of the firth of Tay, and
of a great proportion of the shipping of the firth of Forth, embracing a
very extensive local trade. This estuary is besides the principal inlet
on the northern coast of Britain, in which the shipping of the German
ocean and North sea take refuge when overtaken by easterly storms. At
neap-tides, or at the quadratures of the moon, the Bell rock is scarcely
uncovered at low-water; but in spring-tides, when the ebbs are greatest,
that part of the rock which is exposed to view at low-water, measures
about four hundred and twenty-seven feet in length, by two hundred and
thirty in breadth; and in this low state of the tides, its average
perpendicular hight above the surface of the sea is about four feet.
Beyond the space included in these measurements, at very low tides, a
reef extends about a thousand feet in a south-west direction, from the
higher part of the rock just described; and on this reef the light-house
is erected.

In the erection of a light-house on the Bell rock, independently of its
distance from the main land, a serious difficulty presented itself,
arising from the greater depth of water at which it was necessary to
carry on the operations, than in the case of the Eddystone light-house,
described above, or of any other building of the same kind, ancient or
modern, which had been hitherto undertaken. Its description is as
follows.

The Bell rock light-house, which has not improperly been termed the
Scottish Pharos, is a circular building, the foundation stone of which
is nearly on a level with the surface of the sea at low-water of
ordinary spring-tides; and, consequently, at high-water of these tides
the building is immersed to the hight of about fifteen feet. The first
two, or lowest courses of the masonry, are imbedded, or sunk into the
rock, and the stones of all the courses are curiously dovetailed and
joined with each other, forming one connected mass from the center to
the circumference. The successive courses of the work are also attached
to each other by joggles of stone; and, to prevent the stones from being
lifted up by the force of the sea, while the work was in progress, each
stone of the solid part of the building had two holes bored through it,
entering six inches into the course immediately below, into which oaken
tree-nails, two inches in diameter, were driven, after Mr. Smeaton’s
plan at the Eddystone light-house. The cement used at the Bell rock,
like that at the latter, was a mixture of pozzuolana, earth, lime, and
sand, in equal parts, by measure.

The stones employed in this surprising structure weigh from two tuns to
half a tun each. The ground course measures forty-two feet in diameter,
and the building diminishes as it rises to the top, where the parapet
wall of the light-room has a diameter of thirteen feet only. It is solid
from the ground course to the hight of thirty feet, where the entry door
is placed, the ascent to which is by a kind of rope-ladder, with wooden
steps, hung out at ebb-tide, and taken into the building again when the
water covers the rock; but strangers to this sort of climbing are taken
up in a kind of chair, by a small movable crane projected from the door,
from which a narrow passage leads to a stone staircase thirteen feet in
hight. Here the walls are seven feet thick, but they gradually diminish
from the top of the staircase to the parapet wall of the light-room,
where they measure one foot only in thickness. The upper part of the
building is divided into six apartments for the use of the light-house
keepers, and for containing the light-house stores. The lower, or first
of these floors, contains the water-tanks, fuel, and other bulky
articles; the second, the oil-cisterns, glass, and other light-room
stores; the third is occupied as a kitchen; the fourth is the bed-room;
the fifth, the _library_, or stranger’s room; and the upper apartment
forms the light-room. The floors of the several apartments are of stone,
and the communication from the one to the other is effected by wooden
ladders, except in the case of the light-room, where every article being
fire-proof, the steps are made of iron. In each of the three lower
apartments are two windows; but the upper rooms have four windows each.
The casements of the windows are double, and are glazed with
plate-glass, having besides an outer storm-shutter, or dead-light, of
timber, to defend the glass from the waves and spray of the sea. The
parapet wall of the light-room is six feet in hight, and has a door
leading out to the balcony, or walk, formed by the cornice round the
upper part of the building, which is surrounded by a cast-iron rail,
curiously wrought like net-work. This rail reposes on batts of brass,
and has a massive coping, or top-rail, of the same metal.

The light-room was, with the whole of its apparatus, framed and prepared
at Edinburgh. It is of an octagonal figure, measuring twelve feet
across, and fifteen feet in hight, formed with cast-iron sashes, or
window frames, glazed with large plates of polished glass, measuring
about two feet and six inches, by two feet and a quarter, and the fourth
of an inch in thickness. It is covered with a dome roof of copper,
terminating in a large gilt ball, with a vent-hole in the top. The light
is very powerful, and is readily seen at the distance of seven leagues,
when the atmosphere is clear. It is from oil, with argand burners,
placed in the focus of silver-plated reflectors, measuring two feet over
the lips, the silver surface being hollowed, or wrought to the parabolic
curve. That this splendid light may be the more easily distinguished
from all the other lights on the coast, the reflectors are ranged on a
frame with four faces, or sides, which, by a train of machinery, is made
to revolve on a perpendicular axis once in six minutes. Between the
observer and the reflectors, on two opposite sides of the revolving
frame, shades of red glass are interposed in such a manner, that, during
each entire revolution of the reflectors, two appearances, distinctly
differing from each other, are produced: one is the common _bright
light_ familiar to all; but on the other, or shaded sides, the rays are
tinged of a _red color_. These red and bright lights, in the course of
each revolution, alternate with intervals of darkness, and thus in a
very beautiful and simple manner, characterize this light.

As a further warning to the mariner in foggy weather, two large bells,
each weighing about twelve hundred pounds, are tolled day and night by
the same machinery which moves the lights. As these bells, in moderate
weather, may be heard considerably beyond the limits of the rock,
vessels, by this expedient, get warning to put about, and are thereby
prevented from running on the rock in thick and hazy weather, a disaster
to which ships might otherwise be liable, notwithstanding the erection
of the light-house. The establishment consists of a principal
light-keeper, with three assistants, two of whom are constantly at the
light-house, while the third is stationed at a tower erected at
Arbroath, where he corresponds by signals with the light-keepers at the
rock. This stupendous undertaking is highly creditable to Mr. Stevenson,
the engineer, and does honor to the age in which it has been produced.
The lights were exhibited, for the first time, on the first of February,
1811.


                              STONEHENGE.

This celebrated monument of antiquity, a view of which is given in the
cut on the next page, stands in the middle of a flat area near the
summit of a hill, six miles distant from Salisbury. It is inclosed by a
double circular bank and ditch, nearly thirty feet broad, after crossing
which an ascent of thirty yards leads to the work. The whole fabric, of
which the cut exhibits only a section, was originally composed of two
circles and two ovals. The outer circle is about one hundred and eight
feet in diameter, consisting, when entire, of sixty stones, thirty
uprights, and thirty imposts, of which there now remain twenty-four
uprights only, seventeen standing, and seven down, three feet and a half
asunder, and eight imposts. Eleven uprights have their five imposts on
them at the grand entrance: these stones are from thirteen to twenty
feet high. The smaller circle is somewhat more than eight feet from the
inside of the outer one, and consisted of forty smaller stones, the
highest measuring about six feet, nineteen only of which now remain, and
only eleven standing. The walk between these two circles is three
hundred feet in circumference. The _adytum_, or cell, is an oval formed
of ten stones, from sixteen to twenty-two feet high, in pairs, and with
imposts above thirty feet high, rising in hight as they go round, and
each pair separate, and not connected as the outer pair: the highest
eight feet. Within these, are nineteen other smaller single stones, of
which six only are standing. At the upper end of the adytum is the
altar, a large slab of blue coarse marble, twenty inches thick, sixteen
feet long, and four broad: it is pressed down by the weight of the vast
stones which have fallen upon it. The whole number of stones, uprights
and imposts, comprehending the altar, is one hundred and forty. The
stones, which have been by some considered artificial, were most
probably brought from those called the _gray weathers_ on Marlborough
downs, distant fifteen or sixteen miles; and if tried with a tool,
appear of the same hardness, grain and color, being generally reddish.
The heads of oxen, deer, and other beasts, have been found in digging in
and about Stonehenge; and in the circumjacent barrows, human bones. From
the plain to this structure there are three entrances, the most
considerable of which is from the north-east; and at each of them were
raised, on the outside of the trench, two huge stones, with two smaller
parallel ones within.

[Illustration: STONEHENGE.]

Geoffrey of Monmouth, in his history of the Britons, written in the
reign of King Stephen, represents this monument as having been erected
at the command of Aurelius Ambrosius, the last British king, in memory
of four hundred and sixty Britons who were murdered by Hengist the
Saxon. Polydore Virgil says that it was erected by the Britons as the
sepulchral monument of Aurelius Ambrosius, and other writers consider it
to have been that of the famous British queen Boadicea. Inigo Jones is
of opinion that it was a Roman temple; and this conclusion he draws from
a stone sixteen feet in length, and four in breadth, placed in an exact
position to the eastward, altar-fashion. By Charlton it is ascribed to
the Danes, who were two years masters of Wiltshire; a tin tablet, on
which were some unknown characters, having been dug up in the vicinity,
in the reign of Henry VIII. This tablet, which is lost, might have given
some information respecting its founders. Its common name, Stonehenge,
is Saxon, and signifies a “stone gallows,” to which the stones, having
transverse imposts, bear some resemblance. It is also called in Welch,
_choir gour_, or the giants’ dance. Mr. Grose, the antiquary, is of
opinion that Doctor Stukely has completely proved this structure to have
been a British temple, in which the Druids officiated. He supposes it to
have been the metropolitan temple of Great Britain, and translates the
words _choir gour_, “the great choir or temple.” It was customary with
the Druids to place one large stone on another for a religious memorial;
and these they often placed so equably, that even a breath of wind would
sometimes make them vibrate. Of such stones one remains at this day in
the pile of Stonehenge. The ancients distinguished stones erected with a
religious view, by the name of _ambrosiæ petræ_, _amber stones_, the
word _amber_ implying whatever is solar and divine. According to Bryant,
Stonehenge is composed of these amber stones; and hence the next town is
denominated Ambresbury.


                            ROCKING STONES.

The _rocking stone_, or _logan_, is a stone of a prodigious size, so
nicely poised, that it rocks or shakes with the smallest force. Several
of the consecrated stones mentioned above, were rocking stones; and
there was a wonderful monument of this kind near Penzance in Cornwall,
which still retains the name of _main-amber_, or the sacred stones. With
these stones the ancients were not unacquainted. Pliny relates that at
Harpasa, a town of Asia, there was a rock of such a wonderful nature,
that, if touched with the finger, it would shake, but could not be moved
from its place with the whole force of the body. Ptolemy Hephistion
mentions a stone of this description near the ocean, which was agitated
when struck by the stalk of the plant asphodel, or day-lily, but could
not be removed by a great exertion of force. Another is cited by
Apollonius Rhodius, supposed to have been raised in the time of the
Argonauts, in the island Tenos, as the monument of the two-winged sons
of Boreas, slain by Hercules; and there are others in China, and in
other countries.

Many rocking stones are to be found in different parts of Great Britain;
some natural, and others artificial, or placed in their position by
human art. That the latter are monuments erected by the Druids, many
suppose can not be doubted; but tradition has not handed down the
precise purpose for which they were intended. In the parish of St.
Leven, Cornwall, there is a promontory called Castle Treryn. On the
western side of the middle group, near the top, lies a very large stone,
so evenly poised, that a hand may move it from one side to the other;
yet so fixed on its base, that no lever, or other mechanical force, can
remove it from its present situation. It is called the _logan-stone_,
and is at such a hight from the ground as to render it incredible that
it was raised to its present position by art. There are, however, other
rocking stones, so shaped and situated, that there can not be any doubt
of their having been erected by human strength. Of this kind the great
_quoit_, or _karn-le hau_, in the parish of Tywidnek, in Wales, is
considered. It is thirty-nine feet in circumference, and four feet thick
at a medium, and stands on a single pedestal. In the island of St.
Agnes, Scilly, is a remarkable stone of the same kind. The under rock is
ten and a half feet high, forty-seven feet round the middle, and touches
the ground with not more than half its base. The upper rock rests on one
point only, and is so nicely balanced, that two or three men with a pole
can move it. It is eight and a half feet high, and forty-seven in
circumference. On the top is a basin hollowed out, three feet and eleven
inches in diameter at a medium, but wider at the brim, and three feet in
depth. From the globular shape of the upper stone, it is highly probable
that it was rounded by human art, and perhaps even placed on its
pedestal by human strength. In Sithney parish, near Helston, in
Cornwall, stood the famous logan, or rocking stone, commonly called _Men
Amber_, that is, _Men an Bar_, or the top stone. It was eleven feet by
six, and four high, and so nicely poised on another stone, that a little
child could move it. It was much visited by travelers; but Shrubsall,
the governor of Pendennis castle, under Cromwell, caused it to be
undermined, by dint of much labor, to the great grief of the country.
There are some marks of the tool on it; and it seems probable, by its
triangular shape, that it was dedicated to Mercury.


                      THE ROUND TOWERS OF IRELAND.

Every one, almost, has heard of the round towers of Ireland; and yet,
who has been able to explain their origin, or solve the mystery that
hangs over the history of their builders, and the purposes for which
they were erected?

Of these towers, one hundred and seven are known to have existed; but
probably there were many more. Some are still perfect, others are in
ruins. They bear a general resemblance to each other, seeming,
therefore, to have had the same object in view; yet there were many
minute points of difference. Some were but forty feet high; others
sixty, eighty, and one a hundred and twenty feet. The common hight is
about eighty or ninety feet. Most of them were of a cylindrical form,
and were covered with a conical roof. They were generally divided into
three stories, with a window to each. The door of entrance was from six
to twenty-four feet from the ground; but how this was reached is not
known. In some cases, they were built of hewn stone, nicely laid in
mortar; in others, the stones are merely hammered; in others still, they
are small and of all shapes, but always firmly cemented by mortar,
nearly as hard as the rock itself.

That these towers are very ancient, is clear from the fact that when
Ireland was first invaded by the English, in the twelfth century, they
were then deemed antiquities, and no one was able to tell their origin
or design. Some have been used as towers and belfries of churches; but
these churches were built in later times, and this use of the towers
was, evidently, but an adaptation of old structures to new purposes. The
fact that near them, in most cases, ancient churches, or their remains,
are found, has led to the belief that they were ecclesiastical
structures, erected by the early Christians of Ireland. This idea is
exploded by the circumstance that no such buildings have ever been known
to be erected in any other part of the world, in connection with the
Christian religion; nor is it possible to conjecture for what object, as
part of Christian worship, they could have been designed.

The more prevalent and probable opinion, on the subject, seems to be
this: that they were erected by the Phœnicians or Carthaginians, who are
known to have had settlements in Ireland before the Christian era; or
that they were built by the remote Irish, who bore the name of _Scoti_,
and who were of Asiatic origin. The object of these buildings, on this
supposition, was the preservation of the _sacred fire_, kindled in honor
of Bel, or Baal, a heathen divinity of the east, and who is known to
have been worshiped in Ireland. Indeed, to the present day, some of the
religious rites of the Irish are evidently but the perpetuation of the
ceremonies of their ancestors, turned from their pagan origin and
blended with Catholic observances. This view of the origin and object of
the round towers is strongly confirmed by the fact that in their
vicinity are still to be found the well known relics of ancient
paganism, such as the _sun-stone_, the _cromlech_, the _fire-house_, the
_spring of sacred water_, necessary in mystic rites, &c. To this it may
be added, that in Persia and India, where fire-worship originated, and
has had its most extensive and enduring seat, there are towers of
various forms and sizes, ascribed, in their origin, to this species of
idolatry. It is probable, therefore, that the early settlers of Ireland
brought from Asia, their original country, ideas of religion, which
became modified in the course of ages, but which, still remaining
essentially the same, displayed themselves in the structures which we
have described. The fact that Christian churches, or their remains, are
found near these towers in Ireland, does not controvert the opinion we
express, as, in the first place, they are evidently more modern than the
towers themselves, and are of a different style of architecture; and,
moreover, we know that the early Christians often chose, as the seat of
their churches, the very sites on which paganism had reared its
structures, and not unfrequently adapted the structures themselves to
the purposes of Christian worship; a fact which rather confirms than
opposes the common theory as to these towers.


                         ST. PAUL’S CATHEDRAL.

The chief ecclesiastical ornament of London is the cathedral church of
St. Paul, which stands in the center of the metropolis, on an eminence
rising from the valley of the Fleet. The body of the church is in the
form of a cross. Over the space where the lines of that figure intersect
each other, rises a stately dome, from the top of which springs a
lantern adorned with Corinthian columns, and surrounded at its base by a
balcony; on the lantern rests a gilded ball, and on that a cross (gilt
also) crowning the ornaments of the edifice. The length of the church,
including the portico, is five hundred and ten feet; the breadth, two
hundred and eighty-two; the hight to the top of the cross, four hundred
and four; the exterior diameter of the dome, one hundred and forty-five;
and the entire circumference of the building, twenty-two hundred and
ninety-two feet. A dwarf stone wall, supporting a balustrade of cast
iron, surrounds the church, and separates a large area, which is
properly the church-yard, from a spacious carriage and foot-way on the
south side, and a foot pavement on the north.

The dimensions of this cathedral are great; but the grandeur of the
design, and the beauty and elegance of its proportions, more justly rank
it among the noblest edifices of the modern world. It is adorned with
three porticos; one at the principal entrance, facing the west, and
running parallel with the opening of Ludgate street and the other two
facing the north and south, at the extremities of the cross aisle, and
corresponding in their architecture. The western portico combines as
much grace and magnificence as any specimen of the kind in the world. It
consists of twelve lofty Corinthian columns below, and eight composite
above, supporting a grand pediment; the whole resting on an elevated
base, the ascent to which is by a flight of twenty-two square steps of
black marble, running the entire length of the portico. The portico at
the northern entrance consists of a dome, supported by six Corinthian
columns, with an ascent of twelve circular steps, of black marble. The
southern portico is similar, except that the ascent consists of
twenty-five steps, the ground on that side being lower.

The great dome is ornamented with thirty-two columns below, and a range
of pilasters above. At the eastern extremity of the church is a circular
projection, forming a recess within for the communion table. The walls
are wrought in rustic, and strengthened and ornamented by two rows of
coupled pilasters, one above the other, the lower being Corinthian, and
the other composite. The northern and southern sides have an air of
uncommon elegance. The corners of the western front are crowned with
turrets of an airy and light form. To relieve the heavy style of the
interior, statues and monuments have been erected to the memory of great
men. The statues are plain full-length figures, standing on marble
pedestals, with appropriate inscriptions, in honor of such men as Dr.
Samuel Johnson, Howard the philanthropist, Sir William Jones, &c., &c.
Several of the monuments would disgrace the most barbarous age, and
ought to be removed. The tomb of the great Nelson is beneath the
pavement immediately under the dome.

The two turrets on the right and left of the west front are each two
hundred and eight feet in hight. In the one on the southern side is the
great clock, the bell of which, weighing eleven thousand, four hundred
and seventy-four pounds, and being ten feet in diameter, may be heard in
the most distant part of London, when the wind blows toward that
quarter. The entire pavement, up to the altar, is of marble, chiefly
consisting of square slabs, alternately black and white, and is very
justly admired. The floor round the communion table is of the same kind
of marble, mingled with porphyry. The communion table has no other
beauty; for, though it is ornamented with four fluted pilasters, which
are very noble in their form, they are merely painted and veined with
gold, in imitation of _lapis lazuli_. Eight Corinthian columns of blue
and white marble, of exquisite beauty, support the organ gallery. The
stalls in the choir are beautifully carved, and the other ornaments are
of equal workmanship.

This cathedral was built at the national expense, and cost over
thirty-five hundred thousand dollars. The iron balustrade on the wall
surrounding the space that is properly the church-yard, including its
seven iron gates, weighs two hundred tuns, and cost over fifty thousand
dollars. This immense edifice was reared in thirty-five years, the first
stone being laid on the twenty-first of June, 1675, and the building
completed in 1710, exclusive of some of the decorations, which were not
finished till 1723. The highest stone of the lantern was laid on by Mr.
Christopher Wren, son of the architect, in 1710. It was built by one
architect, Sir Christopher Wren; by one mason, Mr. Strong; and while one
prelate, Dr. Henry Compton, filled the see of London.

The dimensions of St. Paul’s, from east to west, within the walls, are
five hundred and ten feet; from north to south, within the doors of the
porticos, two hundred and eighty-two; the breadth of the west entrance,
one hundred; its circuit, twenty-two hundred and ninety-two; its hight
within, from the center of the floor to the cross, three hundred and
forty feet. The circumference of the dome is four hundred and thirty
feet; the diameter of the ball, six; from the ball to the top of the
cross, thirty; and the diameter of the columns of the porticos, four
feet. The hight to the top of the west pediment, under the figure of St.
Paul, is one hundred and twenty feet; and that of the tower of the west
front, two hundred and eighty-seven. From the bottom of the
whispering-gallery are two hundred and eighty steps; including those to
the golden gallery, five hundred and thirty-four, and to the ball, in
all, six hundred and sixteen steps. The weight of the ball is fifty-six
hundred pounds. The weight of the cross is thirty-three hundred and
sixty. The extent of the ground whereon this cathedral stands, is two
acres and sixteen perches. The length of the hour figures, two feet and
two and a half inches; the circumference of the dial is fifty-seven
feet.

The _whispering-gallery_ is a very great curiosity. It is one hundred
and forty yards in circumference. A stone seat runs round the gallery
along the foot of the wall. On the side directly opposite the door by
which the visitor enters, several yards of the seat are covered with
matting, on which the visitor being seated, the man who shows the
gallery, whispers, with the mouth close to the wall, near the door, at
the distance of one hundred and forty feet from the visitor, who hears
his words in a loud voice, seemingly at his ear. The mere shutting of
the door produces a sound to those on the opposite seat like violent
claps of thunder. The effect is not so perfect if the visitor sits down
half-way between the door and the matted seat, and still less so if he
stands near the man who speaks, but on the other side of the door.

The marble pavement of the church is extremely beautiful, seen from this
gallery. The paintings on the inner side of the dome, by Sir James
Thornhill, are viewed with most advantage here. The ascent to the ball
is attended with some difficulty, and is encountered by few, yet both
the ball and passage to it well deserve the labor. The diameter of the
interior of the ball is nearly six feet, and twelve persons may sit
within it.

The prospect from every part of the ascent to the top of St. Paul’s,
wherever an opening presents itself, is extremely curious. The effect is
most complete from the gallery surrounding the foot of the lantern. The
metropolis, from that spot, has a mimic appearance, like the objects in
a _fantoccino_. The streets, the pavements, the carriages, and
foot-passengers, have the appearance of fairy ground and fairy objects.
The spectator, contemplating the bustle of the diminutive throng below,
is moved a little out of the sphere of his usual sympathy with them;
and, as if they were emmets, asks himself involuntarily, “About what are
those little, inconsequential animals engaged?”

The form of the metropolis, and the adjacent country, is most perfectly
seen from the gallery at the foot of the lantern, on a bright summer
day. The ascent to this gallery is by five hundred and thirty-four
steps, of which two hundred and sixty, nearest the bottom, are extremely
easy; those above difficult, and in some parts dark and unpleasant. In
the ascent to this gallery may be seen the brick cone that supports the
lantern, with its ball and cross; the outer dome being turned on the
outside of the cone, and the inner dome turned on the inside. The entire
contrivance to produce the effect within the church and on the outside,
intended by the architect, is extremely fine, even marvelous. From the
pavement of the church, the interior appears one uninterrupted dome to
the upper extremity; but it consists, in fact, of two parts, the lower
and principal dome having a large circular aperture at its top, through
which is seen a small dome, which appears to be part of the great and
lower dome, although entirely separated from it, being turned also
within the cone, though considerably above it.

[Illustration: FIRST CHURCH IN ENGLAND.]


                      THE FIRST CHURCH IN ENGLAND.

Before passing to speak of Westminster Abbey, which next to St. Paul’s
is the great ecclesiastical edifice of London, it may be interesting to
go back to the earliest church-building in Britain, and notice the kind
of edifices in which our remote ancestors assembled for divine worship.
One of these buildings is represented in the cut below; as to which only
a few words of explanation will be needed. About the close of the sixth
century, it is said, the pope sent Austin, with some forty missionaries,
to convert Britain to popery. Many of the ancient Britons, however, shut
themselves up in the fastnesses of Wales, and refused to be either
persuaded or driven to embrace the new faith which he proclaimed. Still
Austin went on with his work, and the more efficiently to fulfill it,
erected rude edifices, in which to gather the people, to teach them, and
train them to the forms of worship. The first building erected under his
auspices, was at Glastonbury, in the county of Somerset. The view given
of it above is from Somme’s “Britannia Antiqua Illustrata;” and the
following particulars about the building itself are taken mainly from
the “Chronicles of William of Malmesbury.” Its length was sixty feet,
and its breadth twenty-six. Its walls were made of twigs winded and
twisted together, “after the ancient custom that kings’ palaces were
used to be built.” “Nay, castles themselves in those daies were formed
of the same materials, and weaved together.” Its roof was of straw, “or,
after the nature of the soil in that place, of hay or rushes.” The top
of the door reached to the roof; it had three windows on the south side,
and one on the east, over the altar, or communion-table. Such was the
rude and humble building in which Austin first preached to those that he
was able to gather to hear the gospel from his lips.


                           WESTMINSTER ABBEY.

This interesting edifice derives its name of _Westminster Abbey_ from
its situation in the western part of the metropolis, and its original
destination as the church of a monastery. The present church was built
by Henry III. and his successors, with the exception of the two towers
at the western entrance, which are the work of Sir Christopher Wren. The
length of the church is three hundred and sixty feet; the breadth of the
nave seventy-two feet; and the cross aisle one hundred and ninety-five
feet. The roof of the nave and of the cross aisle is supported by two
rows of arches, one above the other, each of the pillars of which is a
union of one ponderous round pillar, and four of similar form, but
extremely slender. These aisles being extremely lofty, and one of the
small pillars continued, throughout, from the base to the roof, produce
an effect uncommonly grand and impressive. The choir is one of the most
beautiful in Europe. It is divided from the western part of the great
aisle by a pair of noble iron gates, and is terminated at the east by an
elegant altar of white marble. The altar is inclosed with a very fine
balustrade, and in the center of its floor is a large square of curious
mosaic work, of porphyry, and other stones of various colors. In this
choir, near the altar, is performed the ceremony of crowning the kings
and queens of England.

At the southern extremity of the cross aisle are erected monuments to
the memory of several of the most eminent poets. This interesting spot
is called the poet’s corner; and never could place be named with more
propriety; for here are to be found the names of Chaucer, Spenser,
Shakspeare, Ben Jonson, Milton, Dryden, Butler, Thomson, Gay, Goldsmith,
Addison, Johnson, &c. Here also, as if this spot was dedicated to all
genius of the highest rank, are the tombs of Handel, Chambers, and
Garrick.

The curiosities of Westminster Abbey consist chiefly of its highly
interesting chapels, at the eastern end of the church, with their tombs.
Immediately behind the altar stands a chapel dedicated to Edward the
Confessor, upon an elevated floor, to which there is a flight of steps
on the northern side. The shrine of the Confessor, which stands in the
center, was erected by Henry III., and was curiously ornamented with
mosaic work of colored stones, which have been picked away in every part
within reach. Within the shrine is a chest, containing the ashes of the
Confessor. The frieze representing his history from his birth to his
death, put up in the time of Henry III., is highly curious, and deserves
the study and attention of every lover of antiquity. The tomb of Henry
III. is in this chapel: it has been extremely splendid, but is now
mutilated. The table on which lies the king’s effigy in brass, is
supported by four twisted pillars, enameled with gilt. This tomb, which
is a fine specimen of its kind, is almost entire on the side next the
area. It likewise contains the tombs of Edward I. and his queen,
Eleanor; of Edward III. and Queen Philippa; of Richard II. and his
queen; of Margaret, daughter of King Edward IV.; of King Henry V.; and
of Elizabeth, daughter of King Henry VII.

The grand monument of Henry V. is inclosed by an iron gate. The great
arch over the tomb is full of ribs and panels, and the headless figure
of Henry still remains: the head was of solid silver, and was stolen
during the civil wars. There was a chantry directly over the tomb, which
had an altarpiece of fine carved work. The armor of Henry once hung
round this chantry; his helmet yet remains on the bar, and the very
saddle which he rode at the battle of Agincourt, stripped of everything
which composed it, except the wood and iron, hangs on the right.

Contiguous to the eastern extremity of the church, and opening into it,
stands the famous chapel of Henry VII. dedicated to the Virgin Mary, one
of the finest and most highly finished pieces of Gothic architecture in
the world. On its site formerly stood a chapel, dedicated to the Virgin
Mary, and also a tavern, distinguished by the sign of the White Rose.
Henry, resolving to erect a superb mausoleum for himself and his family,
pulled down the old chapel and tavern; and on the eleventh of February,
1503, the first stone of the present edifice was laid by Abbot Islip, at
the command of the king. It cost seventy thousand dollars, a prodigious
sum for that period, (equal to fourteen hundred thousand dollars of our
money;) and still more so, considering the parsimonious temper of the
king. The labor merely of working the materials will, at a glance, be
seen to be immense, and almost incredible; and the genius employed both
in this structure and Henry’s tomb, must be mentioned with admiration.

The exterior of this chapel is remarkable for the richness and variety
of its form, occasioned chiefly by fourteen towers, in an elegant
proportion to the body of the edifice, and projecting in different
angles from the outermost wall. It has of late years been repaired and
renewed with exquisite taste, and at great cost. The inside is
approached by the area behind the chapels of Edward the Confessor and
Henry V. The floor is elevated above that of the area, and the ascent is
by a flight of marble steps. The entrance is ornamented with a beautiful
Gothic portico of stone, within which are three large gates of gilt
brass, of most curious open workmanship, every panel being adorned with
a rose and a portcullis alternately.

The chapel consists of the nave and two small aisles. The center is
ninety-nine feet in length, sixty-six in breadth, and fifty-four in
hight, and terminates at the east in a curve, having five deep recesses
of the same form. The entrance to these recesses being by open arches,
they add greatly to the relief and beauty of the building. It is
probable that they were originally so many smaller chapels, destined to
various uses. The side aisles are in a just proportion to the center,
with which they communicate by four arches, turned on Gothic pillars.
Each of them is relieved by four recesses, a window running the whole
hight of each recess, and being most minute and curious in its
divisions. The upper part of the nave has its four windows on each side,
and ten at the eastern extremity, five above and five below. The entire
roof of the chapel, including the side aisles, and the curve at the end,
is of wrought stone, in the Gothic style, and of most exquisite beauty.

An altar tomb, erected by Henry, at the cost of fifty thousand dollars,
to receive his last remains, stands in the center of the chapel. It is
of basaltic stone, ornamented with gilt brass, and is surrounded with a
magnificent railing of the same. This monument is by Pietro Torregiano,
a Florentine sculptor, and possesses uncommon merit. Six devices in
bass-relief, and four statues, all of gilt brass, adorn the tomb. It is
impossible to conceive Gothic beauty of a higher degree than the whole
of the interior of Henry the Seventh’s chapel; and it is with regret
that the antiquary sees the stalls of the knights reared against the
pillars and arches of the nave, forming screens that separate the
smaller aisles from the body of the chapel, and diminish the airiness,
and interrupt the harmony of the plan. Since its restoration in 1820,
this chapel has formed one of the most beautiful adjuncts of the abbey,
affording one of the most beautiful specimens of its peculiar style.

The prospect from the top of one of the western towers, the ascent to
which consists of two hundred and eighty-three steps, is infinitely more
beautiful, though less extensive, than that from St. Paul’s. The many
fine situations and open sites at the west end of the town, and its
environs, occasion the difference. The banqueting-house at Whitehall,
St. James’s park, with the parade and Horse-guards, Carlton house, the
gardens of the queen’s palace, the Green park, the western end of
Piccadilly, and Hyde park, with its river, lie at once under the eye,
and compose a most grand and delightful scene. The bridges of
Westminster, Waterloo, and Blackfriars, with the broad expanse of water
between them, the Adelphi and Somerset house on its banks, St. Paul’s
stupendous pile, and the light Gothic steeple of St. Dunstan’s in the
East, are alike embraced with one glance, and happily contrast with the
former prospect. From this tower, the exterior form of St. Paul’s, when
the sun falls upon it, is distinctly seen: and here its exquisite beauty
will be more fully comprehended than in any part of the city, for a
sufficient area to take in the entire outline is not there to be found.


                        CATHEDRAL OF NOTRE DAME.

Passing from England to the continent, one of the first church edifices
that attracts attention, both as to its antiquity and grandeur, is the
cathedral of Notre Dame, in Paris. This vast erection of world-wide
fame, stands on an island in the Seine, where was the center of the old
city of the Parisii in the days of Julius Cæsar. It is a cruciform
structure, four hundred and forty-two feet long, one hundred and
sixty-two wide, and more than one hundred feet high to the vaulting of
the roof, having all the characteristics of a vast ancient Gothic
cathedral. It was begun in the year 1010, and was nearly four hundred
years in building, not being finished till 1407. At the west end are two
lofty towers, each two hundred and thirty-five feet high, designed as
bases for steeples, which as yet have never been added. The inside of
the church has a very splendid and imposing appearance, owing to its
numerous aisles and chapels; and the west front, with its three large
gates, and circular window, and noble gateway, is worthy of the highest
admiration. In its imposing appearance, no church in Paris will compare
with it.


                          STRASBURG CATHEDRAL.

But by far the most magnificent church edifice in all France, is the
cathedral of Strasburg, a view of which is given in the cut, and which
is famous all over the world. Till the time of Louis XIV., Strasburg was
a free imperial city; but he seized, and the French have for one hundred
and fifty years held it, as a frontier fortress, and the key to Germany.
In the city there are many objects of interest, one of the most
conspicuous of which is a colossal bronze statue of John Guttenberg, who
here first practiced the art of printing; another is a colossal bronze
monument, in honor of General Kleber; and still another is a beautiful
monument to the memory of Marshal Saxe. But the wonder of the city is
the cathedral, the spire of which rises four hundred and seventy-four
feet above the pavement, which is nearly as high as the great pyramid of
Egypt, and one hundred and forty feet higher than St. Paul’s. Still,
owing to the large dimensions of the building, and the light and
graceful structure of the spire, it does not impress the observer as
being of this extraordinary altitude. The nave of the church is two
hundred and thirty feet high, and the round window at the end is
forty-eight feet in diameter. This wonderful structure was begun nearly
eight hundred years ago. The material is red sandstone, obtained in the
vicinity, which has proved very enduring; the church has therefore
suffered very little from time, and the chiseled and carved material,
after so many centuries of exposure to the weather, retains the
sharpness of outline which it had when first finished.

[Illustration: STRASBURG CATHEDRAL.]

The artist who designed this admirable masterpiece of airy open-work,
was Erwin, of Steinbach: his plans are still preserved in the town. He
died in 1318, when the work was only half finished: it was continued by
his son, and afterward by his daughter Sabina. The tower, begun 1277,
was not completed till 1439, long after their deaths, and four hundred
and twenty-four years after the church was commenced. It was then
finished by John Hültz, of Cologne, who was summoned to Strasburg for
this end. Had the original design been carried into execution, both the
towers would have been raised to the same hight. A doorway, in the south
side of the truncated tower, leads to the summit of the spire. On the
platform, about two-thirds of the way up, is a telegraph, and a station
for the watchmen, who are set to look out for fires. One of them will
accompany those who wish to mount the upper spire, and will unlock the
iron gate which closes the passage. There is no difficulty or danger in
the ascent, to a person of ordinary nerve or steadiness of head; but the
stone-work of the steeple is so completely open, and the pillars which
support it are so wide apart, and cut so thin, that they more nearly
resemble a collection of bars of iron or wood; so that at such a hight
one might almost fancy one’s self in a cage, high up, over the city,
rather than in the steeple of a church that has stood firm for ages.

The cathedral, as already said, was intended to have two towers, like
those of the cathedrals of York and Westminster, in England; but as the
expense is enormous, it is probable that the existing tower will remain
solitary. This deficiency gives the building a disfigured appearance,
especially as the unfinished tower, which is square, rises but half-way.
Externally, Strasburg cathedral is distinguished by a light and airy
gracefulness, both of structure and material; the sandstone is cut and
carved into a thousand forms, some of them, especially in the finished
tower, extremely delicate and beautiful. Even the statues and images,
which are very numerous, are chiseled out of sandstone, which has an
agreeable color of reddish gray. There is not an image of marble upon
the whole building. The number of images that cluster around the portal
and adhere to its walls is very great: they form a host of little
beings, in addition to the statues of full size. Indeed, the profusion
of these decorations appears to be extravagant both in point of taste
and economy, and some are quite out of place. In a temple, a building
devoted to religion, it is not easy to understand the propriety of
mounting men on horseback high up in the towers; for such aerial
equestrians are to be seen here, sentinel-like, in positions where
saints and angels would seem more appropriate ornaments. In the interior
of this cathedral there is a simple dignity and grandeur, a holy majesty
that is almost overpowering. The magnificent rows of columns of gigantic
dimensions and altitude, seen in long perspective, exceed in effect all
we can well imagine. The extreme richness of the windows, filled on both
sides with stained glass, commemorating, both historically and
allegorically, the events of the Bible, and the characters and
catastrophes of saints and martyrs, fills both the eye and the mind with
delight; and when we turn from gazing to the right and the left along
the extended line of lateral windows, and look upon the vast circle of
gorgeous light which streams down from the great picture luminary at the
end, (a circular window forty-eight feet in diameter, and presenting, in
radiating lines, more than the colors of the rainbow,) we are ready to
exclaim that Art has not fallen short of Nature in beauty, while she
excels her in the permanency of her hues, which have not here been
dimmed by the lapse of centuries; and if no violence is committed on
this temple, they will be equally brilliant after a thousand years more
shall have passed away.

There is in this cathedral a wonderful clock, which has been substituted
for an older one that has been removed. The present clock was
constructed by a man who is still living; it appears to be about fifty
feet high, and more than half that width; it was mute for fifty years,
but is now again a living chronometer. Among its many performances are
the following. It tells the hours, half-hours and quarter-hours, and the
bells which make the report of the flight of time, are struck by
automaton figures. A youth strikes the quarter, a mature man the
half-hour, and an old man, as the figure of Time, the full hour. This
clock tells also the times and seasons of ecclesiastical events, as far
as they are associated with astronomical phenomena, and it gives the
phases of the moon and the equation of time. At noon, a cock, mounted on
a pillar, crows thrice, when a procession of the apostles comes out, and
passes in view of the Saviour: among them is Peter, who, shrinking from
the eye of his Lord, shows, by his embarrassed demeanor, that he has
heard the crowing of the cock, and has fully understood its meaning.
Among the movements of its automatons, is that of a beautiful youth, who
turns an hour-glass every fifteen minutes. There is also a celestial
orrery, that shows the motions of the heavenly bodies with great
accuracy and beauty.


                         CATHEDRAL OF COLOGNE.

The cathedral of Cologne is at once its ornament and its reproach. It
was begun in 1248 by the elector Conrad, more than six hundred years
ago, but it is not yet finished, although the present Prussian king is
expending vast sums upon it. Since the city has passed under the
Prussian dominion, and more especially since the accession of the
present king, important aid has been obtained from the government. The
unfinished towers are rising year by year; and if the annual supplies
that have been granted are continued, another fifteen years may possibly
see it completed. The estimated expense of finishing it is five million
dollars. It is considered as a very fine specimen of the Gothic
architecture. One tower, that on the front, is completed. This cathedral
is exceedingly gorgeous in decorations, combining all the features that
belong to that species of architecture. The choir is finished, and
exceeds in splendid beauty almost everything of the kind which the
traveler will meet with in Europe. It is very rich in stained glass, and
this is true also of the body of the church. Much of the pictured glass
is modern: it is set in the same window with the ancient, and is not
inferior to it in splendor. The cathedral is paved with rude, common
stones, doubtless intended to be temporary only, and to be in due time
replaced by marble. It was originally intended that the towers of this
cathedral should be five hundred feet high. The dimensions on the ground
are four hundred feet by one hundred and eighty. The nave is supported
by one hundred columns, of which the middle ones are forty feet in
circumference.


                     CHURCH OF ST. MARK, AT VENICE.

This splendid old church has well been described as “a stupendous pile
of oriental magnificence.” A thousand years do not cover the whole
period of its existence. It is adorned with the columns and gems of the
east, and no wonder, for every Venetian captain of a ship and every
traveler of that nation was required to bring home something to adorn
this temple: Greece and Constantinople, Palestine and all Europe, have
contributed to its embellishment. It is totally unlike almost every
other temple. It has round arches and regular domes, and from every part
of them, there look down upon you, in permanent mosaic of gold and
colored stones, and even precious gems, colossal images of the Saviour,
of the virgin mother, of apostles and saints, and of multiform beings of
religious allegory, so numerous and various, and so fresh, rich, and
gorgeous, that you are quite bewildered, and involuntarily drop your
eyes to the floor, where you are almost equally dazzled by the precious
marbles, and jaspers, and serpentines, and verd-antique, and red
porphyry, disposed in endless variety of most beautiful patterns, as if
it had been the work of a magician artist. You read there also the
instability of human glory in the worn and mutilated condition of parts
of the pavement, and in the waving hollows and upward curves which prove
that its foundations were laid in the sea. You again lift your eyes, and
in the permanent mosaics (for no perishable frescoes or oil paintings
are here) you read in large and distinct historical figures the early
Bible history of our race, and the annals of the patriarchal families.
Around the church, hang rich lamps of silver and gold. Huge candles and
lights perpetually burning, symbolize the immortality of the soul.
Passing out of the church, precious columns are on your right and on
your left, columns of marble and porphyry brought from Constantinople,
and Jerusalem, and St. Jean d’Acre. Lifting your eyes again to the roof,
you there see domes, and dome upon dome; minarets and carvings in
arabesque, and other rich forms of oriental architecture, with images
and statues innumerable, standing as sentinels on all the cornices and
angles, and in the niches.


                        THE CATHEDRAL OF MILAN.

Passing on to the last of the church edifices to be described, we come
to the cathedral of Milan. A good picture is necessary to give even a
faint impression of the richness and harmonious proportions of this
wonderful building; but it is possible, from description, to form a
correct conception of its magnitude, and of its principal parts. Its
length is four hundred and eighty-five feet; breadth, two hundred and
fifty-two; breadth across the transepts, two hundred and eighty-seven
feet; hight of the nave, one hundred and fifty-three feet. The hight
from the pavement to the top of the crown of the Madonna, on the summit
of the spire, is three hundred and fifty-five feet. This cathedral is
one of the most stupendous piles ever erected; but it is not yet
finished, although it has been almost five hundred years in building.
Several duomos have been destroyed that once occupied this place. The
first cathedral was destroyed by Attila in the fifth century; the second
was burnt by accident in 1075; and the third was partially ruined by
Frederic Barbarossa. A lofty bell-tower, demolished by him, crushed the
duomo in its fall. The first stone of the present cathedral was laid in
March, 1386, by G. G. Visconti.

The interior presents a wilderness of columns, some of which are almost
twelve feet in diameter at the base, and more than eight in the shaft.
Fifty-two pillars, of the hight of eighty feet, support the pointed
arches on which the roof rests. The exterior shows equally a wilderness
of statues and pinnacles. Each pinnacle, if placed on the ground, would
appear a considerable spire. The statues already in place number three
thousand, and forty-live hundred are necessary to carry out the plan.
Each pinnacle or minaret is crowned by a statue, and there are many more
in the niches, among the pinnacles, as well as in other situations. In
order to become acquainted with them, you must ascend to the roof, and
then you will see life and meaning in them all; if seen from below, they
appear indeed as a multitude of statues in marble, but without any
obvious design. Whatever the moral may be, it is exhibited at an immense
expense of treasure; but, in Italy, it is a national passion, which has
come down to them from the Romans, to people their ideal world with
marble forms, commemorating those who once lived on earth, or the
imaginary beings of allegory and of a fabulous mythology. In this
cathedral, in addition to statues of the size of life or beyond its
dimensions, there are many of inferior magnitude: little pretty cherubs
and imaginative beings are seen, single or in clusters. In all parts of
the building, there are delicate and elaborately wrought carvings in
marble, and even in situations where they can not be seen except by a
diligent explorer. Ascending to the roof of the cathedral, and walking
over it, the traveler will observe that it is composed of massive blocks
of marble accurately adjusted to each other, and although the weight is
immense, no cracks are visible. One moves as freely upon the roof, and
with as much confidence as if a mountain of marble were beneath his
feet; and the view from it is as glorious as it could be from a mountain
rearing its lofty head in place of this structure reared by the art of
man!


                          THE TOWER OF LONDON.

The Tower of London was anciently a palace occupied by the various
sovereigns of England, till the reign of Queen Elizabeth. It was begun
by William the Conqueror in 1073; and additions were made to it by
several of the later monarchs. The extent within the walls is over
twelve acres; and the exterior circuit of the ditch that surrounds it is
over three thousand feet. A broad and handsome wharf, or gravel terrace,
runs along the banks of the river parallel with the Tower, from which it
is separated by the ditch.

Within the walls of the Tower are several streets; and a variety of
buildings, the principal of which are, the church, the white tower, the
ordnance office, the record office, the jewel office, the horse armory,
the grand storehouse, the small armory, the houses belonging to the
officers of the tower, barracks for the garrison, &c.

The white tower, which was the original building, is a large square
structure, situated in the center of the fortress. On the top are four
watch-towers, one of which, at present, is used as an observatory. It
consists within of three lofty stories, beneath which are large,
commodious vaults. In the first story are two grand rooms, one of which
is a small armory for the sea-service, and contains various sorts of
arms, curiously laid up, which would serve upward of ten thousand
seamen. In the other rooms, in closets and presses, are abundance of
warlike tools and instruments of death. In the upper stories, are arms
and armorers’ tools. The models of all newly invented engines of
destruction, which have been presented to the government, are preserved
in this tower. On the top is a large cistern, filled from the Thames by
a water-engine, to supply the garrison with water. The grand storehouse,
which stands north of the white tower, is a plain building of brick and
stone, three hundred and forty-five feet long and sixty feet broad. The
jewel office is a little to the east of the grand storehouse. It is a
dark and strong stone room. The horse armory is a brick building
eastward of the white tower. The record office is in the Wakefield
tower, opposite the platform. The rolls from the time of King John to
the beginning of the reign of Richard III., are kept here in fifty-six
wainscot presses. They contain the ancient tenures of land in England,
the original laws and statutes, the rights of England to the dominion of
the British seas, the forms of submission of the Scottish kings, and a
variety of other records, &c. The principal entrance to the Tower is on
the west. It consists of two gates on the outside of the ditch; a stone
bridge built over the ditch, and a gate within the ditch. On the right
hand, at the west entrance, the menagerie was formerly kept; but having
been superseded by that belonging to the Zoölogical Society in the
Regent’s park, it was broken up a few years ago. What was called the
Spanish armory, contains the trophies of the famous victory of Queen
Elizabeth over the Spanish armada. Among these the most remarkable are
the thumb-screws, intended to be used to extort confession from the
English where their money was hidden. In the same room are other
curiosities; among which is the ax with which the unfortunate Anne
Boleyn was beheaded, to gratify the capricious passions of her husband,
Henry VIII. A representation of Queen Elizabeth in armor, standing by a
cream-colored horse, attended by a page, is also shown in this room. Her
majesty is dressed in the armor she wore at the time she addressed her
army in the camp of Tilbury, 1588, with a white silk petticoat,
ornamented with pearls and spangles.

The small armory is one of the finest rooms of its kind in Europe. It is
three hundred and forty-five feet in length, and in general it contains
complete stands of arms for no less than one hundred thousand men. They
are disposed in a variety of figures, in a very elegant manner. Among
them is a piece of ordnance from Egypt, sixteen feet long, and seven
inches and a half bore. There are several other curiosities, among which
are arms taken at various periods from rebels; the Highland broad-sword
deserves particular notice. In many respects this room may be considered
as one of the wonders of the modern world. The volunteer armory is in
the white tower, and contains arms, piled in beautiful order, for thirty
thousand men, with pikes, swords, &c., in immense numbers, arranged in
stars and other devices. At the entrance of this room stands a fine
figure of Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk in the time of Henry VIII.,
in bright armor, and having the very lance he used in his lifetime,
which is eighteen feet long. The sea armory is also in this tower, and
contains arms for nearly fifty thousand sailors and marines. In this
room are two elegant pieces of brass cannon, presented by the city of
London to the Earl of Leicester, and various similar curiosities. Part
of the royal train of artillery is kept on the ground-floor, under the
small armory. The room is three hundred and eighty feet long, fifty feet
wide, and twenty-four in hight. The artillery is ranged on each side, a
passage ten feet in breadth being left in the center. In this room are
twenty pillars that support the small armory above, which are hung round
with implements of war, and trophies taken from the enemy. There are
many peculiarly fine pieces of cannon to be seen here: one (of brass) is
said to have cost two hundred pounds in ornamenting. It was made for
Prince Henry, eldest son of James I. Others are extremely curious for
their antiquity. Among them is one of the first invented cannon. It is
formed of bars of iron hammered together, and bound with iron hoops. It
has no carriage, but was moved by six rings, conveniently placed for
that purpose. The horse armory is a noble room, crowded with
curiosities. The armor of John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, and son of
Edward III., is seven feet in hight. The sword and lance are of a
proportionable size. A complete suit of armor, rough from the hammer,
made for Henry VIII. when eighteen years old, is six feet high. The
kings of England on horseback, are shown in armor, from the Conqueror to
George II.

The jewel office contains: 1. _The imperial crown_, with which the kings
of England are crowned. It is of gold, enriched with diamonds, rubies,
emeralds, sapphires and pearls; within is a cap of purple velvet, lined
with white taffeta, and turned up with three rows of ermine. This is
never used but at coronations, and of course is not often produced. 2.
_The golden globe._ This is put into the king’s right-hand before he is
crowned; and when he is crowned, he bears it in his left-hand, having
the scepter in his right. 3. _The golden scepter_ and its cross, upon a
large amethyst, decorated with table diamonds. 4. _The ancient scepter_,
covered with jewels and Gothic enamel work, and surmounted with an onyx
dove. This scepter is believed to be far the most ancient in the
collection, and probably is a part of the original regalia. It was found
by the keeper in 1814, exactly at the time of the general peace. It is
estimated at a very high value. 5. _St. Edward’s staff._ It is four feet
seven inches and a half long, and three inches and three-quarters round,
made of beaten gold. It is borne before the king in the coronation
procession. 6. _The gold salt-cellar of state._ In make it is the model
of the square white tower, and is of excellent workmanship. At the
coronation it is placed on the king’s table. 7. _The sword of mercy._ It
has no point. 8. _A grand silver font_, used for christenings of the
royal family. 9. _The crown of state_, which is worn by the sovereign at
the meeting of parliament, and other state occasions. It is of extreme
splendor and value, being covered with large-sized precious stones, and
on the top of its cross is a pearl which Charles I. pledged to the Dutch
republic for eighteen thousand pounds. Under the cross is an emerald
diamond of a pale green color, seven inches and a half in circumference,
and valued at one hundred thousand pounds; and in the front is a rock
ruby, unpolished, in its purely natural state, three inches long, and
the value of which can not be estimated. 10. _The golden eagle_, with
which the king is anointed, and the _golden spur_. 11. _The diadem_,
worn by the Queens Anne and Mary. 12. _The crown_ of Queen Mary, _the
cross_ of King William, and many other valuable jewels. In this office
are all the crown jewels worn by the princes and princesses at
coronations, and abundance of curious old plate. Independently of
several of the jewels which are inestimable, the value of the precious
stones and plate contained in this office, is not less than two millions
sterling. The chapel, situated at the north end of the parade, is not
otherwise attractive, than as it contains a few ancient tombs and
monuments.


                          THE BANK OF ENGLAND.

The building thus entitled is an immense and very extensive stone
edifice, situated a little to the north-west of Cornhill. Until 1825,
this edifice exhibited a great variety of incongruous styles of
architecture; but endeavors have since been made, and with success, to
produce more uniformity of appearance. On the east side of the principal
entrance, is a passage leading to a spacious apartment called the
rotunda, fifty-seven feet in diameter, in which business in the public
funds is transacted; and, branching out of this apartment, are various
offices appropriated to the management of each particular stock. In each
of these, under the several letters of the alphabet, are arrayed the
books in which the amount of every individual’s interest in such a fund
is registered.

The bank of England covers an extent of more than eight acres, and is
completely insulated. Its shape is that of an irregular parallelogram,
the longest side of which measures four hundred and forty feet. Its
exterior is not unsuitable to the nature of the establishment, conveying
the idea of great strength and security. In the interior, a variety of
alterations and improvements have been made to accommodate the vast
increase of business and of the paper money and discounting systems.
This has required considerable enlargements of the offices in every
department, and has led, in the space of thirty or forty years, to the
increase of the clerks from two hundred to about eleven hundred. The
capital, or stock, also, of this grand national establishment, has been
considerably and progressively augmented, until, from twelve hundred
thousand pounds, it has risen to eleven million, six hundred and
forty-seven thousand, seven hundred and fifty pounds, or nearly sixty
million dollars. The direction is vested in a governor, deputy-governor,
and twenty-four directors, all elected annually; and thirteen of the
directors, with the governor, form a court for the management of the
business of the institution.


                             THE MONUMENT.

About two hundred yards north of London bridge, is situated one of the
finest pillars in the world, erected by Sir Christopher Wren, in memory
of the great fire, which, in 1666, broke out at a house on this spot,
and destroyed the metropolis from the Tower to Temple Bar. It is a
fluted column of the Doric order; its total hight is two hundred and two
feet; the diameter at the base is fifteen feet; the hight of the column,
one hundred and twenty feet; and the cone at the top, with its urn,
forty-two feet. The hight of the massy pedestal is forty feet. Within
the column is a flight of three hundred and forty-five steps; and from
the iron balcony at the top is a most fascinating prospect of the
metropolis and the adjacent country. It is impossible not to lament the
obscure situation of this beautiful monument, which, in a proper place,
would form one of the most striking objects of the kind that
architecture is capable of producing.


                              THE LOUVRE.

This splendid palace, which was planned in the reign of Francis I., at
the commencement of the sixteenth century, is a quadrangular edifice,
having a court in the center, and forming a square of about four hundred
and sixteen English feet. The front was built in the reign of Louis
XIV., and is one of the most beautiful monuments of his reign. A
spacious gallery, fourteen hundred and fifty English feet in length,
connects this palace with that of the Tuilleries. Here was displayed,
under the title of the Musee Napoleon, that inestimable collection of
paintings, one thousand and thirty in number, consisting of the
_chefs-d’œuvre_ of the great masters of antiquity, and constituting a
treasury of human art and genius, far surpassing every other similar
institution. The ante-room leading to the gallery contained several
exquisite paintings, the fruits of the triumphs of Bonaparte, or which
had been presented to him by the sovereigns who had cultivated his
alliance. This apartment was styled by the Parisians the Nosegay of
Bonaparte: its most costly pictures were from the gallery of the Grand
Duke of Tuscany; and to these were added a selection from those procured
at Venice, Naples, Turin and Bologna.

It would be impossible adequately to describe the first impressions made
on the spectator on his entrance into the gallery, where such a galaxy
of genius and art was offered to his contemplation. It was lined by the
finest productions of the French, Flemish and Italian schools, and
divided by a curious double painting upon slate, placed on a pedestal in
the middle of the room, representing the front and back views of the
same figures. From the Museum the visitor descends into the Salle des
Antiques, containing the finest treasures of Grecian and Roman statuary.
His notice is instantly attracted by the Belvidere Apollo, a statue
surpassing, in the opinion of connoisseurs, all the others in the
collection. This matchless statue is thus described by Sir John Carr, in
his work entitled “The Stranger in France.” “All the divinity of a god
beams through this unrivaled perfection of form. It is impossible to
impart the impressions which it inspires: the riveted beholder is ready
to exclaim with Adam, when he first discerns the approach of Raphael:

                       “‘Behold what glorious shape
           Comes this way moving: seems another morn
           Risen on mid-noon; some great behest from heaven.’

“The imagination can not form such an union of grace and strength. One
of its many transcendent beauties consists in its aerial appearance and
exquisite expression of motion.” The Medicean Venus, from the palace
Pitti, at Florence, also formed a part of this magnificent collection of
statues. The classic Addison, in speaking of this statue, which he saw
at Florence, observes, that it appeared to him much less than life, in
consequence of its being in the company of others of a larger size; but
that it is, notwithstanding, as large as the ordinary size of women, as
he concluded from the measure of the wrist; since, in a figure of such
nice proportions, from the size of any one part it is easy to guess at
that of the others. The fine polish of the marble, communicating to the
touch a sensation of fleshy softness, the delicacy of the shape, air and
posture, and the correctness of design, in this celebrated statue, are
not to be expressed.

The Paris museum, and Salle des Antiques, although deprived, at the
termination of the contest with France, of so many _chefs-d’œuvre_ of
art, still contain others which render them highly interesting. The
finest productions of Le Brun, several of them on an immense scale,
still remain; as do likewise the matchless marine paintings by Vernet;
the truly sublime works of Poussin, consisting of the chief of his
masterpieces; together with many choice paintings by Rubens, Wouvermans,
De Witte, &c. Many of the statues remaining in the Salle des Antiques
are likewise admirable specimens of sculpture. In the gallery of the
Louvre a very curious collection of models, representing the fortresses
of France and other countries, was once exhibited; but it was removed,
that the paintings might be seen with greater effect. These models,
executed in the reign of Louis XIV., and amounting to upward of one
hundred and eighty, were wrought with the greatest accuracy, and so
naturally, as to represent the several cities which they describe, with
their streets, houses, squares and churches, together with the works,
moats, bridges and rivers, not neglecting the adjacent territory, as
consisting of plains, mountains, corn-lands, meadows, gardens, woods,
&c. Several of these models were so contrived as to be taken in pieces,
so that the curious observer might be better able to perceive their
admirable construction.

Of this splendid building and gallery, Silliman, in his late tour, says,
“A mere catalogue of the objects in the Louvre, with the most brief
description, would swell to a volume. The building forms part of a vast
unfinished quadrangle, upon the usual plan of ancient castles and
palaces. In various stages of its progress, during many centuries, it
has been used both as a castle and a palace. From its windows, or from
the windows of a building occupying the same place, the infamous Charles
IX. fired upon his Protestant subjects during the massacre of St.
Bartholomew, August twenty-fourth, 1572, crying, with the voice of a
fiend, ‘Kill! kill!!’

“The Louvre, as a grand museum of the arts, is indebted chiefly to
Napoleon and Louis Philippe. Even as late as the reign of Louis XVI.,
the greater part of the Louvre remained without a roof. The magnificent
bronze gates are due to Napoleon. He and Louis Philippe did more for the
embellishment of Paris than any monarch, except Louis XIV. Had we seen
the Louvre when we were first in Paris, it would have made a much
stronger impression than now; and this remark can be, in a degree,
extended to all its various contents, whether statues, ancient or
modern, antiquities of various ages and nations, Egyptian, Assyrian,
Etruscan, Grecian, Roman, Mexican, or Peruvian, or of whatever name.
Exquisite objects, in curious arts, may be included—cameos, gems,
crystal vessels, and ornaments. Even at this late period of our tour,
the Louvre has, however, made a very strong impression. It is a glorious
spectacle: there is no museum that can compare with it, except that of
the Vatican. The British museum is not a fair subject of comparison with
either of these, as its plan and main objects are different. The Louvre
is strictly a museum of the fine arts and of antiquities. Libraries it
has not, nor does it include natural history, which is so abundantly
illustrated at the Garden of Plants, and in the other excellent
institutions in Paris. That hall of the Louvre which is called the long
gallery is thirteen hundred and thirty-two feet in length, over a
quarter of a mile, and forty-two feet wide, all seen in one view. The
walls are entirely covered by pictures, amounting in the aggregate to
fourteen hundred and eight, of which three hundred and eighty are
French, five hundred and forty are Flemish and German, four hundred and
eighty are Italian, and eight are modern copies of ancient pictures.
Only the works of deceased artists are admitted into this museum, which
was formed principally by Napoleon, and enriched with most of the
_chefs-d’œuvre_ of Europe. The greater part of those foreign pictures
were claimed and removed by the allies in 1815; but they are hardly
missed; for, even now, this gallery is one of the finest in the world.

“I have already had occasion to remark that in our tour we have seen a
number of pictures and statues in various cities, particularly in Italy,
which, having traveled to Paris, were restored after the Russian
campaign and the battle of Waterloo. There were, however, so many fine
things left behind in the different galleries from which those pictures
had been taken, that the omission would hardly be noticed there, any
more than their absence from the Louvre is observed now, except by a few
scrutinizing artists and connoisseurs. In despair of making any progress
in this vast collection, I shall not even attempt to describe any
particular pictures, and thus I must pass by the grandest gallery
perhaps in the world, because I can not do it any justice, and for a
still worse reason, because so many galleries of less importance have
been visited first. The room called Salle de Bijoux is very rich in the
rare and costly things which kings are wont to collect, and which are
here so numerous and beautiful that they surpass the similar collections
in the Pitti palace in Florence, but they are inferior in splendor and
magnificence to those we had lately seen at Dresden. There is here,
however, a profusion of gems, diamonds, sapphires, rubies, &c.; and the
vessels fabricated from rock crystal are numerous, large and splendid.
The Egyptian museum is particularly rich in everything which illustrates
the history and manners of that country. The gallery of ancient
statuary, and of modern copies, is so similar to what we have seen in
Italy, that I will not enter into particulars. There is nothing here
more surprising than the stupendous sculptured stones from Nineveh, sent
out by M. Botta, the French consul. They are not so numerous as in the
collection which we saw in the British museum, but there are figures
here which surpass in magnitude any that are there; at least such is my
recollection. The winged bulls, with a lion’s head, and the figures on
the reverse of the stone panels, are of such vast size, that we are
astonished that they could have been transported without injury from the
other side of the world. A tall man is a dwarf by their side.”


                          THE BRITISH MUSEUM.

This grand national collection of antiquities, books and natural
curiosities, is placed in the noble house formerly belonging to the Duke
of Montagu, in Great Russell street, Bloomsbury. It is a stately
edifice, in the French style of the reign of Louis XIV., and on the plan
of the Tuilleries. The celebrated French architect, Peter Paget, was
sent over from Paris, by Ralph, first Duke of Montagu, expressly to
construct this splendid mansion, which is, perhaps, better calculated
for its present purpose than for a private residence.

The British museum was established by act of parliament, in 1753, in
consequence of the will of Sir Hans Sloane, who left his museum to the
nation, which he declared in his will, cost him upward of fifty thousand
pounds, on condition that parliament should pay twenty thousand pounds
to his executors, and purchase a house sufficiently commodious for it.
The parliament acted with great liberality on this occasion; several
other valuable collections were united to this of Sir Hans Sloane, and
the whole establishment completed for the sum of eighty-five thousand
pounds, which was raised by the way of a lottery. Parliament afterward
added, at various times, to the Sloanean museum, the Cottonian library;
that of Major Edwards; the Harleian collection of manuscripts; Sir
William Hamilton’s invaluable collection of Greek vases; the Townleian
collection of antique marbles; the manuscripts of the Marquis of
Lansdowne; and, lastly, the celebrated Elgin marbles, which comprise
what are considered as the finest specimens of ancient sculpture. The
whole of the important library of printed books and manuscripts which
had been gradually collected by the kings of England from Henry VIII. to
William III., was presented to the museum by George II.; and George III.
bestowed on it a numerous collection of valuable pamphlets, which had
been published in the interval between 1640 and 1660. His majesty
likewise contributed the two finest mummies in Europe; the sum of eleven
hundred and twenty-three pounds, arising from lottery prizes, which had
belonged to his royal predecessor; and, in 1772, a complete set of the
journals of the lords and commons. To these contributions he afterward
added a collection of natural and artificial curiosities, sent to him,
in 1796, by Mr. Menzies, from the north-west coast of America, and
several single books of great value and utility. The trustees have at
various times added Greenwood’s collection of stuffed birds; Hatchet’s
minerals; Halhed’s oriental manuscripts; Tyssen’s collection of Saxon
coins; Doctor Bentley’s classics; and the Greville collection of
minerals. To these may be added numerous donations from several of the
sovereigns of Europe, as well as from learned bodies and private
individuals, including the splendid monuments from Nineveh, and other
wonderful and curious contributions that will be mentioned.

The building itself is a spacious quadrangle of some two thousand feet,
or nearly two-fifths of a mile in circuit, occupying a large part of
Great Russel square; and even now, greatly enlarged as it has been, it
is quite inadequate for the growing demands for space in all
departments. The ground-floor consists of twelve main rooms, and
contains the library of printed books. The first room of the upper story
contains modern works of art from all parts of the world, arranged in
cases. In the one in the center are several beautiful miniatures, among
which are those of Sir Thomas More, Charles I., and Oliver Cromwell, the
latter having his watch placed by its side. Two curious portraits of
William III. and Queen Mary, are carved on two walnut-shells. In the
presses are arranged, in geographical order, some fine specimens of
China, and a variety of implements of war from different quarters of the
globe. Here is to be seen the rich collection of curiosities from the
South Pacific ocean, brought by Captain Cook. In the left corner is the
mourning dress of an Otaheitan lady, in which taste and barbarity are
singularly blended; and opposite, are the rich cloaks and helmets of
feathers from the Sandwich islands. Among these is one, which, in
elegance of form, vies even with the Grecian helmets. In another case
are the cava bowls, and above them battoons, and other weapons of war.
The next objects of attention are the idols of the different islands,
presenting in their hideous rudeness, a singular contrast with many of
the works of art formed by the same people; near these are the drums and
other instruments of music, and a breast-plate from the Friendly
islands. The ceiling of this room, or vestibule, represents the fall of
Phæton.

The second room consists of similar objects. The third is devoted to the
Lansdowne collection of manuscripts, which have been handsomely bound
and lettered. In the fourth are the Sloanean and Birchean collections of
manuscripts. The fifth contains part of the Harleian library of
manuscripts, and the sixth, the first part of the same, and additions
made since the establishment of the museum. The seventh is appropriated
to the royal and Cottonian library of manuscripts. On a table, in a
glazed frame, is the original of the Magna Charta, belonging to the
Cottonian library. Against the press, number twenty-one, of the
Cottonian collection, is the original of the articles preparatory to the
signing of the great charter, perfect, with the seal. The magnificent
saloon is filled with the Greville collection of minerals, the finest in
the world, admirably arranged, and luminously colored. The dome of this
saloon merits notice. It was painted by La Fosse, and has been described
as the apotheosis of Iris, or birth of Minerva. In the middle of the
window stands a table, composed of a variety of lavas from Mount
Vesuvius, presented by the Earl of Exeter. The eighth room contains a
department of natural history, part of which is the valuable donation of
Mr. Cracherode, disposed in two tables, nearly in the Linnæan order; and
a much more extensive series, arranged according to the Wernerian
system. The principal productions are very valuable, consisting of
minerals from Derbyshire, Siberia, the South seas, volcanic and rock
stones from Germany, &c. One very curious specimen of natural history is
pointed out in the fifth division of the Cracherodean collection, an
egg-shaped piece of chalcedony, containing water, which may be seen by
gently shaking the vase. Here, also, in a glass case, is the famous
fossil skeleton from Gaudaloupe, which has been the object of much
interesting controversy among eminent naturalists. The ninth is
appropriated to petrifactions and shells. In the first division of the
cases in the middle of the room, is a valuable univalve shell, of the
species called the paper nautilus, or argonaut shells, remarkable for
the slightness of its fabric, and the elegance of its shape. It is
inhabited by an animal not unlike a cuttle-fish, which by extending a
pair of membranes, adhering to the top of its longest arms, has the
power of sailing on the surface of the sea. Under the tables are
deposited, in this and the next room, a great number of volumes and
parcels, containing collections of dried plants; which, from the fragile
nature of their contents, are shown only on particular leave. The tenth
room is entirely filled with vegetable productions, zoöphytes, sponges,
&c. The contents of the eleventh room are birds, and arranged as far as
convenience would admit, according to the Linnæan system. Among the
curious specimens of ornithology is a humming-bird, scarcely larger than
a bee; also another beautiful little creature called the harlequin
humming-bird, from the variety of its colors. In this room there is a
curious picture, executed many years ago in Holland, of that extremely
rare and curious bird, the dodo, belonging to the tribe _gallinæ_. In
the table in the middle are preserved the nests of several birds, among
the most curious of which are several hanging nests, chiefly formed by
birds of the oriole tribe; nests of a substance resembling isinglass,
which the Chinese make into a rich soup; scarce feathers, &c. In the
second table are deposited a variety of eggs and nests: among the former
may be noticed the eggs of the ostrich, the cassowary, the crocodile,
&c. In the cases between the windows are several of the rarer
quadrupeds; among these the most curious are, two orang-outangs, in a
young state, a long-tailed macauco, ermine, &c.; in cases under the
tables are an armadillo, or porcupine, several young sloths, and a fine
specimen of the two-toed ant-eater. The twelfth room contains a general
and extensive arrangement of fishes, serpents, lizards, frogs, &c.

The Townley marbles and Egyptian antiquities, are deposited in a very
elegant suite of rooms built purposely for them. The first room is
devoted to a collection of bass-reliefs, in _terra cotta_, pronounced
the finest in Europe. The second is a beautiful circular room, whence
you have a fine view of the whole suite of apartments, bounded at the
end by an exquisitely-wrought _discobolon_, or ancient quoit-player.
This room is devoted to Greek and Roman sculptures, among which may be
pointed out a fine candelabrum, with several beautiful busts and
statues. The third and fourth rooms are also filled with Greek and Roman
sculptures: in the latter are several fine bass-reliefs. The fifth
contains a collection of Roman sepulchral monuments, and a beautiful
mosaic pavement, discovered in digging the foundations for a new
building at the bank of England. The sixth exhibits a miscellaneous
collection of one hundred grand pieces of Roman and Greek sculpture. The
seventh is devoted to Roman antiquities, and the eighth, on the left, to
Egyptian antiquities, among which are the two mummies before mentioned,
with their coffins; a manuscript, or papyrus, taken from a mummy, &c.
Among the Egyptian sculptures in the ninth room, is the celebrated
sarcophagus, commonly called the tomb of Alexander the Great, an
engraving and dissertation on which appeared in the Monthly Magazine for
February, 1809. The tenth contains Greek and Roman sculptures of
singular beauty.

Thence returning, and proceeding up stairs, the visitor is conducted to
the eleventh room, containing ancient and modern coins and medals,
arranged in geographical order, those of each country being kept
separate. It is not shown unless by the permission of the trustees, or
of the principal librarian. Not more than two persons are admitted at
one time, without the presence of the principal librarian, or of some
other officer. The twelfth room contains the collection of the late Sir
William Hamilton, which has been removed from the saloon. It principally
consists of penates, or household gods, bronze vessels, utensils, &c.,
specimens of ancient glass, necklaces, bullæ, fragments of relievos, and
ancient armor, tripods, knives, patent lamps, seals, weights, sculpture
in ivory, bracelets, bits, spurs, ancient paintings from Herculaneum,
Babylonish bricks, and his unrivaled collection of Greek vases, the
greater part of which were found in the sepulchers of Magna Grecia. The
forms of the vases are much varied, and are equally simple and
beautiful. In the thirteenth is deposited the extensive and valuable
collection of prints and drawings, the most important part of which was
bequeathed by the Rev. William Cracherode. The contents of this room can
be seen only by a few persons at a time, by particular permission.

In addition to the various curiosities enumerated above, Professor
Silliman mentions many others which have been contributed to the museum
more recently; and more fully describes some already noticed. “Here,” he
says, “is a rich collection of Etruscan vases, from the cemeteries of
the ancient inhabitants of Italy, who preceded the Roman empire. A part
of this collection was deposited by the Prince de Canino, son of Lucien
Bonaparte. The Maltese are now the only people who fabricate ware like
the ancient Etruscan. Through the kindness of a gentleman attached to
the museum, we were permitted to see the original Portland vase. It is
of moderate dimensions. The material, contrary to my former impression,
is glass, and not earthen-ware. The basis was dark blue, almost black,
and in the manner of the modern Bohemian glass, it appears to have been
dipped into a semi-transparent white enamel, which gave it an exterior
coating of that color. This was then cut away, so as to leave the
exquisitely wrought figures of the human form by which it is adorned. It
was successfully imitated by the late Mr. Wedgwood, in his peculiar
porcelain, but it has never been surpassed in beauty of model, or in the
perfection of its decorations. Mr. Wedgwood’s copies cost fifty pounds
each, which, even with a large subscription, did not reimburse him. Mr.
Webber, the artist, received fifty pounds for modeling it. The original
was discovered in the tomb of Alexander Severus, who died as early as
the year 235, and the Duchess of Portland paid one thousand guineas for
it; hence it was called the Portland vase. It will appear incredible
that any one should be willing to destroy such a gem of art; still, a
few years ago, a man who was believed to be either drunk or insane,
(very probably both,) hurled a stone at it, and shivered the beautiful
antique into fragments. A fac-simile of the vase, as it lay in ruins, is
preserved in a glazed frame in the room. But by great care and skill,
the fragments have been reunited, and cemented together, so that the
joinings can be perceived only by a near approach. The culprit was
imprisoned for two years; and a law being afterward made to fit such
cases, (_ex post facto_, perhaps,) he is, I believe, not yet liberated,
and, certainly, ought not to be, without satisfactory evidence of a
sounder state of mind. In the same room with the Portland vase is a rich
collection of antique ornaments in gold. They are personal ornaments,
Etruscan, Roman, British, Saxon, Norman, Scotch and Irish. Among them
are elegant forms, rings, bracelets, girdles, tiaras, brooches, &c. They
are in appearance as rich and bright as if made yesterday; and evince
that in ages long past, both the value of gold and the manner of working
it were well understood. Some of these things were found in graves, some
in morasses, and, probably, some on battle-fields.

“Here, also, we saw the colossal monuments of stone, disinterred by the
labors of Mr. Layard, and brought from ancient Nineveh. The bull and the
lion, each with the wings of an eagle, and the face of a man, symbolical
of strength, courage, speed and intelligence, are at present in the
lower room, along with the two gigantic figures in human form, each
being originally divided transversely above the waist. It is now
intended to reunite them, when the Nineveh figures receive their final
position in the museum. These stupendous pieces of primeval sculpture
fill the observer with astonishment, both that they could ever have been
constructed, and that they should ever have been extricated from their
long-forgotten sepulchers, and transported, without the slightest
injury, from a position far inland, across wide oceans, to this distant
country, which did not begin to emerge from barbarism until ages after
the very site of Nineveh had passed into oblivion. These colossal forms
are so vast in their dimensions, that man, by the side of them, appears
a pigmy; and still they were shaped by human hands, which for thousands
of years have crumbled into dust, while their works remain fresh and
perfect as when first finished by the chisel of the now long-forgotten
artist. Our polite conductor also accompanied us to a lower room, in
which are stored a great number of the alabaster panels of Nineveh. They
are very large, and are covered by figures in relief, bold and perfect;
scenes of war and of peace, figures of master and servant, of monarch
and subject, of warrior and soldier, and of victor and prisoner. In
fact, they are exactly such figures as are represented in the published
volumes of Mr. Layard, the illustrations in which are in no degree
exaggerated, but, on the contrary, the figures are copied with the most
scrupulous exactness. A hall is in preparation for these precious relics
of an age coeval with the dawn of art and civilization, and of which, as
extended to our time, the entire Christian era forms but an integral
part. At first view, it appears very surprising that they have escaped
through thirty or forty centuries without injury; and this is the more
remarkable, as they are composed of so soft a material as alabaster. It
would certainly have been worn and corroded by the hand of time had it
not been protected by the mildness of the climate, and still more by the
position of these sculptures, cut off from the atmosphere, and buried in
the crumbled and dry earth of the buildings when they were destroyed.”

The collection of minerals, &c., Silliman goes on to say, is arranged in
sixty cases in four rooms. And here is the fossil woman of Gaudaloupe, a
skeleton both headless and footless, but having ribs, spine, limbs, &c.,
so complete as to show beyond doubt that once it belonged to a living
woman; and with it there were found numerous other human bodies as well
as utensils, rude weapons, &c. Here, too, are the remains of the
enormous lizards of geological antiquity. “The _fossil saurians_, in the
collection of Mr. Hawkins,” says the writer just quoted, “purchased by
the museum, were skeletons of ichthyosauri, plesiosauri, and other forms
of reptilian life. There is a perfect fossil skeleton of the
ichthyosaurus, which I measured. It is fully twenty feet long; and there
is beneath it a series of vertebræ of another individual, doubly
cup-shaped, like the vertebræ of fishes. They seem to be all present,
and must have belonged to an animal still larger than the one which I
have named. The figures of these ancient distinct races are now familiar
in our elementary books, and I shall not enter into any minute details.
Most of the fossil saurians were marine. They appeared soon after the
period of the coal formation, and were continued to that of the chalk. A
miniature lizard has been recently found in the old-red-sandstone.

“The collection in the British museum is appalling. It fills one with
astonishment, as we here contemplate the indubitable remains of an age
gone by, never to return. Still more astonishing are the reptilian
remains, brought to light chiefly by the researches of Dr. Mantell,
aided by Dr. Buckland and other coadjutors. But to Dr. Mantell solely
belongs the credit of having established the existence of several
families of land lizards, whose magnitude far exceeds that of the marine
saurians. The bones of the iguanodon, of the hylæosaurus, and
pelorosaurus, are colossal—equal to those of the largest elephants, and
in some individuals even surpassing them, while their length, in some
instances, was equal to that of the longest whales. The form of their
teeth, and the hollow condition of their bones, with a large canal for
marrow, prove that their habits were those of terrestrial animals; while
the form of the teeth, and the solid condition of the bones of the
saurians, before named, adapt them to a marine life; since the buoyancy
derived from the sustaining power of the water would enable them to swim
with this additional weight. The bones of these land lizards discovered
by Dr. Mantell, and now in the museum, with those in his own house,
studied and disposed of anatomically, by his skill in comparative
anatomy, and in the general principles of physiology, prove the
existence of these giants of antiquity, which were not carnivorous, but
were vegetable eaters, in a climate capable of producing a tropical
vegetation, which then existed both in England and on the European
continent, and probably pervaded, more or less, the entire planet. Dr.
Mantell’s original memoirs and published volumes must be consulted for
the proofs of these positions, and for the details of anatomical
structure. He was with me in my last visit to the museum, and gave
additional explanations on the grand fossils deposited there, especially
those of his own gathering, and also on those obtained by Mr. Hawkins,
of Gloucester. Both collections relate chiefly to the extinct colossal
lizards of the gone-by geological ages. The immense collection of
fossils from the Himalaya mountains also passed under review. They have
added much to our knowledge of zoölogical antiquity. Dr. Buckland
discovered near Oxford the bones of a large carnivorous reptile, the
megalosaurus, which approximated toward the magnitude of the lizards of
Dr. Mantell.”


                        MADAME TUSSEAU’S MUSEUM.

This museum consists of a celebrated collection of wax figures, which
“enjoys a high and deserved reputation,” says Silliman; and which, he
adds, “is the only one of the kind from which I have ever received any
pleasure.” “There are three successive rooms,” he continues, “in which
are seen a great number of personages in costume, and in natural and
characteristic positions in relation to each other. In the vestibule the
visitor passes through groups of marble statues, such as may be seen in
many other places. On entering the first room of the museum, exactly at
the door, and sitting in a chair, a pleasant looking young Chinese, a
door-keeper, as I supposed, almost spoke to me, and I did quite speak to
him, so lifelike was he; but as he seemed not to understand English, we
passed on. The next personage, in the right corner of the room, was a
well dressed gentleman, whom I for the moment mistook for a living
Englishman; he looked so very affable, that I took him for an official,
and was about to make an inquiry of him, when I perceived that he too
belonged to the deaf mutes. Next came those to whom I must not speak,
the queen with Prince Albert, and four of their sweet children, mounted
on an elevated platform. The likenesses are so striking, judging from
pictures, statues and information, (for I have not seen them,) that the
royal personages might be readily recognized by one who knew them; for,
as seen here, they are all but speaking, and moving, and breathing.

“Although no figures in these rooms spoke, three gave signs of life.
One, a Chinese lady in a rich oriental dress, was standing on her little
feet, by her husband, while he, a Hong merchant, in splendid attire, was
listening to some communication from her; and although we could not hear
what she said, she gave effect to her address by an earnest look and by
a gentle movement of her head. Another lady, Madame —--, afterward a
victim of Robespierre’s cruelty, because she indignantly refused to
become the victim of his lust, lies asleep on her couch in her day
dress, probably in prison prior to her execution. She breathes, and her
bust, with her dress, rises and falls so naturally with the respiration,
that you instinctively move softly, lest she should be disturbed in her
slumber. In these rooms are seen imposing occasions of state. The queen,
in another scene than which has been named, with her family, is
surrounded by her ministers, bishops, and lords and ladies, and by
courtiers, and generals, and foreign embassadors; (I blend two of these
scenes into one;) all are in full court-dress, in magnificent robes, and
sparkling with factitious diamonds. The illusion is so complete, that
were an observer introduced suddenly into the scene, without an
intimation of the deception, he would be startled at finding himself in
such company.

“Hundreds of the most eminent persons, both of the living and the dead,
are here, and the likenesses are so good that I readily recognized
several, either of those whom I had seen when living, (_e. g._, George
III., Pitt, and Fox,) or whose pictures or busts were familiar,
(Voltaire, Sir. W. Scott, and Washington.) Calvin, Luther and John Knox
are in one group, and the latter is addressing Queen Mary of Scotland,
on whom he seems not likely to make any more impression now than he did
of yore. I might multiply these instances. Napoleon and his marshals;
Louis XVI. and his children and sister; Louis Philippe and his family;
Queen Elizabeth and her courtiers; Anne Boleyn and her bloody husband;
Charles I. and II., the former listening to a talk from Cromwell; James
I. and II.; the royal dukes, sons of George III.; Lord Wellington; Lord
John Russell; Admiral Napier, of Acre memory; and many, many more.
Pictures of eminent persons and of interesting scenes are hung all
around the lofty rooms, which are gilded and adorned in the manner of a
palace. A throng of visitors were in the apartments, but from their
dress and appearance, it was obvious that they belonged not to the upper
ten thousand, but to the lower million, and most of them were probably
of that class, who, having been drawn to London by the great exhibition,
take the opportunity to see other wonders of the great metropolis, and
we were pleased that they could be thus gratified.

“Passing the room of _horrors_, (that is of murders and executions,)
where an additional sixpence is demanded for the pleasure of seeing what
all should desire to avoid, we entered a room called the hall of
Napoleon, occupied chiefly by relics of that great captain and emperor,
who made such an impression on the age in which he lived, that his name
and his deeds—the deeds of more than twenty years of sanguinary
conflict, with only short interludes of repose—are now enrolled in
history, and will go down to the end of time. The relics here preserved
are personal articles, which once belonged to him. His own hair is
inclosed in the same locket with that of his son, the Duke of
Reichstadt. There is the sword of the Egyptian campaign, which was waved
in many a bloody battle. Here are the more harmless utensils of his
table; but the most conspicuous things are his carriages, three in
number. In one of these he made his excursions from Longwood, in St.
Helena, to the boundaries of that small island, rough with volcanic
rocks. This carriage is a plain yellow barouche, with nothing peculiar
in its appearance. His common or usual traveling carriage was in the
post-chaise form, with inside seats for only two persons, and there is a
low division between them. His iron bedstead was folded like the legs of
a grasshopper, packed in a case, and hung beneath the coachman’s seat.
Inside of the carriage is a writing-desk, which can be drawn out at
pleasure, to accommodate the traveler; and it still retained its
connection with the front of the carriage. There is a movable board,
which answered for a table; and a door opens in front, beneath the
writing-desk, to afford room for the limbs when the traveler wishes to
sleep. The bedstead might perhaps admit of a partial contraction, so as
to be placed in the carriage, in front of the seat, as a support, or
there might have been some other contrivance for this purpose. This
carriage is said to be lined with concealed iron plates, to afford
protection against the bullets of assassins. That found on the field of
Waterloo is yellow, and the paint and varnish, have come off in certain
places, so that it is defaced in appearance. This latter carriage is a
common coach with two seats, the front seat, as usual, reversed; but
there is nothing peculiar in its appearance or conveniences, and it was
probably taken in haste after the return from Elba; for the hundred days
included Napoleon’s hegira, his brief sway in Paris, and his downfall at
Waterloo, and to that fatal field he rode in this carriage. But the most
interesting relic is the bed on which the fallen emperor died. We were
assured that it was the very bed and bedstead of St. Helena, and that it
was the camp establishment of his campaigns.”


                        THE PALACE OF BLENHEIM.

The palace of the famous Duke of Marlborough, presented to him by the
nation, in honor of his services, is not far from Oxford, in England.
This magnificent structure has often been described, and recently by
Silliman in his “Visit to Europe.” “We entered,” he says, “by the
splendid portal erected to the memory of her husband by the surviving
Duchess of Marlborough. The palace is situated on a plain in the midst
of an extensive domain, eleven miles in circuit, laid out in the finest
style of an English park. There are twenty-five hundred acres covered
with the richest verdure, including a beautiful lake, from which large
pike are obtained. The palace is an immense structure, and has been
greatly improved by the present duke, who, it is said, has recently
expended eighty thousand pounds upon the establishment. It is in vain to
attempt a detailed description. The north front measures three hundred
and eighty-four feet from one wing to the other. We were courteously
conducted through the palace by a man of good appearance, and of civil
but formal manners. He was dressed in black: you would take him for a
gentleman, and feel that it would be improper to offer him money, but he
took it from our party. We were taken through one splendid room after
another, until it would seem as if there would be no end of them. They
were generally lofty, apparently twenty to twenty-five feet high, and
ornamented with rich ceilings, gilding, and fresco paintings. The
principal apartments are the hall, the bow-window room, the state
bedroom, the billiard-room, the breakfast-room, the grand cabinet, the
small drawing-room, the great drawing-room, the dining-room, the saloon,
the green drawing-room, the state drawing-room, the crimson
drawing-room, the library, the chapel, and the Titian room. This palace
had no appearance of being the comfortable home of the family, who, it
is said, keep it up out of regard to the glory of their great ancestor;
but that they are too poor to live in it in a style of appropriate
magnificence. The gardens or pleasure grounds, and the private grounds,
were not visible.

“The pictures in this palace are numerous, and many of them are
admirable. Vandyke, Sir Godfrey Kneller, Rubens, Holbein, Paul Veronese,
Leonardi da Vinci, Reynolds, Poussin, Carlo Dolci, Corregio, Rembrandt,
Teniers, Titian, and other eminent artists, by mental creations,
contributed the living glowing images of their own minds, or transferred
living features to the canvas. Many very beautiful and lovely women and
princely men look down upon the observer from these animated and
eloquent walls; for the palace is, in fact, an immense gallery of
pictures, divided among many rooms. The victories of the Duke of
Marlborough are displayed in Antwerp tapestry upon the walls of several
of the apartments. The tapestry pictures are of great size: a single
picture covers a side, sometimes two sides of a large room; so that
there is space to exhibit also the scenery of the country; there is room
also for portraits of the principal officers, as large as life—of the
duke himself, and even of the horses; and near or remote, the hostile
armies are lingering on the fearful edge of battle, or they are actually
engaged in deadly combat. How touching the reflection, how sad the
remembrance, that, excepting the present duke and his family, only one
individual of all the vast number of human beings represented by these
pictures survives. One that appears as a little child in a large family
group, is now the aged grandmother of a distinguished peer. All the rest
have passed away, and the great Marlborough himself, and his proud,
aspiring duchess, lie under the marble pavement of the chapel in the
palace, as Louis XIV., the Grand, reposes in his own tomb, and Queen
Anne in hers; and all the sanguinary conflicts of that eventful period
are now to be found in history alone. War, by a spirit of chivalry, was
then a kind of duel on a great scale; it is said that military courtesy
sometimes offered the first fire to the enemy; and a similar offer being
made in return, they thus bandied compliments as if in sport, when they
knew that the first fire would lay many a gallant soldier low.

“One room is one hundred and eighty-three feet in length, and contains
the ducal library, consisting of seventeen thousand volumes. They are
protected by a wire netting in front. At the upper end of the library is
a fine marble statue of Queen Anne, which cost five thousand guineas.
This palace, like most of the ancient public structures in England
constructed of oölite, is externally much corroded by time. These
immense establishments are, of course, very expensive in repairs, in
embellishments, in service, and in many other ways; but they bring no
income; nor, in general, does the vast domain which surrounds the
palace. If kept in high order, as they generally are, they require a
great number of laborers, especially in the horticultural department;
and for all this there is little or no return, unless it may be
something toward supplies of food for the household. There is at
Blenheim a column or obelisk to the memory of the Duke of Marlborough,
which is one hundred and thirty-four feet high, crowned with a statue in
Roman dress. The gallery of Titian is secluded in a separate building,
and for reasons obvious to those who have seen it, is exhibited in a
more reserved manner to artists and amateurs.”


                       THE PALACE OF VERSAILLES.

This splendid palace was founded by Louis XIV. “A building on this
ground,” says a late tourist, “had been used by his immediate
predecessors as a hunting-lodge; but in 1660, Louis commenced converting
it into a palace, and, after many additions, it became the royal
residence in 1681. For a century or more it was a favorite abode of the
kings of France, and no expense was spared upon its decorations. In
1792, the palace was devastated by the revolutionists. Everything
convertible into money was sold for the nation, and but for Napoleon, it
would have been completely destroyed. It was said, that he would have
made it his residence, had it not required fifty millions of francs to
put it in order. Louis XIV. expended upon it forty millions of pounds
sterling, and Louis Philippe fifteen millions of francs. The latter
restored it to splendor, and labored to concentrate in it splendid
illustrations of the glories of France. All the painted ceilings,
gildings, &c., were restored, and new galleries and saloons were formed.
An immense series of paintings, sculptures, and works of art,
illustrative of every important event that has reflected honor on the
annals of France, now fills the splendid halls of this noble palace,
forming a historical museum that has not its parallel in Europe, or in
the world. It would be a vain attempt to endeavor to describe the
palace. Its buildings and grounds are of very great extent. It is said
to contain one hundred and thirty-seven grand saloons and lesser
apartments, which are furnished with ten thousand pictures.

“Four hours are allowed for the inspection of the rooms and of their
contents: and this time we employed most industriously, passing through
the apartments with painful rapidity. No sooner were we attracted by a
room, or interested in a picture, than we were hurried on to another,
and another, and another apartment, until our faculties were tired, and
our eyes satiated with the brilliant display. Many of the pictures are
very large; and it appeared, from the delineations on some of the larger
ones, which were in an unfinished state, that the canvas was hanging on
the wall where the pictures now are when they were painted. Most of the
pictures are battle scenes, from Clovis, Charlemagne, and the crusaders,
down to Napoleon’s wonderful career, and even to the war in Algeria. The
figures are of such dimensions as generally to appear of the size of
life, notwithstanding the distance and elevation from which they are
seen. It is painful to observe how large a part of human effort has been
expended upon war. There are, however, many pictures of quiet scenes,
and an immense number of portraits. Although the productions of the
French pencil are here of unequal excellence, there are certainly among
them no small number of fine pictures. Here also we see a vast
collection of statues in marble and of casts in plaster, and a great
series of medals and coins. The pictures of royal residences represent
many that no longer exist, and with them are illustrations of the
costumes of past times. Some of the galleries in the palace are three
hundred feet long, and are filled with statuary. In order to see all the
works of art, it is necessary to walk three or four miles.

“We looked into the private theater and chapel. Prayers and divine
service were held in the one, and plays acted for the royal
entertainment in the other; and here members of the royal family
sometimes appeared on the stage. The confessional of Louis XIV. is a
small room, by the side of which is a window, where a soldier was always
stationed while the king was at confession; and the very chair in which
his confessor, Père la Chaise, sat, and the very cushion on which Louis
XIV. kneeled, are here in their places. Strange infatuation! The
confessor who urged and obtained the revocation of the edict of Nantes,
which was to let loose the dogs of persecution upon the Protestants, and
the pliable monarch who yielded himself to license this cruel work of
death on thousands, and of banishment upon many thousands more, could
here meet in a private act of devotion, while they were about to violate
the first laws of humanity! The bed in which the king slept, and in
which he died, is still to be seen in his bedroom, and no one has since
slept in that room. The private room of Marie Antoinette, queen of Louis
XVI., has a small door in the side, through which the queen escaped in
October, 1789, when the palace was forced. Through this door she was
compelled to fly in her night dress, while a faithful officer of her
guard was killed on the spot. All these melancholy places we saw, and
also the gallery in which the king and queen and their children
appeared, October sixth, 1789, to appease the fury of the Parisian mob,
many thousands of whom filled the immense court of the palace yard. In
this gallery La Fayette also appeared with them, and in sight of the
people kissed the queen’s hand, to testify his loyalty and fidelity. It
required no small share of courage and firmness thus to appear as the
friend and protector of the royal pair, and their children, in the face
of an infuriated multitude. This palace is associated with many other
interesting events. In the time of Louis XIV. it was the scene of more
splendor than any palace in Europe. And though for a time neglected
after the flight of Louis Philippe, yet more recently under the
government of Louis Napoleon, it has been adorned and restored in a very
lavish and expensive manner. I had no opportunity to see the splendid
play of the waters: the fountains were undergoing repair; besides, they
play only on Sundays, which is the great gala day of the French, and
when vast numbers of people, as in past times, resort to Versailles for
amusement. In the time of Louis XIV., XV., and XVI., there were here
extensive military establishments, which are now in decay. There was a
manufactory of arms, which produced annually fifty thousand stands; but
it was plundered by the Prussians, when the allies took Paris in 1814.
The court of the palace measures eight hundred feet by five hundred, and
is paved, as the courts of the French palaces generally are. In this
court there are statues of great men, Colbert, Turenne, and others, of
ultra-colossal size. In the center of the court there is an equestrian
statue of Louis XIV., also of enormous dimensions. Versailles, nourished
by the power, influence and money of Louis XIV., became a splendid city
of one hundred thousand people; but the population has now dwindled to
thirty thousand. Louis XVI. was an excellent mechanic: happy had it been
for him had a shop instead of a throne been his lot. We saw a good
door-lock of his construction, which was still serviceable; and there is
yet to be seen a brass meridian made by him, and inlaid in the floor.
Several of the royal carriages are here in a perfect state of
preservation. They are gorgeous in the extreme, being all covered
massively with gilded carving, and superbly lined.”


                        THE PALACE OF ST. CLOUD.

“This splendid palace is close upon the Seine, at a point where that
river takes a graceful curve, and, in the course of several miles, is
crossed by numerous bridges of stone, elegantly arched, and of the most
solid construction. The landscape is here very rich and picturesque.
Barracks of superior construction, and other handsome buildings, rise on
the slope of a hill from the river, and the palace crowns the summit.
The palace of St. Cloud was founded in 1572, by a rich financier. In
1658, it was purchased by Louis XIV. for his brother, the Duke of
Orleans, who adorned it expensively. In 1782, Louis XVI. bought it for
his queen, Marie Antoinette. It was a favorite place with her, as it was
subsequently with Napoleon and Josephine. The principal front is one
hundred and forty feet long and seventy feet high. Important events have
happened here. In this palace Henry III. was assassinated by Jacques
Clement, in 1589, and our guide assured us, that a place in the long
room, which he indicated, was the very spot where the deed was done.
Henrietta, the queen of Charles I. of England, died here. Here Napoleon,
November tenth, 1799, completed the subjugation of the then existing
government, dispersed the members of the council of ancients, whom he
had adjourned to this place from Paris, and assumed the reins himself.
In this place, the capitulation of Paris was signed in 1815. Here
Charles X., in 1830, was informed of the explosion of the revolution;
and here Louis Philippe rested a short time, during his flight from
Paris in 1848.

“We have seen nothing in Europe so delightful as this palace. Its
situation is splendid; being elevated high upon the side of a hill
rising from the Seine, it overlooks Paris, and all the populous and most
beautiful country around; the Seine winds gracefully along through the
meadows, and appears wider than at Paris, where it is narrowed by the
quays and other structures of the city. The views into the park are very
fine on all sides of the palace; in the interior the ground rises, and
vistas open up the green slope, with a long avenue of statues standing
in the open air in one direction, and a tower in the distance in
another, while a noble park of old and lofty forest trees, stretches
over the flat ground in front, quite to the river. In the interior of
the palace, everything is in the best taste. The furniture of the rooms
remains as it was left by Josephine, Maria Louisa, and the family of
Louis Philippe. The Duchess of Orleans, daughter-in-law of the late
king, passed much time here with her children, and their beds, as well
as that of Louis Philippe and his queen, remain undisturbed, with their
rich silk curtains and covers.

“The pictures at St. Cloud are very numerous, and are lovely exhibitions
of that almost creative art. They are all drawn from quiet scenes, such
as must ever remain grateful to the human mind. Among the hundreds of
pictures by the first masters that adorn these walls, there is not a
single battle-piece. In this respect, St. Cloud presents a striking and
very agreeable contrast with the carnage that crimsons the long
galleries of Versailles. Louis Philippe sought, in that palace, to
gratify the national avidity for glory, by multiplying battle-scenes in
which the arms of France had been triumphant, and by depicting the
persons of her heroes, until the tired eye that gazes on them is
satiated with gorgeous costume, and the mind afflicted with human
suffering. At St. Cloud a more amiable feeling was cherished, as appears
by the charming pictures of rural scenery, of mild and splendid
landscapes, of peaceful buildings, abodes of happy domestic life, scenes
living and real, and ever grateful. As the private rooms in which the
successive royal families lived, are rich in elegant simplicity, in a
style of chaste beauty, they are in strong contrast with the rooms of
state, which are extremely magnificent, and adorned by a profusion of
princely decorations. Their domes are all alive with the imaginary
beings of fabulous antiquity. Gods and goddesses, and muses and nymphs,
and a multitude of creations of poetic fancy and records of old legends,
decorate the ceilings. A principal ornament of the public rooms is the
Gobelin tapestry, manufactured and hung by order of Louis Philippe. All
that I had seen before at Windsor castle, or at Blenheim palace, fades
in comparison with the rich decorations of the Gobelin looms, which
adorn the public halls of St. Cloud. These textile pictures are
perfectly beautiful, and from their magnitude and the august personages
of the historical dramas which they present so impressively to the eye,
they are sublime. No one viewing them from the distance across the room,
would even suspect that they are anything else than the most perfect
productions of the pencil, and even when the observer approaches them,
it is not easy to convince himself that the splendid illusion is
produced by the interweaving of colored woolen and silken threads. Five
of the scenes here depicted in Gobelin tapestry are copied from original
paintings still existing in the Louvre, executed by Rubens, for Marie de
Medicis. The first is the duke of Anjou, declared king of Spain (Philip
V.) The second of these pictures, which is not less than twenty-five
feet square, is the birth of Marie de Medicis; the third is the
presentation of her picture to Henry V.; the fourth, his marriage with
her; the fifth represents his departure from his capital, and the
committing of the government to the care of the queen. We saw also most
magnificent vases of Sèvres porcelain: one of them was presented to
Maria Antoinette; it must have been, I believe, five feet high without
the pedestal, and of the capacity of a barrel or two. We have nothing in
America that can convey a full impression of these superb productions of
the plastic art. They are modeled after the forms of the most beautiful
Etruscan vases; the most perfect purity of the porcelain material is
contrasted with the finest efforts of the pencil, in the pictures, which
being incorporated by the fire, are indissolubly wedded to the basis on
which they are delineated, and they are resplendent with gold and blue
enamel of cobalt. One is at a loss which most to admire, the productions
of the Gobelin looms or those of the Sèvres furnaces.

“The floors of the palace, according to the general custom in French
houses, are made of pieces of boards. They rarely exceed six inches in
width, and are tastefully disposed in various geometrical figures. All
the floors that we have seen in Paris, except some that are covered by
carpets, are kept waxed; the waxing is renewed daily, and they are so
smooth as to appear hazardous to those unaccustomed to walk upon them.
The floors of the palace of St. Cloud have been, heretofore, covered by
Gobelin carpets, which, at the time of our visit, were rolled and put
away for safe keeping. We saw the council table of Napoleon and Louis
Philippe, memorable for the deliberations which have been held over its
boards. St. Cloud was the favorite place of consultation on matters of
peace and war; here Napoleon planned some of his campaigns; here Louis
Philippe passed much time with his family, and his daughter-in-law, the
Duchess of Orleans, found a quiet retreat with her little son, the Count
de Paris, whom she in person presented in the legislative hall during
the revolution of 1848. Her husband, the Duke of Orleans, presumptive
heir to the throne, having been killed by a mysterious providence, she
naturally hoped that the legislature would acknowledge the claims of her
son, founded on both those of his father and his grandfather Louis
Philippe; but all the world knows that she was disappointed, and was
fain to retreat and seek protection for her child and herself. There was
a deep feeling of pensiveness connected with our visit to St. Cloud;
closed now as it is and quite solitary, without a single individual
remaining of those who formerly figured there; it was to us an
instructive memento of the vanity of human glory. The splendid
apartments remain, with all their furniture and decorations in perfect
order. The solitary chapel, chastely elegant, although grave in its
architecture, seemed all ready and waiting for the arrival of
worshipers; and the entire palace, with its beautiful grounds, impresses
one almost with the belief, that kings and queens, and courtiers and
nobles, and guests of renown, will soon return and give life and joy to
those vacant scenes; but alas, except some few members of the family of
Louis Philippe and of Napoleon, all are gone to the tomb. The dreaded
conqueror of nations found his second prison and his grave on a bleak
rock, in the ocean, and his final tomb among those invalids whom, in
their youth, he led to fields of battle and victory. Josephine, once an
ornament of St. Cloud, as she was of every scene in which she presided,
went with a broken heart from Malmaison to her grave. An old man, our
guide through the palace, said to us, ‘I have been thirty years here,
and I have seen three monarchs expelled from this palace and from their
thrones.’ I have omitted to mention the large library of Louis Philippe,
which still remains at St. Cloud, undisturbed and in perfect order. It
is my impression that the number of volumes was stated at twelve
thousand.”


                    THE CRYSTAL PALACE IN NEW YORK.

Turning now from palaces constructed for the kings and monarchs of the
earth, let us pass to palaces reared for the exhibition of the works of
industry and art of the people. And the first of these which we will
notice is the crystal palace in New York. This splendid structure, a
view of which is given in the cut below, was erected for the exhibition
of the industry and art of all nations. This magnificent building was
erected on Reservoir square, at the northern extremity of the city of
New York, from plans furnished by Messrs. Carstensen and Gildermeister.
The building is now standing, and is filled with the works of industry
and art from every part of the globe. Its main features are as follows.
It is, with the exception of the floor, entirely constructed of iron and
glass. The general idea of the edifice is that of a Greek cross,
surmounted by a dome at the intersection. Each diameter of the cross is
three hundred and sixty-five feet and five inches long. There are three
entrances, each forty-seven feet wide, and one of which is approached by
a flight of eight steps. Over each front is a large semicircular
fan-light, forty-one feet wide and twenty-one feet high, answering to
the arch of the nave. Each arm of the cross is on the ground-plan one
hundred and forty-nine feet broad. This is divided into a central nave
and two aisles, one on each side; the nave forty-one, each aisle
fifty-four feet wide. The central portion or nave is carried up to the
hight of sixty-seven feet, and the semicircular arch by which it is
spanned, is forty-one feet broad. There are thus in effect two arched
naves crossing each other at right angles, forty-one feet broad,
sixty-seven feet high to the crown of the arch, and three hundred and
sixty-five feet long; and on each side of these naves is an aisle
fifty-four feet broad and forty-five feet high. The exterior of the
ridgeway of the nave is seventy-one feet. Each aisle is covered by a
gallery of its own width, and twenty-four feet from the floor. The
central dome is one hundred feet in diameter, sixty-eight feet inside
from the floor to the spring of the arch, and one hundred and eighteen
feet to the crown; and on the outside, with the lantern, one hundred and
forty-nine feet. The exterior angles of the building are ingeniously
filled up with a triangular lean-to, twenty-four feet high, which gives
the ground-plan an octagonal shape, each side or face being one hundred
and forty-nine feet wide. At each angle is an octagonal tower eight feet
in diameter, and seventy-five feet high.

[Illustration: THE CRYSTAL PALACE IN NEW YORK.]

Ten large and eight winding staircases connect the principal floor with
the gallery, which opens on the three balconies that are situated over
the entrance hall, and afford ample space for flower decorations,
statues, vases, &c. The ten principal staircases consist of two flights
of steps with two landing-places to each; the eight winding staircases
are placed in the octagonal towers, which lead also to small balconies
on the tops of the towers and to the roof of the building.

The building contains on the ground-floor, one hundred and eleven
thousand square feet of space, and in its galleries, which are
fifty-four feet wide, sixty-two thousand square feet more, making a
total area of one hundred and seventy-three thousand square feet, for
the purposes of exhibition. There are thus on the ground-floor two acres
and a half, or exactly two and fifty-two hundredths; in the galleries,
one acre and forty-four hundredths; total, within an inconsiderable
fraction, four acres.

There are on the ground-floor one hundred and ninety octagonal cast-iron
columns, twenty-one feet above the floor, and eight inches in diameter,
cast hollow, of different thicknesses, from half an inch to one inch.
These columns receive the cast-iron girders. These are twenty-six and
one-third feet long and three feet high, and serve to sustain the
galleries and the wrought-iron construction of the roof, as well as to
brace the whole structure in every direction. The girders, as well as
the second-story columns, are fastened to the columns in the first
story, by connecting pieces of the same octagonal shape as the columns,
three feet and four inches high, having proper flanges and lugs to
fasten all pieces together by bolts. The number of lower-floor girders
is two hundred and fifty-two, besides twelve wrought-iron girders of the
same hight, and forty-one feet span over a part of the nave. The second
story contains one hundred and forty-eight columns, of the same shape as
those below, and seventeen feet and seven inches high. These receive
another tier of girders, numbering one hundred and sixty, for the
support of the roofs of the aisles, each nave being covered by sixteen
cast-iron semicircular arches, each composed of four pieces.

The dome will strike every one as the grand architectural feature of the
building. Its diameter is one hundred feet, and its hight to the
springing line is nearly seventy feet, and to the crown of the arch, one
hundred and twenty-three feet. It is said to be the largest, as well as
almost the only dome hitherto erected in the United States. It is
supported by twenty-four columns, which rise beyond the second story,
and to a hight of sixty-two feet above the principal floor. The system
of wrought-iron trusses which connects them together at the top, and is
supported by them, forms two concentric polygons, each of sixteen sides.
They receive a cast-iron bed-plate, to which the cast-iron shoes for the
ribs of the dome are bolted. The latter are thirty-two in number. They
are constructed of two curves of double angle iron, securely connected
together by trellis-work. The requisite steadiness is secured by
tie-rods, which brace them both vertically and horizontally. At the top
the ribs are bolted to a horizontal ring of wrought and cast iron, which
has a diameter of twenty-feet in the clear, and is surmounted by the
lantern. As in the other roofs of the building, the dome is cased with
matched deal and tin sheathing. Light is communicated to the interior
through the lantern, and also in part from the sides, which are pierced
for thirty-two ornamental windows. These are glazed with stained glass,
representing the arms of the union and of its several states, and form
no inconsiderable part of the interior decoration.

The external walls of the building are constructed of cast-iron framing
and panel-work, into which are inserted the sashes of the windows and
the louvers for ventilation. The glass is one-eighth of an inch thick,
and was manufactured at the Jackson glass works, New York, and afterward
enameled by Cooper & Belcher, of Camptown, N. J. The enamel, with which
the whole of it is covered, is laid upon the glass with a brush, and
after drying, is subjected to the intense heat of a kiln, by which the
coating is vitrified, and rendered as durable as the glass itself. It
produces an effect similar to that of ground glass, being translucent,
but not transparent. The sun’s rays, diffused by passing through it,
yield an agreeable light, and are deprived of that heat and glare which
belong to them in this climate. In the absence of a similar precaution
in the crystal palace at Hyde park, in England, (of which an account
will next be given,) the roofs of which, as well as walls, were inclosed
with transparent glass, it was found necessary to cover the interior of
the building with canvas, to produce the required shade.

At each angle of the building there is an octagonal tower, eight feet in
diameter and seventy-six feet in hight. These contain winding stairways,
which lead to the galleries and roofs, and were intended for the use of
the officers and employees of the association. Twelve broad staircases,
one on either side of each entrance, and four beneath the dome, connect
the principal floor with the gallery. The latter are circular in part,
and consist of two flights of steps with two landing-places. The
flooring of the galleries is made of closely matched planks, while those
forming the floor of the first story are separated by narrow intervals,
in the same manner and for the same purpose as in the London building.
Over each of the principal entrance halls, the galleries open upon
balconies, which afford ample space for placing flowers, vases and
statues for decoration. Above the balconies, the ends of the naves are
adorned with large fan-lights, corresponding to the semicircular arches
within. On each side of the entrances there are ticket offices, and
adjacent to them rooms are provided for the officers of the association,
telegraph, &c.

The rapid and unexpected increase of the applications of exhibitors,
induced the association to erect a large addition to the building
already described. It consists of two parts, of one and two stories
respectively, and occupies the entire space between the main building
and the reservoir. Its length is four hundred and fifty-one feet and
five inches, and its extreme width is seventy-five feet. It is designed
for the reception of machinery in motion, the cabinets of mining and
mineralogy, and the refreshment rooms, with their necessary offices. The
second story, which is nearly four hundred and fifty feet long,
twenty-one feet wide, and extends the whole length, is entirely devoted
to the exhibition of pictures and statuary. It is lighted from a
skylight, four hundred and nineteen feet long, and eight feet and six
inches wide.

The decorations of the building were intrusted to Henry Greenough, Esq.,
brother of the lamented sculptor of the same name. Mr. Greenough has
made art his study, and in its pursuit has resided long in Italy. The
leading idea in the plan of decoration, has been to bring out the
beautiful construction of the building; to decorate construction rather
than to construct decoration. To do this, and at the same time to
preserve a general harmony of effect, has given Mr. Greenough ample
opportunity to display his knowledge of the resources of his art. The
result is surprisingly beautiful. The colors employed on the exterior
are mixed in oil, the base being the white lead manufactured by the
Bellville Company. The exterior presents the appearance of a building
constructed of a light-colored bronze, of which all features purely
ornamental are of gold. The interior has a prevailing tone of buff, or
rich cream color, which is given to all the cast-iron constructive work.
This color is relieved by a moderate and judicious use of the three
positive colors, red, blue and yellow, in their several tints of
vermilion, garnet, sky-blue and orange, (certain parts of the ornamental
work being gilt,) to accord with the arrangement of colors employed in
the decoration of the ceilings. The only exceptions to the use of oil
colors are the ceilings of the American lean-to and the dome; these
decorations are executed on canvas. The effect of the interior of the
dome, (designed by Sr. Monte Lilia,) is particularly splendid. The rays
from a golden sun, at the center, descend between the latticed ribs, and
arabesques of white and blue, relieved by silver stars, surround the
openings.

The building is supplied with gas and water in every part. The gas was,
at first, designed for the use of the police, in protecting the property
by night; but was so arranged that now, when the building is opened in
the evenings, it affords the most ample light throughout the entire
edifice. The water is accessible at numerous points, with convenience
for drinking, also for the attachment of hose, in case of fire.

The whole quantity of iron employed in the construction amounts to
eighteen hundred tuns; of which three hundred tuns are wrought and
fifteen hundred tuns cast iron. The quantity of glass is fifteen
thousand panes, or fifty-five thousand square feet. The quantity of wood
used amounts to seven hundred and fifty thousand feet, board measure.

The general mode of erection by base pieces, columns, connecting pieces
and girders, is the same with that of the great Hyde park building, but
the construction of the arched nave, and of the dome, is of course
entirely peculiar, and the general effect of the building is completely
different. The London building was certainly deficient in architectural
effect. The form of the New York edifice affords the requisite scope for
a pleasing variety of embellishments, by which all monotony can be
avoided, and allows a very economical use of the ground. The dome,
independent of its effect in the interior arrangement of the edifice,
will give hight and majesty to the exterior.

To complete the explanation of the construction of the building, we
recapitulate its principal dimensions.

                                                            Ft.  In.
    From principal floor to gallery floor,                   24
    From principal floor to top of second tier of girders,   44   4⅜
    From principal floor to top of third tier of girders,    59   10
    From principal floor to ridge of nave,                   67    4
    From principal floor to top of bed-plate,                69   11
    From principal floor to top of upper ring of dome,      123    6
    From Sixth avenue curb-stone to top of lantern,         151
    From Sixth avenue curb-stone to top of towers,           76    9
          Area of first floor,       157,195 square feet.
          Area of second floor,       92,496 square feet.
                                       —-—--
                 Total area,         249,692 or 5¾ acres.

The magnitude of these proportions alone, is calculated to excite
feelings of profound awe in the spectator’s mind; and when we see added
the gorgeous but subdued chromatic decoration with which the interior is
ornamented, and the innumerable works of art and industry with which it
is so richly filled, we may well be proud of an erection which is
destined to confer lasting honor on the American name.

It was to be hoped that this splendid building, filled with the products
of the industry and art of all nations, might have remained permanently
in New York, to be an ornament to the city, and a museum for the
entertainment and instruction of visitors from every part of the country
and the world; but since the above was written, it has been decided that
the building is to be taken down, either for removal to some other
place, or for the sale of its materials.


                     THE CRYSTAL PALACE IN LONDON.

Having spoken of the New York crystal palace, we now pass to the crystal
palace of London, which preceded the former in the order of time, and
far surpassed it in size and magnificence. This splendid building,
erected for the great exhibition of 1851, was located on the south side
of Hyde park, near the Kensington road, in a position highly favorable
in all respects to its intended objects. The construction of the edifice
presented not a few difficulties. The building committee, comprising
some of the leading architects and engineers of Great Britain,
advertised for plans to be presented for the building; and as the
result, no less than two hundred and forty designs were laid before
them. A large part of these were at once put aside as utterly worthless;
and then from about sixty, which were thought worthy of consideration,
the committee proceeded to prepare a design which pleased nobody, not
even themselves. This plan, however, such as it was, was decided upon,
and advertisements were issued for proposals to build it. Objections
were at once raised, both against the plan proposed, and the possibility
of its execution; but while the committee, perplexed with the
difficulties suggested, were doubting what they should do, relief came
to them from an unexpected quarter, which we must go back a little to
explain.

In 1839, Sir Robert Schomburg, a distinguished botanist, in going up the
river Berbice, in Demerara, had discovered in the still waters of the
stream, a gigantic water-lily, of a shape hitherto unknown, and had
transmitted some of its seeds to England, where the plant growing from
them, under the care of Joseph Paxton, the head gardener of the Duke of
Devonshire, was called the Victoria Regia. This plant was the occasion,
and in some respects the model for the crystal palace. Every means was
adopted to place this wonderful exotic in its accustomed circumstances.
A tropical soil was formed for it, of burned loam and peat. Coal-heat
was substituted for that of the tropical sun; and by means of a wheel, a
ripple, like that of its native river, was communicated to the waters of
the tank upon which its broad leaves reposed in beauty. In these
circumstances the lily grew luxuriantly, and Mr. Paxton was obliged to
plan an edifice capable of holding it. This he was doing just about the
time when the committee were poring wearily over their two hundred and
forty plans; and in June, he drew out a design for the exhibition
building, which had been suggested to his mind while preparing an abode
for the Victoria Regia. In ten days he had completed his elevations,
sections, working plans and specifications; and the whole being
submitted to the inspection of competent and influential persons, was
unanimously declared to be practicable, and the only practicable scheme
presented.

The design, thus prepared, was next laid before the contractors, Messrs.
Fox & Henderson, who at once determined to submit a tender for the
construction of a building in accordance with it. And in a single week,
they had calculated the amount and cost of every pound of iron, every
pane of glass, every foot of wood, and every hour of labor, which would
be required, and were prepared with an offer and specifications for the
construction of the edifice. But here arose a difficulty. The committee
had advertised only for proposals for carrying out their own design;
but, fortunately, they had invited the suggestion, on the part of
contractors, of any improvements on it; and so Mr. Paxton’s plan was
presented simply as “an improvement” upon that of the committee, though
it had not a single feature in common with it. This, with certain
modifications, was adopted; and the result was the celebrated crystal
palace, the first of the name, and the suggester of all others of the
same general character—the great, _original_ crystal palace; itself the
greatest wonder of the most wonderful exhibition the world has ever
seen!

The building consisted, or rather still consists, of three series of
elevations, of the respective hights of sixty-four, forty-four, and
twenty-four feet, intersected at the central point of meeting, by a
transept of seventy-two feet in width, having a semicircular roof rising
to the hight of one hundred and eight feet in the center. It extended in
length eighteen hundred and fifty-one feet from north to south, or more
than one-third of a mile, with a breadth of four hundred and fifty-six
feet on the ground; thus covering a surface of some eighteen acres, or
nearly double the extent of Washington square in New York, and
exceeding, by more than one-half, the dimensions of the Park or the
Battery. The whole rested upon cast-iron pillars, united by bolts and
nuts, fixed to flanges perfectly true, so that if the socket was placed
level, the columns and connecting pieces could not but stand upright;
and in point of fact, not a single crooked line, it is said, was
discoverable in the combination of such an immense number of pieces in
the building as first erected, or as it now stands. For the support of
the columns, holes were dug in the ground, in each of which was placed a
bed of concrete, and upon this rested the iron sockets, of from three to
four feet in length, according to the level of the ground; to which
sockets the columns were firmly attached by bolts and nuts. At the top,
each column was attached by a girder to its opposite column, both
longitudinally and transversely, so that the whole eighteen acres of
pillars were securely framed together.

The roofs, of which there were five, one to each of the elevations, were
constructed on the ridge and furrow principle, and glazed with sheets of
glass of forty-nine inches in length. The construction will be easily
understood, by imagining a series of parallel rows of the letter V,
extending (thus, VVV) in uninterrupted lines the whole length of the
building. The apex of each ridge was formed by a wooden sash-bar, with
notches on each side for holding the laths in which the edges of the
glass were fitted. The bottom bar, or rafter, was hollowed at the top,
so as to form a gutter to carry off the water, which passed through
transverse gutters into the iron columns, which were made hollow so as
to serve as water-pipes; while in the base of each column a horizontal
pipe was inserted to convey the accumulated water into the sewers. The
exhalations from so large a surface, from the plants and from the breath
of the innumerable visitors, rising against the glass and there being
condensed, would, if the roof had been _flat_, have descended in the
form of a perpetual mist, or dropping rain; but it was found that from
glass pitched at a particular angle, the moisture did not _fall_, but
would glide down its surface. The bottom bars, therefore, were grooved
on the inside, thus forming interior gutters, by which the moisture
found its way down the interior of the columns, and thus through the
drainage pipes into the sewers. These grooved rafters, of which the
total length was two hundred and five miles, were formed by machinery,
at a single operation.

The lower tier of the building was boarded; the walls of the upper
portion being composed, like the roof, of glass. Ventilation was
provided for by the basement portion being walled with iron plates,
placed at an angle of forty-five degrees, known as _luffer-boarding_,
which admits the air freely, while it excludes the rain. A similar
provision was made at the top of each tier of the building; the plates
all being so constructed that they could be closed at pleasure. In order
to subdue the intense light in a building having such an immense extent
of glass surface, the whole roof and the south side were covered with
canvas, which also precluded any possible injury from hail, as well as
rendered the edifice much cooler than it otherwise would have been.

In the construction of the building the utmost care was taken to give
each part the stiffest and strongest form possible in a given quantity
of material. The columns were hollow; and the girders which united them
were trellis-formed. The utmost weight which it was supposed any girder
would be likely to have upon it, was seven and a half tuns; and not one
was used till after having been tested to the extent of fifteen tuns;
while the breaking weight was calculated at thirty tuns. At first sight
it would seem as if there might be danger that a building presenting so
vast a surface to the action of the wind, might be liable to be blown
down, or at least forced out of position. But from the manner in which
the columns were framed together, they could not be overthrown except by
breaking them; and experiments showed, that in order to break the one
thousand and sixty columns on the ground floor, a force of sixty-three
hundred and sixty tuns must be exerted, at a hight of twenty-four feet.
But the greatest force of the wind known, is computed at twenty-two
pounds to the superficial foot; so that assuming even a force of
twenty-eight pounds, and supposing a hurricane with that momentum to
strike at once the whole side of the building, the total force, it was
said, would be less than fifteen hundred tuns, not one-fourth what the
building could easily sustain, independently of the bracings, which
added materially to its strength. So that, if any reliance at all could
be placed on theoretical engineering, there could, it was said, be no
doubt whatever but that the building would be safe in the most violent
tempest.

The building being thus erected, the spectator entering at the main east
or west entrance, found himself in a nave sixty-four feet in hight, and
seventy-two in breadth, and extending without interruption the whole
length of the building, one-third of a mile. Parallel with this, but
interrupted by the transept in the center, was a series of side aisles,
of forty-eight and twenty-four feet in breadth, and with a hight of
forty-four and twenty-four feet. And over the center of the nave,
swelled the semicircular roof of the transept, overarching the stately
trees beneath; thus forming a gigantic green-house, with the ancient
elms of the park in the place of geraniums and rose-bushes. The whole
area of the ground-floor was seven hundred and seventy-two thousand,
seven hundred and eighty-four square feet, and that of the galleries,
two hundred and seventeen thousand; making in all nearly a million
square feet, to which should be added five hundred thousand feet of
hanging space, available for the display of the innumerable products of
human skill and labor, that made the exhibition one of the most wondrous
of all the wonders of the world.

There were three refreshment rooms; one in the transept, and one near
each end of the building, around the huge trees of the park, which, as
already said, were left standing. No wine, spirits or fermented liquors
were allowed to be sold, but only tea, coffee and unfermented drinks;
while pure water was to be furnished gratis to all, by the lessees of
the refreshment rooms. As to the decoration of the interior, it may here
be added, that the shafts of all the columns were painted yellow; the
concave portions of the capitals, blue; the under sides of the girders,
red; and their vertical surfaces, white.

We might dwell in detail on the vast collection of the products of human
industry and art which filled the interior of this immense structure,
and made it the resort of visitors from every part of the world. But the
history of “the great exhibition” is familiar to most if not all of our
readers. We will only add, that among all the wonders of the crystal
palace, nothing was more wonderful than its cheapness, and the rapidity
of its construction. Possession of the site was obtained on the
thirtieth of July; and in a period of one hundred and forty-five working
days, the building was mainly completed. Its _cost_ was less, by the
cubic foot, than an ordinary barn. If it had been used only for the
exhibition, and at its close returned to the contractors, its cost would
have been nine-sixteenths of a penny per foot; and if it had been left
remaining permanently, it would have been but one penny and one-twelfth
of a penny per foot. The astonishing fact, that a building of glass and
iron, including thirty-three million cubic feet, and covering eighteen
acres, and affording room for nine miles of tables, should have been
completed in less than five months from the day when the contract was
entered into, at a cost less than that of the humblest hovel, opens a
new era in the art of building.

Silliman, in his late “Visit to Europe,” under the date of the
twenty-ninth of March, 1851, says: “Into this wonderful and imposing
structure we have to-day merely made our entrance. As we drove along the
eastern side of Hyde park, on a bright and beautiful morning, the
splendid vision caught our eyes, as the sunlight was thrown wide around
by this immense mirror. It was merely a glance that we took on this
occasion, reserving more deliberate observation for future
opportunities. It was not accessible, as yet, to visitors, but by
particular favor, through an introduction to one of the managers, we
were admitted into the interior. It has become so familiar, in all its
aspects, to the whole world, that at this date, after its complete
development, any detailed description would be out of place. The general
impression made upon us, by our walks through this stupendous
conservatory of the arts, was that of great splendor and magnificence.
It appeared a fairy palace, like the creations of fable; a building
equally unique and original in its structure; original, also, in its
bearing upon the concord and amicable rivalry of nations; in this
respect of most auspicious tendency. Already the consignments of the
world are coming in, and to a great extent have actually arrived.
African Tunis sends its contributions, and even more remote countries
are beginning to occupy the large space allotted to them. The palace is
so high as to cover several of the large trees of Hyde park, where it is
erected; and we saw, not without a shudder, a man dangling in the air at
the end of a rope near the roof, at the hight of eighty feet. He had
been drawn up simply by holding on the end of the rope by his hands, and
was whirled around and around, until he reached a plank almost in the
angle of the roof, where at last he was safely landed.”

And at a later date, he adds: “Although I have walked many hours, and I
presume ten miles in this immense structure, I seem only to have begun
to see it. In despair of my ability to convey any adequate idea of it, I
am almost disposed to pass it in silence, but this would disappoint
those for whom I write. Pictures and descriptions of the building had
reached America before I left home, and it is known that its front
extends more than one-third of a mile, besides its branches. The area
which it covers is eighteen acres, and under its vaulted transept are
included some large and lofty trees that were growing in the park. So
many accounts of its contents, and so many views of its form, both
within and without, have been since published, that a better idea of
both can be obtained from numerous sources, than from anything that I
can write. I shall, therefore, attempt nothing more than some general
remarks, and will mention a few examples. When we were here in March, I
expressed my admiration of the general design. So far as I know it is
novel. Exhibitions of the productions, whether in nature or art, of
particular countries, have often been made, and in some countries they
are annual, as in France, England, and in the United States; but I
believe it was reserved for Prince Albert to originate the design of
inviting all nations to bring to one place the results of their industry
and skill, and specimens of their physical resources. For obvious
reasons, no place was so proper as London, the commercial metropolis of
the world, and I suppose now containing a greater population, and
certainly more wealth, and exerting more influence on mankind, than any
other city. The invitation was a pledge of universal good-will, and it
has evidently tended to produce kind feelings among the nations. Instead
of new fortresses of stone and iron, instead of walls and battlements to
protect this immense city from invasion, there rises in its grand domain
of Hyde park, a crystal palace, the temple of arts and industry. It rose
like an exhalation, a magical illusion of the senses. The frame-work of
iron, although strong enough to sustain the weight and to resist the
winds, is so little apparent to the eye, that the crystal palace appears
a sea of glass, as in the Revelations, ‘A sea of glass like unto
crystal.’ One might dream, as in the ‘Arabian Nights,’ of such a
creation, ‘in the visions of the night, when deep sleep falleth upon
men,’ and might find on waking that it was all an illusion, when it
would vanish like the fabric of a dream, and leave not a wreck behind.
But there it stands, a splendid reality, and with its widely extended
transepts, wings and galleries, has proved sufficient to receive and
protect the gathered riches of mankind.

“I mentioned in my passage from Boulogne, that I was in company with a
large number of French people coming over to see the crystal palace.
Crowds of all nations throng this palace; fifty thousand, or sixty
thousand, and sometimes seventy thousand in a day. As you walk about, or
thread your way through the great masses of human beings that crowd the
avenues, you may hear half the languages of Europe, and some of those of
the orient. I imagined that before our return from the continent the
deluge of nations would have subsided, and this consideration was not
without weight in inducing us to prefer a late inspection of the
splendid wonder; but in this particular we have been disappointed. The
numbers who daily resort to the crystal palace are undiminished: it may
be that there are fewer foreigners, but since the price has been reduced
to a shilling, the country people come in, parents and children, and
mothers with their infants; steamboats and cars are crowded, and it
seems as if the rural population of the kingdom were all rushing into
London.

“As to the contents of the palace, it is impossible to enumerate them. A
mere catalogue, with the most brief descriptive notices, would fill a
large volume. I can only mention groups of things, with here and there a
particular instance. The collection embraces the useful as well as the
fine arts. All kinds of agricultural machines are here to be seen, and
there are seeds, and specimens of crops, all duly arranged and labeled.
The American department has been somewhat undervalued, because it was
not so splendid, and was less full than the collections from some other
countries, but even the Times, which has generally an unfriendly bearing
in relation to our country, has commended the American department on the
score of utility. Indeed, it was not reasonable to expect that a country
occupied but two centuries by civilized people, should be able fully to
compete with nations who have been civilized for a thousand years; and
our great distance, and the difficulty and expense of transporting
articles across the ocean, and of coming over to look after them, must
have prevented our appearing as we do at home, in the great industrial
exhibitions of New York, Philadelphia and Boston. I have seen such
gatherings at Niblo’s and the Castle Garden, in New York, and in Boston,
not only of useful, but of elegant things, as I should feel proud to see
in the American department in the crystal palace. Two agricultural
instruments are, however, spoken of as giving the palm to America above
all competition. I refer to the plow and the reaping-machine of American
manufacture. The plow is said to have attained the perfection of form,
and the reaping-machine to be recommended by its great utility.

“Iron, as it is the material which, more than others, (wood excepted,)
contributes indispensable aid to the arts of life, occupies a
conspicuous place in the exhibition. Its ores and its castings, and its
wrought articles, whether in a locomotive, or the hair-spring of a
chronometer, whether in chain-cables or a cambric needle, are displayed
in endless variety of useful and beautiful forms, and in this department
England justly claims and fully proves her preëminence. Iron, lead,
copper, bismuth, zinc, antimony, and silver, gold and platinum, are
conspicuous here. England glories in her tin, lead and copper: in the
two latter we can compete with her; our lead is inexhaustible, and our
native copper of Lake Superior, is unequaled for abundance. A large mass
of it has been brought over for the exhibition, weighing many thousand
pounds.

“Nothing can exceed the beauty of the articles of silver, whether
utensils or ornaments, which are exposed to view in the gallery of the
crystal palace. The most graceful forms both of peaceful men, and of
warriors, armed cap-à-pie; and of woman in the very _beau ideal_ of her
loveliness, are here in profusion; and if England excels in these
articles in silver, France is not behind her, both in them and in gilded
furniture, and bronze, as seen in all the splendor and elegance of the
show windows of the Palais Royal. The silver extracted from lead by
Pattinson’s process is here seen in piles so rich, with a perfect purity
of whiteness, and in scaly pyramids, a kind of flaky mound, that the
observer looks on with delight, as also upon the same metal cast in
ponderous ingots. Here is the gold of California, one brilliant mass
weighing in value eight hundred pounds sterling, equivalent to nearly
four thousand dollars. There are three masses of native Siberian, or
Russian platinum, weighing respectively twenty-one, twenty-three, and
twenty-five pounds, and many wrought articles of the same metal. The
copper of Russia, in the form of malachite, here makes a great figure.
The same material which we saw in the Vatican, and in the palace of the
king of Prussia, in the form of magnificent vases, is here seen wrought
into innumerable forms of beauty. There is even a large paneled door
fabricated entirely of malachite. Of course many pieces are united to
afford the requisite mass. There are tables, vases, urns, chairs,
settees, &c., mounted with the same rich material. The gems form a
conspicuous ornament of the collection. Queen Victoria has loaned her
largest diamond, with several smaller ones, to be exhibited, and here
also are some of the most precious of the diamonds, rubies, sapphires,
topazes, emeralds, chrysoberyls, opals, and pearls of the regalia of
Russia, Spain and India. The Duke of Devonshire has an emerald deposited
by Mr. Tenant, nearly two inches in the diagonal diameter, and two to
three inches in length; it is of surpassing beauty, being perfectly
crystallized, and of the most intense and uniform grass-green color.
There is no end to the _bijouterie_ of the French. A case in the gallery
is composed of four pieces of plate glass, each between five and six
feet long, and four to five broad. This case is entirely filled with
elegant ornamental articles.

“I can not pretend to enumerate the marbles, granites, porphyries,
serpentines, and other architectural materials, nor the piles of mineral
coal, and anthracite, nor the perfect imitations of beautiful and useful
mineral compositions, such as serpentines, verd-antique, porphyry, and
verd-antique marbles, &c. The _chemical products_, too, of great beauty,
are numerous. The crystallizations of carbonate and bi-carbonate of
soda, of alum, of the prussiates, yellow and red, of the sulphate of
iron, and the sulphate of copper, and sal-ammoniac, are splendid, and
evince that the chemical arts are not behind the mechanical. Large cakes
of metallic antimony are crystallized in beautiful fern-like radiations.

“France, Belgium, Holland, Austria, Germany, Prussia, Turkey, the
Barbary states, Egypt, Bermuda, the East Indies, Canada, Australia, and
other countries, have combined to decorate the crystal palace. Superb
silks have come from the east, and pictured stuffs, shawls, carpets,
&c., from Germany; the antipodes have conspired to crown the glorious
spectacle; plain and useful materials, leather, hemp, ropes of manilla
grass and of other fibrous vegetables, and glass and pottery in their
varieties, are not omitted. To give animation to the scene, steam
generated out of doors is brought in through concealed tubes and applied
to machinery. Cotton-gins and paper-making machines are at work, and the
palace resounds with the noise of actual and productive labor. Ship
models are presented in many forms, especially ships of war, in sections
longitudinal and transverse, with all their interior structure.
Life-boats and life-preservers, and in harmony with them, mirrors for
light-houses; but in contrast, swords, pistols, revolvers, guns, dirks
and daggers, and multiform contrivances to do the work of killing the
greatest number of men in the shortest time; such are man’s
inconsistencies!

“But time would fail to tell of the furniture, the carriages, the
musical instruments, the ceramic wares, and all the countless and
indescribable throng of articles which contribute their effect in the
_tout ensemble_ of this vast storehouse of the nations. The statuary
arranged along the naves is a conspicuous and interesting feature. Many
of the prominent and more meritorious of these marbles, have since
become so familiar from the engravings in the Art Journal and other
illustrated works, that it is needless at this late day to call
attention to them individually. The famous Amazon of Kiss, the same
which was in London, is now the most remarkable artistic object in the
American crystal palace. The most interesting view is obtained from the
galleries of the moving masses of human life below. It is a panorama
where multitudes are passing to and fro, and soon are seen no more,
fleeting as the _jets-d’eau_ which sport among them from living
fountains, that curl over and descend in graceful sweeps, and seem to
enliven the stately palms and other living plants and trees which grace
the scene.”

In closing this extended notice of the crystal palace, we hardly need
add, that after the close of the great exhibition, it was taken down and
removed; and that at present, it rears its splendid form and stately
transepts in a new and more beautiful situation at Sydenham, with many
important additions and improvements. It now stands in the midst of a
magnificent undulating park of three hundred acres, surrounded with
rural delights, fountains, shaded walks and silvan temples; while
within, it has been converted into a great permanent museum of arts,
antiquities and science, with living groves of palms, enlivened by
singing birds and sparkling fountains. For eighteen pence the London
artisan can visit it, including the ride out and back upon the railway.
This is being done by a private association at a cost of near four
million dollars.


                       THE CAPITOL AT WASHINGTON.

Among the public buildings at Washington, the capital city of the
nation, the first in architectural merit, and in point of interest, is
the Capitol, which contains the halls of the national legislature, the
supreme court room, &c., &c. This building (a view of which, as it will
appear when the enlargement now in progress is completed, is given in
the cut below) is situated on an eminence at the eastern part of the
city, about seventy feet above tidewater, its main front looking toward
the west. As it was before the commencement of the alterations and
improvements now in progress, it consisted of a center building, with
two wings, having a total length of three hundred and fifty-two feet,
and a depth at the wings of one hundred and twenty-one feet. The central
building contains a rotunda, ninety-six feet in diameter, and the same
in hight, crowned by a magnificent dome which rises one hundred and
forty-five feet from the ground. The wings, as they were, were each
surmounted by a flat dome. The eastern front, which was intended for the
main one, projects, including the steps, sixty-five feet, and is graced
by a portico of twenty-two Corinthian columns, thirty feet in hight,
forming a colonnade one hundred and sixty feet in length, presenting one
of the most commanding fronts in the United States. The western front
projects eighty-three feet, including the steps, and is embellished with
a recessed portico of ten columns. This front, though not so imposing,
in itself, as the eastern, commands the finest view anywhere to be had
in Washington, overlooking all the central and western parts of the
city, and all the principal public buildings. On the steps of the east
front is a noble statue of Columbus, supporting a globe in his
outstretched arm. In the interior of the western projection is the
library of Congress, a part of which was burned in the winter of 1851-2.
Before that event it contained over fifty thousand volumes. It has been
rebuilt so as to be fire-proof.

[Illustration: THE CAPITOL AT WASHINGTON.]

On entering the rotunda, the first objects that strike the attention,
are the paintings which adorn the walls. There are “The Declaration of
Independence,” “The Surrender of Burgoyne,” “The Surrender of
Cornwallis,” “Washington resigning his Commission,” “The Embarkation of
the Pilgrims at Leyden,” “The Landing of Columbus,” “The Baptism of
Pocohontas,” and “The Discovery of the Mississippi by De Soto.”
Surrounding the rotunda, are a number of chambers, passages,
committee-rooms, rooms for the president, members of the cabinet, &c.
The senate-chamber is on the second floor of the north wing, of which it
occupies about half, and is of a semicircular form, being seventy-five
feet long, and forty-five high. A gallery for spectators, supported by
iron or bronze pillars, surrounds the semicircle, and fronts the chair
of the presiding officer, which stands in the middle of the chord of the
semicircle. In the rear of the chair, and above it, is a gallery,
supported by Ionic columns of the conglomerate or Potomac marble, in
which sit the reporters, fronting the senators. The hall of
representatives is on the second floor of the south wing, and is also
semicircular, but much larger than the senate-chamber, being ninety-six
feet long, and sixty high, and surrounded by twenty-four Corinthian
columns of Potomac marble, with capitals of Italian marble. The
galleries are similar in their arrangement to those of the
senate-chamber. Over the chair of the speaker is a statue of Liberty,
supported by an eagle with spread wings. In front of the chair, and
immediately above the main entrance, is a figure representing History
recording the events of the nation.

The enlargement of the Capitol, commenced in 1851, and now in progress,
will, however, materially change and improve its appearance. It will
comprehend two wings, two hundred and thirty-eight by one hundred and
forty feet, which are to be surrounded on three sides by colonnades, and
on the fourth side to communicate by corridors, forty-four feet long and
fifty feet wide, with the main building. The whole will be seven hundred
and fifty-one feet long, and will cover three and one-half acres, or
more than one hundred and fifty-three thousand square feet. The
architect of the new building has completed the design of a magnificent
new dome for the center of the enlarged building, which is said to be a
splendid conception of genius, and which is to take the place of the
present dome, and thus perfect the symmetry and architectural beauty of
the entire building when complete. It will be constructed entirely of
cast iron, and will be on the foundation of the old dome. And if it at
all meets the expectations formed of it, it will be a lasting monument
of the skill and genius of the architect.

The whole cost of the building as it now stands, before the extension,
was some two million dollars; but the improvement will cost several
millions more. The original structure was commenced in 1793, and had not
been completed when it was burned, by an act of vandalism, in 1814; and
was not entirely finished till 1828. The grounds around the Capitol,
embracing some thirty acres, and forming an oblong on three sides, and a
semicircle on the west, are handsomely laid out, and planted with trees
and shrubbery, presenting, during the spring and summer, a scene of
great beauty. About the center of the grounds, on the eastern front, is
a colossal statue of Washington, by Greenough. The material of the
Capitol is a porous stone of a light yellow color, painted white. The
enlargement is to be of marble.


                       THE SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTE.

South-west from the Capitol, and midway between it and the president’s
house, on a gently rising ground, in the midst of a new park which has
recently been laid out, stands the Smithsonian Institute, one of the
noblest institutions and finest structures in Washington, a view of
which is given in the cut beyond.

[Illustration: The Smithsonian]

This edifice is four hundred and fifty feet long, by one hundred and
forty wide, and is built of red sand-stone, in the Romanesque or Norman
style, embellished by nine towers, from seventy-five to one hundred and
fifty feet high, and of different forms. In the building is a
lecture-room, large enough to seat some two thousand persons; a museum,
for objects of natural history, some two hundred feet long; one of the
best supplied laboratories in the United States; a gallery for paintings
and statuary; a library-room, capable of containing one hundred thousand
volumes; and various other smaller apartments connected with the designs
of the building. The institution was endowed by James Smithson, an
Englishman, who left his whole fortune, some five hundred thousand
dollars, “to found, at Washington, an establishment for the increase and
diffusion of knowledge among men.” The fund, which is in the keeping of
the United States government, yields an income of more than thirty
thousand dollars per year; and this increase is divided into two parts,
one of which is to be devoted to the increase and diffusion of knowledge
by means of original research and publications, and the other to the
gradual formation of a library, a gallery of art, museum, &c.


                        THE WASHINGTON MONUMENT.

On the proposed new park, and between the Smithsonian Institute and the
president’s house, has been commenced a colossal monument to the memory
of Washington, to be erected by the voluntary contributions of the
people. A view of it, as it will appear when completed, is given in the
cut.

[Illustration: THE WASHINGTON MONUMENT.]

The plan contemplates, as a base, a circular temple, two hundred and
fifty feet in diameter, and one hundred feet high, from the center of
which is to rise a shaft, seventy feet square, to the hight of six
hundred feet above the ground, and to be cased in marble. The base is
intended to be the Westminster Abbey of the United States, to contain
the statues of the revolutionary worthies, and in the center, (if his
family approve,) are to be placed the remains of Washington. The temple,
at the base, will be entirely surrounded by a colonnade of thirty
pillars, in the Doric style, forty-five feet high by twelve in diameter,
surmounted by an entablature of twenty feet, which, in turn, is to be
surmounted by a balustrade of fifteen feet in hight. Each state in the
union is invited to furnish a block of native stone or other material,
with an inscription, which will be inserted in the interior, where the
block may be seen and the inscription read in coming ages. A triumphal
car, with a statue of Washington, is to stand over the grand entrance,
as seen in the engraving. The column, at present, has reached the hight
of less than two hundred feet; but if completed according to the
original plan, it will form the most magnificent monument ever erected.
It is said that there is not a column, either ancient or modern, in
Europe, as high as the Bunker-hill monument. And yet, such are the
gigantic proportions of the Washington monument, that Bunker-hill
monument could be placed inside of it without much impeding the
operations of the workmen; and when it is finished, any two of the
monuments of Europe could be stowed away within its walls without being
noticed from the exterior. The design has been severely criticised; and
the great hight of the column, receding so suddenly from so wide a base,
has been strongly objected to. But the plan was deliberately adopted
after much consideration, and when the work is finished, it will
doubtless be approved by the great mass of beholders. Certainly it will
attract the gaze of thousands as a monument not merely to a _man_, but
to _principles_ which should be dear to every American. The endowments
of the great man whom it commemorates, were peculiarly adapted to the
exigency which called them into action. He was brave, but cautious;
earnest, yet calm; resolved, yet guarded against rash adventure; a
patriot, in whose heart the love of country predominated; a statesman,
in whose conduct every public virtue was exemplified; a citizen, whose
intercourse with his fellow-men was without reproach. Placed in a
position at once responsible and perilous, he felt and was ever ready to
acknowledge the overruling providence of God, by whose blessing alone he
could succeed. It was not one great quality which formed the character
of Washington, but a rare union of many great qualities. These, with
unfeigned devotion, he laid on the altar of his country, and for the
promotion of her interests he was ready to sacrifice his personal
comfort and his life. Wonderfully was he sustained in his self-denying
and eventful career, and remarkable was the success which accompanied
his efforts. The most formidable obstacles were surmounted, the most
powerful opposition subdued; his country was liberated; the battle of
free institutions was fought and won; and he, superior to the impulses
of mere personal ambition, nevertheless achieved a fame which has no
parallel in the world’s history. If he was “first in war,” he was “first
too in peace,” and he still remains “first in the hearts of his
countrymen.” Such a name should never be forgotten; such an example
should never lose its influence.


                     THE COLUMN OF VENDOME, PARIS.

The _Place de Vendome_, formed upon the site of a hotel that belonged to
the Duke de Vendome, was begun by Louis XIV., who, in 1685, purchased
and leveled the hotel, intending to erect, round a public place,
edifices for the royal library, the mint, the extraordinary embassadors,
&c. This project, however, was abandoned, and the property ceded to the
city of Paris, with a stipulation to erect a _place_ upon the site.
Mansard, who furnished the first plans, was charged with the second; and
the buildings, as they now stand, were begun in 1699, and finished by
the financier Law. The form of the place is a symmetrical octagon, the
larger sides of which measure respectively, four hundred and twenty and
four hundred and fifty feet. Two wide streets, forming the only
entrances to it, the _Rue de la Paix_ and the _Rue de Castiglione_,
equisect its northern and southern sides. The buildings are uniform,
consisting of a rustic basement surmounted by upper stories, ornamented
with Corinthian pilasters, and high roofs pierced with lucarne windows.
The middle of each side is graced with a pediment supported by
Corinthian columns. This place was first called the _Place des
Conquêtes_, then the _Place Louis le Grand_, and afterward the _Place
Vendome_. In the middle formerly stood a colossal equestrian statue of
Louis XIV., in bronze, erected in 1669, but demolished the tenth of
August, 1792; the bronze figures that ornamented its base were saved,
and are still to be seen in the _Musée de la Sculpture Moderne_. The
mutilated pedestal remained till 1806, when it was replaced by the
triumphal pillar, erected by Napoleon, to commemorate the success of his
arms in the German campaign of 1805. This column is an imitation of the
pillar of Trajan at Rome, of which it preserves the proportions on a
scale larger by one-twelfth. Its total elevation is one hundred and
thirty-five feet, and the diameter of the shaft is twelve feet. The
pedestal is twenty-one feet in hight, and from seventeen to twenty in
breadth. The pedestal and shaft are of stone, covered with bass-reliefs,
representing victories of the French army, in bronze, made from twelve
hundred pieces of brass cannon taken from the Russians and Austrians.
The metal employed in this monument weighs about three hundred and sixty
thousand pounds. The bass-reliefs of the pedestal represent the
uniforms, armor and weapons of the conquered troops. Above the pedestal
are garlands of oak, supported at the four angles by eagles, each
weighing five hundred pounds. The door, of massive bronze, is decorated
with crowns of oak, surmounted by an eagle of the highest finish; above
is a bass-relief, representing two figures of Fame, supporting a tablet,
with an inscription in honor of Napoleon, and commemorating the
victories which the column was erected to celebrate. The bass-reliefs of
the shaft pursue a spiral direction to the capital, and display, in
chronological order, the principal actions, from the departure of the
troops from Boulogne to the battle of Austerlitz. The figures are three
feet high; their number is said to be two thousand, and the length of
the scroll eight hundred and forty feet; a spiral thread divides the
lines, and bears inscriptions of the actions they represent. The figure
of Napoleon on the top of the column, is eleven feet high. The statue of
Napoleon, in imperial robes, was melted down in 1814, to form a part of
the equestrian statue of Henry IV., but was replaced by Louis Philippe,
May first, 1832, clad in military costume, shrouded by crape. From the
summit of the monument, which is reached by a spiral staircase, there is
a splendid view of the capital, and admission is obtained through one of
Napoleon’s veterans, who keeps the door.


                       THE BUNKER HILL MONUMENT.

This celebrated monument, a view of which is given in the cut on the
next page, is in the town of Charlestown, Mass., on the hill where the
first battle was fought between the provincial and British troops in the
war of the revolution. The hill was originally called Breed’s hill,
Bunker hill being to the north of it, at the entrance of the peninsula
on which Charlestown is situated. On this hight a detachment of one
thousand men were directed to intrench themselves, on the night of the
sixteenth of June, 1775. By some mistake, they proceeded to Breed’s
hill, which is nearer Boston, and which has since been called Bunker
hill, as the name is associated with the battle. The men had worked with
such secrecy, that by the dawn of day they had, unperceived by the
enemy, thrown up a redoubt eight rods square. The incessant fire from
the shipping and a battery on Copp’s hill, in Boston, did not prevent
the Americans from completing by midday, with great labor and fatigue, a
slight breastwork from the redoubt to the bottom of the hill on the east
side. Between twelve and one o’clock, the British, to the number of
three thousand men, with a portion of artillery, under Generals Howe and
Pigot, landed in Charlestown, and having formed their men in two lines,
advanced slowly to the attack, frequently halting to allow their
artillery time to fire. The Americans, in their intrenchments, coolly
waited their approach. It is said that General Putnam, who was a leader,
though Colonel Prescott had the chief command, told the men that they
had not a charge of powder to waste, and exhorted them not to fire upon
the enemy till they could see the whites of their eyes. They were
suffered to approach to within ten or twelve rods, when these practiced
American marksmen fired with such deadly aim as to throw the British
ranks into confusion, and cause them to retreat precipitately to the
bottom of the hill. By the efforts of their officers they were formed a
second time and advanced to the attack. The Americans waited till they
were within five or six rods, when they again opened a destructive fire,
which brought them to a stand and threw them into confusion. At this
critical moment General Clinton arrived from Boston, and succeeded in
rallying his men, and in bringing them to a charge, while some cannon
were brought to a station that enabled them to rake the breastwork from
end to end. The works were now attacked with fixed bayonets, and as the
Americans were not furnished with them, and they found their ammunition
beginning to fail, they were obliged to retreat over Charlestown neck.
The British were victorious; but it was a dearly bought victory. Their
loss, by the acknowledgment of General Gage, was ten hundred and
fifty-four killed and wounded; while the engagement was particularly
fatal to the officers, as they were singled out by the American
marksmen. Nineteen commissioned officers were killed, and seventy
wounded. Of the men, two hundred and twenty-six were killed, and eight
hundred and twenty-eight wounded; while of the Americans, who had only
fifteen hundred men engaged, only one hundred and forty-five were
killed, and three hundred and four wounded and missing.

[Illustration: The Bunker Hill Monument]

On the site of this celebrated battle, sixty-two feet above the level of
the harbor, on ground purchased for the purpose, the Bunker hill
monument, a splendid obelisk, has been erected. The corner-stone was
first laid by La Fayette, on the fiftieth anniversary of the battle, in
the presence of an immense concourse of citizens, the seventeenth of
June, 1825, when an address was delivered by Daniel Webster. This
foundation, however, having been found insufficient, the corner-stone of
the present structure was laid, in a more substantial manner, in March,
1827; and the monument was completed the twenty-third of July, 1842. The
obelisk is thirty feet square at the base, and sixteen and one-third
feet at the top; and is substantially built of hewn Quincy granite. The
hight from the base to the top of the apex, is two hundred and
twenty-one feet; and the cost of the work was about one hundred and
twenty thousand dollars. The interior is circular, having a diameter of
ten feet and seven inches at the bottom, and of six feet and four inches
at the top, and is ascended by two hundred and ninety-four steps. The
top is an elliptical chamber, about eighteen feet high, with four
windows, the view from which is truly magnificent, embracing Boston, and
its harbor and environs, together with the mountain scenery in the
distance, and the adjacent towns nearer at hand. The monument consists
of ninety courses of hewn stone, eighty-four above the base, and six
below it. There are a number of windows in the sides, closed with iron
shutters, beside numerous apertures. The completion of the monument in
1842, was hailed by the firing of cannon, and other testimonials of
rejoicing. The monument itself, being the most elevated object in the
vicinity, will serve as a landmark to seamen, and will long stand in
commemoration of the brave men who here fought, and many of whom fell,
in defense of the rights of their country, nobly contributing to the
independence of the United States.


                          THE ARC DE TRIOMPHE.

This triumphal arch, says a late tourist, “is one of the most wonderful
conceptions of that wonderful man, Napoleon. It was begun by him, but
finished by his successors. This stupendous fabric strikes one with
astonishment; and after we had opportunity to compare it with the
triumphal arches of the Roman emperors, we were still more impressed
with its grandeur. Dimensions are indispensable, if we would produce in
others any correct conceptions of structures or space; but they fail to
impress the mind as does the actual vision, and this is eminently the
fact with this elaborate work. Napoleon decreed its erection in 1806,
after his successful campaigns in Prussia and Germany. The plan of the
triumphal arch was furnished in 1809. The foundations were sunk
twenty-five feet below the surface, and it was only above ground in
1811. In 1814, the works were suspended, and remained neglected until
1823. After various interruptions, the pile was finished by Louis
Philippe in 1836, thirty years from the decree which gave birth to it,
and from the laying of the first stone. The cost was ten million, four
hundred and twenty thousand francs, or over two million dollars. The
monument consists of a vast central arch, ninety feet in hight by
forty-five in width, over which rises a bold entablature, frieze and
cornice. There is also a transversal arch, fifty-seven feet high and
twenty-five feet wide. The total hight of the structure is a hundred and
fifty-two feet, and its breadth and depth are a hundred and thirty-seven
and sixty-eight feet respectively. These dimensions are more than
realized by actual inspection. The panels, frieze, and pediment of this
structure, are covered by figures in bold relief, eighteen feet in
hight, three times the size of life, and those above are half of this
size. All of them illustrate the history of France, and they are chiefly
warlike. One group may be mentioned as an example. Victory is crowning
Napoleon with a laurel wreath; History is writing the narrative of his
deeds, and Fame, soaring above, is proclaiming them with her trumpet.

“The observer should ascend the monument, when he will realize more than
ever its great hight and magnitude, and its massy materials. An aged
woman at the door furnished us with a lantern for our ascent through
dark passages. The stairs are easy, although narrow, and we mounted,
without difficulty, up the two hundred and sixty-one steps. The floor
which covers the arches, is composed of very large stones, hewn into
perfect symmetry. Notwithstanding the mountain weight of this structure,
not the slightest crack in the massy stones, or opening in the joints,
can be perceived, in any part of the pile. The top affords a secure and
convenient place for observation, and from this place the observer
enjoys a glorious view of Paris and its environs. Away into the country
stretches interminably, as far as the eye can discern, a beautiful road,
almost of the same ample width as that of the broad avenue, at the head
of which the triumphal arch stands. Looking from the arch to the north,
the avenue leads through and along the Elysian Fields, the Place de la
Concorde, the gardens and palace of the Tuilleries, the Carrousel and
palace of the Louvre, all of which are in one continuous line of two or
three miles. On our right, looking east, are the dome of the Invalides,
the extensive Champs de Mars, and the Ecole Militaire near that field.
The triumphal arch of Napoleon in the Carrousel, the cathedral of Notre
Dame, and the commemorative column of July, 1830, erected on the site of
the ancient Bastile, are seen on the north-east. Alas! how much blood
has this arch of triumph cost. The places of ninety-six victories are
given on the monument, with the names of the generals by whom they were
won, the latter making an aggregate of three hundred and eighty-four.”


                         THE COOPER INSTITUTE.

This is a structure, not yet complete, but to be of huge proportions,
the foundations of which are imbedded deep in the earth, there resting
on masses of stone, from which, as they rise from the ground, they
ascend in columns and arches of iron. It is situated near the upper part
of Broadway, in the city of New York, not far from the Astor library,
the Bible house, and the fine building of the Mercantile Library
Association. Like the Bible house it covers a whole block, and extends
on every side as far as the streets which surround will allow. The space
inclosed is nearly three-quarters of an acre. The ground is excavated to
the depth of twenty-five feet, to lay the broadest foundations, and also
to furnish space below the level of the street for a large hall, which
may be used for public assemblies. Here, under one corner, is to be a
complete apparatus for the manufacture of gas, and also for warming and
ventilating the whole building. From the pavement the edifice rises to
six stories, reaching a hight nine feet above the Bible house. The lower
story, which, from its long row of iron arches, presents a noble
appearance, is intended for stores, the rent of which will be a
perpetual endowment for the support of the institution. The second story
is to be fitted up for offices, which will also be a source of revenue.
With the third story, commences the portion of the edifice devoted
strictly to scientific purposes. Here, occupying the body of the
building, is a hall, which will hold four thousand people, and will
probably be found the best place for lectures in the city, being much
more spacious and elegant than the Tabernacle. It will not be quite so
large as the Academy of Music, which is out of all proportion with
ordinary speaking and hearing; but it will hold as large an audience as
can well get within the sound of one man’s voice. On this floor, a room
of ample dimensions is set apart for a school of design for ladies. This
is an admirable feature in the plan. It will furnish hundreds of young
women, who have a taste for drawing, with facilities for becoming
perfect in that accomplishment, and also with a means of support for
such as wish to teach. Another spacious apartment is devoted to Egyptian
antiquities. The fine collection brought to this country by Dr. Abbott
has been secured, and will form one of the attractions of the Cooper
Institute. Here will be placed the famous bulls, and all the wonders
brought from the land of the Nile. Other divisions of the building will
contain collections of natural history, of beasts, birds and reptiles.
Thus will be formed a grand museum, bringing together what is rare and
curious from the earth, air and sea. Here, too, the mineralogist and the
botanist will find a place for their collections, and the chemist be
furnished with his laboratory. Connected with these departments, there
will be professors and courses of lectures. The design of the benevolent
founder is to furnish to young men, free of expense, an education in any
branch of science or art. In many of its features, this institution is
modeled after the Polytechnic school in Paris. To every young man who
has a thirst for science, is here afforded the means of satisfying it.
The fountains of knowledge will be open to him, and he may drink freely.
We doubt not, many will avail themselves of this opportunity. Sir
Humphrey Davy once said, the greatest discovery he ever made was the
discovery of the poor Irish boy, Michael Faraday, now the world-renowned
professor of London. May not such a one yet be picked up in the streets
of New York, who will here find open to him a path to science and to
fame. Many a country lad, whose desire for knowledge can not be
satisfied in a district school, will here find an ampler field of study.
In future years, the dwellers in that part of the city will often see,
at midnight, the lights gleaming in those high windows, where ardent
youth pore over books, exploring that world of science then, for the
first time, opened to their gaze. In another year, _i. e._, by 1856, we
hope to see it in full operation. A structure so immense, of course, can
advance but slowly. It has been delayed, also, for want of stone, and in
order to have made, specially for this building, iron girders, which
take the place of wood, and which give greater strength and security. It
is guarded against fire, in every possible way, and built in the firmest
manner; and when completed, it will be a huge mass of rock and iron. It
is built to last for ages, and will stand as a monument to the
liberality of a private individual, who, having, on this very spot,
begun life himself as a poor boy, and risen, by a long course of
industry, to be one of the merchant princes of the land, desired to
found an institution for the benefit of the young men of his native
city.

[Illustration: VERGNAIS’S HERCULEAN BRIDGE.]


                      VERGNAIS’S IMPROVED BRIDGE.

Various plans have from time to time been formed, for giving strength
and security to bridges; the history of which, from the time when
streams were first crossed by rude logs or trees thrown over them, up to
the latest inventions, would be full of interest. One of the latest
improvements in this department, designed and invented by an ingenious
French engineer, M. Vergnais, is presented in the preceding cut. It was
originally intended to be thrown across the river Seine, at Paris. Some
years ago, a wire suspension bridge at Angiers gave way, while a body of
troops was crossing, precipitating an entire regiment into the water,
with a terrible loss of life. Since that dreadful catastrophe there has
always been a feeling of aversion in France, toward the erection of
suspension bridges. The ingenious improvement here presented is designed
to relieve all possible danger of breakage, and yet allow of the
construction of a bridge of gigantic proportions, without in the least
impeding navigation. In the ordinary suspension bridge, the main cables
sustain the entire weight, and should the connection between the bridge
and the cables give way, or either of the cables break, a most
melancholy end awaits all who have happened to be trusting their lives
to its security at the moment. In the application of Vergnais’s
improvement, the utmost security is afforded. A monster arch of iron is
thrown across from shore to shore. This arch is composed of such strong
materials as not to require great bulk, so that it presents an aerial
appearance. The flooring of the bridge is suspended from the arch by
innumerable pendants of iron, so that the weight of a body, in crossing
the bridge, is brought to bear gradually upon the structure, and when it
reaches the center, where common bridges are the weakest, under this
invention it reaches the strongest part, for it is directly beneath the
arch. Besides, should any of the pendants give way, the entire bridge
does not yield, for it is impossible for all the pendants to break at
once. This plan is certainly a new and novel one, so far as suspension
bridges are concerned. We hope that the inventor will be encouraged to
erect them in this country. Railroad companies will find them to be in
every way advantageous to their interest, since the cars may run across
them at the highest speed, with perfect security.


                 RAILROAD BRIDGE AT PORTAGE, NEW YORK.

A group of natural and artificial wonders more varied and magnificent
than at Portage, N. Y., is not to be found in this land of sublime
scenery and rapid improvement. It is destined to be a Mecca of travel,
only to be classed with the White mountains, Niagara and the Mammoth
cave. No descriptive language will appear exaggerated to one who visits
the scene, or studies the measurements and details now presented. These
do not tell half the story; a complete account would require a
guide-book of pen-and-pencil sketches. The small village of Portage lies
on the Genessee river, at a point where it enters a stupendous gorge,
which continues seventeen miles, in a north-east direction, to Mount
Morris. Here it flows into the famous Genessee valley, which extends
from Dansville to Rochester, and is a level tract of rich farms and
shaded meadows, that are said to resemble English park scenery more than
anything in our country. The river enters the lake a few miles below the
Rochester falls, thirty miles north of Mount Morris. To begin back, just
below Portage village is a noble aqueduct of the Genessee canal: this is
built of hewn limestone, and is much like the high bridge at Harlem, in
size and appearance. Passing this and advancing into the river-gulf,
with the Genessee on one hand, the canal on the other, and two hundred
and fifty feet of wooded declivity inclosing both, a short walk brings
you suddenly to the new bridge of the Buffalo and New York city
railroad. The first and last look at this bridge must be one of dumb
amazement. It is the crystal palace of all bridges. How any mortal ever
conceived, or having conceived ever dared to attempt carrying it into
execution, passes our comprehension. Resting on six heavy stone
basements in the water, and as many more on the land, it rises to the
immense hight, for a bridge, of two hundred and thirty-four feet, and is
eight hundred feet long, lifting its immense net-work of timber, as if a
whole village of house-frames and rectangular streets were raised up and
set perpendicularly on edge. The first fall of the river, a sidelong,
broken descent of sixty feet, is a few steps below the structure, and
visible from its top, long before reaching which the ascending mist is
dissipated. One and a half million feet of timber, being the product of
two hundred acres of land, together with thirty tuns of iron spikes,
were required for this climax of modern engineering. The cost is
estimated at one hundred and thirty thousand dollars. Before the work
had reached its completion, the railroad passengers were taken in
carriages two miles around from one end of the bridge to the other, a
very comfortable hotel having been erected at the eastern extremity.
Below the monster bridge and its waterfall, the river chasm widens into
a deep basin of hills, with a pond in the center, and the second fall, a
descent of eighty feet, at the lower extremity. This grand natural
temple of cliffs, has thus at each end an organ with a shining range of
silver pipes; on the left side are several galleries in the shape of
canal aqueducts of wood, built to avoid the incessant slides of
quicksand; and, at the upper entrance, the six-story bridge furnishes
fifty rostrums for as many orators. Connected with the lower falls is a
singular semicircular chasm, and, at its base, a cave, worn by water,
which, as a matter of course, has been afflicted with a Satanic name: it
is of difficult access. Here begin the imposing precipices of three
hundred feet in hight, forming, at this point, a mighty amphitheater,
around the eastern brink of which winds the canal, protected by a stone
parapet. A gigantic tunnel was first constructed, and still remains in
part; but the rock proved so insecure, that the overhanging roof was
thrown off, at great expense, into the river, and the bed of the canal
laid in cement. Nearly the whole array of these wonders could be brought
into one view from a high point on the western bank, where the artist
Cole, when this scenery was in its pristine wildness, once took a sketch
for a very large autumnal picture, which is now in the possession of
Hon. W. H. Seward. Some distance below the places now described, is a
third fall, very grotesque in its features, and made remarkable by a
tall natural tower, left by the wearing of the river and surmounted by a
crown of foliage.


                     THE BRITANNIA TUBULAR BRIDGE.

This wonder of modern engineering, a view of which is given in the cut,
forms part of the railroad from Chester to Holyhead, and is thrown over
the Menai strait which separates Caernarvon, in Wales, from the island
of Anglesey. This strait appears to the eye as a beautiful river, half a
mile wide, through which the tide, which here rises twenty and
twenty-five feet, rushes with great rapidity and force. The tubular
bridge over it is one hundred feet above high-water level, and formed of
long, hollow, rectangular tubes, one for up, and the other for down
trains, composed of wrought-iron boiler-plates riveted together, and
resting on huge and massive towers of masonry. Of these tubes or
galleries, eight in number, four for each line, the four shortest are
each two hundred and thirty feet, and the four longest each four hundred
and seventy-two feet in length. The middle and largest pier or tower, is
sixty-two feet by fifty-two at the base, and rises majestically to a
hight of two hundred and thirty feet. The workmen engaged upon this
bridge, with their wives and families, were equal in number to the
population of a moderately sized town, and had the usual provisions for
large communities, of a clergyman, schoolmaster, surgeon, _etc._ The
entire cost of the stupendous structure, was about three million, five
hundred thousand dollars. The number of rivets used in fastening the
tubes of this bridge was over two million; and the entire length of it
is eighteen hundred and thirty-four feet. Silliman says of this immense
and ingenious structure, that it “is wonderful. To construct,” he adds,
“a vast tube of iron strong enough to admit of railroad trains passing
safely through it; to build it in separate pieces down on the common
level; to float them to the site, and there raise them to their
elevation of one hundred feet, and place them on firm pillars of masonry
as supports, and then to unite them into one continued tube, as part of
the grand railroad connection between London and Holyhead and Ireland,
is an achievement which must forever place the name of Robert Stevenson
above all praise.” To show the immense strength of this bridge, he goes
on to say, “An enormous weight of between three and four hundred
thousand pounds, caused a depression of the level only three inches. The
ordinary pressure of the railroad trains produces a depression of
one-eighth of an inch, or even less, discernible only by instruments. A
pressure of more than six hundred thousand pounds produced a deflection
of less than an inch and a half. As works of art, this bridge, and the
one next to be mentioned, are triumphs of mechanical skill and science,
and they not only establish the connection which has been named between
Wales, Anglesey and Ireland, but they afford the prospect of a still
more important connection from Galway, in Ireland, to Nova Scotia, by
steamers, thus bringing Europe and America within a week of each other.
The most massy stone pier, the Britannia, was erected upon a firm rock
which is in the middle of the river. The term tube, as here applied to
the body of the bridge, may convey an erroneous idea; for instead of
being round, it is square. It is an immense iron corridor, or
parallelopiped, closed in, forming a horizontal iron gallery, or
passage, in which the rails are laid. It is thirty feet high in the
middle, and twenty-two feet toward the ends.

[Illustration: THE BRITANNIA TUBULAR BRIDGE.]

“This stupendous structure proves to be a very delicate thermometer. A
little sunshine raises the center an inch, (as the expansion can not
extend downward,) and produces a horizontal deflection or swelling of an
inch and a half. For every fifteen degrees of Fahrenheit, it expands one
ten-thousandth of its length, or half an inch. Alternate sunshine and
showers of rain, cause the tubes to expand and contract. If one of the
tubes was placed on end in St. Paul’s churchyard, London, it would rise
one hundred and seven feet higher than the top of the cross. The rivets
that unite the plates are an inch in diameter; they were put in red-hot,
and beaten with heavy hammers, and in cooling, they contracted so
strongly as to draw the plates together with a force requiring four to
six tuns to make them slide on each other. The tubes were raised from
their position afloat on the water, by means of a Brahmah hydraulic
press, into which the water was injected by powerful steam-engines. The
force exerted by this power would throw water nearly twenty thousand
feet high; more than five times the hight of Snowdon, the highest
mountain in Wales, and almost five thousand feet higher than the summit
of Mont Blanc. The greatest number of men employed at any one time on
this bridge, was two thousand, and the fatal casualties were seven. The
second tube was floated to its place December fourth, 1849, and the
opening of the bridge by the passage of cars took place March fifth,
1850. It may be deflected thirteen inches without injury, and would bear
a weight of one thousand tuns.”


                         THE SUSPENSION BRIDGE.

In the same vicinity, and over the same strait, is the great suspension
bridge, which, when it was finished in 1826, was deservedly esteemed one
of the wonders of the world, and is still entitled to hold that rank. It
is indeed a stupendous structure, of which the full details may be
learned from the official reports; but the following are among the
principal facts. It is one hundred feet above the water, so that the
ships, even those of a large size, are not impeded, and can pass under
it without lowering a sail or a spar. The bridge is built out upon
arches from both sides of the river, to a certain distance, leaving the
space between the points of suspension, five hundred and sixty feet. The
platform is about thirty feet wide. The whole is suspended from four
lines of strong iron cables, by perpendicular iron rods, five feet
apart. The cables pass over rollers, on the tops of pillars, and are
fixed to iron frames under ground, which are kept down by masonry. The
weight of the whole bridge between the points of suspension is four
hundred and eighty-nine tuns. The massy materials of which this bridge
is composed, the admirable manner in which they are locked together, the
great elevation at which it crosses this grand strait, its persistence
without sign of failure during more than a quarter of a century, its
importance as a connecting link between England and Ireland, and the
result of this early effort to conquer formidable physical difficulties,
fill the beholder with admiration and delight, and do lasting honor to
Mr. Telford, the distinguished architect.


           GREAT RAILWAY SUSPENSION BRIDGE AT NIAGARA FALLS.

We have before, on page 265, given some account of this vast structure
as it was, when so far completed as to be used for ordinary passage. But
we advert to it again here, both because it has since had added to it
the superstructure for railway-trains, and also that we may bring in
comparison, the first suspension bridge ever attempted, (an account of
which has been given,) and one of the last and largest ever undertaken.
The first train of cars passed over this bridge on the ninth of March,
1855, from the Canada to the American shore, the engine and tender being
crowded with people, having the English and American colors flying,
while bands of music were playing alternately the national airs of Great
Britain and of the United States. The opening of this mighty and
magnificent structure, well worthy of being classed with the world’s
wonders, really forms an epoch in the history of the world. It unites
with strong iron bands two countries, to the intelligence and enterprise
of whose inhabitants the bridge owes its existence, and stands a fitting
monument. Its strength can never be fully tested; the weight of a fully
laden train being but a trifle in comparison to its capacity. A train of
eight cars, filled with passengers, two baggage-cars, locomotive and
tender, weigh but about one hundred and thirty tuns; this being only
one-sixtieth of its immense capacity. The railway portion of the bridge
is leased to and controlled by the Great Western railway company, and
has laid upon it tracks of three different gauges, _viz._, the New York
Central, four feet and eight and a half inches; the Elmira and Niagara
Falls, six feet; and the Great Western, five feet and six inches, thus
affording facilities for the transit of both passengers and freight,
without change of cars. The following statistics will give some idea of
this immense structure and its capacity.

  Length of span from center to center of towers,         822 feet.
  Hight of tower above rock on the American side,          88 feet.
  Hight of tower above rock on the Canada side,            78 feet.
  Hight of tower above rock on the floor of railway,       60 feet.
  Number of wire cables,                                    4
  Diameter of each cable,                                  10 inch.
  Number of No. 9 wires on each cable,                  3,659
  Ultimate aggregate strength of cables,               12,409 tuns.
  Weight of superstructure,                               750 tuns.
  Weight of superstructure and maximum loads,           1,250 tuns.
  Maximum weight the cable and stays will support,      7,200 tuns.
  Hight of track above water,                             234 feet.


                         OTHER IMMENSE BRIDGES.

At Peru, in Illinois, is the great bridge of the Illinois Central
railroad, which is thirty-five hundred feet, or nearly two-thirds of a
mile long. This is perhaps the greatest work of the kind in all the
western states. It reaches from bluff to bluff, is seventy-five feet in
hight, and contains over one million feet of lumber, beside immense
quantities of iron and stone. The top is covered with tin, and made
water-tight; the trains of cars are to run on the top of all; and
beneath them, and between the frames, pass the roads for wagons; while
underneath all are the river and canal. An ornamental railing is placed
on each side of the track.

Another large bridge, on the suspension principle, is that over the
Mississippi, near St. Anthony and Minnesopolis, in Minnesota. The work
consists of a wire suspension bridge, of one span of six hundred and
thirty feet, having seventeen feet of roadway, connecting the western
bank of the Mississippi river with Nicollet island, about one hundred
yards above the first break of its waters into rapids above the falls.

But perhaps the largest bridge ever built, will be, when completed, that
now erecting over the St. Lawrence, called the Victoria (railroad)
bridge, which is to be an immense iron tube, ten thousand, two hundred
and eighty-four feet, or nearly two miles long. It is to be set on
twenty-four piers, from two hundred and twenty to three hundred feet
apart. At the highest point it will be some sixty feet from the water;
and it is estimated that it will take at least five years to finish it.
These are some of the largest bridges, (in addition to those already
particularly mentioned,) ever erected in any part of the world.


                       THE HIGH BRIDGE AT HARLEM.

The High bridge at Harlem, a view of which is given in the cut below,
forms part of the immense works erected to bring the water of the Croton
river into the city of New York. The dam at the river, which is seventy
feet wide at the bottom, seven feet wide at the top, and two hundred and
fifty feet long and forty feet high, creates a pond five miles long,
covering a surface of four hundred acres, and containing five hundred
million gallons of water. From this the aqueduct proceeds, sometimes
tunneling through solid rocks, crossing valleys by embankments, and
brooks by culverts, till it reaches the Harlem river, a distance of
thirty-three miles. It is built of stone, brick and cement, arched over
and under, and is made large enough to discharge sixty millions of
gallons every twenty-four hours. It crosses the Harlem river on a
magnificent bridge of stone, fourteen hundred and fifty feet long,
having fourteen piers, eight of them bearing arches of eighty feet span,
and seven others of fifty feet span, one hundred and fourteen feet above
tide-water at the top. The aqueduct then passes on to a first, or
receiving reservoir, which covers thirty-five acres and will hold one
hundred and fifty million gallons, and thence to the second, or
distributing reservoir, which holds twenty million gallons, whence it is
distributed by pipes through the city. The entire cost of the work has
been fifteen million dollars.

[Illustration: THE HIGH BRIDGE AT HARLEM.]


                         THE BOSTON RESERVOIR.

The mention of the High bridge at Harlem, and its connection with the
aqueduct which brings the Croton water to the city of New York, suggests
some notice of the aqueduct by which water is brought to the city of
Boston, Massachusetts. So early as 1795, an association was formed in
Boston for supplying the inhabitants with pure water; and for years it
was brought from Jamaica pond, in Roxbury, some four miles distant, in
logs which were bored for the purpose. These logs were capable of
supplying some fifty thousand gallons daily, which could be raised to
the hight of forty-nine feet above tide-water. This supply, however, was
soon found inadequate to the wants of the city, though in 1845, some
fifteen miles of pipes had been laid, and some three thousand houses
were regularly supplied with water. A plan was therefore formed in 1845,
to supply the city with water from Lake Cochituate, or Long pond, as it
was formerly called, about twenty miles west of Boston. This lake covers
a surface of some six hundred and fifty acres, is seventy feet deep, and
drains the springs, it is supposed, of some eleven thousand acres. Its
elevation is one hundred and twenty-four feet above spring-tide, so that
the descent is such as to make the conveyance of water to the city both
easy and sure. The water is carried in a brick conduit or tunnel, high
enough for a man to walk upright in, as far as the receiving reservoir
in Brookline, and from there is taken in thirty and thirty-six inch
pipes to the distributing reservoir on Beacon hill, in Boston. It is
this reservoir, a view of which is given in the cut beyond, from which
the water is distributed in pipes throughout the city. The average daily
supply of water needed for the present population of Boston, is about
five million gallons. The water-works are capable of supplying twenty
million gallons daily; and the Cochituate lake is capable, (by laying
down another main pipe,) of supplying forty million gallons daily. The
supply of the lake is fully equal to the wants of half a million of
people.

[Illustration: THE BOSTON RESERVOIR.]


                   AQUEDUCT AT THE PEAT FOREST CANAL.

This aqueduct forms part of the Peat Forest canal, which is a branch of
one of the canals extending out from Manchester in England. The latter
city is the great center of the cotton manufacture for England, and
perhaps the principal manufacturing town in the world. Before the
invention of what was called the _spinning-frame_, in 1767, the entire
imports of cotton into Great Britain did not amount to four million
pounds a year, and the value of exported cotton goods was not over one
million dollars. But so rapid has been the improvement of machinery, and
the increase of manufactures, that in 1840 the imports of cotton
amounted to the prodigious quantity of nearly six hundred million
pounds, of which nearly five hundred million were manufactured. And in
1854, these imports amounted to nearly nine hundred million pounds, of
which about the same proportion was manufactured as in 1840. Of this
immense manufacture, Manchester is the center; and to this may be added
various other manufactures, as in silks, worsteds, machinery, &c., &c.,
&c. As a consequence of this immense business, seeking, of course,
outlets to market, Manchester has become a great center of internal
navigation. So early as 1761, the Duke of Bridgewater’s canal was
constructed; and this was soon followed by the Bury and Bolton canal, in
1791; by that to Ashton and Oldham, in 1792; and by that to Rochdale, in
1794. And these, again, are connected with other canals in such a manner
as to establish an easy communication with the eastern, central and
southern counties, including the ports of Hull, London and Bristol, as
well as Liverpool, which, of all others, is _the_ port of Manchester. It
is on one of these side canals that the aqueduct, a view of which is
given in the cut above, is located; or rather, it forms part of the
canal itself. It is not so much to be noted for its greatness or
expensiveness, as for the fact that it was among some of the earliest
structures of this kind, which have since become common wherever canal
navigation is known.

[Illustration: AQUEDUCT ON THE PEAT FOREST CANAL.]


                           THE THAMES TUNNEL.

A _tunnel_, in engineering, is a subterranean passage cut through a
hill, or under a river, for the purpose of carrying a canal, road, or
railway, &c. One of the most remarkable works of this kind, ever
executed, is the tunnel under the river Thames, planned by Mr. Brunel,
and successfully executed under his direction. Two previous attempts had
been made to carry a tunnel under the river; one in 1799, and the other
in 1804; but both were unsuccessful. In 1824, however, an act of
parliament, authorizing operations on the plan of Mr. Brunel, was
obtained; and shortly after the work was commenced. A short account of
the progress of the work will probably be the best mode of conveying a
notion of the nature and difficulty of tunneling in general.

Mr. Brunel began his operations by making preparations for a shaft fifty
feet in diameter, which he commenced one hundred and fifty feet from the
river on the Surrey side; this he effected by constructing on the
surface of the ground a substantial brick cylinder of that diameter,
forty-two feet in hight and three feet in thickness. Over this he set up
a steam-engine, necessary for pumping out the water, and for raising the
earth to be taken from within the cylinder, and then proceeded to sink
it bodily into the earth. By this means he succeeded in passing through
a bed of sand and gravel twenty-six feet deep, constituting, in part, a
quicksand, and in which the drift-makers of the former undertaking had
been compelled to suspend their work. The cylinder having been sunk to
the depth of sixty-five feet, the horizontal excavation was commenced at
the depth of sixty-three feet; and in order to have sufficient thickness
of ground to pass safely under the deep part of the river, the
excavation was made to descend two feet and three inches in every
hundred feet. This excavation is thirty feet wide, and twenty-two and a
half feet high, and the process of making it may briefly be described as
follows.

It was accomplished by means of a powerful apparatus of iron, called a
_shield_, and which consisted of twelve large frames, standing close to
each other, like so many volumes on the shelf of a book-case, these
frames being twenty-two feet in hight, and about three feet in width.
They were divided into three stages or stories, thus presenting
thirty-six cells or chambers for the miners. The front of each one of
these cells was protected by narrow boards, technically called
polling-boards, each of which was separately held in its place by an
apparatus constructed for the purpose. The miner commenced by removing
the upper polling-board in his division of the shield, thus exposing a
small portion of earth; into this earth he made an excavation of six
inches in depth, throwing the earth behind him, from whence it was
removed to the mouth of the tunnel, and from thence raised by steam to
the surface of the ground. He then replaced the polling-board, causing
it to press against the face of the newly excavated earth, and thus
advancing it six inches beyond the other polling-boards of his division.
Then successively taking down the remaining boards, excavating the earth
six inches behind them, and replacing the boards six inches further in
than before, he very soon had advanced that distance over the whole
length of his division. All the other miners in the thirty-six cells
having done the same, the framework was moved forward, and six inches
more of earth removed. It was in this way, by these slow degrees, that
the work was finally completed. As the frame-work advanced, it was
closely followed by a solid mass of brick-work, inclosing two arched
passages. These two passages were separated by a solid wall, three and a
half feet at the top and four at the bottom. Other arches, however, were
formed in this wall, for the purpose of opening a communication between
one tunnel and the other. The whole of the brick-work is laid in Roman
cement, and each archway is finished with a lining of cement, a
carriage-road, and a narrow foot-path adjoining the central wall.

This immense enterprise was not finally completed without serious delay
and apparently insurmountable obstacles. The works were thrice
interrupted: in 1826, by the breaking off of the clay, leaving the
shield exposed to the influx of the land-water for six weeks; also in
May, 1827, and in January, 1828, when the river broke in and filled the
tunnel. This was quickly remedied, however, by filling the holes or
chasms with strong bags of clay; the structure, on clearing the tunnel
of the water, being found in a most satisfactory state. Some time later,
the works were suspended for seven years, owing to the want of funds.
Parliament, however, after repeated applications, granted an advance for
their completion, and the works were resumed and continued, till they
were brought to a successful termination. The cost of the tunnel, with
the approaches on both sides of the river, was about three million and a
half dollars; much less than the cost of the modern metropolitan bridges
which span the Thames between Surrey and Middlesex.


                           RAILROAD TUNNELS.

The establishment of railroad communication has given rise, both in this
country and Europe, to some stupendous undertakings in the way of
tunneling; one or two of which are worthy of notice as illustrating the
nature and extent of this kind of work. And the first of these which we
shall mention, and one of the most remarkable, is the Box tunnel on the
Great Western railway in England. This tunnel pierces what is called Box
hill, between Chippenham and Bath, part of which is four hundred feet
above the level of the track. It is ninety-six hundred and eighty feet
long, thirty-nine feet high, and thirty-five wide to the outside of the
brick-work. The shafts for making and ventilating it, are thirteen in
number, and vary in depth from eighty to three hundred and six feet. The
excavation amounted to four hundred and fourteen thousand cubic yards;
and the brick-work and masonry, to more than fifty-four thousand cubic
yards. The number of bricks used, was thirty million. A tun of gunpowder
and a tun of candles were consumed every week for two years and a half;
and eleven hundred men and two hundred and fifty horses were kept
constantly employed for all that time. For a considerable distance the
tunnel passes through freestone rock, from the fissures of which there
was, at times, an immense influx of water, by which on one occasion the
works were interrupted for a period of nine months. On another occasion
after an irruption, water was for some time discharged by the engine at
the rate of thirty-two thousand hogsheads a day. This tunnel is on an
inclined plane of one in a hundred. There are several other tunnels of
great extent in England, such as the Kilsby tunnel, on the London and
Birmingham road, which is over seven thousand feet long; and the tunnel
from Wapping to Edge hill, on the Liverpool and Manchester road, which
is over six thousand feet long, and quite a number of others of five
thousand, four thousand, three thousand feet long, &c. One of these
remarkable tunnels, is that on the South-eastern or Dover railway, a
view of which is given in the cut on the following page, which passes
through what is called Shakspeare’s cliff, at Dover, (though _the_ cliff
to which the poet alluded has been undermined and thrown down, and the
name is now given to another part of the same range,) on the north side
of the British channel. This cliff is a high bluff of chalk, on the west
of the town, the white appearance of which gave the name of _Albion_
(white) to England. There are two openings in the tunnel; and through
these the whizzing locomotives fly along the dizzy precipice, as if it
were an ordinary highway. There is, also, a _second_ tunnel in the same
cliff. This last is called the Abbot’s-cliff tunnel, and is about a mile
in length, coming out on the face of the rock about sixty feet above the
sea. The track passes along the front of the rampart for about a mile,
and then enters the Shakspeare tunnel, which is also about a mile in
length. Thence, again, it issues on the face of the cliff, and proceeds
to the station at Dover.

[Illustration: TUNNEL IN SHAKSPEARE’S CLIFF.]

In the United States there are quite a number of railroad tunnels of
great extent. One of these is the Blue Ridge tunnel, in Virginia, the
length of which, when completed, will be forty-two hundred and sixty
feet, of which more than half is already (1855) finished. The work has
been commenced on each side of the mountain, and is progressing at the
rate of about fifty feet a month, at which rate of progress it would
take about three years to complete it.

But probably the most gigantic work ever proposed in the way of
tunneling, is the Hoosic tunnel, on the line of the Troy and Greenfield
railroad, by which it is designed to shorten the passage from the former
place to Boston. This immense tunnel it is proposed to carry through the
solid rock of the mountain for a distance of some four miles, and to
make it wide enough for a double track for the railroad; the expense of
doing which is variously estimated, at from four million to six million
dollars. By the ordinary method of drilling and blasting, it would take
so long a time, and require so large an expenditure, that all idea of
thus accomplishing the work has long since been given up, if, indeed, it
was ever entertained. And the plan is, by immense boring machines,
constructed for the purpose, to make grooves round large masses of the
rock, and when these latter are broken up by blasting, to remove them
piece by piece. Several such machines have been invented and constructed
with reference to this very work, and one or two of these have been
found successful in practice, though the immense strain caused by the
boring is such as to require corresponding strength in the borer. To
give the necessary ventilation, and now and then light to the tunnel,
both when in the course of construction, and especially when finished
and in use, it is proposed at proper intervals to sink dry wells, or
openings from the top of the mountain, down to the tunnel itself; so
that the constant stream of air entering the mouth of the latter, at
either end, may be always and steadily passing up through these chimneys
or ventilators, thus carrying off the smoke of the engines, or any
impurities of the otherwise stagnant air. The work, when completed, if
it ever is, will be a monument of enterprise and perseverance, unrivaled
in the history of tunneling in this or any other country of the world.


                        THE COLOSSUS AT RHODES.

This was a celebrated brazen image of Apollo, of the enormous hight of
one hundred and five Grecian, or one hundred and twenty-five English
feet, placed at the entrance of one of the harbors of the city of
Rhodes, (anciently Rhodus,) which is about twenty miles from the coast
of Lycia and Caria, in the Mediterranean sea. The island of Rhodes is
about one hundred and twenty miles in circumference, and was early
occupied by a colony of Greeks from Crete and Thessaly, who in time
became both wealthy and powerful. Their capital city was on the east of
the island; it was built in the form of an amphitheater, and had
numerous splendid buildings, among which was a temple to Apollo. Having
for a time submitted to the power of Alexander the Great, they afterward
refused to assist Antigonus in his war with Egypt, when he sent his son
Demetrius against them, with an immense fleet and army. They, however,
being aided by Ptolemy, king of Egypt, were enabled to repulse his
forces and to oblige him to agree to a peace. And he being thus
reconciled to them, in admiration of the courage they had displayed,
presented to them all the engines he had employed in the attack, by the
sale of which, for three hundred talents, they raised the famous
colossus, a view of which is given in the cut.

[Illustration: THE COLOSSUS OF RHODES.]

This immense statue, as already said, was of brass, and was erected in
honor of Apollo, the tutelary god of the island, in acknowledgment of
the protection he was supposed to have rendered the Rhodians in their
recent conflict. It was the workmanship of Chares, (a pupil of Lysippus,
a celebrated sculptor and statuary of Greece,) who, with an assistant,
was engaged in the work for more than twelve years. The hight of the
statue, as already said, was one hundred and twenty-five feet; its thumb
was so large that few people could grasp it; and the fingers were each
larger than the bodies of statues of ordinary size. It was hollow, and
to counterbalance the weight, and render it steady on its feet, its legs
were lined with heavy masonry; and within them, were winding staircases
leading to the top of the statue, from which one could easily see Syria,
and the ships sailing to Egypt. It is supposed to have stood, with
distended legs, on the two moles which formed the entrance of the
harbor; but as the city had two harbors, one twenty, and the other fifty
feet wide at the entrance, it has been supposed to have been at the
narrowest. It bore a light, or lantern, so as to serve as a light-house;
but whether on the head, or in one of the hands, as represented in the
cut, is not certainly known. The statue was erected B. C. 300, and after
having stood about sixty years, was thrown down by an earthquake. After
its fall, the Rhodians solicited help from the kings of Macedonia and
Egypt, and in other countries, to enable them to restore it; and so
great was the commercial importance of Rhodes, that their appeal was
promptly met by magnificent gifts; but the oracle at Delphos forbade
them again to raise the colossus. The statue then remained in ruins for
the space of eight hundred and ninety-four years, when, in the year 672
A. D., it was sold by the Saracens, who were then masters of the island,
to a Jewish merchant of Edessa, who loaded nine hundred camels with the
metal which had composed it, and which, estimated at eight hundred
pounds for each camel-load, would have amounted to seven hundred and
twenty thousand pounds’ weight.

The character of Rhodian art was a mixed Græco-Asiatic style, which
seems to have delighted in executing gigantic and imposing conceptions;
for beside this celebrated colossus, (which was one of the seven wonders
of the ancient world,) there were three thousand other statues adorning
the city; and of these, about one hundred were on such a scale of size
and magnificence, that the presence of any one of them would have been
thought sufficient to dignify almost any other spot. The architecture of
Rhodes was of the most stately character: the plan of the city was by
the same architect who built the Piræus at Athens; and all was designed
with such symmetry, that Aristides remarks, “It is as if it had been one
house.” The streets were wide, and of unbroken length; and the
fortifications, strengthened at intervals with lofty towers, did not
appear, as in other cities, detached from the buildings which they
inclosed, but by their boldness, and decision of outline, hightened the
unity and conception of the groups of architecture within. The temples
were decorated with paintings, by Protogenes, Zeuxis, and other
celebrated artists of the school of Rhodes; and of one of these
pictures, it is said, that when taken to Rome, it was the object of
universal admiration. The island, after passing through various
fortunes, has, for a long time, been part of the Turkish empire.


              -------------------------------------------


                         MISCELLANEOUS WONDERS.


                  ------------------------------------


Having dwelt so long on the WONDERS OF NATURE, and the WONDERS OF ART,
both ancient and modern, we pass to some of the wonders and curiosities
of the world of a miscellaneous nature. Some things are wonders only
through their associations, as is the case with many of the localities
of Palestine, for example, where the Saviour lived and walked, and
wrought his miracles of power and mercy. Some are wonders as exhibiting
the inventive powers of man, or the progress of our age as compared with
another; some as exhibiting the singularities of nature; and some as
combining the wonders both of science and art. The steamboat, the
printing-press, the air-balloon, the residence of Washington, the hut of
the Kamtschatkadale, the spot where the “Pilgrim Fathers” landed, the
telegraph, the diving-bell or armor, the prairie on fire, the nest of
the African tailor-bird, each of these, and of a multitude of other
things that might be enumerated, is, in some way, or for some reason,
associated to our minds with what is more or less wonderful, while still
it may not be strictly a wonder either of nature or of art. Some of
these we propose now to notice, interspersing them at intervals with
some of the more miscellaneous wonders of nature, or art, or both, so as
to give variety to the pages that follow. And the first of this class of
wonders we will notice, is,


                          YOULE’S SHOT-TOWER.

This edifice, which is one of the best of its class, is situated at the
foot of Fifty-fourth street, on the East river, in the city of New York.
It is hexagonal in form, and rises to the hight of one hundred and
seventy-five feet; being sixty feet in diameter at the base, and
gradually growing smaller as it rises toward the top. It forms a most
striking object of interest; and is remarked by the multitudes who pass
by it going up and down the sound, to and from New York. When we
consider the small size of the article to the manufacture of which this
lofty structure is devoted, the means appear greatly out of proportion
with the result. Formerly in casting shot, the apparatus was merely a
plate of copper, in the hollow of which were punched a number of holes.
This was placed a few feet above a kettle of water, into which the
melted lead descended, after passing through the holes in the plate. But
in falling so short a distance, and being so suddenly cooled and
hardened, the shot did not acquire a perfectly globular form, a
desideratum which is now attained by means of shot-towers. In the tower
of Mr. McCullough, the largest shot falls from the summit of the tower
to the bottom of a well twenty-five feet below the surface of the earth,
making the descent one hundred and seventy-five feet. The size of the
shot is determined by the size of the holes through which it passes. The
furnaces for melting the lead are situated near the top of the tower;
three or four tuns of shot are manufactured per day. This method of
casting shot was invented by Mr. Watt, the celebrated engineer, in
consequence, it is said, of a dream. He tried the experiment from the
tower of the church of St. Mary, Radcliffe, and finding it very
successful, obtained a patent, which he afterward sold for ten thousand
pounds. There are now several shot-towers in the vicinity of London, and
different parts of the world; but none more worthy of notice than the
one of which we are now speaking. An iron staircase ascends from the
base to the summit of the tower. Arsenic is mingled with the lead in
proportion of forty pounds to one tun. In casting, the metal is poured
through a tube, but descends through the open space of the tower in a
continual stream of silvery drops. As the weight of the lead prevents it
from scattering or being blown about like water-drops, the workmen pass
to and fro, without danger, close by this fiery cascade. The shot is of
different sizes, from number one, swan shot, to number twelve, dust
shot. Mr. James McCullough has brought the art of the manufacture of the
shot to perfection. Certain portions of his factory are kept entirely
secret; and the shot manufactured in New York are not surpassed in the
world. The cause of most of the imperfections in the manufacture of lead
shot, is the too rapid cooling of the spherules by their being dropped
too hot into the water, whereby their surfaces form a solid crust, while
the interior remains fluid, and in its subsequent concretion shrinks so
as to produce the irregularities of the shot. The patent shot-towers
originally constructed in England, obviate this evil, by exposing the
fused spherules, after they pass through the cullender, to a large body
of air during their descent into the water-tub placed on the ground. The
greatest erection of this kind is probably at Villach, in Carinthia,
being two hundred and forty Vienna, or two hundred and forty-nine
English feet high. The following is the process. Melt a tun of soft
lead, and sprinkle round the sides of the iron pot about two shovelfuls
of wood ashes, taking care to leave the center clear. Then put into the
middle about forty pounds of arsenic, to form a rich alloy with the
lead. Cover the pot with an iron lid, and lute the joints quickly with
loam or mortar, to confine the arsenical vapors, keeping up a moderate
fire to maintain the mixture fluid for three or four hours; after which,
skim carefully, and run the alloy into ingots or pigs. The composition
thus made is in proportion of one pig to one thousand pounds of melted
lead. Two or three tons are usually melted at once in large
establishments. A crust of oxyd of a white spongy nature, sometimes
called cream by the workmen, covers the surface of the lead, which is of
use to coat over the bottom of the cullender. The cullenders are hollow
hemispheres of sheet-iron, about ten inches in diameter, perforated with
holes perfectly round and free from burs. These must be of a uniform
size in each cullender; but, of course, a series of different
cullenders, with sorted holes for every different size of lead shot,
must be prepared. The operation is always carried on with three
cullenders at a time, which are supported upon projecting grates of a
kind of chafing-dish made of sheet-iron, somewhat like a triangle. This
chafing-dish should be placed immediately above the fall; while at the
bottom there must be a tub half-filled with water, for receiving the
granulated lead. The cullenders are not in contact, but must be parted
by burning charcoal, in order to keep the lead constantly at the proper
temperature, and to prevent its solidifying in the filter. The hight
from which the particles should be let fall, varies likewise with the
size of the shot; as the congelation is the more rapid, the smaller they
are. The workman then puts the filter stuff into the cullender, pressing
it well against the sides; he next gently pours lead into it with an
iron ladle. The center of the cullender being less hot, affords larger
shot than the sides. Occasionally, also, the three cullenders employed
together, may have holes of different sizes; the shot will then be of
different magnitudes. These are separated by square sieves of different
fineness, and after passing through other minute processes, are ready
for sale and use.


                         THE EMPEROR FOUNTAIN.

This splendid fountain, a view of which is given in the cut beyond, is
one of the most remarkable in the world, and in commemoration of a visit
paid to it in 1844, by the emperor of Russia, it was called the Emperor
fountain, though since the outbreak of the war between Great Britain and
Russia, the name is said to have been changed to that of the Victoria
fountain. It is situated in Chatsworth, one of the most luxurious seats
of the English nobility; famous for its exceeding beauty and its costly
embellishments. Its walks, lawns, parterres, mimic Alpine scenery,
conservatories, gardens, cascades, halls, pictures, and sculpture, and
music, and fountains, have all been constructed and arranged with
consummate taste and with lavish expense. A month would scarcely suffice
to visit all that is worthy of observation in this wonderful place, and
perhaps few sights could produce a deeper impression of the wealth
possessed by the English aristocracy. We have from this munificent
storehouse selected a single object to be delineated by the pencil. The
Emperor fountain is fed by immense artificial reservoirs on the hills
above Chatsworth, covering eight acres of ground, into which various
springs and streams have been diverted. Our American ideas of a fountain
are usually limited to a beautiful jet of water forced twenty or thirty
feet in hight; hence it is with amazement, if not incredulity, that we
hear of the fountain of Chatsworth, which throws its jet to the hight of
two hundred and sixty-seven feet! Such is the velocity with which the
water is ejected, that it is calculated to escape at the rate of one
hundred miles a minute!

[Illustration: THE EMPEROR FOUNTAIN.]


                THE UNITED STATES MINT IN PHILADELPHIA.

The United States mint was founded in 1790; and the business of coining
commenced in 1793, in the building now occupied by the Apprentice’s
library. In 1830, it was removed to the fine building it now occupies,
on Chestnut street, above Olive street. The edifice is of white marble;
and the north front, opposite to Penn square, is one hundred and twenty
feet long, with a portico of sixty feet long, having six Ionic columns;
while the south front, on Chestnut street, has a similar portico. Since
the enormous influx of gold from California, the United States mint has
become an object of more than common interest and attention; and the
place is usually filled with visitors, watching the various processes
the metal goes through before it comes out in finished coin. The
machinery and apparatus by which these are accomplished, are of the most
complete and perfect character. The rooms in which the smelting,
refining, and alloying are done, are spacious apartments in which a
large number of workmen are employed. Heaps of the rich ores are to be
seen lying around, just as they were extracted from the mines, or
gathered in dust from the sands of the mountain-streams of California.
Bars of the pure metal, of thousands of dollars’ value, are passing
through hands, which like those of the fabled Midas, seem to turn all
they touch into gold. The heat of this place is very great; the fires
glow with the intensity of those in a foundery; the men, in appearance,
resemble the workmen in a smithy; and there is a suffocating sensation
of hot air, steam, and perspiration, penetrating the atmosphere, which
is anything but pleasant to experience, especially when one is
palpitating under the heat of a summer temperature, without the
freshness of the open air to modify and alleviate it. Crucibles are
handled with iron tongs, and cotton or woolen mittens; and the metal is
shaped into bars, and then reduced to the requisite fineness. All this
takes place in one apartment.

In another room, is seen a most beautiful steam-engine, which drives all
the rolling and stamping machinery. It is of one hundred horse-power,
and works the rolling machinery, the draw-benches, and the cutting
presses. It is called a steeple-engine, and has two cylinders; its
boilers are forty feet long, and forty inches in diameter; and the steam
from them also moves a ten horse, and a five horse engine, in the
separating and cleaning apartments. This main engine is of the most
elegant workmanship, polished like a piece of cutlery, and works with
the most admirable precision and regularity, without the least
perceptible jar, and with scarcely a noise. From this room, the visitor
walks into that where the rolling machines are at work, turning out the
metal to the proper degree of thickness which each particular kind of
coin requires. The metal is cast into ingots fourteen inches long, and
about five-eighths of an inch thick; and these are rolled to very near
the proper thickness, when they are passed through the draw-benches to
equalize them. The strips are then cut at the presses, which is done at
the rate of about two hundred to two hundred and sixty per minute. There
are fourteen men employed in this room, two at each pair of rolls. The
pieces, as thus cut, then pass to the adjusting room, where each piece
is weighed separately, and if too heavy, filed down, or if too light, or
any way imperfect, thrown back to be remelted. There are fifty-four
females employed in this room. The pieces are next taken to the milling
and coining room, where from two hundred to four hundred are milled in a
minute, according to their size. In another apartment, the coins are cut
with a punch to the desired size, and then stamped. For this purpose
they are placed, by a person seated at the machine, in a perpendicular
tube, down which they descend, one at a time, being seized as they drop
by a part of the machinery, which pushes the coin under the stamp,
whence it falls beneath the machine into a glass-covered box. This part
of the process used formerly to be performed by a press which required
eight men to work its lever and screw; but now the process requires
scarcely any manual labor except handling the various pieces of coin.
The rapidity with which the pieces are executed, is surprising; being at
the rate of from seventy-five to two hundred per minute. Cents, dimes,
dollars, eagles and double-eagles are turned out with equal facility,
the process being the same in all. Some idea of the extensiveness of
these operations may be had, when it is stated, that, in a single month,
lately, nearly three million pieces of gold, silver and copper were
coined, and that over four million dollars in value are coined every
month.

In addition to the other attractions of the mint, there is a most
extensive cabinet of coins, ancient and modern, of various nations,
which is one of the greatest of curiosities to be found, probably, in
any part of the world. Here, too, are exhibited specimens of all the
existing or past coins of the mint itself, and models or specimens of
any intended coins. The officers and attendants of the mint are polite
and attentive to all visitors, and endeavor to make their visit one of
instruction as well as amusement; and any one, by calling at appointed
hours, can go through the various apartments of the building, and see
the various processes which have thus been described.


                            THE AIR BALLOON.

From the earliest ages, the notion of flying in the air, either by wings
or by supernatural agency, seems to have been in the minds of at least
some of mankind; but the idea of the _balloon_, consisting of an
envelope containing something light enough to make it rise and float in
common air, is comparatively of much later date. It is said that the
first definite notion of the balloon originated with a Jesuit, by the
name of Francis Lana, who in 1670 conceived the idea of raising metal
balls in the atmosphere, which had previously been exhausted of air, but
which should be at the same time so thin, as to weigh less than their
bulk of air. The experiment, however, he never tried, as, in his age, it
was not believed that God would allow an invention to succeed, by means
of which civil government could so easily be disturbed. Later
experiments have proved that strength to resist the external air is
incompatible with the necessary degree of thinness in the material. From
this period, one hundred years elapsed, before the idea of raising a
body in the air, by means of its being lighter than the air whose space
it occupies, was pursued any further. In 1782, an attempt was made to
raise bodies filled with hydrogen gas, a substance which, as is well
known, is lighter than atmospheric air. The experimenter succeeded,
however, in raising nothing heavier than a soap-bubble. In the same
year, the brothers Montgolfier, paper-makers at Lyons, attempted to
raise a paper balloon by means of hydrogen gas. Being unsuccessful in
this, they conceived the idea of applying fire underneath a large
balloon of paper built upon a framework of wood, and containing a
receptacle for fire in the place where, in modern balloons, the car is
suspended. This experiment being so far successful as to show the
correctness of the principle, they next made a balloon of linen cloth,
and kindled under it a fire made and fed by bundles of chopped straw,
apparently with the impression that it was the smoke rather than
rarefied air which had the ascending power. The balloon, thus inflated,
rose about a mile in a direct line, and then described a horizontal line
of about seven thousand feet, after which it gradually sunk. The next
attempt was upon a balloon of lutestring dipped in a solution of India
rubber, and filled with hydrogen gas. The experiment at first failed,
but on the twenty-seventh of August, the same year, at Paris, the
balloon rose beautifully to a great hight, and fell about twelve miles
off. Soon after, animals (sheep, ducks, &c.) were sent up; and on the
fifteenth of October, the first human aeronaut made an ascent of a
hundred feet. The balloon, however, was held by a rope, and connection
with the earth not entirely severed. A month later, on the twenty-first
of November, the daring feat of completely leaving the earth was
performed by two gentlemen, one of whom was M. Rosier, and the other the
Marquis d’Arlandes. The balloon was a _Montgolfier_, or one in which the
elevating power was air rarefied by fire. The signature of Benjamin
Franklin, who at that time was American minister to Paris, is upon the
official paper describing the balloon, its dimensions, &c. It was
seventy feet high, forty-six in diameter, and carried a weight of from
sixteen to seventeen hundred pounds; it rose to the hight of five miles
in twenty-five minutes. When the aeronauts wished to ascend still
higher, they shook a bundle of straw into the flame; when they wished to
sink, they let the fire smolder, or extinguished it with a wet sponge.
The attempt was successful, and the voyagers alighted in safety, after
an absence of a little less than an hour.

[Illustration: THE AIR BALLOON.]

The first trial of a hydrogen balloon was made a week later, from the
garden of the Tuilleries, just after sunset. It ascended two miles with
perfect ease; its occupants here came in sight of the sun, which seemed
to rise again, as at morning, in the east. The balloon and its two
travelers were the only illuminated objects, all the rest of nature
being plunged in shadow. During the next two years, many ascensions were
made by different persons, and successive improvements and inventions
were added. The parachute was invented in 1784, and the first attempt at
steering a balloon was made in this year, but without success. In 1802,
M. Garnerin descended successfully from a great hight by means of a
parachute. In 1806, two aeronauts ascended to such a distance, that they
came into an atmosphere so rarefied as to burst the balloon. The
remnants, however, broke the fall, and they descended in safety. From
the beginning of this century to the present day, but little progress
has been made in an art which seems destined to be of little service to
mankind. No possible means of guiding the balloon have yet been
discovered, or any practicable method of giving it a horizontal motion,
so as to withdraw it from the influence of winds and currents. It has
now become a mere toy, and for any practical or scientific purpose, has
long since ceased to be of the slightest account.

One of the largest balloons ever constructed is that of Mr. Green, a
celebrated English aeronaut, which is called the Continent, and has made
many ascensions from London and Paris. The following account of an
ascent from the Hippodrome at Paris, in 1848, is from a leading French
journal. It is from the pen of Theophile Gautier, an eminent Parisian
romancer and _feuilletonist_.

“Last Sunday, about five o’clock in the afternoon, Green’s balloon
sprung from the inclosure of the Hippodrome into the blue abyss of the
heavens. The ascension of a balloon is certainly not a novelty at the
present day; but an aerostat, like the one belonging to Green, is not of
the ordinary class: its colossal dimensions, the extraordinary care with
which it is constructed, the comfort of its arrangements, make it the
wonder of aerial navigation, and place it in the rank of a vessel of a
hundred guns. To see it swelling its enormous taffeta case under the
net-work of cords which holds the car lined with red velvet, one feels
perfectly at ease as to the dangerous chances of a voyage through the
air. It would seem safer than an excursion in a diligence or upon a
railroad. Admitted into the reserved inclosure, we of course saw the
departure, being near the spot. Nothing could be more quiet or more
gentle. Mr. Green, in a black coat and white cravat, like a gentleman
going out to dine, stepped into his carriage—I should say his
balloon—with confidence and self-possession. A charming young English
girl, accompanied by a friend, had already taken her place in the boat
or car. She was calm and smiling; animation tinged her cheeks slightly,
but it arose rather from embarrassment at seeing so many eyes fixed upon
her, than from any fear whatever. Her intelligent face breathed that
confidence in the inventions of human genius, which characterizes the
English and American races. A Parisian lady would have screamed loudly.

“The balloon held by cords, trembled, and balanced itself, preparing to
take flight. A strong cord still held it to the earth, but soon, upon a
signal from Mr. Green, the cable was cut, and the aerial vessel arose
steadily, with a movement at once easy, powerful, and of exceeding
majesty. As much as the locomotive has an infernal appearance, so has
the balloon a celestial one, without any play upon words. The one
borrows its auxiliaries from iron, coal, fire and boiling water; the
other employs only silk and gas, a thin cloth filled with a light wind.
The engine, with its frightful shrieks, its noisy rattling, and its
black puffs of smoke, runs upon inflexible rails, roars through the
bowels of the earth, and dives into the darkness of tunnels, seeming as
if seeking some evil genius who might have invented it; the balloon,
without noise and without effort, leaves the earth, where the laws of
gravity hold us, and mounts tranquilly up toward heaven. Unhappily, the
balloon, like the fancied inspiration of the poet, goes where the wind
guides it; this every one knows; while the steam-engine, like prose,
goes straight upon its road. Green and his balloon were soon overlooking
Paris and all its horizon; long trails of sand, ballast that he threw
over to raise himself higher, streaked the heavens with their white
tracks, proving, by the time it took them to descend to the earth, the
hight to which the intrepid aeronaut had mounted in a few minutes. He
had disappeared, while the crowd was still looking for him, in the blue
depths of the atmosphere. What a splendid and magnificent spectacle the
triumphal arch, and the giant city with its black ants, illuminated by
the setting sun, must have afforded him! What greatness, and at the same
time what littleness! and how mean, from that distance, must seem the
cares and ambitions of the world!

“While looking with the rest of the crowd, a world of thoughts came
whirling through our brain. The balloon, which it was endeavored to make
perform a useful part in the battle of Fleurus, and at the siege of
Toulon, has only been considered, up to this time, as an amusing
experiment of natural philosophy. It is made to figure in _fetes_ and in
public solemnities; for the crowd, who have more feeling for great
things than academies and wise bodies, feel an interest in balloon
ascensions, which has not diminished since the first attempts of
Montgolfier. It is a profoundly human instinct, which induces us to
follow into the air, until it is lost to the sight, this globe swelled
with smoke, as if it contained the destinies of the future. Man, the
king of creation in intelligence, is, physically, but indifferently
endowed. He has neither the swiftness of the stag, the eye of the eagle,
the scent of a dog, the wing of the bird, nor the fin of the fish; for
everything in man is sacrificed to the brain. All these auxiliaries he
has been forced to furnish himself by the skill of his hand and the
sweat of his brow. The horse, the carriage and the rail-car make up to
him for his want of speed; the telescope and the microscope equal the
eagle’s eye; the compass enables him to follow a track as unerringly as
a dog; the ship, the steamboat and the diving-bell open to him the
dominion of the waters. Nothing remained but the air, where the bird
escaped us, followed only a few hundred feet by the arrow or gun,
ingenious means of bringing distances nearer together. It really seems
as if God should have given us such wings as the painters lend the
angels; but the beauty and grandeur of man consist in his not having
these giant appendages, or being embarrassed by fins. With the power of
thought, and the hand, that admirable tool, he must seek and find, out
of himself, all his physical powers.

“The idea of mounting into the air is not new; it is not to-day that
Phaeton asked to get into Phœbus’s car, and that Dædalus launched into
the air his son Icarus. Their descents were only unaccomplished ascents.
The griffins, the hippogriffs, the Pegasus, the winged shoes of Mercury,
the arrow of Abarys, the carpet of the four Facardins, testify to the
continuance and persistence of this idea. At night, does not the dream
deliver us from the laws of weight? Does it not give us the faculty of
going, of coming, and of flying to the summit of things before
unattainable, or of losing ourselves in the infinite hights? This
general and oft-repeated dream, which expresses the secret desire of
humanity, has it not something prophetic? Perhaps modern skepticism
treats too lightly the meaning of these flights of the soul, temporarily
freed from the more earthly control of reason and sense. With the
astonishing simplicity of the operations of nature, a miracle took place
in the fireplace, without attracting attention, every time that the
smoke carried out of the chimney a piece of burnt paper. It required six
thousand years to take a hint from this simple fact. The balloon floats
in the air as oil floats upon wine, as cork upon water, as the
cannon-ball upon mercury, by relations of weight and of lightness, one
single law everywhere. But unfortunately, the balloon has neither wings,
nor tail, nor neck, nor feet, nothing which can guide it; it is a vessel
without sail or helm, a fish without fins, a bird without feathers; it
floats, that is all; it is immense, and it is nothing. Why do not all
the inventors, wise mechanicians, chemists, poets, occupy themselves by
endeavoring to solve the problem of the guiding of balloons? Is it not
shameful for man to have found the hippogriff which transports him to
the celestial regions, and not to know how to guide it; while every day
the birds go and come on airy wings, as if to instruct and defy us? The
air, although a fluid, offers points of propulsion, since the condor, or
the sparrow, mounts, descends, goes to the right and left, quickly or
slowly, as he pleases; and why should not man be able to do the same?
The time when he shall do this may be near. That will be a great day!
Man will truly become master of his planet, and will have conquered his
atmosphere! No more seas, no more rivers, no more mountains, no more
valleys; that will be the true reign of liberty. Merely by this
knowledge of the direction of balloons, the whole face of the world will
change immediately. Other forms of government, other manners, a new
style of architecture, a different system of fortification, will be
needed; but then men will no longer make war. The custom-house and its
taxes, and the stronghold, will disappear. Visit, if you can, with your
gauge and your yardstick, balloons ten thousand feet in the air; of what
use will be moats, ditches, portcullis and bridges, against an aerial
army? What a fine spectacle it will be to see crossing one another in
the air, at different hights, these swarms of balloons, painted with
brilliant colors, guided during the day by the light, and at night with
their lanterns, having the appearance of stars traversing the firmament!
The ascension of the highest mountains will then be but child’s play. We
shall penetrate into China, and go to Timbuctoo as one goes to St.
Cloud; the deserts of Africa, of Asia and of America, will be forced to
deliver up their secrets. We shall go even to the border of the
atmosphere which surrounds us. We shall visit creation in every nook and
recess. There will be servant balloons and master balloons; and in
speaking of the luxury or extravagance of a person, it will be said, ‘He
is rich; he has a balloon of thirty-four thousand cubic feet of gas;’
which will be equivalent to saying that he has a coach and four. And
when this dream is realized, the execution of another, already dreamed
by the poets, will be attempted. Man, arrived at the outward limits of
his atmosphere, will wish to leave his planet; and will seriously
attempt to reach the moon! And who shall say that at some time he shall
not do it?”

[Illustration: EARLY NAVIGATION.]


                      THE PROGRESS OF NAVIGATION.

One of the wonders of the world, is to be found in tracing the _progress
of navigation_, from its small beginning, up to its present wonderful
condition and results. There is an old legend, that, ages ago, a piece
of reed floating on the water, first suggested the idea of navigation.
And if so, the next step might have been, the use of logs for crossing
rivers; then, the use of rafts; then, of canoes of hollowed logs; and
then, of artificial boats, of various forms and materials, some of wood,
some of skins, and some of bark. The earliest navigators on an extended
scale were the Phœnicians, who made voyages through the Mediterranean,
and along the northern coasts of Europe, and down the Red sea, as early
as the days of Solomon, one thousand years before the Christian era.
Their earliest attempts to navigate the waters, might perhaps be
represented in the following cut, in which several forms of boats may be
seen. Their larger and later vessels were somewhat of the shape of those
now in use, though more perhaps of the Dutch, than of the English or
American form. The sails of these vessels are said to have been
suggested by the little sea animal, called the _nautilus_. The vessels
themselves had no decks, and were not over twenty or thirty tuns’
burden. They had masts and rudders, and the prow was decorated with
paint and gilding, and represented the image of some god. The ships of
the Greeks and Romans, in after times, were larger, but they were
uncouth structures, managed with difficulty, and liable to numerous
accidents and hindrances. The war ships were nothing but large
row-boats. These were very long and narrow, like canoes. The cable and
anchor were later inventions. The latter at first was a large stone. In
the days of the Roman emperors, vessels of immense size were
occasionally built, but they were of little use, except for the
transportation of heavy objects. In the middle ages, navigation made
little progress; but about the close of the fifteenth century, its
strides were prodigious. The mariner’s compass had been invented, and
the sailor had now a guide over the mysterious ocean. Hence America was
discovered in 1492, though the three ships of Columbus were not so large
as our common schooners, and had no proper decks; so that it seems a
wonder to us, that with these comparatively small vessels he should have
ventured so far on the mighty deep. From his day to the present, there
has been a steady advance in ship-building. The forms of vessels have
been improved; their size greatly increased; and their number
multiplied, a thousand fold; so that if the great navigator were now
again to visit the earth, he would be astonished at the huge structures
built as packet and freight ships for crossing the ocean. For a long
time, the English took the lead in ship-building; but it is now admitted
that the fastest vessels in the world, as well as those of most graceful
appearance, are those built in the United States. In the cut above, is a
view of one of our large packet-ships, just ready to be launched from
the stocks. Vessels of this class may vary from fifteen hundred to two
thousand tuns’ burden; their main cabins are beautifully furnished with
mahogany and gilded carvings; and no expense is spared that may
contribute to their elegance, or the comfort of passengers.

[Illustration: THE LAUNCH OF A PACKET-SHIP.]


                           STEAM NAVIGATION.

So far as we know, the ancients were unacquainted with the nature and
properties of steam. Some accounts, indeed, have come down to us, of
engines of a very early date, such, for example, as that proposed by
Hero, of Alexandria, in which the mechanical agency of steam was more or
less used; but it does not appear that those who invented and applied
these machines, understood the properties of vapor, or had any correct
idea of the effect of heat when applied to liquids. Even at a much later
date, the effects produced by steam were ascribed, not to the vapor of
water, but to the force of the air which was supposed to be expelled
from water by heat. In the seventeenth century, De Caus proposed the
construction of a machine by which a column of water was raised by the
elastic force of steam, but he does not seem to have understood the
principle on which it was effected. About the middle of the same
century, Lord Worcester published the description of a high pressure
steam-engine, which has since formed so remarkable a feature in all
histories of steam-engines. Toward the latter end of the century,
however, the actual properties of vapor began to be more unfolded. In
1683, Sir Samuel Morland discovered the exact numerical proportion in
which water increases its volume when evaporated. A few years later,
Papin discovered the method of producing a vacuum by the condensation of
steam; and this discovery was, by others, soon applied to mechanical
purposes. About the middle of the eighteenth century, Watt applied
himself to the improvement of the steam-engine; and from this time
forward, the various discoveries of chemistry, and the experiments of
scientific and practical men, prepared the way for rapid progress in the
application of steam.

In 1793, Fulton, the celebrated engineer, engaged actively in
endeavoring to improve inland navigation. Even at that early period, he
had conceived the idea of propelling vessels by steam; and he speaks, in
some of his manuscripts, with great confidence of its practicability. In
1797, he went to Paris, and, while there, projected the first panorama
that was ever exhibited there. He also planned a _submarine boat_. In
1803, he completed his first steamboat, which was tried upon the Seine,
and proved completely successful. He now proceeded to New York, to carry
his ideas of steam navigation into practical effect; and in 1807, his
first steamboat, a view of which is given in the cut beyond, ascended
the Hudson river, to the great delight and wonder of thousands of
spectators. She was called the Clermont; and was only one hundred feet
long, twelve wide, and seven deep. Her first trip was made, September
first, 1807, from New York to Albany, one hundred and sixty miles, in
thirty-six hours; the fare for the passage being seven dollars,
exclusive of meals. Thus this great man brought to a successful issue
his long meditated invention, and determined the possibility of applying
steam to navigation. Several steamboats were soon after constructed
under Mr. Fulton’s directions, and also a steam-frigate. He continued to
make various experiments till his death, which occurred in 1815.

[Illustration: FULTON’S FIRST STEAMBOAT.]

Still later than this, we find a description of the Clyde steamboat,
which is spoken of in an English magazine as follows: “Its extreme
length is seventy-five feet, its breadth fourteen feet, and the hight of
the cabins six and a half feet. She is built very flat, and draws from
two feet and nine inches to three feet of water. The best or
after-cabin, is twenty feet long, and is entered from the stern: between
the after-cabin and the engine, a space of fifteen feet is allotted for
goods. The engine is a twelve horsepower, and occupies fifteen feet; the
fore-cabin is sixteen feet long, and is entered from the side. The
paddles, sixteen in number, form two wheels of nine feet diameter, and
four feet broad, made of hammered iron: they dip into the water from one
foot and three inches to one foot and six inches. Along the outer edge
of these wheels a platform and rail are formed quite round the vessel,
projecting over the sides, and supported by timbers reaching down to the
vessel’s side. This steamboat runs at the rate of four or four and a
half miles per hour in calm weather; but against a considerable breeze,
three miles only. It can accommodate two hundred and fifty passengers,
and is wrought by five men. The engine consumes twelve hundred weight of
coals per day. The funnel of the boiler is twenty-five feet high; and
carries a square-sail twenty-two feet in breadth.”

In the same connection, we find an article published in the Monthly
Magazine, by Sir Richard Phillips, with the express object of giving
clear ideas of the utility of steamboats, and of quieting apprehensions
as to their safety, which at the present day it is truly amusing to
read. The writer says: “The groundless alarms relative to a supposed
increase of danger from traveling by steam-packets, led the editor of
the Monthly Magazine, within the current month, (July, 1817,) to make a
voyage, in one of them, from London to Margate. This vessel left her
moorings, at the Tower of London, about half past eight in the morning,
at the time the tide was running strong up the river, and when no other
vessel could make progress, except in the direction of the tides. The
steam-packet proceeded, however, against the stream, in a gallant style,
at the rate of six or seven miles an hour; and a band of music, playing
lively airs on the deck, combined with the steadiness of the motion, to
render the effect delightful. An examination of the steam-engine, and of
her rate of working, proved that no possibility of danger exists. It
appeared that the boiler had been proved at twenty-five pounds to the
square inch; but that the valve was held down by a weight of only four
pounds, and that the mercurial gauge did not indicate an employment of
actual pressure of above two pounds and a half per square inch. Hence it
follows, that, although the engine was capable of sustaining a pressure
of at least twenty-five pounds, only four pounds, or less than a sixth,
was the whole force which the valve would permit to be exerted; and
that, in point of fact, a pressure of only two pounds and a half to the
square inch, or only _one-tenth_ of the proven power of the boiler, was
employed. There is, therefore, less danger in passing some hours in
contact with such a machine, than there is in sitting near a boiling
tea-kettle, tea-urn, or saucepan, under circumstances in which they are
often used. Opposite Greenwich, a fine commentary was afforded of the
value of steam as a navigating power, in preference to winds and tides;
a Margate sailing-packet passing toward London, which had been a day and
two nights on its passage, a period of time which it appears is not
uncommon. In short, with uninterrupted pleasure, and in an hour sooner
than the captain had named at starting, the vessel was carried
along-side Margate pier, having employed nine hours in performing a
voyage of ninety miles. In this case it appeared, that a pressure of two
pounds to the square inch, produced about forty rotations per minute of
the acting water-wheels; and, as these were ten feet in diameter, the
motion of the impelling floats, or wheel-paddles, would be at the rate
of fifteen with, or against the stream, at an average of ten miles an
hour. The consumption of coals during the voyage was less than a
caldron; but it was described as amounting frequently to a caldron and a
half. On the whole, nothing could be more demonstrative of the worth and
security of this mode of navigation; and there can be little doubt but,
in a few years, vessels of every size, and for every extent of voyage,
will be provided with their steam-engine, which will be more used, and
more depended upon, than winds or tides. The chances of accidents are
lower than those under most other circumstances in which men are placed
in traveling. By land, horses kill their thousands _per annum_, open
chaises their hundreds, and stage-coaches their scores; and, by water,
the uncertainty of winds has destroyed thousands, by prolonging the
voyage, and increasing the exposure to bad weather; but in a
steam-packet, navigated by an engine whose proven powers necessarily
exceed what can be exerted during its use, or in general by such engines
as those used on the Thames or Clyde, no accident can possibly happen;
unless, by a miracle, it were to happen, that a force of _four_ pounds
should overcome a resistance of _twenty-four_ pounds.”

From the above amusing article, we pass to notice the immense ocean
steamers of the present day, as they so forcibly illustrate the progress
of steam navigation. The chief lines of those with which we are
familiar, are the Cunard line and the Collins line, both plying between
the United States and England. Before describing them particularly,
however, it should here be mentioned, that the first steamship that ever
crossed the Atlantic sailed from Savannah, in Georgia, for Liverpool, on
the twenty-sixth of May, 1819, and made the voyage in twenty-two days.
She was telegraphed at Liverpool as “_a ship on fire_” and a
revenue-cutter was dispatched to her relief, when the officers and crew
of the latter were struck with astonishment at not being able to
overtake a vessel _under bare poles_. At Liverpool, and afterward at
Copenhagen, Stockholm, and St. Petersburg, whither she went, she was
visited by crowds of wondering people; and at the latter place a service
of plate was presented to her officers. She was commanded by Captain
Rodgers, of New London, Conn., and some of her officers are still
living. After this, it was a long time before another steamship crossed
the Atlantic. At last, however, the experiment was again and still again
tried, until now the ocean is constantly traversed by the huge steamers
above alluded to, in the average time of about eleven days and a half,
though the passage has been made, in some single cases, in a little over
nine days.

A good idea of these ocean steamers may be formed from the view given of
one of them in the cut below, in connection with the following
description of the Baltic, belonging to the Collins line.

[Illustration: AN OCEAN STEAMER.]

The Baltic is of thirty-two hundred tuns’ burden, carpenter’s measure;
in length, two hundred and eighty-seven feet; breadth of beam, forty-six
feet; depth of hold, thirty-two feet; to the top of the gunwale,
thirty-four feet and six inches. The diameter of her wheels is
thirty-six feet; the number of floats, (corresponding to the buckets or
paddles of a common water-wheel,) twenty-six in each wheel; their
length, twelve feet and a half; their breadth, twenty-eight, and their
thickness, three inches and a half; each float being armed with three
hundred pounds of iron, so that it requires six men to lift it. The
engine has two working cylinders, each ninety-six inches in diameter;
the length of their stroke is ten feet; and the number of revolutions is
from eleven to fourteen in a minute. The vacuum is equivalent to
fourteen pounds upon the square inch; a near approximation to a perfect
vacuum, which corresponds to fifteen pounds on the square inch. The
pressure of steam is from twelve to twenty pounds upon the square inch;
usually from twelve to fifteen pounds; this is all the amount of the
power tending to produce explosion, while including what is gained by
the vacuum, the effective motive power is equivalent to twenty-six,
twenty-nine and thirty-four pounds on the square inch. The highest
pressure used in an ordinary passage may be about eighteen pounds,
equivalent to a working force of thirty-two pounds; and the lowest about
seven or eight pounds, giving a moving force of twenty-one or twenty-two
pounds. The ability of the boilers corresponds to fifty pounds, and with
the addition of the vacuum, to sixty-four pounds; it follows, therefore,
that they are generally worked with less than half their power. The
entire weight of the steam machinery is one thousand tuns, and it
occupies sixty feet in the length of the ship.

As to capacity for passengers, there are one hundred and sixty berths,
aside from the accommodations for the people of the ship. As to strength
of structure, the timbers are fitted side by side, and calked so tight
that it was said the ship would float even before she was planked.
Plates of iron six inches wide and an inch and a quarter thick, are let,
obliquely, into the timbers at the distance of twenty-eight inches from
the centers of each, and therefore they are twenty-two inches apart.
These are crossed obliquely by other bars or plates of the same
dimensions, which are let into the boards or planks that are nailed over
them. Copper bolts, for twenty feet from the keel, pass through the
plates of iron at their intersection, and in many other places, and
copper sheathing covers eighteen feet of the lower part of the hull, the
draught being nineteen feet, and twenty with the coal in. The ships of
this line are as strong as wood, iron and copper can make them, and they
hardly leak at all. They would bear long thumping upon the rocks before
they would go to pieces. The movement of the machinery, and the stroke
of the waves, produce scarcely a perceptible tremor, and not the
slightest deviation in the deck from a right line can be seen, when
viewed horizontally from stem to stern through its length of nearly
three hundred feet. No opening of a joint is perceived even in the beams
that form the capping of the gunwale; a knife-blade can not be passed
between their contiguous ends.

The machinery rests on an iron bed-plate, on the keelson, or engine bed;
and the bed-plate, which is cast in one piece, weighs forty tuns. The
machinery is below, and is invisible from the deck, except through
certain doors. A wave can hardly reach it at all, even should it break
over the ship; and by closing the apertures above, the engine room is
safe from flooding, while ventilation is secured by large tubes, having
their orifices higher than the upper or promenade deck. The people
below, on the level of the keelson, where there is little motion, hardly
know when there is a storm above; they live in a comparatively quiet
world of their own, and always in a tropical climate, even when among
icebergs. The working of the machinery is admirable. It travels onward
with the greatest ease and regularity; even with a heavy head-wind and
opposing waves, it moves like clockwork, without apparent labor,
throwing up its mighty arms and moving its ponderous levers as if there
were no weight to be lifted, or _vis inertiæ_ to be overcome. By
observations made up to the tenth day of one of the passages, there had
not been the slightest leak of steam, nor had it been necessary to turn
a screw, although for several days together there was a heavy head-sea,
impelled by adverse winds. Except the effect of hidden flaws in the
immense masses of wrought iron that form some of the principal moving
parts, there seems to be little cause for anxiety, as the machinery
appears to be, in general, equal to every emergency.

Danger from fire, is always a subject of anxiety; but in ships protected
as the Baltic is, the danger is believed to be less than in a sailing
ship. The engine room is lined with iron; the boilers and their furnaces
are everywhere surrounded by that metal and by water, and no wood is in
a position to be unduly heated. All lights, except those necessary to
the management of the ship, are extinguished at eleven o’clock; many
people are up all night, and are about in every place; there are
fire-engines always ready to flood the ship, and they are adapted so as
to be wrought both by hand and by steam power. The behavior of the
Baltic as a sea-boat, is admirable in every variety of weather. This
immense vessel rides upon the waves like a duck, and has, in general, a
dry and comfortable deck, rarely shipping a sea, although the spray
dashes over the forecastle in showers. The ship is warmed by steam
tubes, passing under the marble tables. More than fifty persons are
employed about the machinery, of whom forty-eight attend to the coal and
the fires, and there are six or eight engineers. There are between
thirty and forty servants, twenty or twenty-five sailors, and three or
four supernumerary officers; in all, about one hundred and forty,
besides passengers. The style and furnishing of the Baltic are elegant,
rich enough for a nobleman’s villa. Of mirrors, large and small, there
are about fifty; indeed, they are in such excess that a passenger can
not look in any direction without meeting his own image or the faces of
his companions. The tables of these steamers are amply supplied, and
have the best attendance; and of luxuries, there seems to be no end. The
saloons of these steamers are fitted up in superb style. Some of the
table-covers are of beautiful variegated marble, and the panels around
are finely decorated with emblems of the various American states. The
cabin-windows are of beautiful painted glass, embellished with the arms
of various American cities. There are large circular glass ventilators
reaching from the deck to the lower saloon. There is a rich and elegant
ladies’ drawing-room near the chief saloon, and there are berths for
about one hundred and fifty passengers. Each berth has a bell-rope
communicating with one of Jackson’s patented American annunciators.
Crossing the ocean in one of these steamers, some one has said, is _no
cross at all_!

Such are the present ocean steamers; and yet even these immense
structures will soon be thrown in the background by steamers of still
vaster dimensions. For the Edinburgh Journal gives an account of an
immense iron steamer, now (1855) being constructed for the Australian
trade, which will far surpass them. The actual measurements of this
leviathan vessel are, six hundred and seventy-five feet long,
eighty-three feet wide at her greatest breadth of beam, and sixty feet
deep in the hold, forming four decks. She will be furnished with
paddle-wheels and a screw, the former of a nominal power of one thousand
horses, the latter of sixteen hundred horses; but practically, the
combined power may be estimated at three thousand horses. The four
cylinders in which the pistons are to work, are the largest in the
world; each of them weighs twenty-eight tuns. When they are lying on the
ground, a man, with his hat on, may walk through them without touching
the upper side. The engines, when erected and put together, will be
upward of fifty feet in hight. The weight of the entire machinery will
be about three thousand tuns, and of the hull, ten thousand tuns, making
thirteen thousand tuns. She will carry several thousand tuns of coal and
merchandise, sixteen hundred passengers, and her measurement capacity
gives about twenty-five thousand tuns’ burden! Notwithstanding, her
draught of water will be but small, not exceeding twenty feet when
light, and thirty feet when fully loaded. She will carry five or six
masts, and five funnels. Her cost will be about eighteen hundred
thousand dollars. She will carry coal enough for a voyage round the
world, and is built upon a model to insure great speed. Her ordinary
speed is expected to be eighteen or twenty miles an hour. She is
expected to make the voyage from England to Australia in thirty days,
and return by Cape Horn in thirty days more; thus making the circuit of
the globe in two months.

More wonderful still, it is said that Mr. Vanderbilt, of New York, is
about building an immense steamer, which is to be eight hundred feet in
length, and of corresponding proportions throughout, which of course
will surpass even the huge steamship just described. Where the rivalry
and enterprise in this matter are to end, who can tell?


                             CHINESE JUNKS.

As in perfect and wonderful contrast to the magnificent floating palaces
just described, we close the subject of navigation by a view of the
clumsy Chinese junk, which is represented in the cut below. The Chinese,
though neither a savage, nor a barbarous people, are still, in most
respects, very unlike other civilized nations. In houses, dress,
furniture, equipage, worship, indeed, in most of the actions, feelings,
and opinions of life, they are a peculiar people. They have, in fact,
struck out a civilization of their own. Their religion, their
literature, their arts, are all Chinese, and nothing but Chinese. It is
curious to observe that although, for many centuries, they have been a
cultivated people, and have even preceded the Europeans in many useful
and ingenious discoveries, they seem to stand still at a certain point,
beyond which they are not capable of improvement. There they remain,
century after century; and, while other nations have surpassed them,
they still conceive that they are the most learned, civilized and
polished people in the world. All other nations they conceive to be
barbarians, and hold them in supercilious contempt. And the Chinese
vessels may serve as a sample of their national character. We give above
a picture of one of their junks, which shows some ingenuity, and no
little industry; yet how clumsy, how ineffective is it, in comparison
with a Yankee steamboat! The Chinese can go, by dint of rowing, three
miles an hour, while we go fifteen. This is about the difference between
the energy of the Chinese and the civilized people of Europe and
America.

[Illustration: CHINESE JUNKS.]


                     THE ARTESIAN WELL OF GRENELLE.

Artesian wells, or fountains, are made by boring in the earth to a great
depth, till at last water rises to the surface, and often with such
force as to form abundant and elevated jets. The name _artesian_ is
derived from Artois, a province of France, where especial attention has
been given to this means of obtaining water; though it appears from
sufficient evidence, that wells of this kind were well known to the
ancients. Olympiadorus, who flourished in the sixth century at
Alexandria, states that where wells were dug in the oases of the desert
to the depth of two, three or five hundred yards, rivers of water gushed
out from their orifices, of which advantage was taken by agriculturists
to water their fields. The oldest artesian well known in France, is at
Lillers, in Artois, and is said to have been made in 1126. In the great
desert of Sahara, water is said to have been obtained in this way; and
the Chinese, we are told, have practiced it for thousands of years.
Artesian wells are now common in Europe and in the United States. The
artesian well of Grenelle, is a famous fountain of this kind, and as
such is worthy of notice. It is not far from the Hotel des Invalides,
and was undertaken chiefly with reference to the great slaughter-houses
in its vicinity. It was begun January first, 1834, and the boring was
prosecuted during seven years and two months. It opened with a diameter
of twelve inches; at the depth of thirteen hundred feet it was
contracted to six inches. Water was struck at the depth of eighteen
hundred feet, and the entire depth is two thousand feet, or nearly
two-fifths of a mile. The water rose at first in a fine thread, but soon
after it came so rapidly as to injure the machinery. It rose to the
hight of one hundred and twelve feet above the surface; high enough to
flow into the attics of the most lofty houses in Paris, and into many of
its towers. The entire depth of the boring is five and a half times the
hight of the dome of the Hotel of the Invalids, and more than five times
that of the cross on the summit of St. Paul’s, in London. In a diagram
of the strata, seen in section, the cathedral of Strasburg, and the
church of St. Peter, at Rome, are figured at the bottom on the level of
the subterranean fountain, and they appear very humble, compared with
the great distance to the surface of the ground.

The flow of the water was equivalent to six hundred gallons in a minute;
five hundred thousand gallons in twenty-four hours; and the quantity
thus far is not diminished. Some time after the opening of the well, it
flowed bountifully over the top of the tube, and with a force that would
doubtless have raised it to the full hight, although at that time the
upper part of the tube had been removed for repairs. It had collapsed,
and a new tube was about to be inserted; the old tube was twenty-one
inches wide at the top and seven at the bottom; but the new tube was to
be reduced to five inches. It is now, and was formerly, made of
galvanized iron. The temperature of the water, at first, was
eighty-three and three-fourths degrees of Fahrenheit, and it is now
stated to be eighty-five degrees; a degree of permanent heat far
exceeding that of midsummer in Paris. Indeed, it is so warm, that it
does not answer for the use of the slaughter-houses, as was at first
proposed, and they are compelled to resort to water from other sources.
It was quite warm to the touch, when a hand was immersed in it. The
labor attending this boring was immense; and great difficulties were
encountered. The boring instrument broke several times, and fell in.
This happened at the depth of thirteen hundred and thirty-five feet, and
it required incessant labor during fourteen months to recover it. The
government, at whose expense it was prosecuted, was, at times, nearly
discouraged.

Quite recently, in boring an artesian well in Livingston, Alabama, an
_egg_ was brought up from the depth of three hundred and thirty-five
feet below the surface, of which distance, three hundred feet were
through the solid rock. The egg was completely petrified, and perfect in
shape, except in one place where the auger had defaced it. How it came
there, and in what remote age, it might puzzle the wisest geologist or
philosopher to tell!


                            THE BANYAN-TREE.

The banyan, or burr tree, the _ficus Indica_ of Linnæus, a picture of
which is given in the cut beyond, claims our particular attention. It is
considered as one of the most curious and beautiful of Nature’s
productions in the genial climate of India, where she sports with the
greatest profusion and variety. Each tree is in itself a grove, and some
of them are of an amazing size, as they are continually increasing, and,
contrary to most other animal and vegetable productions, seem to be
exempted from decay: for every branch from the main body throws out its
own roots, at first in small tender fibers, several yards from the
ground, which continually grow thicker; until by a gradual descent, they
reach its surface; where, striking in, they increase to a large trunk,
and become a parent tree, throwing out new branches from the top. These,
in time, suspend their roots, and, receiving nourishment from the earth,
swell into trunks, and shoot forth other branches; thus continuing in a
state of progression so long as the first parent of them all supplies
her sustenance.

[Illustration: THE BANYAN-TREE.]

A banyan-tree with many trunks, forms the most beautiful walks, vistas
and cool recesses, that can be imagined. The leaves are large, soft, and
of a lively green; the fruit is a small fig, of a bright scarlet when
ripe, affording sustenance to monkeys, squirrels, peacocks, and birds of
various kinds, which dwell among the branches.

The Hindoos are peculiarly fond of this tree; they consider its long
duration, its outstretching arms, and overshadowing beneficence, as
emblems of the Deity, and almost pay it divine honors. The Brahmins, who
thus “find a fane in every sacred grove,” spend much of their time in
superstitious solitude under the shade of the banyan-tree; they plant it
near the _dewals_, or Hindoo temples, improperly called pagodas; and in
those villages where there is no structure for public worship, they
place an image under one of these trees, and there perform their morning
and evening sacrifice. These are the trees under which a sect of naked
philosophers, called Gymnosophists, assembled in Arrian’s days; and this
historian of ancient Greece, says Forbes, in his “Oriental Memoirs,”
affords a true picture of the modern Hindoos. “In winter the
Gymnosophists enjoy the benefit of the sun’s rays in the open air; and
in summer, when the heat becomes excessive, they pass their time in cool
and moist places, under large trees; which, according to the accounts of
Nearchus, cover a circumference of five acres, and extend their branches
so far, that ten thousand men may easily find shelter under them.”

On the banks of the Narbudda, in the province of Guzzerat, is a
banyan-tree, supposed by some persons to be the one described by
Nearchus, and certainly not inferior to it. It is distinguished by the
name of the Cubbeer-Burr, which was given to it in honor of a famous
saint. High floods have, at various times, swept away a considerable
part of this extraordinary tree; but what still remains is nearly two
thousand feet in circumference, measured round the principal stems; the
overhanging branches, not yet struck down, cover a much larger space;
and under it grow a number of custard-apple, and other fruit trees. The
large trunks of this single tree amount to _three hundred and fifty_,
and the smaller ones _exceed three thousand_. Each of these is
constantly sending forth branches and hanging roots, to form other
trunks, and become the parents of a future progeny. The Cubbeer-Burr is
famed throughout Hindoostan, not only on account of its great extent,
but also of its surpassing beauty. The Indian armies generally encamp
around it; and, at stated seasons, solemn _jatarras_, or Hindoo
festivals, to which thousands of votaries repair from every part of the
Mogul empire, are there celebrated. It is said that seven thousand
people find ample room to repose under its shade. It has long been the
custom of the British residents in India, on their hunting and shooting
parties, to form extensive encampments, and spend weeks together, under
this magnificent pavilion, which affords a shelter to all travelers,
particularly to the religious tribes of the Hindoos. It is generally
filled with a variety of birds, snakes and monkeys, the latter of whom
both divert the spectator by their antic tricks, and interest him by the
parental affection they display to their young offspring, in teaching
them to select their food, to exert themselves in jumping from bough to
bough, and in taking, as they acquire strength, still more extensive
leaps from tree to tree. In these efforts, they encourage them by
caresses, when timorous, and menace, and even beat them, when
refractory.


                        THE WEDDED BANYAN-TREE.

Among the varieties of the banyan, or burr tree, is the _peipal_, or
_ficus religiosa_, which is not uncommon in Guzzerat, and causes a
singular variety of vegetation. It may be considered as belonging to the
order of creepers, and often springs round different trees, particularly
the palmyra, or palm. The latter growing through the center of a
banyan-tree, looks extremely grand. The peipal frequently shoots from
old walls, and runs along them, so as to cause a singular phenomenon of
vegetation. In the province of Bahar, one of these trees was seen by an
English traveler, on the inside of a large brick well, the whole
circumference of the internal space of which it lined, and thus actually
became a tree turned inside out. A banyan-tree thus inverted is
uncommon; but the general usefulness and beauty of this variety,
especially in overshadowing the public wells and village markets, can
only be known by those who live in a sultry climate.


                            THE COCOA-TREE.

Of all the gifts which Providence has bestowed on the oriental world,
the cocoa-tree is the one most deserving of notice. The blessings which
are conveyed to man, by this single production of nature, are
incalculable. It grows in a stately column, from thirty to fifty feet in
hight, crowned by a verdant capital of waving branches, covered with
long spiral leaves: under this foliage, bunches of blossoms, clusters of
green fruit, and others arrived at maturity, appear in mingled beauty.
The trunk, though porous, furnishes beams and rafters for the
habitations; and the leaves, when platted together, make an excellent
thatch, as well as common umbrellas, coarse mats for the floor, and
brooms; while their finest fibers are woven into very beautiful mats for
the rich. The covering of the young fruit is extremely curious,
resembling a piece of thick cloth, in a conical form, as close and firm
as if it came from the loom; it expands after the fruit has burst
through its inclosure, and then appears of a coarser texture. The nuts
contain a delicious milk, and a kernel sweet as the almond: this, when
dried, affords abundance of oil; and when that is expressed, the
remainder answers to feed cattle and poultry, and make a good manure.
The shell of the nut furnishes cups, ladles, and other domestic
utensils; while the husk which incloses it is of the utmost importance:
it is manufactured into ropes, and cordage of every kind, from the
smallest twine to the largest cables, which are far more durable than
those of hemp. In the Nicobar islands, the natives build their vessels,
make the sails and cordage, supply them with provisions and necessaries,
and provide a cargo of arrack, vinegar, oil, jaggree or coarse sugar,
cocoa-nuts, coir, cordage, black paint, and several inferior articles,
for foreign markets, entirely from this tree.

Many of the trees are not permitted to bear fruit; but the embryo bud,
from which the blossoms and nuts would spring, is tied up to prevent its
expansion; and a small incision being then made at the end, a cool
pleasant liquor, called _tarre_, or toddy, the palm-wine of the poets,
oozes out in gentle drops.


                          THE REINDEER SLEDGE.

The reindeer is a native of Greenland, and the cold climates of the
extreme north. To the Greenlander he supplies the place of the horse,
the locomotive, and the steamboat to us, as may be seen in the cut,
which illustrates the mode of traveling in Greenland. The reindeer is
swift of foot, sharp-sighted, and of acute smell and hearing. His flesh
supplies the Greenlander with food; while his skin, with its thick, warm
hair, affords material for his tent, his bedding and his clothing. The
bones and antlers, or horns, are worked into implements for domestic
use, for fishing and hunting, and the tendons are split into threads for
various purposes. The speed of the Greenlander on his sledge, is said to
rival that of the locomotive on the railroad.

[Illustration: THE REINDEER SLEDGE.]


                       THE UPAS, OR POISON-TREE.

Although a serious refutation of the gross imposition practiced on the
people of Europe, by the romance of Foersch, on the subject of the upas,
or celebrated poison-tree of Java, may at this time be in a great
measure superfluous, as the world has long ceased to be the dupe of his
story, and as regular series of experiments have been instituted both in
England and in France, to ascertain the nature and potency of the
poison; yet an authentic account of this poison, as drawn out by Doctor
Horsfield, and given in the seventh volume of the Batavian transactions,
can not fail to be interesting. Almost every one has heard of its
fabulous history, which, from its extravagant nature, its susceptibility
of poetical ornament, its alliance with the cruelties of a despotic
government, and the sparkling genius of Darwin, whose purpose it
answered to adopt and personify it as a malignant spirit, (in his “Loves
of the Plants,”) has obtained almost equal currency with the wonders of
the Lernian hydra, or any other of the classic fictions of antiquity.

Although, as Doctor Horsfield observes, the account published by
Foersch, so far as relates to the situation of the poison-tree, to its
effects on the surrounding country, and to the application said to have
been made of the upas on criminals in different parts of the island,
has, as well as the description of the poisonous substance itself, and
its mode of collection, been demonstrated to be an extravagant forgery;
yet the existence of a tree in Java, from the sap of which a poison is
prepared, equal in fatality, when thrown into the circulation, to the
strongest animal poisons hitherto known, is a fact which it is his
object to establish and illustrate. The tree which produces this poison
is the _anchar_, and grows in the eastern extremity of the island. The
work of Rhumphius contains a long account of the upas, under the
denomination of _arbor toxicaria_. The tree does not grow in Ambonia,
and his description was made from the information he obtained from
Macassar. His figure was drawn from a branch of what is called the
male-tree, sent to him from the same place, and establishes the identity
of the poison-tree of Macassar, and the other eastern islands, with the
_anchar_ of Java. The simple sap of the _arbor toxicaria_ (according to
Rhumphius) is harmless, and requires the addition of several substances
of the affinity of ginger, to render it active and mortal. In so far it
agrees with the _anchar_, which, in its simple state, is supposed to be
inert, and, before being employed as a poison, is subjected to a
particular preparation. Besides the true poison-tree, the upas of the
eastern islands, and the _anchar_ of the Javans, this island produces a
shrub, which, as far as observations have hitherto been made, is
peculiar to the same, and by a different mode of preparation, furnishes
a poison far exceeding the upas in violence. Its name is _chetik_; but
the genus to which it belongs has not yet been discovered or described.

The _anchar_ is one of the largest trees in the forests of Java. The
stem is cylindrical, perpendicular, and rises completely naked to the
hight of sixty, seventy, or eighty feet. It is covered with a whitish
bark, slightly bursting in longitudinal furrows. Near the ground this
bark is, in old trees, more than half an inch thick, and, upon being
wounded, yields plentifully the milky juice from which the celebrated
poison is prepared. A puncture or incision being made into the tree, the
juice or sap appears oozing out, of a yellowish color from old trees;
but paler, or nearly white, from young ones; and when exposed to the
air, its surface becomes brown. The consistence very much resembles
milk; but it is more thick and viscid. This sap is contained in the true
bark, (or _cortex_,) which, when punctured, yields a considerable
quantity, so that in a short time a cupful may be collected from a large
tree. The inner bark (or _liber_) is of a close fibrous texture, like
that of the _morus papyrifera_, and, when separated from the other bark,
and cleansed from the adhering particles, resembles a coarse piece of
linen. It has been worked into ropes, which are very strong; and the
poorer class of people employ the inner bark of the younger trees, which
is more easily prepared, for the purpose of making a coarse stuff, which
they wear in working in the fields. But it requires much bruising,
washing, and a long immersion, before it can be used; and, when it
appears completely purified, persons wearing this dress, being exposed
to rain, are affected with an intolerable itching, which renders it
insupportable. It appears from the account of the manner in which the
poison is prepared, that the deleterious quality exists in the gum, a
small portion of which still adhering, produces, when exposed to wet,
this irritating effect; and it is singular that this property of the
prepared bark is known to the Javans in all places where the tree grows,
while the preparation of a poison from its juice, which produces a
mortal effect when introduced into the body by pointed weapons, is an
exclusive art of the inhabitants of the eastern extremity of the island.


                          THE PRAIRIE ON FIRE.

One of the most striking features in the geography of the Western
states, is the prairies, or natural meadows. These are immense plains,
often stretching, in every direction, further than the eye can reach,
entirely destitute of trees, and covered with grass and wild flowers.
These prairies cover a vast extent of country north of the Ohio and west
of the Mississippi, affording pasturage to countless herds of the
buffalo, deer and other wild animals. When the grass has been dried and
parched by the heat of summer, it sometimes takes fire, as represented
in the cut above, and then a sea of flame is swept by the wind over
these vast plains, spreading, it is said, more swiftly than the fleetest
horse can run before it. In such cases, the only resort is, to pull up
the grass around one, and kindle on every side a counter-flame, which
burning _outward_, in every direction, leaves the hunter or traveler in
a place of safety.

[Illustration: THE PRAIRIE ON FIRE.]


                    THE MAMMOTH TREE OF CALIFORNIA.

One of the vegetable wonders of the world, is the immense tree
discovered, a year or two since, in California. The first reports
concerning this huge giant of the forest seemed fabulous, so
extraordinary were the particulars; but it is found that the largest
statement did not exceed the truth. The tree is a cedar, of the species
called _arbor vitæ_, and was first discovered by some miners in the
mountains of Calaveras, California, in a forest called the Redwoods, on
Trinidad bay, some twenty or thirty miles from the mouth of Klamath
river, on the northern sea-coast of the state, a region that has been
but very little explored. A correspondent of the Sonora Herald, who
recently made an excursion to see it, thus describes it. “At the ground
its circumference was ninety-two feet; four feet above that, it was
eighty-eight; and ten feet above that, it was sixty-one feet in
circumference; and the tapering of the shaft was very gradual. Its
hight, to the end of the trunk, is two hundred and eighty-five feet; or,
if we include the topmost branches, three hundred and twenty-five feet.
This tree is by no means a deformity, as most trees with large trunks
are. It is throughout one of perfect symmetry, while its enormous
proportions are inseparable concomitants of its grandeur. I have said
that this is the largest tree yet discovered in the world. It is so. The
celebrated tree of Fremont would have to grow many centuries before it
could pretend to be called anything but a younger brother. It is said
that a tree was once found in Senegal, in Africa, whose trunk measured
ninety feet in circumference. But nobody has been able to find it since
its first discovery. There is a tree in Mexico called the _taxodium_,
which is said to be one hundred and seventeen feet in circumference, but
this is said to be formed by the union of several trees. The hight of
all these foreign trees is not more, in any case, than seventy feet; and
none of the trunks are more than ten feet. The age of this mammoth cedar
of California, if each zone may be reckoned one year, is about
twenty-five hundred and twenty years. A section of the wood which I
brought home with me, exclusive of the sap, which is only about one inch
thick, numbers about fourteen zones or grains to the inch. At that rate,
if it were permitted to grow, it would increase its diameter one-seventh
of an inch every year. In eighty-four years its diameter would be
increased one foot; in eight hundred and forty years, ten feet; and in
twenty-five hundred and twenty years, it would be forty feet in
diameter, and one hundred and twenty in circumference.

“It seems like an act of desecration to cut down such a noble tree, such
a magnificent specimen of the growth of the primeval forest. But it has
been done, not, however, without a vast deal of labor. It was
accomplished by first boring holes through the body with long augers,
worked by machinery, and afterward sawing from one to the other. Of
course, as the sawing drew to a close, the workmen were on the alert to
notice the first sign of toppling, but none came; the tree was so
straight and evenly balanced on all sides that it retained its upright
position after it had been sawed through. Wedges were then forced in,
and a breeze happening to spring up, over went the monster with a crash
which was heard for miles around. The bark was stripped from it for the
length of fifty feet from the base, and is from one to two feet in
thickness. It was taken off in sections, so that it can be placed,
relatively, in its original position, and thus give the beholder a just
idea of the gigantic dimensions of the tree. So placed, it will occupy a
space of about thirty feet in diameter, or ninety feet in circumference,
and fifty feet in hight. A piece of the wood will be shown, which has
been cut out from the tree across the whole diameter. We are told that
this piece of wood shows a vestige of bark near the middle, and that
this bark was evidently charred many centuries ago, when the tree was
comparatively a sapling.”

Since the above was written, the section of this huge tree alluded to,
has been exhibited in Stockton and San Francisco, and thence brought to
the United States, so that some of our readers may be able to get a view
of this monster of the California woods for a trifling admission fee. In
its natural condition, rearing its majestic head toward heaven, and
waving in all its native vigor, strength and verdure, it was a sight
worth a pilgrimage to see; and it will still be a rich gratification to
look upon the section of it, though that will give but a faint idea of
what the whole was in its native forest.

Notwithstanding the calculation given above by the writer in the Sonora
Herald, it is supposed that this tree can not be less than three
thousand years old; for, for a large space on the outer surface next to
the bark, the rings of growth are so thin as not to be distinguishable
from each other. Add one-third to the hight of Bunker-hill monument, and
the outward dimensions of the main trunk of this tree would be about the
same. From actual measurement it contained more than three hundred cords
of wood. One hundred men could easily stand within the hollow of it at
the same time, and a six-foot man rode a full-sized horse through it
without touching his hat to the upper surface.


                          OTHER MAMMOTH TREES.

A California paper says, that in the neighborhood of the mammoth tree
just described, within a circumference of half a mile, there are twelve
immense trees, which rival, or even surpass that huge giant of the
forest. One of these is called the Father Pine. This is dead, and has
fallen to the earth. Its dimensions are as follows: length, four hundred
feet; circumference, one hundred and ten feet. The trunk of this tree is
hollow, and it has been traced for a distance of two hundred and fifty
feet. There is a little pond of water in the center of this cavity, four
feet in depth. This tree, two hundred and fifty feet from the stump, is
no less than twelve feet in diameter. The cluster called the Three
Sisters, taken together, is ninety-two feet in circumference, and three
hundred feet in hight. The center one is bare of branches for two
hundred feet above the ground. The Mother Tree is ninety-one and a half
feet in circumference, and three hundred and twenty-five feet high. The
Mother and Son are ninety-two feet in circumference and three hundred
feet in hight, united at the base. The Twin Sisters, one hundred feet in
circumference and three hundred feet in hight. The Pioneer’s Cabin is a
remarkable curiosity. This tree has been partially burned; the result of
the scorching is the dividing of the trunk into several compartments,
which are known as the parlor, bedroom and kitchen. The hollow, which is
two hundred feet in hight, is called the chimney. This tree is
eighty-five feet in circumference. The Siamese Twins is ninety feet in
circumference, three hundred and twenty-five feet in hight. Guardian of
the Times, eighty-five feet in circumference, three hundred and
twenty-five feet in hight. Uncle Tom’s Cabin, ninety-four feet in
circumference, three hundred feet in hight. Pride of the Forest,
eighty-seven feet in circumference, three hundred feet in hight. Beauty
of the Forest, seventy-two feet in circumference, three hundred feet in
hight. Two Friends, eighty-five feet in circumference, three hundred
feet in hight. The above trees are all embraced in an area not exceeding
half a mile in extent. The surrounding country is exceedingly
picturesque and beautiful, and the scenery, at many points along the
road, is said to be unsurpassed for sublimity and grandeur.


                             THE PALM-TREE.

Passing from California to the countries of the east, let us next glance
at the palm-tree. This tree, which is called by Linnæus, from its noble
and stately appearance, “the prince of the vegetable kingdom,” is of
several kinds, the chief of which are the doum-palm, and the date-palm.
They are chiefly found in the tropics. The doum or Theban palm, the same
that is found in Florida, differs from the columnar date-palm in the
form of its leaves, which are fan-like, and so thickly set as to
resemble a huge bushy mop, though they are always gracefully disposed,
and also in having a branching trunk. The main stem divides a few feet
from the root, each of the branches again forming two, and each of these
two more, till the tree receives a broad, rounded top. The fruit hangs
below in clusters, resembling small cocoa-nuts, (or, says a late
traveler, still more of the size, shape, and appearance of a
yellowish-white potato, of full growth,) and has a sort of gingerbread
flavor, which is not disagreeable. When fully dry and hard, it takes a
polish like ivory, and is manufactured by the Arabs into beads,
pipe-bowls and other small articles.

[Illustration: THE DATE-PALM.]

The more common, or date-palm, a view of which is given in the cut,
produces the sweet fruit which is brought to us from Smyrna, and other
ports of the Mediterranean, with which all are familiar, under the name
of the date. In the regions between Barbary and the great desert, the
soil, which is of a sandy nature, is so much parched by the intense heat
of the sun’s rays, that none of the corn-plants will grow; and in the
arid district, called the _land of dates_, the few vegetables that can
be found are of the most dwarfish description. No plants arise to form
the variety of food to which we are accustomed; and the natives of these
districts live almost exclusively upon the fruit of the date-tree. A
paste is made of this fruit by pressing it in large baskets. This paste
is not used for present supply, but is intended for a provision in case
of a failure in the crops of dates, which sometimes occurs, owing to the
ravages committed by locusts. The date, in its natural state, forms the
usual food; and the juice yielded by it when fresh, contains so much
nutriment as to render those who live upon it extremely fat. As, by the
Moors, corpulence is esteemed an indispensable requisite of beauty, the
ladies belonging to the families of distinction among them, nourish
themselves, during the season, solely with the fresh fruit, and by
continuing this regimen during two or three months, they become of an
enormous size! The date-palm flourishes very generally on sandy soils in
the hot countries of Asia and Africa. Not always, however, is the soil
that supports it so barren as the one we have described. It is
frequently found by streams, and as the tired traveler sees its foliage
waving afar, he hastens toward it, hoping to find a stream of water.
Sometimes its tall stem is surrounded by beautiful climbing plants, and
the most brilliant flowers flourish beneath. This kind of palm not only
rises to a great hight, often sixty or eighty feet, but is also
frequently of great diameter and strength; being unlike in this respect,
some other species of palm, whose slight forms yield to the winds. It
was to this tree that the psalmist alluded when he said, “The righteous
shall grow as the palm-tree;” firm and unmoved by the shocks of
temptation and the storms of adversity.

The clusters of dates are sometimes five feet in length, and when ripe
are of a bright gold color, surrounded from above with the deep, rich
leaves, as with a crown. This kind of the palm is trained to its high
growth, without a single branch on its solitary, upright trunk, by
trimming off the leaves every year from the young stalk; so that its
strength shoots upward; and by this process, also, the bark is formed
into a succession of steps or notches, by which the barefooted Arab
easily mounts to the top. From the very top of the tree, the long,
pointed leaves curl gracefully on every side, like the close-set frame
of a parachute; and just where the broad, ridge-shaped base of the leaf
adheres to the tree, the fruit hangs in clusters, all around the trunk.
When its early training is neglected, the palm-tree grows less
gracefully; sometimes dividing at the root into several trunks, which
grow without branches to various hights, and then spread out their leafy
crests. The palm-tree looks most majestic and picturesque, when it
stands alone upon some broad plain or gentle bluff, and when its leaves
are gently stirred by the wind. The eye then takes it in at one view,
measures it by some mental standard, or disdaining all mathematical
proportions, dreamily contemplates the waving lines of beauty, and the
straight, slender, yet stately stalk that stands in bold relief against
the stainless sky. The date-palm is unknown in the United States, except
in rare garden culture; but in Egypt it grows everywhere, and is to the
people food, shelter, shade, fuel, raiment, timber, divan, cordage,
basket, roof, screen. Its fruit is found in perfection on the confines
of Nubia.


                            THE BAMBOO-TREE.

Nature, or rather the great Author of nature, has conferred on the
inhabitants of hot countries few gifts more valuable than the
bamboo-tree, a view of which is given over the leaf. To such a multitude
of useful purposes are its light, strong and graceful stems applied,
that almost any other production of the vegetable world might more
easily be spared than this. These stems spring from a strong-jointed,
subterraneous root-stalk, which is the trunk of the tree, the shoots
being the branches. They are hollow, and jointed, and of a hard, woody
texture, the outside being coated with silex, and the inside consisting
of a close, fibrous and very hard wood. The bamboo grows with great
rapidity; and the shoots, when quite young, are sometimes cut and boiled
like asparagus: but when full grown and vigorous, it becomes a large and
strong tree. Its shoots vary in size, from six to one hundred and fifty
feet in length. When fully grown, the bamboo is a straight rod, bearing
a number of stiff branches, which shoot at nearly right angles from the
main stem. It seems, at first, difficult to imagine how such a stem
elevates itself through the dense mass of rigid branches, which cross
each other in every direction. This is, however, arranged in a very
simple manner. The young shoot, when it is first produced, is nothing
but a sucker, as already said, like a shoot of asparagus; but, having a
sharp point, it easily pierces the dense and overhanging branches. It is
only when it has arrived at its full length, and has penetrated through
all obstacles, that it forms its lateral shoots, which readily interpose
themselves amid the stems. There are many species of the bamboo, all of
which are useful. The young shoots, as mentioned above, are sometimes
eaten as food; the full-grown stems, when ripe and hard, are converted
into bows, arrows, quivers, fishing-rods, masts of vessels, bed-posts,
walking-sticks, floors, supporters of rustic bridges, chairs, and a
variety of other purposes. By notching their sides, the Malays form
wonderfully light ladders. Bruised and crushed in water, the leaves and
stems form Chinese paper; some species are used for lining tea-chests;
cut into lengths, and the partitions knocked out, they form durable
water-pipes. Slit into strips, they form excellent materials for weaving
mats, baskets, window-blinds, and even the sails of boats. It is,
however, for the purposes of building, that the bamboo is most
important. The frame-work of the houses in Sumatra is chiefly composed
of this material. The floors are made of the whole canes, laid close to
each other. The sides are made of the stems, split and flattened, and
the roof is formed of a thatch split into various strips. Great hopes
are entertained of introducing this most useful tree into other
countries; and, as it grows in dry and stony places, where nothing else
flourishes, its introduction would be of great importance. A few species
of the bamboo are found in the tropical parts of America.

[Illustration: THE BAMBOO-TREE.]


                            THE MANNA-TREE.

Manna, in our version of the Bible, is a term applied to the food that
God gave the Israelites in the wilderness. But what we now call manna,
is a saccharine substance that exudes from the bark of a species of
ash-tree found in the southern parts of Europe, and especially in Sicily
and Calabria. At the warmest season, the tree most abounds in sap, and,
accordingly, in August, the people make incisions into the bark. These
are two inches long horizontally, and half an inch in depth. On
incision, the manna immediately begins to flow, at first in the form of
water, but it gradually becomes thicker. A leaf is inserted into the
incision, which conducts the juice into a vessel placed at the foot of
the tree. The liquor does not harden till it has remained some time. It
has an unpleasant taste, but after the watery parts have evaporated, it
is sweeter, but slightly nauseous. Manna is used in medicine as a mild
aperient. It differs remarkably from common sugar, in not being
susceptible of what is called vinous fermentation; so that if mixed with
common sugar and yeast, and subjected to the process of fermentation,
while the sugar is converted into alcohol, the manna remains unaltered
in the liquor.

[Illustration: Continental Money]


                           CONTINENTAL MONEY.

One of the curiosities, if not wonders of the world, is afforded in the
Continental money, or Continental bills, issued by congress in the early
stages of the Revolutionary struggle, a specimen of which may be seen in
the cut. These bills were of various denominations, and were issued by
thousands on thousands. But from the very great extent of their issue,
and the fact that the government could not redeem them in silver and
gold, they rapidly depreciated in value, till at last they became almost
worthless. As they are now almost never seen, except it be in some
museum, or collection of old curiosities, the _fac-simile_ given above
can not fail to be of interest.


                             THE MILK-TREE.

That singular production of nature called the _masseranduba_, or
milk-tree, is found in the tropical regions of South America, and is
thus described by Wallace, in his “Travels on the Amazon.” Speaking of
the various interesting objects of the journey he was making, he says:
“What most interested us, however, were several large logs of the
_masseranduba_, or milk-tree. On our way through the forest, we had seen
some trunks much notched by persons who had been extracting the milk. It
is one of the noblest trees of the forest, rising with a straight stem
to an enormous hight. The timber is very hard, fine-grained, and
durable, and is valuable for works which are much exposed to the
weather. The fruit is eatable and very good, the size of a small apple,
and full of a rich and very juicy pulp. But strangest of all is the
vegetable milk, which exudes in abundance when the bark is cut. It has
about the consistence of thick cream, and, but for a very slight
peculiar taste, could scarcely be distinguished from the genuine product
of the cow. Mr. Leavens ordered a man to tap some logs that had lain
nearly a month in the yard. He cut several notches in the bark with an
ax, and in a minute the rich sap was running out in great quantities. It
was collected in a basin, diluted with water, strained, and brought up
at tea-time, and at breakfast next morning. The peculiar flavor of the
milk seemed rather to improve the quality of the tea, and gave it as
good a color as rich cream. In coffee it is equally good. Mr. Leavens
informed us that he had made a custard of it, and that, though it had a
curious dark color, it was very well tasted. The milk is used for glue,
and is said to be as durable as that made use of by carpenters. As a
specimen of its capabilities in this line, Mr. Leavens showed us a
violin he had made, the belly-board of which, formed of two pieces, he
had glued together with it applied fresh from the tree, without any
preparation. It had been done two years. The instrument had been in
constant use; and the joint was now perfectly good and sound throughout
its whole length. As the milk hardens by exposure to air, it becomes a
very tough, slightly elastic substance, much resembling gutta percha;
but not having the property of being softened by hot water, it is not
likely to become so extensively useful as that article.”


                             THE TELEGRAPH.

Tho old-fashioned telegraph, which was in common use before the
wonderful invention of the electro-magnetic telegraph by Morse, was an
arrangement for the communication of intelligence by signals, or
movements, previously agreed upon; which signals represented letters,
words, or ideas, which could thus be transmitted from one station to
another, as far as the signals could be seen. It was first devised in
France, about 1793 or 1794, and soon became extensively adopted and used
in other nations. A good idea of its appearance may be formed from the
cut below. It consisted of a mast, or frame, in connection with
shutters, or sliding-boards, worked by ropes pulled like bell-ropes, and
exhibiting, in all, sixty-three signals; by which were represented the
nine digits, the letters of the alphabet, and several generic words:
and, sometimes, to these were added other signals, expressive of entire
phrases. The observers at these telegraphs were not expected to keep
their eye constantly at the glass, but to look only every five minutes
for the signal to make ready. The telescopes used for observation, were
commonly what are called Dolland’s achromatics, which possess no
recommendation but their enlarged field, and their freedom from
prismatic colors in that field; points of no consequence in looking
through a fixed glass at a fixed and circumscribed object. Sometimes a
common and powerful spy-glass was found sufficient. In the use of this
kind of telegraph, dead flats or levels were found to be universally
unfavorable; and generally stations were found to be useless nearly in
the proportion of the miles of dead flat looked over. On the contrary,
stations between hill and hill, looking across a valley, or a series of
valleys, were found to be mostly clear; and water surfaces were found to
produce fewer obscure days than land in any situation. The period least
favorable of the same day was an hour or two before and after the sun’s
passage of the meridian, particularly on dead levels, where the play of
the sun’s rays on the rising exhalations, renders distant vision
exceedingly obscure. The tranquillity of the morning and evening were
ascertained to be the most favorable hours for observation.

[Illustration: THE SIGNAL TELEGRAPH.]

The old line of this kind of telegraph between London and Portsmouth,
had twelve stations; and another chain from London to Yarmouth, had
nineteen stations. The distances of the stations averaged about eight
miles, yet some of them extended to twelve or fourteen; and the lines
were often increased by circuits, for want of commanding hights. After
about twenty years’ experience, they found they could calculate on about
two hundred days on which signals could be transmitted throughout the
day; about sixty others on which they could pass only part of the day,
or at particular stations; and about one hundred days in which few of
the stations were visible to each other. A message from London to
Portsmouth, was usually transmitted in about fifteen minutes; but, by an
experiment tried for the purpose, a single signal has been transmitted
to Plymouth and back again in _three minutes_, which, by the telegraph
route, is at least five hundred miles. In this instance, however, notice
had been given to make ready, and every captain was at his post to
receive and return the signals. The progress was at the rate of one
hundred and seventy miles in a minute, or three miles a second, or three
seconds at each station; a rapidity truly wonderful for so imperfect an
apparatus! And yet, clumsy and slow-moving as all this now seems to us,
it was the best telegraph known before the invention of Morse. In
contrast to it, let us turn to the latter.


                    THE ELECTRO-MAGNETIC TELEGRAPH.

The invention of this wonderful instrument, it is now universally
admitted, is due to Professor S. F. B. Morse, of whom some one has well
said, that “_if Franklin brought the lightning from heaven, Morse both
tamed it, and taught it the English language_.” So early as 1822, Mr.
Morse described his invention to reliable witnesses; and having obtained
an appropriation from Congress, for the purpose of testing it on an
extended scale, he set up the wires from Washington to Baltimore, a
distance of about forty miles, and thus established the first
electro-magnetic telegraph ever known, and the parent of that wonderful
system that now threads every continent, conveying messages literally on
the lightning’s wing. A view of the instrument used for transmitting
messages, is given in the cut below. By this instrument connecting with
the wires, messages are either written or printed; by the system of
House, in actual letters, and by the systems of Morse and Bain, in a
cipher.

[Illustration: ELECTRO-MAGNETIC TELEGRAPH.]

The telegraphic wires having been extended throughout the United States
and the continent of Europe, it is now proposed to carry them _under the
Atlantic_, and so connect America and Europe. The plan now is, to carry
the cable from the northernmost point of the Highlands of Scotland to
Iceland, by way of the Orkney, Shetland and Ferroe islands; to lay it
from Iceland across to the nearest point in Greenland, thence down the
coast to Cape Farewell, where the cable would again take to the water,
span Davis’s straits, and then go across Labrador and Upper Canada to
Quebec. Here it would lock in with the North American meshwork of wires,
which hold themselves out like an open hand for the European grasp. This
plan seems quite feasible, for in no part of the journey would the cable
require to be more than nine hundred miles long; and as it seems pretty
certain that a sand-bank extends, with good soundings, all the way to
Cape Farewell, there would be little difficulty in mooring the cable to
a level and soft bottom.

Among the most startling wonders in connection with electricity and the
telegraph, is the announcement that M. Bonelli, of Turin, has invented a
new electric telegraph, by which trains _in motion_ on a railway are
enabled to communicate with each other at all rates of velocity, and, at
the same time, with the telegraphic stations on the line; while the
latter are, at the same time, able to communicate with the trains. It is
added, that M. Bonelli is in possession of a system of telegraphic
communication by which wires are entirely dispensed with.


                          THE ART OF PRINTING.

From the telegraph, to printing, and the printing-press, is but a step;
and one that is naturally suggested. The origin of printing is involved
in mystery. Some think it was practiced as far back as the building of
Babylon. The Romans, we know, had metal stamps with which they marked
words and names on their various articles; but having no paper, they
could hardly be said to _print_. Printing from engraved blocks of wood,
was practiced by the Chinese nearly fifty years before the Christian
era. But the credit of first introducing movable types, is commonly
attributed to John Fust, or Faust, of Mentz, who is represented, in the
cut on the next page, as looking, with his associates, at the first
proof taken from movable types. This was supposed to be not far from the
year 1450. Between 1450 and 1455, the celebrated “Mentz Bible” appeared,
without date; and this was the occasion of the art being discovered by
the public. Next followed the “Psalter,” in 1457; and from this time,
printing rapidly spread throughout Europe. William Caxton was the first
to introduce printing into England, about 1474. The first book in which
Greek types appear, was printed in 1465; and the first using the Roman
character, in 1467.

[Illustration: FAUST TAKING FIRST PROOF FROM MOVABLE TYPES.]

Printing-presses were gradually improved. The old-fashioned press was
made of wood, with an iron screw that had a bar fitted in it; and to the
lower end of this screw was attached, horizontally, a flat piece of
wood, called the _platen_, which was brought down by means of the screw,
and pressed the paper on the face of the types, and thus the impression
was given. This kind of presses, however, soon gave place to those made
of iron. The Stanhope press was a great improvement on anything that had
gone before it; and the Caledonian press, invented by George Clymer, an
American, was a great improvement, in many respects, on the latter. The
press represented in the cut on the following page, on which Franklin
printed, was one of these old-fashioned hand-presses, on which it would
have been a hard day’s work to print twenty-five hundred impressions, or
twelve hundred and fifty sheets on both sides, in a day. After a time, a
plan was devised of obtaining impressions from types by means of
cylinders; and in 1804, the idea was started, of applying steam-power to
printing-presses. It was not, however, till after years of experiments,
and an immense outlay of capital, that the invention was brought to a
successful issue, so as to be advantageously applied in practice. When,
however, in 1814, the machine was completed, it was adopted in the
office of the London Times newspaper, and was thus spoken of in the
papers of the day.

[Illustration: FRANKLIN’S PRINTING-PRESS.]

“A new printing-press, or printing-engine, has recently excited the
attention of the typographical world. It is wrought by the power of
steam, and, with the aid of three boys, perfects nearly a thousand
sheets per hour. A common press, worked by two men, takes off but two
hundred and fifty impressions on one side, and requires eight hours to
_perfect_ a thousand sheets. Hence, three boys in one hour are enabled,
by this new application of the power of steam, to perform the labor of
two men for eight hours. Such are the present capabilities of this
engine: but as there is no limit to its required powers, and the size of
the _form_ is no obstacle to its perfect performance, it is proposed to
take impressions on double-demy, in which case three boys will, in one
hour, perform the labor of thirty-two men. This engine is now at work at
the printing-office of Bensley & Sons, near Fleet street, and another on
a similar (but less perfect) construction, has for some time past been
employed on a morning newspaper. In its general analogy, this press is
not unlike the rolling-press of copper-plate printers. The forms being
fixed on the _carriage_, are drawn under a cylinder, on which the sheet
being laid, and the ink distributed by an arrangement of rollers, the
impression is taken on one side. The sheet is then conveyed off by bands
to a second cylinder, around which it is conveyed on the _second form_,
and the _reiteration_ is produced in _perfect register_, without the aid
of _points_. All the manual labor is performed by a boy, who lays the
sheet of paper on the first cylinder, by one who takes it off from the
second cylinder, and by a third, who lays the sheets even on the _bank_.
As a further instance of economy in the materials, we may mention, that
the waste steam from the copper is carried in tubes round the entire
suit of offices, with a view to warm them.”

Passing on, over various improvements, we come, last of all, to what
thus far is the perfection of all printing-machines, _viz._, _Hoe’s
eight-cylinder power-press_, a view of which is given in the cut on the
following page. This immense printing-machine is thirty-three feet long,
fourteen feet and eight inches high, and six feet wide. It has one large
central cylinder on which the type is secured, and eight smaller
cylinders arranged around it, at convenient distances. Eight persons
supply the eight small cylinders with the sheets, and at each revolution
of the large cylinder, eight impressions are given off, the sheets being
delivered in neat order by the machine itself. The limit to the speed is
in the ability of the eight persons to supply the sheets. At the rate of
twenty-five hundred sheets to each, the press would give off the
unparalleled number of twenty thousand printed impressions per hour. The
press is thus far used exclusively for newspaper and similar printing.
What it may next be applied to, or what will be the next stride in the
rapidity and perfection of printing, only the future can reveal.

[Illustration: HOE’S EIGHT-CYLINDER POWER-PRESS.]

Before leaving the subject of printing, it may not be uninteresting to
mention, that a _composing_, or type-setting machine, is said to have
been recently invented, in Denmark. One who has seen it in operation,
says: “It is now in actual operation in the office of the Fædrelandet.
Instead of the usual cases and composing-sticks, and the compositor
standing at his work, we see a person sitting before a machine with keys
like a piano, which he plays on incessantly, and every touch on the
tangent is followed by a click; the letter already in its place in the
long mahogany channel prepared for it. The whole is excessively
ingenious. In fact it is fairy work. The most wonderful part is that it
distributes the already used types at the same time that it sets the new
page, and with an exactness perfectly sure. No mistake can ever occur.
The compositor, by this machine, does four times as much work as another
workman; but as he requires an assistant to line and page the set type,
this brings it to twice the amount of type set. The whole is so clean
and pleasant, that it will probably soon be a favorite employment for
women. The machine occupies a very small space, not more than a large
chair, and is beautifully made of hard woods, brass and steel. Its
success is now beyond all doubt. The proprietors of the Fædrelandet are
so gratified by the one they now have, that they have ordered another.
The price is twenty-four hundred Danish dollars. It will last,
apparently, for a century or two without repair. Mr. Sorenson, the
inventor, himself a compositor all his life, kindly shows the machine to
any visitor. Of course, a compositor can not set with this machine at
once; it will take a short time, a few days, for him to become familiar
with the details, but he is then a gentleman compared to his old
comrades.”


                         THE INDIA-RUBBER TREE.

India-rubber, called, also, _caoutchouc_, is produced from several
different trees, all of them of the _ficus_, or fig species. The _ficus
elasticus_ is the tree from which it is chiefly obtained. This is a
native both of India and of South America; and its general appearance
may be seen in the cut below. When the bark is cut or broken, it gives
forth a milky liquid, which, being exposed to the air, produces the gum
elastic which is so much in use among us. It is now about a hundred
years since it was first introduced into Europe. For a long time it was
only used to erase the marks of lead-pencils. The natives of South
America had, however, long employed it, as we do now, for boots and
shoes. They also smear the inside of baskets with it, thus providing a
tough and tight lining. In the vicinity of Quito, they make it into a
kind of cloth. Its multiplied uses in the United States and Europe, are
familiar to every reader. In a volume lately published in New York,
entitled “Scenes and Adventures on the Banks of the Amazon,” is found
the following account of this singular and most useful tree.

[Illustration: THE INDIA-RUBBER TREE.]

“A number of blacks, bearing long poles on their shoulders, thickly
strung with India-rubber shoes, also attracted our attention. These are
for the most part manufactured in the interior, and are brought down the
river for sale by the natives. It has been estimated that at least two
hundred and fifty thousand pairs of shoes are annually exported from the
province, and the number is constantly increasing. A few words here
respecting the tree itself, and the manufacture of the shoes, may not be
out of place. The tree is quite peculiar in its appearance, and
sometimes reaches the hight of eighty and even a hundred feet. The trunk
is perfectly round, rather smooth, and protected by a bark of a light
color. The leaves grow in clusters of three together, are thin, and of
an ovate form, and are from ten to fifteen inches in length. The center
leaf of the cluster is always the longest. This remarkable tree bears a
curious fruit of the size of a peach, which, although not very
palatable, is eagerly sought after by different animals. It is separated
into three lobes, which contain each a small black nut. The trees are
tapped in the same manner that the New Englanders tap maple-trees; the
trunk having been perforated, a yellowish liquid, resembling cream,
flows out, which is caught in small clay cups fastened to the tree. When
these become full, their contents are emptied into large earthen jars,
in which the liquid is kept until desired for use. The operation of
making the shoes is as simple as it is interesting. Imagine yourself in
one of the seringa groves of Brazil. Around you are a number of
good-looking natives of low stature and olive complexions. One is
stirring, with a long wooden stick, the contents of a caldron, placed
over a pile of blazing embers. This is the liquid as it was taken from
the rubber tree. Into this a wooden ‘last,’ covered with clay, and
having a handle, is plunged. A coating of the liquid remains. Another
native then takes the ‘last,’ and holds it in the smoke arising from the
ignition of a species of palm fruit, for the purpose of causing the
glutinous substance to assume a dark color. The ‘last’ is then plunged
again into the caldron, and this process is repeated as in dipping
candles, until the coating is of the required thickness. You will
moreover notice a number of Indian girls engaged in making various
impressions, such as flowers, &c., upon the soft surface of the rubber,
by means of their thumb-nails, which are especially pared and cultivated
for that purpose. After this final operation, the shoes are placed in
the sun to harden, and large numbers of them may be seen laid out on
mats in exposed situations. The aboriginal name of the rubber is
_cahchu_, from which the formidable word of _caoutchouc_ is derived.”

[Illustration: THE OLD ROUND TOWER AT NEWPORT.]


                      THE ROUND TOWER AT NEWPORT.

“The tower”—“the old round tower”—“the old stone tower,” at Newport,
Rhode Island, if not one of the wonders of the world, has at least
excited wonder enough in some of its inhabitants, and been a monument of
deep interest to the traveler, the antiquarian, the controversialist,
and the poet. Its appearance may be seen in the cut below, which is
taken from a drawing made on the spot. For a long time it was the
prevailing belief, that it was built by the Northmen, who, it was
supposed, coasted along the New England shores as early as the twelfth
century. Even the society of Danish antiquaries, gravely came to this
conclusion, from some drawings and accounts that were sent them; and the
discovery of a “skeleton in armor,” on the main land, near Newport, gave
currency to this impression. Later investigations, however, have settled
the point that it was originally built _for a windmill_, about 1676. It
is about seventy-five feet above high-water level in the harbor, and
about one hundred and twenty rods from the shore. Thus has been
dissipated the foundation of many a wild theory, and many a joyous hoax
of other days.

[Illustration: SUBMARINE OR DIVING ARMOR.]


                             DIVING ARMOR.

The mention of the India-rubber tree, on a previous page, suggests the
application of the valuable substance derived from it, to one of its
many important uses, _viz._, to the _submarine_ or _diving armor_. This
is represented in the cut below, where the diver, or person about to
descend into the sea, is seen encased with a water-proof dress, made
chiefly of India rubber. His feet are heavily loaded with boots which
have soles made of thick plates of lead. On his head is a helmet-shaped
covering, made of iron, from which rises a hose, through which fresh air
is forced to him, by powerful air-pumps, when he is under the water.
This helmet, which is well padded, is furnished with two glass eyes,
which are protected by wire gratings. Around the waist is a strong
girdle provided with iron rings, one on each side, from which ascend
cords to the persons in the boat from which the diver descends, for the
purpose not only of aiding to guide him over the rocks, and helping him
to an upright position, but to serve for signalizing in case of sudden
danger or accident, and as a means of hauling him up when required. Thus
although the diver is at perfect liberty to direct his own movements, he
is still held in leading-strings from the boat, and all his motions are
vigilantly watched and cared for by his companions above. To aid him in
keeping under water, the diver also wears two heavy plates of lead, one
in front and the other behind, which are so adjusted as to leave his
arms at liberty, and at the same time give equilibrium to his submerged
body. In this case, he also has a bag in front, into which he may put
valuables of small size picked up in the deep, such, for example, as
pearls, or amber, both of which have been sought for by persons thus
equipped.

[Illustration: MANNER OF WORKING THE DIVING ARMOR.]

The method of exploring with this armor, is seen in the second cut,
where the diver is represented as below the water, while his companions
are in the boat above, some of them holding the ropes, some pumping down
air, and others holding the ladder, while the diver himself is picking
up some object of value from the bottom of the sea. This armor has been
used in searching for amber, pearls, lost treasure, &c., &c. And when,
some years since, the United States steam-frigate Missouri was sunk in
Gibraltar harbor, so as to obstruct navigation, and all attempts by
distinguished English engineers to raise her had proved in vain, an
American, going down in the above-described armor, explored her
position, and then contracted to blow her to pieces, which he
successfully accomplished, though she was in twenty-six feet water, and
covered by fifteen feet of sand. In doing this, he consumed forty-three
thousand pounds of powder, raised sixteen hundred tuns of iron, and some
eight hundred tuns of oysters that had grown to the iron. All his men
were clothed in the submarine armor, and so perfect was the management,
that not a life was lost, and not an accident happened during the whole
of the operation.

In this connection, the recently invented “Nautilus diving-bell” is
worthy of notice. This bell is provided with air-tight compartments,
which hold either air or water, as ascent or descent is required: and is
so ballasted that, when filled with water, buoyancy is destroyed, and
the machine gradually sinks. Expel the water from the tanks, and the
machine comes of course at once to the surface. By opening a valve near
the bottom of the bell, the water enters through a pipe into the tanks;
the air at the same time escaping through a valve at the top, opened or
closed by the operator at will. Descent is thus effected. On the
contrary, let air be turned into the tanks, escape at top be closed, and
valves at bottom opened, water is expelled and ascent secured. To raise
heavy weights, a greater or less amount of water is expelled.
Suspension-chains attached to weight, immediately tighten; machine and
weight become buoyant, and then by cables attached to anchors working
through stuffing-boxes, windlasses may be transported to any desired
spot, and there deposited. Free communication may be held with the
bottom through an opening of between twelve and fifty square feet,
according to size of bell, closed by an iron door, and secured by bolts.
By throwing the door back, an equilibrium between air and water may be
attained at any depth, by greater or less amounts of air, as determined
by suitable gauges permanently fastened in the bell. Such is the
ingenious mechanism of this wonderful contrivance.


                        TREE-HOUSE IN CAFFRARIA.

In Caffraria, in Africa, there is an “inhabited tree,” which travelers
thus describe: “It stands at the base of a range of mountains, due east
from Kurrichaine, in a place called ‘Ongorutcie Fountain.’ Its gigantic
limbs contain seventeen conical huts. These are used as dwellings, being
beyond the reach of the lions, which, since the incursion of the
Mantates from the adjoining country, when so many thousands of persons
were massacred, have become very numerous in the neighborhood, and
destructive to human life. The branches of the tree are supported by
forked sticks, or poles, and there are three tiers, or platforms, on
which the huts are constructed. The lowest is nine feet from the ground,
and holds ten huts; the second, about eight feet high, has three huts;
and the upper story, if it may be so called, contains four. The ascent
to these is made by notches cut in the supporting poles; and the huts
are built with twigs, thatched with straw, and will contain ten persons,
conveniently.”

[Illustration: TREE-HOUSE IN CAFFRARIA.]

A view of one of these trees is given in the cut on the previous page.
Other villages have been seen by travelers, built somewhat similarly to
the above; but these were erected on stakes, instead of trees, about
eight feet above the ground, about forty feet square, larger in some
places, and containing about seventy or eighty huts. The inhabitants sit
under the shade of these platforms during the day, and retire at night
to the huts above.


                           THE RAINING-TREE.

The island of Fierro is one of the most considerable of the Canaries,
and some suppose its name to have been given upon this account: that its
soil, not affording so much as a drop of fresh water, seems to be of
iron; and, indeed, there is in this island neither rivulet, nor well,
nor spring, save that only toward the seaside there are some wells; but
they lie at such a distance from the city, that the inhabitants can make
no use thereof. But the great Preserver and Sustainer of all, remedies
this inconvenience by a way so extraordinary, that we can but sit down
and acknowledge that he gives in this, undeniable demonstration of his
goodness and infinite providence. For in the midst of the island, says a
late traveler, there is a tree, which is the only one of the kind,
insomuch that it hath no resemblance to those mentioned by us in this
relation, nor to any other known to us in Europe. The leaves of it are
long and narrow, and continue in constant verdure, winter and summer;
and its branches are covered with a cloud, which is never dispelled, but
resolved into a moisture, causing to fall from its leaves a very clear
water, and that in such abundance, that the cisterns, which are placed
at the foot of the tree to receive it, are never empty, but contain
enough to supply both man and beast.


                         THE TRAVELER’S FRIEND.

Somewhat like the tree last mentioned, is one which is found in
Madagascar, and which, from its property of yielding water, is called
“the traveler’s friend.” It differs from most other trees in having all
its branches in one plane, like the sticks of a fan or the feathers of a
peacock’s tail. At the extremity of each branch grows a broad double
leaf, several feet in length, which spreads itself out very gracefully.
These leaves radiate heat so rapidly after sunset, that a copious
deposition of dew takes place upon them, which, soon collecting into
drops, forms little streams, which run down the branches to the trunk.
Here it is received into hollow spaces of considerable magnitude, one of
which is found at the root of every branch. These branches lie one over
the other alternately, and when a knife, or, which is better, a flat
piece of stick (for it is not necessary to cut the tree) is inserted
between the parts which overlap, and slightly drawn to one side, so as
to cause an opening, a stream of water gushes out as if from a fountain.
Hence the appropriate name of “the traveler’s friend.”

[Illustration: THE CAMPHOR-TREE.]


                           THE CAMPHOR-TREE.

The camphor-tree, a view of which is given in the cut below, grows
naturally in the woods of Japan, and in many of the islands of the far
distant Pacific ocean. The part which smells stronger of camphor than
any other, is the root, which yields it in great quantities. The bark of
the stalk has outwardly rather a rough appearance; the inner surface is
smooth and mucous, and is very easily separated from the wood, which is
dry in its nature, and white in its color. The leaves stand upon
slender, delicate foot-stalks, having an entire undulating margin
running out into a point; the upper surface of the leaf is of a lively,
shining green, and the lower, herbaceous and silky. The flowers are
produced on the tops of footstalks, which proceed from the arm-pits of
the leaves, but not till the tree has attained considerable age and
size. The flower-stalks are slender, branched at the top, and divided
into very short pedicles, each supporting a single flower; these flowers
are white, and consist of six petals, which are succeeded by a shining
purple berry, of the size of a pea. This is composed of a soft, pulpy
substance, of a purple color, having the taste of cloves and camphor,
and of a kernel of the size of a pepper, which is covered with a black,
shining skin, of an insipid taste.

The _camphor_ is a solid concrete juice, extracted from the wood of the
camphor-tree. Pure camphor is very white, clear, and unctuous to the
touch: the taste is bitterish-aromatic, and accompanied with a sense of
coolness: the smell is particularly fragrant, something like that of
rosemary, but much stronger. It has been long esteemed for its medicinal
qualities, and has been justly celebrated in fevers, malignant and
epidemic distempers. In delirium, where opiates failed in procuring
sleep, but rather increased and aggravated the symptoms, this medicine
has been often found to procure it. Physicians attribute these effects
to its sedative qualities. It is a powerful medicine, capable of doing
great good or harm. It is said to be poisonous to animals, often putting
them into a sleep from which they never waken.


                          THE CINNAMON-PLANT.

This plant grows most abundantly in Ceylon, and is thus described by
Bishop Heber. After speaking of the visits of a forenoon, he adds: “In
the afternoon we drove through the far-famed cinnamon-gardens, which
cover upward of seventeen thousand acres of land on the coast, the
largest of which are near Colombo. The plant thrives best in a poor,
sandy soil, in a damp atmosphere. It grows wild in the woods to the size
of an apple-tree, but when cultivated is never allowed to grow more than
ten or twelve feet in hight, each plant standing separate. The leaf is
something like the laurel in shape, but of a lighter color. When it
first shoots out it is red, and changes gradually to green. It is now
out of blossom, but I am told the blossom is white, and spreads, when in
full blossom, to cover the garden. After hearing so much of the spicy
gales from this island, I was much disappointed at not being able to
discover any scent, at least from the plants. In passing through the
gardens, there is a very fragrant-smelling flower growing under them,
which at first led us into the belief that we smelt the cinnamons, but
we were soon undeceived. On pulling off a leaf or twig, you perceived
the spicy odor very strongly, but I was surprised to hear that the
flower had little or none. As the cinnamon forms the only considerable
export of Ceylon, it is of course preserved with care. By the old Dutch
law the penalty for cutting a branch was no less than the loss of a
hand; at present a fine expiates the offense. The neighborhood of
Colombo is particularly favorable to its growth, being well sheltered,
with a high, equable temperature, and as showers fall frequently, the
ground is never parched.”

[Illustration: TREE TEMPLE AT MATIBO IN PIEDMONT.]


                            THE TREE TEMPLE.

Among the miscellaneous wonders, or at least curiosities, that the
traveler may behold as he passes through Italy, may be mentioned the
_tree temple_, a view of which is given in the engraving below. This
singular tree is one of the curious ornaments of a beautiful estate,
called Matibo, in the neighborhood of Savigliano, in Piedmont, in
northern Italy. It was planted some seventy years ago; but it was only
within some thirty years that the idea was started of making it grow in
the form of a temple, which, after much time, perseverance and labor,
was finally realized. It consists, as may be seen in the engraving, of
two stories, each of which has eight windows, and is capable of
containing twenty persons. The floors are formed of branches twined
together with great skill, and covered by nature with leafy carpets; and
all around, the natural growth and verdure of the tree have formed thick
walls, where flocks of birds have taken up their abodes and built their
nests. The proprietor of the island Matibo has never disturbed these
joyous little tenants of his property, but rather encouraged their
presence; so that at all hours of the day, they may be heard fearlessly
sporting and warbling, to the delight of the numerous visitors, who here
enjoy alike the cool breezes and the beautiful prospect.


                      THE TERMITES, OR WHITE ANTS.

These curious and wonderful insects are found both in India and Africa.
They are of several species, one or two of which construct works
surpassing in skill those even of the bee and beaver, and comparatively
of far greater size for them, than the boasted pyramids of the ancients
are for man. The laborers employed among them in these works, are not a
quarter of an inch in length; and yet the structures they rear rise to
the hight of ten or even twelve feet above the surface of the earth, and
in their interior construction and various arrangements, exceed even the
works of man himself. The most striking parts of these structures are
the royal apartments, the nurseries, magazines of provisions, the arched
chambers and galleries, with their various communications; the ranges of
the Gothic-shaped arches, projected, and not formed by mere excavation,
some of which are two or three feet high, but which diminish rapidly,
like the arches of aisles in perspective; the various roads, sloping
staircases, and bridges consisting of one vast arch, constructed to
shorten the distance between the several parts of the building, which
would otherwise be connected only by winding passages. In the following
engraving may be seen, on the right, one of the ant-hills as it appears
_externally_; and on the left, a _section_ of one of them, surmounted by
its conical roof. In some parts of Senegal, the number, magnitude and
closeness of these structures make them appear like the villages of the
natives; and their strength is such, that when they have been raised to
about half their hight, the wild bulls of the country stand on them, as
sentinels, while the rest of the herd are feeding below. When at their
full hight of ten or twelve feet, they are used by Europeans as look-out
stations, whence they can see over the grass, which in Africa is, on an
average, of the hight of thirteen feet. Four or five persons may stand
on the top of one of these buildings, to look out for a vessel the
approach of which may be expected.

[Illustration: ANT-HILLS OF THE WHITE ANT.]

The termites themselves are divided into three distinct ranks, or
orders, viz., the laborers, or working insects; the soldiers, or the
fighting order, who avoid all labor, and are about twice as long as the
laborers, and nearly fifteen times their bulk; and lastly, the winged or
perfect insects, which may be styled the nobility or gentry, who neither
fight nor work, and from whom come the kings and queens of the
establishment.

These insects are extremely destructive; and it is said that a deserted
town has been known to be utterly destroyed by them in two or three
years, so that not a vestige of it remained. At Bombay, in a few hours,
they will demolish a large chest of books, papers, silks, or clothes,
perforating them with a thousand holes; and they sometimes penetrate and
eat up the timbers and boards of houses, and in the same manner destroy
the timbers of a ship. The only way to preserve anything from their
depredations, when they are in a neighborhood, is to put it on a
platform resting on glass bottles, which, if kept free from dust, they
can not ascend.

[Illustration: HUTS IN KAMTSCHATKA.]


                          HUTS IN KAMTSCHATKA.

Side by side with the finished structures of animal instinct exhibited
in the engraving of the ant hills above, we next give a picture of the
rude huts of the uncivilized inhabitants of Kamtschatka, in their cold
northern home, at the north-eastern extremity of Asia, which is one of
the coldest spots on the face of the earth. It is impossible, in so
severe a climate, to raise wheat, corn, or the common productions of
warmer regions. The people, however, have a compensation for the
scantiness of vegetable productions in the profusion of animal life
which seems to fill alike the earth, the air and the water. The coasts
swarm with seals and other marine animals; the rocks are covered with
shell-fish; the bays abound in herrings, and the rivers with salmon and
other most valuable fish. Flocks of grouse, wild geese and ducks, often
darken the air. The country abounds in bears, which are fat, and greatly
esteemed by the inhabitants as food. From all these sources, the people
are supplied with the greatest abundance; and, as a consequence, they
have sunk into a lazy and almost stupid sensuality. They are a short and
copper-colored race, somewhat like the Esquimaux. Like them, they have
dogs, which they use in sledges, as seen in the engraving. Their winter
houses are half sunk in the earth, while those for summer are elevated
on poles above it.

[Illustration: TAKING A WHALE.]


                               THE WHALE.

This vast monster of the deep is one of the wonders of the world, or at
least of its mighty oceans. It is found chiefly in the more northern
seas, where its food, consisting of small molluscous and crustaceous
animals, but chiefly of the _clio borealis_, is found. Whales are often
found from fifty to sixty, and some of them from ninety to one hundred
feet in length, and from thirty to forty feet, and even more, in
circumference. The true whale is remarkable for the immense size of its
head, which constitutes a full third of the entire length of the animal.
The eyes are very small, and placed just above the angles of the mouth.
The external opening of the ears is scarcely perceptible. The pectoral
fins are of moderate size, and located about two feet behind the angles
of the mouth. The tail, or, more properly, the tail fin, consists of two
parts, or lobes, of immense strength, measuring, in a full-grown whale,
some twenty feet across, from tip to tip. It is wielded by muscles of
enormous power, and thus becomes a weapon of offense and defense for the
whale, as well as its chief means of locomotion. A single blow of the
tail is sufficient to cut the stoutest whaleboat in two, and to send its
fragments whirling through the air. The engraving gives a view of a
right whale about to be harpooned; while in the distance is another,
lashed to the ship for “cutting in,” and still another, which the
sailors, having killed, are towing in toward it. The whale fishery was
carried on by the Biscayans as early as the twelfth century; afterward
it was taken up by the Dutch and the English, and it now engages nearly
a tenth of the tunnage of the United States.


                        LANDING OF THE PILGRIMS.

One of the most wonderful events in the history of the world, was the
voluntary exile of the forefathers of New England from their native
country, and their landing (December twenty-first, 1620) at
Plymouth—here, in the new world, to organize a community where they
might enjoy personal freedom, and liberty of conscience, and to worship
God as seemed right to themselves. The engraving on the following page
gives a view of them as they landed, in a howling wilderness, inhabited
only by savages and wild beasts, in the depth of winter, with no place
of abode, or even shelter, and no trust but in their own resources and
the kind providence of God which had thus far watched over and protected
them. The history of their trials, their preservation, their growth and
prosperity as a people, and of the wonderful country that has sprung up,
and is still growing, with a giant growth, in the broad land which they
found a wilderness, is one that fills us with wonder as we ponder it,
and that should fill us with deep thankfulness to the great source of
all mercies, both to them and ourselves.

[Illustration: LANDING OF THE PILGRIMS.]

The place where the pilgrims landed is well known as the celebrated


                             PLYMOUTH ROCK.

This is, in part, still in the same place where it stood when our
forefathers first stepped upon it at their landing, and is pointed out
to the visitor as “Plymouth rock,” or the “Pilgrim rock,” or the “Rock
of the Pilgrims.” It is a hard kind of syenitic granite, of a dark gray
color. The mica, which in part composes it, is in very small quantity,
and in fine black particles. The rock is now in two pieces, each of
which is about four feet through. One of these pieces, about six feet
and a half in diameter, as already said, is still at the water’s edge,
in its original position. The other part, represented in the engraving
on the next page, has been removed from its natural location, and
inclosed in an iron railing in front of “Pilgrim hall,” which was
erected as a monumental edifice on land that once belonged to Governor
Carver. Here it is visited by thousands, who, from year to year, go, as
to a shrine of the most sacred associations, to the spot which is
consecrated by the sufferings, the courage, and the piety of the
founders of our nation.

[Illustration: PLYMOUTH ROCK.]

We might fill pages with the narratives of their exposures, hardships
and dangers; but they are more or less familiar to all. The history of
their perils from the Indians, the native lords of the forest, is of
itself full of excitement and thrilling interest. The latter, fearful
lest the superior knowledge and rising power of the white men should in
the end be the ruin of their own supremacy, were stirred up to endeavor
to exterminate them; and though some powerful chiefs and tribes were
steadfastly friendly, others were as steadfastly their foes. For years
after the firm establishment of the colonies, the early settlers were
compelled to go to church, on the Sabbath, armed, as represented in the
engraving on the next page, that they might be ready, if need be, to
defend themselves in case of an attack by the Indians. During the days
of the Indian warfare such scenes were not uncommon, and more than once
a congregation has been roused by such an attack, and gone forth to meet
and disperse the foe, and then, setting their sentinels to watch,
returned to the house of God, to thank him for their deliverance, and
continue the worship of his holy day. Thanks to their labors, and toils,
and self-denials, and heroic enterprise, to the principles that guided
them and the institutions they established, and to the divine blessing
attending all, we are not exposed to such perils; but may safely enjoy
the privileges they have handed down to us, with none to molest us or
make us afraid.

[Illustration: EARLY SETTLERS OF NEW ENGLAND GOING TO CHURCH.]


                            A WONDER OF ART.

There is now (1855) on exhibition in Paris, one of the most remarkable
pieces of masterwork which the union of art and science has ever
produced. It consists of a picture, of about three feet square. This
picture is made up of colors admirable for their beauty and boldness,
but there is no _subject_. The most experienced eye can detect nothing
but disjointed and half-formed approximations toward a coherent design.
The most able artist sees there only the finest colors, but no one can
tell what they are intended to represent. In the middle of the picture,
which is horizontally placed, is a mirror formed by a copper cylinder
covered by a perfectly polished coating of silver. This mirror is
usually veiled. So far there is little remarkable, and the greatest
amateurs in painting would hardly consent to spend five francs on such
an apparently profitless study. But it is impossible not to feel a glow
of admiration, when, on uncovering the mirror, there is represented upon
it in the brightest reflected rays, the whole scene of the Crucifixion.
The partial coloring then takes a character of incontestable
superiority, and presents to the astonished spectators a picture
composed of six most perfect figures, depicted with a degree of boldness
such as the master painters alone knew how to impart to the subject
which it was their glory to represent.


                           THE WHALE-KILLER.

This fish is one of the wonders of the mighty deep, well known to those
engaged in whaling, and in the Pacific cruisers. It is thus described by
one who has often witnessed its attacks on the whale.

“The _killer_ is the wolf of the ocean, and hunts in packs, and their
tall dorsal fin can be constantly seen above the water. This fish has
always as a companion, but swimming deeper, the _sword-fish_, and now
and then can be seen the _shark_. On sighting their prey, which the
killer sees at a great distance, the pack gives chase. The unconscious
whale is slowly moving near the surface, and occasionally spouting, as
it were in sport, jets of water above him. But he now suddenly sees the
sea-wolf near him. Instinct at once teaches him that on the surface he
can not be safe, and, taking in a long breath, he flukes; that is,
dives. But there has been another enemy watching him from the depths
below—the sword-fish, which now darts at him with the velocity of
lightning, and perforates the whale beneath, with his long and
spear-like nose. This sends him at once to the surface; here he again
meets with his enemies, the killers; but as yet they are afraid to
approach him. The whale now begins to see the extent of his danger, and
for a time merely lashes the water with his ponderous fluke. He soon
tires of this, and remains for a short time at rest; the pack now
approach him, and he seeks safety in flight. But what can he do? The
poor whale has a hump on his back, and steers unsteadily, while the
killer’s tail and stiff fin steady him on his course. Nearer and nearer
approach the pack to their victim; again he takes a long breath and
dives. The sword-fish has steadily kept him in view; he, too, has a tall
fin and long slender propelling tail; and while it is an effort to the
whale to increase his speed, it is but play to the sword-fish, which
again darts and perforates his prey, and sends the wounded whale again
to the surface.

“The race again commences, but this time with diminished speed, the
killers having separated to watch the rise of the whale, who, finding
his enemies in every direction, courses in a circle, and again makes a
third, and sometimes a fourth attempt to escape by diving, but is always
met by the terrible spike of the sword-fish. He at last, weak, exhausted
and dispirited, returns to the surface, where he again attempts escape
by flight. Streams of blood mark his course; his enemies still follow
steadily after him, until he stops and begins to lash and make the ocean
foam around him; but now large streams of his life-blood are pouring
out, and he is only increasing his weakness by the exertion, and merely
lashing amidst his own gore. Tired, exhausted and faint, he rolls over.
The deep red streaks of blood flowing from large orifices in his white
belly can now be distinctly seen. The hungry pack now close, and one
more bold than the rest seizes him near the throat and tears away the
white skin and fat; he opens his mouth and bellows with pain. This is
generally the signal for a combined attack. His tongue is seized and
torn out; so are his eyes. The sword-fish now rises to the surface, and
his tall spar-like protuberance is seen projecting over the body of the
whale; the sharks also close in and feed on the fat rejected by the
killers. In this state the whale makes a few dying struggles. The feast
now commences and continues until the fat and sufficient flesh are
stripped off to cause the carcass to become too heavy to float on the
surface, and it sinks. The shark is left to enjoy his few streaks of
fat, while the killer pack, accompanied by their companion, the
sword-fish, rove again the broad ocean to seek another leviathan of the
great deep.”


                          A PILE OF SERPENTS.

Baron Humboldt says: “In the savannas of Izacubo, Guiana, I saw the most
wonderful and terrible spectacle that can be seen; and although it be
not uncommon to the natives, no traveler has ever mentioned it. We were
ten men on horseback, two of whom took the lead, in order to sound the
passages, while I preferred to skirt the great forests. One of the
blacks who formed the vanguard returned at full gallop, and called to
me, ‘Here, sir, come and see the serpents in a pile.’ He pointed to
something elevated in the middle of the savanna or swamp, which appeared
like a bundle of arms. One of my company said, ‘This is certainly one of
the assemblages of serpents which heap themselves on each other after a
violent tempest. I have heard of these, but never saw any; let us
proceed cautiously, and not too near them.’ When we were within twenty
paces of it, the terror of our horses prevented our approaching nearer,
to which none of us were inclined. On a sudden, the pyramid mass became
agitated; a horrid hissing issued from it, thousands of serpents rolled
spirally on each other, and shot forth out of the circle their hideous
heads, presenting their envenomed darts and fiery eyes to us. I own I
was the first to draw back, but when I saw this formidable phalanx
remain at its post, and appear to be more disposed to defend itself than
to attack us, I rode round, in order to view its order of battle, which
faced the enemy on every side. I then thought what could be the design
of this numerous assemblage; and I concluded that this species of
serpent dreaded some colossean enemy, which might be the great serpent
or cayman, and they reunite themselves after seeing the enemy, so as to
resist this enemy in a mass.”


                            AMERICAN RUINS.

The recent discoveries in what is called the “Great Basin,” a tract of
table-land lying between the Rocky and the Pacific chain of mountains,
are exciting much interest, and awakening inquiry and speculation again
as to the origin of the people who evidently, in a former period,
inhabited these now desolate regions. Captain Walker, the mountaineer,
passed through the center of this basin in 1850, and made some
interesting revelations of what he saw. These statements have been
called in question, on account of their supposed improbability; but a
later trip of Lieutenant Beale gives a degree of confirmation to the
facts, which will make the credibility of the statements more readily
admitted. The whole country, from the Colorado to the Rio Grande,
between the Gila and San Juan, is full of ruined habitations and cities,
most of which are on this table-land. Captain Walker states that, in
traversing this desert, he had frequently met with crumbling masses of
masonry and numberless specimens of antique pottery.

In his last trip across, he saw the ruins of a city more than a mile in
extent, the streets of which ran at right angles. The houses had all
been built of stone, but all had been reduced to ruin by the action of
some great heat, which had evidently passed over the whole country. In
the center of the city rose abruptly a rock twenty or thirty feet high,
upon the top of which stood a portion of the walls of what had once been
an immense building. The outline of the building was still distinct,
although only the northern angle, with walls fifteen or eighteen feet
long, and ten feet high, was standing. These walls were constructed of
stone, well quarried and well built. Lieutenant Beale, on his first trip
across the continent, discovered in the midst of the wilderness of Gila,
what appeared to be a strong fort, the walls of great thickness, built
of stone. He traversed it, and found it contained forty-two rooms. A
correspondent of the Placerville Herald gives an account more wonderful
still, of a stone bridge, which had also been discovered, the
foundations of which were of stone, and nearly six hundred feet from one
of the outer abutments to the other, while between the two are no less
than seven distinct piers. This bridge has the appearance of a river
once flowing between its piers, though now there is not the slightest
appearance of such a river in that vicinity.

Next we have an account of a strange race of people, neither whites nor
Indians, called Moquis, lighter in color than the Indians of California.
The women are tolerably fair, not being so much exposed to the sun.
Among them Captain Walker saw three perfectly white, with white hair and
light eyes. They raise all kinds of grain, melons and vegetables. They
have also a number of orchards, filled with many kinds of fruit-trees.
The peaches they raise are particularly fine. They have large flocks of
sheep and goats, but very few beasts of burden or cattle. They are a
harmless, inoffensive race; kind and hospitable to strangers, and make
very little resistance when attacked. The warlike Navajos, who dwell in
the mountains to the north-east of them, are in the habit of sweeping
down upon them every two or three years, and driving off their stock. At
such times, they gather up all that is movable from their farms, and fly
for refuge to their mountain stronghold. Here their enemies dare not
follow them. When a stranger approaches, they appear on the top of the
rocks and houses, watching his movements. One of their villages, at
which Captain Walker stayed for several days, is over six hundred yards
long. The houses are mostly built of stone and mortar; some of adobe.
They are very snug and comfortable, and many of them are two and even
three stories high. The inhabitants are considerably advanced in some of
the arts, and manufacture excellent woolen clothing, blankets, leather,
basket-work and pottery. Unlike most of the Indian tribes in this
country, the women work within doors, the men performing all the farm
and out-door labor. These people, according to the accounts, have never
had any intercourse with the white race.


                            INSECT SLAVERY.

The most remarkable fact connected with the history of ants, is the
propensity possessed by certain species to kidnap the workers of other
species, and compel them to labor for the benefit of the community, thus
using them completely as slaves; and, as far as we yet know, the
kidnappers are red or pale-colored ants, and the slaves, like the
ill-treated natives of Africa, are of a jet black. The time for
capturing slaves extends over a period of about ten weeks, and never
commences until the male and female are about emerging from the pupa
state; and thus the ruthless marauders never interfere with the
continuation of the species. When the red ants are about to sally forth
on a marauding expedition, they send scouts to ascertain the exact
position in which a colony of negroes may be found. These scouts having
discovered the objects of their search, return to the nest and report
their success. Shortly afterward, the army of red ants marches forth,
headed by a vanguard, which is perpetually changing; the individuals
which constitute it, when they advance a little before, are sent to the
rear, and their places occupied by others. The vanguard consists of
eight or ten ants only. When they have arrived near the negro colony,
they disperse, wandering through the herbage and hunting about, as if
aware of the propinquity of the object of their search, yet ignorant of
its exact position. At last they discover the settlements, and the
foremost of the invaders, rushing impetuously to the attack, are met,
grappled with, and frequently killed by the negroes on guard. The alarm
is quickly communicated to the interior of the nest; the negroes sally
forth by thousands, and the red ants rushing to the rescue, a desperate
conflict ensues, which, however, always terminates in the defeat of the
negroes, who retire to the innermost recesses of their habitation. Now
follows the scene of pillage. The red ants, with their powerful
mandibles, tear open the sides of the ant-hills, and rush into the heart
of the citadel. In a few minutes each invader emerges, carrying in its
mouth the pupa of a worker negro, which it has obtained in spite of the
vigilance and valor of its natural guardians. The red ants return in
perfect order to their nests, bearing with them their living burdens. On
reaching the nest the pupa appears to be treated precisely as their own;
and the workers, when they emerge, perform the various duties of the
community with the greatest energy and apparent good-will. They repair
the nest, excavate passages, collect food, feed the larvæ, take the pupa
into the sunshine, and perform every office which the welfare of the
colony seems to require. They conduct themselves entirely as if
fulfilling their original destination.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           Transcriber’s Note

At 94.32, there is a paragraph preceding some verse which ends abruptly,
without punctuation. It seems that the intent was to continue the
thought with the first lines of the poem.

At 530.18, a closing quote mark occurs where there is no opening quote.
The previous paragraph closes an extended quotation, which is not
re-opened. It is difficult to say whether the ‘voice’ has shifted. In
any case, the closing quote in question has been removed.

The word ‘bass-relief’ appears thirty-two times, while the more familiar
‘bas-relief’ appears only twice. Both versions have been retained.

Other errors deemed most likely to be the printer’s have been corrected,
and are noted here. The references are to the page and line in the
original.

  9.18     an object must be seen[,]                      Removed.
  18.1     “THE CASTA[G]NO DE CENTO CAVILLI,”             Inserted.
  26.17    rate of eight[y]-six feet an hour              Added.
  28.2     wholly disap[p]eared                           Inserted.
  36.1     mottled with black and[ and] white spots       Redundant.
  82.17    Mauna Loa and Mauna [R/K]ea                    Replaced.
  87.33    In many [y/p]arts of the precipice             Replace.
  126.23   by any sounding line[,/.]                      Replaced.
  198.12   carried on in Colebrook[ ]dale                 Removed.
  230.17   Earth’s universal family.[”]                   Added.
  275.23   [‘/“]the waterfall mountain,”                  Replaced.
  289.1    some of the savan[t]s                          Inserted.
  317.17   or St. Helmo’s fires                           _sic_:
                                                          Elmo’s.
  324.28   I had thought a mere fable.[’/”]               Replaced.
  348.36   from such a[ ]surface                          Inserted.
  421.6    four hund[d]red feet                           Removed.
  427.27   it[s] extreme length                           Added.
  446.21   fresh-water mus[cle/sel]s                      Replaced.
  470.23   the name of E[d/l] Hedjeaz                     Probable.
  470.24   the cities of Medi[an/na] and Taif             Transposed.
  511.15   PYRAMIDS OF MERO[E/Ë]                          Replaced.
  516.3    so has it been forever!’[”]                    Added.
  525.37   and quitted them forever.[”]                   Added.
  610.15   in Agræ[./,]                                   Replaced.
  634.22   these ancient piles.[”]                        Added.
  649.35   the f[ri/ir]th of Forth                        Transposed.
  655.24   On the top is a bas[o/i]n                      Replaced.
  710.37   [“]France, Belgium, Holland,                   Added.
  798.27   closed by the operator at will[.]              Restored.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WONDERS OF THE WORLD ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


