The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Girl's Own Paper, Vol. XX, No. 992, December 31, 1898
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Girl's Own Paper, Vol. XX, No. 992, December 31, 1898

Author: Various

Release date: May 19, 2016 [eBook #52104]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Susan Skinner, Chris Curnow, Pamela Patten and
        the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
        http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GIRL'S OWN PAPER, VOL. XX, NO. 992, DECEMBER 31, 1898 ***

[Illustration: THE GIRL'S OWN PAPER

VOL. XX.--NO. 992.      DECEMBER 31, 1898.      [PRICE ONE PENNY.]




OLD ENGLISH COTTAGE HOMES;

OR,

VILLAGE ARCHITECTURE OF BYGONE TIMES.


[Illustration: AT CLARE, SUFFOLK.]

_All rights reserved._]


PART III.

We have already pointed out the simplicity of outline observable
in old English cottages, and the absence of exaggeration and that
disagreeable fussiness brought about by too much striving after the
picturesque. It must not, however, from this be concluded that ancient
village buildings are always plain and do not at times possess elegant
ornamentation and graceful details.

The general outline, however, is always simple and quiet, for, as will
be seen by the examples we give (two of the most elaborate cottages in
England), the roof lines are very little broken up or varied.

The first of these buildings is at Clare in Suffolk, and the second is
at Newport in Essex, the latter being one of the richest counties in
England for cottage architecture, many of its villages retaining quite
a mediæval aspect down to the present time.

We will now say a few words upon the methods of applying ornamental
detail to cottages adopted in mediæval times, and we shall commence
with those structures erected in "Post-and-pan" construction. We trust
that our readers have not forgotten what is meant by the ugly-sounding
expression "Post-and-pan," and regret that we are quite unable to
discover or invent some more elegant name for this description of
building. Some years back a number of architects and archæologists
were examined before a parliamentary commission. The commission
objected to the words "Post-and-pan" being used in their report, and
suggested to the witnesses that they should find some more scientific
expression for this kind of work! It was found, however, impossible to
invent any one which conveyed the idea so concisely and satisfactorily,
so the old-fashioned name "Post-and-pan" received parliamentary
sanction! This being the case, our girls need not scruple to use it,
and may it not, after all, be as valuable for the formation of the lips
as the "prunes" and "prism" of Little Dorritt?

There are several ways of applying ornamentation to "Post-and-pan"
buildings. The first is to add mouldings, tracery or carving, to the
doorways, windows, cornices, corbels and other constructive parts of
the building.

The second is to arrange the "posts" in patterns by introducing curved
beams amongst them, or other woodwork, forming a kind of tracery
pattern.

The third is to adorn the "pans" (panels) either with stamped
plaster-work called "pargeting," or with coloured plaster-work, or
wood-carving.

The first of these methods is seen in the beautiful example which we
have sketched at Newport in Essex: here it will be noticed that the
bow window of the upper storey is adorned with wood tracery, and its
corbel richly carved with figure subjects, all executed in oak. The
"spurs," as they are called, which carry the projection of the upper
storey, are richly moulded and rest upon elegant little colonnettes.
The pans are filled in with brickwork laid in herring-bone patterns.
The centre of the building is recessed back, but in order to preserve
the severe and simple lines of the roof, the latter does not follow
the line of the recess, but is supported upon an arched beam, from the
centre of which projects a lifting-crane, a treatment quite peculiar to
the home counties and the south of England.

Of course this building is far more elaborate than most cottages, and
the tradition of the place accounts for this by the supposition that it
was formerly the dwelling of a farm bailiff to the Abbot of Westminster.

The beautiful little village of Newport has several examples of
interesting domestic work and a very noble church.

The building which we illustrate dates from the 15th century, and is
still in excellent repair though not in any way restored.

The very elaborate cottage represented in our first sketch is an
excellent example of pargeting, the surface of the pans being covered
by a rich kind of shawl-pattern executed in hard plaster, like the
Newport example. The constructive portions of the building are
elaborately treated. We are unable to account for the amount of
elaboration bestowed on this cottage, but as it is close to the church,
which is a very handsome building and liberally endowed with chantries,
it is very probable that this may have been the dwelling of one of the
chantry priests.

Clare was an important place in the Middle Ages and possessed a castle,
remains of which are still to be seen. Richard Strongbow, the Conqueror
of Ireland, is said to have lived in it.

The Manor of Clare in later times belonged to Edmund Mortimer, Earl of
March. There was also a priory here, built in 1248 by Richard, Earl of
Gloucester.

A very curious poem exists in the form of a dialogue, "betwixt a
secular askyng and a frere answering at the grave of Dame Johan of
Acris" (of Clare). It is a quaint example of Old English and begins in
rather a curious manner.

Q. "What man lyeth here, sey me, Sir Frere?"

A. "No man."

Q. "What ellis?"

A. "It is a woman."

Then follows her pedigree all in rhyme, from which it appears that she
was a daughter of King Edward I., and the remarkable circumstance is
stated, that she was borne of her "moder"!

As the poem is about three pages long and all pretty much like the
sample we have given, we will not inflict it upon our readers.

    H. W. BREWER.

[Illustration: AT NEWPORT, ESSEX.]




ABOUT PEGGY SAVILLE.

BY JESSIE MANSERGH (Mrs. G. de Horne Vaizey), Author of "Sisters
Three," etc.


CHAPTER XIII.

Peggy felt weak and shaken for some days after her fright, and was
thankful to stay quietly indoors and busy herself with her new task.
The gas fire could be turned on in her room whenever she desired, and
at every spare moment she ran upstairs, locked her door behind her, and
began to write. Robert insisted that the work should be kept secret,
and that not a word should be said about the competition downstairs,
for he was sensitive about the remarks of his companions, and anxious
to keep a possible failure to himself. All the work had to be done
upstairs therefore, and the frequent absence of the partners from the
schoolroom, though much regretted, did not seem at all inexplicable to
the others. It was understood that Peggy and Robert had some interest
in common, but as winter advanced this was no unusual occurrence in a
house where Christmas was a carnival, and surprises of an elaborate
nature were planned by every member of the household. It was taken for
granted that the work had some connection with Christmas, and inquiries
were discreetly avoided.

With an old calendar before her as a model for the lettering, Peggy did
her work neatly and well, and the gilt "arabesques" had an artistic
flourish which was quite professional. When Robert was shown the first
half-dozen sheets he whistled with surprise, and exclaimed, "Good old
Mariquita!" a burst of approval before which Peggy glowed with delight.
It had been agreed that, after printing the first ten days of January,
Peggy should go on to the first ten of February, and so on throughout
the year, so that Rob should be able to use what quotations had already
been found under each heading, and should not be detained until the
whole thirty or thirty-one had been chosen.

The partners were most fastidious in their selection at the beginning
of their work, but when half the time had passed and not one-third of
the necessary number of quotations had been found, alarm seized upon
the camp, and it was realised that a little more latitude must be shown.

"We shall have to use up all the old ones which we struck off the
list," said Rob disconsolately. "I'm sorry; but I never realised
before that three hundred and sixty-five was such an outrageously
large number. And we shall have to get books of extracts and read them
through from beginning to end. Nearly two hundred more to find; a
hundred and fifty, say, when we have used up those old ones! It will
take us all our time!"

"I'll get up at six every morning and read by my fire," said Peggy
firmly. "If it's necessary I'll get up at five, and if I can't find
bits to suit all the stupid old things, I'll--I'll write some myself!
There! Why shouldn't I? I often make up things in my head, and you
wouldn't believe how fine they are. I think of them days afterwards,
and ask myself, 'Now where did I read that?' and then it comes back to
me. 'Dear me; I made it up myself!' If we get very short, Rob, there
wouldn't be any harm in writing a few sentences and signing them
'Saville,' would there?"

"Not if they were good enough," said Rob, trying to suppress the laugh
which would have hurt Peggy's feelings, and looking with twinkling eyes
at the little figure by his side, so comically unprofessional, with her
lace collar, dainty little feet, and pigtail of dark brown hair. "You
mustn't get up too early in the morning and overtire yourself. I can't
allow that!" he added firmly. "You have looked like a little white
ghost the last few days, and your face is about the size of my hand.
You must get some colour into your cheeks before the holidays, or that
beloved Arthur will think we have been ill-treating you when he comes
down."

Peggy gave a sharp little sigh and relapsed into silence. It was the
rarest thing in the world to hear her allude to any of her own people.
When a letter arrived, and Mrs. Asplin asked questions concerning
father, mother, or brother, she answered readily enough, but she never
offered information, or voluntarily carried on the conversation.
Friends less sympathetic might have imagined that she was so happy in
her new home that she had no care beyond it, but no one in the Vicarage
made that mistake. When the square Indian letter was handed to her
across the breakfast table, the flush of delight on the pale cheeks
brought a reflected smile to every face, and more than one pair of eyes
watched her tenderly as she sat hugging the precious letter, waiting
until the moment should come when she could rush upstairs and devour
its contents in her own room. Once it had happened that mail day had
arrived and brought no letter, and that had been a melancholy occasion.
Mrs. Asplin had looked at one envelope after another, had read the
addresses twice, thrice, even four times over before she summoned
courage to tell of its absence.

"There is no letter for you to-day, Peggy!" Her voice was full
of commiseration as she spoke, but Peggy sat in silence, her
face stiffened, her head thrown back with an assumption of calm
indifference. "There must have been some delay in the mail. You will
have two letters next week, dearie, instead of one."

"Probably," said Peggy. Mellicent was staring at her with big, round
eyes; the Vicar peered over the rim of his spectacles; Esther passed
the marmalade with eager solicitude; her friends were all full of
sympathy, but there was a "Touch-me-if-you-dare!" atmosphere about
Peggy that day which silenced the words on their lip. It was evident
that she preferred to be left alone, and though her eyes were red
when she came down to lunch, she held her chin so high, and joined in
the conversation with such an elegant flow of language, that no one
dare comment on the fact. Two days later the letter arrived and all
was sunshine again; but in spite of her cheery spirits, her friends
realised that Peggy's heart was not in the vicarage, and that there
were moments when the loneliness of her position pressed on her, and
when she longed intensely for someone of her very own, whose place
could not be taken by even the kindest of friends.

Like most undemonstrative people, Peggy dearly loved to be appreciated,
and to receive marks of favour from those around. Half the zest with
which she entered into her new labour was owing to the fact that Robert
had chosen her from all the rest to be his partner. She was aglow with
satisfaction in this fact, and with pleasure in the work itself, and
the only cloud which darkened her horizon at the present moment was
caused by those incidental references to the fair Rosalind, which fell
so often from her companion's lips.

"Everything," said Peggy impatiently to herself, "everything ends
in Rosalind! Whatever we are talking about, that stupid girl's name
is bound to be introduced! I asked Mellicent if she would have a
scone at tea this afternoon, and she said something about Rosalind
in reply--Rosalind liked scones, or she didn't like scones, or some
ridiculous nonsense of the sort! Who wants to know what Rosalind likes?
I don't! I'm sick of the name! And Mrs. Asplin is as silly as the rest!
The girls must have new dresses because Rosalind is coming, and they
will be asked to tea at the Larches! If their green dresses are good
enough for us, why won't they do for Rosalind, I should like to know?
Rob is the only sensible one. I asked him if she were really such a
marvellous creature, and he said she was an affected goose! He ought
to know better than anyone else! Curls indeed! One would think it was
something extraordinary to have curls! My hair would curl too, if I
chose to make it, but I don't; I prefer to have it straight! If she is
the 'Honourable Rosalind,' I am Mariquita Saville, and I'm not going to
be patronised by anybody, so there!" and Peggy tossed her head, and
glared at the reflection in the glass in a lofty and scornful manner,
as though it were the offending party who had had the audacity to
assume superiority.

Robert was one with Peggy in hoping that his people would not leave
town until such time as the calendar should be despatched on its
travels, for when they were installed at the Larches he was expected to
be at home each week from Saturday until Monday, and the loss of that
long holiday afternoon would interfere seriously with the work on hand.
He had seen so little of his people for the last few years, that he
would be expected to be sociable during the short time that he was with
them, and could hardly shut himself up in his room for hours at a time.
Despair then settled down upon both partners when a letter arrived to
say that the Darcy family were coming down even earlier than had been
expected, and summoning Robert to join them at the earliest possible
moment.

"This is awful!" cried the lad, ruffling his hair with a big, restless
hand. "I know what it means--not only Saturdays off, but two or three
nights during the week into the bargain! Between you and me, Mariquita,
the governor is coming down here to economise and intends to stay much
longer than usual. Hector has been getting into debt again; he's the
eldest, you know--the one in the Life Guards. It's a lot too bad, for
he has had it all his own way so far, and when he runs up bills like
this, everyone has to suffer for it. Mother hates the country for more
than a few weeks at a time, and will be wretched if she is kept here
all through the winter. I know how it will be, she will keep asking
people down, and getting up all sorts of entertainments to relieve the
dulness. It's all very well in its way, but just now when I need every
minute----"

"Shall you give up trying for the prize?" asked Peggy faintly, and Rob
threw back his head with emphatic disclaimer.

"I never give up a thing when I have made up my mind to do it! There
are ten days still, and a great deal can be done in ten days. I'll take
a couple of books upstairs with me every night and see if I can find
something fresh. There is one good thing about it, I shall have a fresh
stock of books to choose from at the Larches. It is the last step that
costs in this case. It was easy enough to fix off the first hundred,
but the last is a teaser!"

On Saturday morning a dog-cart came over to convey Robert to the
Larches, and the atmosphere of the vicarage seemed charged with
expectation and excitement. The Darcys had arrived; to-morrow they
would appear at church; on Monday they would probably drive over with
Rob and pay a call. These were all important facts in a quiet country
life, and seemed to afford unlimited satisfaction to every member
of the household. Peggy grew so tired of the name of Darcy that she
retired to her room at eight o'clock, and was busy at work over the
September batch of cards, when a knock came to the door, and she had
to cover them over with the blotting paper to admit Mellicent in her
dressing-gown, with her hair arranged for the night in an extraordinary
number of little plaited pig-tails.

"Will you fasten the ends for me, Peggy, please?" she requested. "When
I do it, the threads fall off, and the ends come loose. I want it to be
specially nice for to-morrow!"

"But it will look simply awful, Mellicent, if you leave it like this.
It will be frizzed out almost on a level with your head. Let me do it
up in just two tight plaits, it will be far, far nicer," urged Peggy,
lifting one little tail after another, and counting their number in
dismay. But no, Mellicent would not be persuaded. The extra plaits were
a tribute to Rosalind, a mark of attention to her on her arrival with
which she would suffer no interference, and as a consequence of her
stubbornness, she marched to church next morning disfigured by a mop of
untidy, tangled hair instead of the usual glossy locks.

Peggy preserved a demeanour of stately calm, as she waited for the
arrival of the Darcy family, but even she felt a tremor of excitement
when the verger hobbled up to the square pew and stood holding the door
open in his hand. The heads of the villagers turned with one consent
to the doorway; only one person in the church disdained to move her
position, but she heard the clatter of horses' hoofs from without, and
presently the little procession passed the vicarage pew, and she could
indulge her curiosity without sacrifice to pride. First of all came
Lord Darcy, a thin, oldish man, with a face that looked tired and kind,
and faintly amused by the amount of attention which his entrance had
attracted. Then his wife, a tall, fair woman, with a beautiful profile,
and an air of languid discontent who floated past with rustling silken
skirts, leaving an impression of elegance and luxury, which made Mrs.
Asplin sigh and Mellicent draw in her breath with a gasp of rapture.
Then followed Robert with his shaggy head, scowling more fiercely than
ever in his disgust at finding himself an object of attention, and last
of all a girlish figure in a grey dress, with a collar of soft, fluffy
chinchilla, and a velvet hat with drooping brim, beneath which could be
seen a glimpse of a face pink and white as the blossoms of spring, and
a mass of shining, golden hair. Peggy shut her lips with a snap, and
the iron entered into her soul. It was no use pretending any longer!
This was Rosalind, and she was fairer, sweeter, a hundred times more
beautiful than she had ever imagined!

(_To be continued._)




GIRLS AS I HAVE KNOWN THEM.

BY ELSA D'ESTERRE-KEELING, Author of "Old Maids and Young."


PART III.

THE VULGAR GIRL.

As translated by Cowley, Horace is made to say--

    "Hence, ye profane, I hate ye all,
    Both the great vulgar and the small!"

[Illustration: The small vulgar]

There will be no attempt made in this paper to deal with the great
vulgar, but some attempt will be made in it to deal with the small,
being the category to which, it may be assumed, belongs the average
vulgar girl.

It is of course impossible within the limits of a short essay to
indicate more than a few of the leading characteristics of this girl.
She it is who not only wants to monopolise the conversation, but who
wants to confine it to one subject. She should remember the quaint
counsel, "The honourablest part of talk is to give the occasion,
and again to moderate, and pass to something else." Moreover in
conversation she too often follows the rule laid down by a French
author for those about to write love-letters:

"Begin without knowing what you are going to say, and end without
knowing what you have said."

If at the end of a conversation she sometimes knew what she had said,
the vulgar girl, who is not necessarily a callous girl, would feel very
unhappy.

Her tendency to talk indiscreetly has doubtless its origin in the
precipitancy which causes her to break in upon the speech of others.
There is a lesson which she might learn from a certain polite echo.
This echo may be heard opposite to Mugdock Castle in Scotland. It will
repeat any sentence of six syllables in the exact tone in which it is
uttered--waiting till the sentence is finished.

Another result of the lack of deliberation which characterises the
vulgar girl is seen in the fact that the latest book, the latest play,
the latest picture, is to her Thingimy by Thingimbob. That nomenclature
is somewhat vague, and is moreover out of date, but it still commends
itself to the vulgar girl, as does the soubriquet _The Bard_ for
Shakespeare.

Her singular phraseology, which she conceives to set her at an
advantage, in reality sometimes sets the vulgar girl at a disadvantage.
Of Tennyson she said the other day--

"I don't pretend to understand him any more than Browning, but then he
tootles on prettily, and that's what I like in poetry."

[Illustration]

A main difference between Browning and Tennyson was here correctly set
forth, but the phrasing was in questionable taste. "Tootles" is a good
word, but to say that Tennyson "tootles on prettily," is to understate
his merits. It shall here be pointed out in passing that "I don't
pretend" is a favourite form of asseveration with the vulgar girl, and
is one which she should try to vary, if only because it inferentially
asserts that other people do pretend.

The vulgar girl is "by way of being" (her own phrase) witty. One part
of her wit is to say "muchly" for much, and another part of it is to
say "free gratis" for free of charge.

Flippancy as a substitute for wit so often evokes mirth that the vulgar
girl as would-be wit not incomprehensibly largely indulges in it. I sat
beside her once during a performance of Beethoven's Septett, one of
the loveliest things in music, with here and there a heart-delighting
gaiety in it. During the fifth movement of it she whispered to me--

"Isn't it like 'The Bogie Man'?"

[Illustration]

The levity in what follows was even more remarkable. The speaker was a
young bride.

"I didn't feel a bit nervous at my wedding," she said. "You see, I have
been used to private theatricals."

A girl like that mistakes gaiety of head for gaiety of heart.

[Illustration: Her first appearance in a new role]

As a sample of vulgar girl-wit at its crudest, I give the following, in
which a girl spoke of a lady--

"She couldn't turn white, but she went the colour of an unripe tomato."

[Illustration: Upset by Tomato sauce]

The vulgar girl who is "by way of being" witty is not "by way of
being" sentimental, and is rather addicted to signing her letters
"Your's," which word she believes to be rightly written as above, with
an apostrophe. This girl, for the rest, is generally good-natured, and
her vein of censure is more often odd than terrible. Thus she said the
other day of a dentist--

"He is a horrible little snob, but that doesn't matter when he gets
into your mouth."

[Illustration: An old Fairy Tale]

As often as not the vulgar girl has both sense and sensibility. Of the
latter fact she is profoundly ashamed, and has been known to say of a
book that has deeply agitated her--

"I got to feel quite eye-in-water over it."

She affects to care, only for the gaieties of life, but knows something
of its gravities, and has often a bit of heroine in her. The worst
thing about her is her speech. "Jolly" is her favourite adverb. She
is jolly glad when she is not jolly mad, and she will soon describe
herself as jolly sad. She uses the verb "mashed" hideously; where her
prototype of twenty years ago said "swell" she says "swagger;" and
she does not stick at saying "beastly." For the rest, she has always
some pet word of the hour. Thus "dotty" is an adjective now much in
favour with her. Thereby hangs a tale. The vulgar girl sometimes knows
Italian, and it was she who translated a line from a famous lady's
epitaph--

    "_Vergine magnanime, dotta, divina._"

    "A virgin magnanimous, dotty, divine."

On the other hand there are vulgar girls who do not know Latin, and one
of them has been known to say "effluvia" for "smell," the Latin for
"smell" being "effluvium."

The pronunciation of her own language is by some thought to offer
insuperable difficulties to the English vulgar girl, who pronounces
the "t" in "often" but does not pronounce it in "Westminster," whose
favourite colour, she has been heard to aver, is "terrar cottar,"
who plays an instrument which she calls "the varlin," who says
"to_wards_" and "inter_est_ing," who pronounces "ate" "et," and whose
vocabulary has been known to include the words "pantomine," "Feb'uary"
and "sec'etary." So far is this list from exhausting the faults of
pronunciation of the said vulgar girl, that it must be added that she
gives to no one vowel its proper sound, while among the consonants
"h" initial and "g" final stumble her. She is particularly careless
regarding the latter consonant when the form which her vulgarity takes
is that of would-be "smartness."

Very abominable to this girl is grammar, which is all but invariably
set at defiance by her. Thus, even when she does not say "it were," as
did Mrs. Cluppins, she favours such phrasing as "those sort of," "very
pleased," "different to" and "between you and I."

[Illustration: A model]

Her predilection for abbreviations is another marked feature of the
vulgar girl. To "'bus" she has lately added "biz," and "spec" has found
her approval.

The pity of it!

Just as she has always a favourite word, she has mostly a favourite
phrase. In one instance known to me it is "You know what I mean," and
everyone knows what she means, as well everyone may.

Take this assertion--

"It's one of those schools where they sleep in carbuncles--you know
what I mean."

Of course everyone knows what she means.

[Illustration]

Or take this--

"I can't be in six or seven places at one; I'm not omnivorous--you know
what I mean."

[Illustration: not omnivorous]

Of course everyone knows what she means.

They call her Mrs. Malaprop; but, in point of fact, her case is a
notable improvement upon that of Sheridan's heroine, the ignorance
of that lady having been of a shade by just so much deeper that it
left her unwitting of the fact that she was wrong. The girl here in
view has a shrewd suspicion that she is wrong, but pays her hearers
the compliment of assuming that they will understand her. In only one
instance, so far as has come to my knowledge, has she ever overtaxed
her listener's powers of comprehension. She spoke of a living novelist.

"I can't bear his books," she said. "They're so very _femme de
chambre_--you know what I mean."

Not only did the person addressed not know what she meant, but he
will not now be induced to believe that she meant "_fin de siècle_,"
and unconsciously used what, it seems to some of us, was a very happy
substitute for this rather hackneyed phrase.

I have in the foregoing dwelt more particularly on what is to me the
most striking fact in connection with the vulgar girl, the base uses
to which she puts her native speech; that my account of her may not,
however, be wholly inadequate, I have also conferred with persons whose
views on manners and deportment, as frequently expressed by them, have
led me to believe that they may be better able than I am to point out
what, from the social standpoint, constitutes a vulgar girl. Of the
many _data_ supplied me, I give below a few.

The vulgar girl is "arch."

The vulgar girl is "coy."

The vulgar girl loves "chaff."

The vulgar girl has sidelong looks.

The vulgar girl calls milk "cream" and bacon "ham."

The vulgar girl shouts or whispers.

The vulgar girl thinks all other girls vulgar.

[Illustration: An extreme view]

The vulgar girl has never been told, or has been told in vain, to sit
up and put her knees together.

The vulgar girl is the girl of whom the vulgar boy says that she is
"not half a bad sort."

(_To be continued._)




"OUR HERO."

A TALE OF THE FRANCO-ENGLISH WAR NINETY YEARS AGO.

BY AGNES GIBERNE, Author of "Sun, Moon and Stars," "The Girl at the
Dower House," etc.


CHAPTER XIV.

IN A FORTIFIED TOWN.

It was growing dark when at length they drove through the gates into
Verdun.

No one then said a needless word, not even Roy. The sense of banishment
and of captivity pressed upon them all with a new force, at the
sight of this fortified town, with its massive encircling walls, its
iron gates, its pervading gendarmerie. If any lack of realisation of
their true position had helped them hitherto, it had small chance of
surviving this hour.

At the gate they had to pause, a gendarme coming to the coach door. He
said something to Denham, which made Colonel Baron ask sharply--

"Eh, what's that?"

"We are to go first to the citadel. Not necessary for Mrs. Baron and
Roy. You and I might walk it, sir, and send them on."

"No, no," Mrs. Baron interposed; "I cannot go on alone. We will keep
together."

"A pity," murmured Ivor; and Colonel Baron looked doubtfully from him
to his wife.

"I am not going to do it," she repeated, with her manner of graceful
determination; and then, earnestly, "Do not ask it of me--pray do not!"
No more could be said, and the man was ordered to drive on.

Verdun at that date lay in the then French province of Lorraine, the
then French department of the Meuse, upon which river it was built.
Distant from Paris somewhere about one hundred and fifty miles, it was
also within about fifty miles, in different directions, of two towns
which have since become vividly historic, Sédan and Metz. The river
thereabouts follows a tortuous course, and the lower part of Verdun
stood mainly on little islands in the Meuse, while the upper part led
to the French citadel, which crowned a rocky summit.

The valley, containing the town, ran north-west and south-east, being
surrounded by hills.

On reaching the citadel Mrs. Baron and Roy were desired by the Colonel
to remain in the coach, while he and Denham disappeared within, there
to be carefully examined and closely questioned, and having again
to give their parole. After which they came out, the Colonel saying
shortly--

"That business is done! Tell them where to go, Den. They seem
determined to know us again."

"Were they civil?" his wife asked.

"No end of a fuss, my dear. As if the word of an English gentleman were
not sufficient. Close description of us both written in the register."

Once more they drove on, Roy gazing from side to side, noting the
small insignificant shops, and exclaiming at occasional peeps of the
river with an interest which never quite failed him. The others were
for the most part silent. Mrs. Baron's eyes were dim, the Colonel was
pre-occupied, and Ivor, usually the most observant of men, seemed to
see nothing.

Presently they stopped before the gateway of a large old house or small
private "hôtel," with an untidy little courtyard. An old Frenchman,
in quaint dress, grey-haired, with an imposing pig-tail, came to meet
them, bowing profoundly to the gentlemen, and still more profoundly to
Mrs. Baron.

"C'est, sans doute, Monsieur le Colonel--et Madame----"

Colonel Baron's particular gift did not lie in the direction of foreign
languages. He never could talk French, and probably he never would, no
matter how many years he might be compelled to live in France.

"Oui, monsieur. Bon jour. C'est nous qui sont viendrai," he responded,
feeling it incumbent on him to say something, as he descended from the
old coach. "J'espère que vous êtes bien. Je suis bien aise que nous
sommes haut--pas bas--pas près de le rivière. Bother their grammar,
Denham; you can do it better than I. Just say what's suitable."

Denham obeyed, and the next object which dawned upon Roy's perceptions
was the sad and gentle face of Lucille de St. Roques. He seized her
hand vehemently.

"I say, mademoiselle, it's nice to find you here. Isn't it, Den?
Mamma, this is Mademoiselle de St. Roques. Papa, you know she helped
to nurse me after I'd had small-pox. Are we going to live upstairs,
mademoiselle? Is that what it's to be? The whole upstairs, all to
ourselves? What fun! Which way is it? Oh, I see! This way, mamma. Those
poor horses do look tired, just half-starved, and so skinny. Is there
a stable for them? Are we to have tea? Dinner! that's right. We didn't
get half a dinner to-day, and I'm famished. What a droll old staircase?
Do look out of this window, mamma."

Roy's flow of spirits helped them all. The Colonel and his wife
gratefully expressed their thanks to the French girl for her past
kindness to their boy, both being much attracted by her face and her
pretty manner as she led the way upstairs to the first floor. There
stood Madame Courant, a fat and smiling little Frenchwoman, ready to
bestow unlimited welcomes upon the unfortunate foreigners.

Lucille had exchanged bows with Ivor at first, and then had a few
words with him, scanning his face as she talked, with rather troubled
glances. There was, however, small leisure at first for any quiet
conversation. The rooms had to be inspected, and they were found to be
not at all bad as to size, though meagrely furnished. Lucille had set
her heart on making everything wear as far as possible an English look,
using her childish recollections of a home across the Channel; and if
she was less successful than she had hoped, nobody betrayed the fact.
It was clear to them all how hard she had worked to render the place
comfortable.

"But it has been no trouble--non, vraiment--not at all," she assured
them, with her pensive smile, when they apologised.

While sincerely anxious to help, full of sympathy for their position,
and most desirous to cheer them up, she plainly feared to be guilty
of intrusion, and very soon she took herself off with Madame Courant
to the ground floor. A somewhat clumsy but well-intentioned maiden
had been deputed to wait upon the upstairs party--probably had been
hired for the purpose, since Madame Courant did most of her own
house-work--and dinner was laid in the smaller salon in readiness for
their arrival.

On the whole that first meal might be reckoned a success. Madame
Courant was no mean cook; and though not much could be said as to the
actual waiting, from an English point of view, that was a minor matter,
compared with the comfort of finding clean and cosy quarters, not to
speak of a kind reception. Roy did his best to supply all deficiencies
in the conversational line, and his efforts were seconded, though not
vigorously, by Denham.

When, however, dinner was at an end, and they had moved into the
larger salon, which was to be their drawing-room--when a long evening
lay before them, and there was nothing that had to be done, beyond a
certain amount of unpacking and arranging, which no one felt disposed
to begin upon at once--then a change came. Then the shadow of their
captivity descended heavily upon them all, even upon the valiant Roy;
and for once the spirit of cheerfulness and of keeping up seemed to
vanish.

For a quarter of an hour they all remained together, no one speaking.
No one was able to speak. They had nothing whatever to say. And
presently, when this had gone on a little while, Mrs. Baron made
a move, retreating into her own bedroom, avowedly to "see to a
few things," but in reality, as they all knew, to indulge in a
breakdown--her husband, after a brief hesitation, going thither also.
Denham had flagged completely, retreating to a shady corner near the
big fireplace, where he could scarcely be seen; and for Ivor to flag
meant the flagging of everybody. As for Roy--but that he would have
been ashamed, counting himself already almost a man, he could at this
stage have flung himself on the ground and cried like a little child
for very home-sickness.

He wanted Molly--oh, most awfully! He wanted her this evening more than
he had ever wanted anything or anybody in his whole life. The craving
that took possession of him for Molly's face, Molly's voice, Molly's
companionship--the passionate desire to have dear little Molly once
more by his side--was a pain never to be forgotten.

Roy did not know how to bear himself under it. He had nothing to do,
nothing with which to pass the time. He stood at the window, looking
out upon the darkness, trying desperately to be cool and stoical, as
one five minutes crawled by after another. Denham never moved, never
spoke a word. Roy could just make out his dark outline, as motionless
as a carved image, a few yards distant. If only Denham would have
talked, if something would have happened, if somebody would have come
in, it would have been easier to keep going. But nobody came, nothing
happened, and Denham did not stir.

Roy drummed with his fingers on the window-sill. He could hear shrill
voices out in the street, not far off, and the sound of some tuneless
instrument. One of the two candles was gone with Mrs. Baron, leaving
the room dim. He tried to listen, tried not to think. And just when
he counted himself victorious, there was a queer little catch of his
breath which sounded suspicious. Roy drummed again angrily, hoping that
Denham had not heard. He might be asleep, he was so still. But, after a
slight break, he said--

"Come here."

Roy unwillingly obeyed. He would have liked to refuse, but he looked
upon Ivor as in some sort his commanding officer, so of course he had
no choice.

"They're making no end of a row out there," he remarked in a tone of
profound indifference, as he lounged nearer. "Can't think what it's all
for. Just listen."

"Yes; I wish they would stop."

"Don't know what's it's all about. Something or other--going on. I
shouldn't wonder--if they're quarrelling."

That odd little catch again.

"Feel very bad this evening, Roy?"

The question took Roy by surprise, and a lump in his throat prevented
an immediate reply.

Denham understood.

"Never mind," he said. "It's the same with all of us, you know. And
there's one comfort for you--that Molly wants you at least as much as
you want her. Some people would give a good deal for that certainty."

Roy tried to explain matters away.

"I didn't say----"

"My dear boy, there's no need for you to say anything; I know well
enough. Don't you see?"

Denham's chair shook as Roy leant against it, but no further sound
came. He fought his battle courageously, and Denham waited.

"We shall all feel better to-morrow," the latter presently remarked.
"It's a strange place, and things look uncomfortable to-night--can't
well do otherwise. Suppose you and I have a game of chess. Better than
to sit brooding over what can't be cured. My little travelling set is
somewhere about, I believe."

"O yes." Roy's voice told of instant relief. "You gave it to me to take
care of. Don't you mind a game, really? I should like that. Will you
give me your queen?"

"No; not to-day. I'm not at my best. We'll try on even terms. Get out
the pieces."

Roy obeyed with alacrity, and whatever the move meant to Denham, it
served to lift Roy out of his unwonted fit of misery. He was soon
deeply absorbed in the mimic fight, and for once he found himself on
the way to win an easy victory. Roy became exultant--till the honour
and glory of success were impaired by the casual discovery that Ivor
could not tell a knight from a bishop except by feeling. Roy stared
wonderingly into the spare bronzed face.

"Why, Den!"

"All right; this is my bishop."

"I say, you didn't take that for a knight?"

"I believe I was under the delusion for a moment."

"But why? There, now it's your turn. Oh, I say!--you're going to move
my king."

Denham laughed slightly.

"I am rather a futile opponent, seemingly. Never mind. Now it is your
turn."

"What's the matter? Can't you see?"

"Not well; just a headache. Go on; you'll soon end the game at this
rate."

Roy showed himself capable of heroism. Though he had never yet beaten
Denham in full fight, without having some of his adversary's best
pieces presented to him, though the desire of his heart was for a
victory, and though he was on the high road to administering checkmate,
one more glance decided him. He swept his arm over the board.

Denham half smiled, and made no protest.

"You are a kind fellow," he said, as he went back to his former
retreat; and Roy dropped on the floor to pick up the scattered pieces.

"Why didn't you tell me? You'd no business to play. Can't I do anything
for you?"

"Yes, if you don't mind"--after a moment's racking of his brain to
think of anything that might keep the boy occupied. "I wish you would
unpack my valise--just the things that I shall want to-night."

Roy was delighted and went off at full speed. In the passage he found
himself face to face with Lucille, and all but rushed into her arms.
Lucille drew back.

"I say! Oh, I beg your pardon, mademoiselle. I'm going to unpack for
Den. He's just floored; can't even play chess. It's all this horrid
beastly bother, having to come to Verdun, you know. He never used to be
like that. Den was always up to anything. What have you got there?" as
she held up one hand. "A letter!"

"It is medicine for Monsieur le Capitaine--from England," Lucille said,
with a look of heartfelt pleasure.

"It really is from England! Won't he be glad? Where did you get it
from? You shall give it to him yourself. Yes; I declare you shall."

Roy flung open the salon door, and announced, "Here's Mademoiselle de
St. Roques. Den, she's got something for you! Guess what it is. Come
in, Mademoiselle."

Ivor stood up, not grateful to Roy at this moment.

"Pray take a seat," he urged.

"It's a letter--a letter--a letter from England," cried the boy.

"You have brought this from the post?" asked Denham, as he received
from her hand a folded and sealed packet.

"Non, it is not that. The letter arrives from M. de Bertrand. It was
send to him from England under cover, and he waited till he should
learn your address and have opportunity to send it with safety. When
I wrote to him that you all were ordered to Verdun, then he sent the
letter to me by one travelling this way. It is but now arrived. I am
glad!" Lucille added, under her breath.

Denham bent nearer to the candle, trying with drawn brows to make out
the handwriting. As he did so, a curious light crept over his face.
Lucille thought she could read its meaning.

"You are very good, mademoiselle. I am much indebted to you and to M.
de Bertrand," he said.

"Den, I do believe it's Polly's writing!" exclaimed Roy.

Denham glanced towards him.

"Yes; it is from Polly."

(_To be continued._)

[Illustration]




FROCKS FOR TO-MORROW.

BY "THE LADY DRESSMAKER."


[Illustration: EVENING DRESSES FOR CHRISTMAS FESTIVITIES.]

The winter is always distinguished by a rather dowdy style of dress,
especially in town, where, for at least three months of the year, the
days are so dark and the light so poor at best that everyone says, "It
really cannot matter what one puts on in such sombre weather as this."
Such is the sentiment expressed by the general public, but, of course,
does not apply to those who, having carriages at their disposal, can
blossom out like the lilies of King Solomon, and be carried over the
mud and through the gloom without let or hindrance. It is only on sunny
days during the winter and at Church Parade in Hyde Park that one sees
the brighter side of winter dress. Otherwise it only blooms in the
shops, at the dressmakers', and at the endless afternoon teas which
constitute the main amusement during the winter. One must have at least
one nice walking-dress for the winter, in spite of the gloom, for these
last-named festive occasions, and one generally needs a cape or mantle
as well to wear in turn with our costume or with it as we may require.
Besides this, most women have a certain amount of "wearing out" to do
of clothes that must put in a second winter. Those wise people who have
established a kind of rule for themselves in the purchase of dress get
a handsome cape or mantle one year and a handsome gown the next, the
latter becoming less visible and important the second year when worn
under the new mantle. Both of these should come from first-rate shops,
in order to get the full value out of them. Then there are the people
who wait for the sales to supply themselves with winter clothes, and
say they manage to finish out the last year's stock by this means in
the still darker and shorter days before Christmas. I always consider
the wearing out of one's winter things a grievous bother which falls
most heavily on the shoulders of those who are very careful wearers of
their garments. I know people who really are never able to wear out
their clothes, and become quite dispirited at the constant sight of
them. I know one lady who is able to clothe several others poorer than
herself because she takes such good care of what she wears, and things
are hardly worn in appearance when she has them repaired and brushed up.

The class which has the most difficulty in clothing themselves so as
to present a respectable appearance is composed of these very poor
ladies, who are governesses, lady-helps, or companions, and no doubt
my readers will have noticed the moving appeals issued by many of the
societies and agencies which are interested in procuring work for them.
As we are always anxious to find out good works for our women and
girls, we commend to them this one, as one of the most blessed both to
giver and receiver.

The return to fashion of dresses made from the same material entirely
instead of those which have been so long in wear, which consisted of a
blouse, more or less handsome, and a skirt, has brought in a necessity
for mantles and capes, and so these are really the most fashionable
of the out-of-door garments for the winter months. There is no fear,
however, of the skirt and jacket disappearing from amongst us, for they
have been found too useful to lose their place in our esteem; and the
winter jackets are, some of them, very pretty and tight-fitting, with
large buttons, and generally of three-quarter length, though there are
many quite short ones, but which seem more used for cycling or golf
than for real walking or driving.

[Illustration: TWO WINTER GOWNS.]

One of these costumes with a tight-fitting coat is shown in our
illustration of "a gown with braid and fur," which is a very handsome
example of the walking-gowns of the winter. The skirt is made with the
fashionable tightness, the much-worn shaped flounce, and the braiding
is carried down the front on either side in a graceful arabesque
design, which is wider and fuller in detail at the top near the waist.
The points are braided in the same manner, and the tops of the sleeves.
The fronts have revers of mink fur. The dress itself is in dark blue
cloth, and the braiding is in black. The hat is of blue velvet, with
white and green wings, and blue and green velvet trimmings. This
admixture of blue and green seems more popular than ever this winter,
and I have frequently seen a blue hat with a bright green velvet choux
bow placed in a conspicuous position in front.

The choux and the Louis XII. or true lovers' knot are the two
fashionable bows of the season, for hats and bonnets as well as for
dress. The first-named seems ubiquitous in evening dress, where black
velvet also appears to be most popular as a trimming.

[Illustration: GOWN WITH BRAID AND FUR.]

Both velvet and velveteen are much worn, and are suited to the fashions
of the day, and the velveteen blouse retains its popularity, but is
more dressy and fanciful than it was. In some cases velvet is used
for the coat-shaped bodices, with short square tails that are much
seen, and these have almost invariably fancy vests or yokes. In most
instances, too, these are of finely tucked silk muslin, which, in cream
or white, is quite the most popular material for them, in spite of its
perishable nature and apparent unseasonableness.

So far as materials are concerned, everything that is clinging and soft
is sought after, and even the rustling silks that lined our skirts and
gave us such a feeling of opulence have been relinquished in favour of
something more clinging. Cashmere and nuns' veiling are used for the
lining of day dresses, and China silks for evening ones. For slight
people this clinging effect is sometimes trying, but where stout people
are concerned the matter becomes worse, and we shall hear of all kinds
of cures for obesity in order to wear the new skirts.

Of course, as is usual at this season, many evening dresses for small
Christmas festivities are simple, and our illustration shows three
of these, which are inexpensive and pretty. The first seated figure
to the right wears a pink silk muslin, plain for wearing over the
accordion-kilted skirt, and having a small black leaf-like pattern on
it for the pointed overskirt; a ruching of rose-coloured silk goes
round the latter part of the bodice and sleeves, and the back is
finished with a wide band and bow with ends of rose colour. This can,
of course, be carried out in any hue, but in white or cream-colour it
is very pretty, and there are such numbers of fancy gauzes and nets
that a pretty choice can be made which would be more inexpensive than
the model we present.

The centre figure wears a dress of _mousseline-de-soie_ of a pale shade
of Parma violet, which is trimmed with narrow ribbons, drawn up to
form small ruches. These are of a slightly darker violet. The small
Eton jacket is of the same shade of violet velvet or satin, with bands
of velvet and paste buckles. The standing-up figure wears a dress of
jet-embroidered net, with bands of _passementerie_ on the front of the
bodice. The evening wrap is of a soft yellow brocade, which is lined
with a pale violet, and trimmed with flounces of lace and silk. The
collar is edged with white fur, and a bow of chiffon ornaments the neck
at the back. In giving these dresses I should observe that, although
they seem costly, they can be copied in less expensive materials. Nuns'
veiling, China silk, velveteen, taffetas, Russian net, and Brussels net
are all in fashion, and all are comparatively so moderate in price as
to be attainable by those who have slender purses. This season we also
have the embroidered net skirts that were introduced last year, with
the improvement that this season the bodice-piece is sold as well. So
we have not to make troublesome inquiries and huntings for the material
to decorate them. There seems to be a tendency likewise to return to
the use of a three-quarter length sleeve, which fits the arm smoothly
as far as the elbow and terminates in a frill. The long net and chiffon
sleeves are still worn, and I notice that there are some very pretty
high net bodices without sleeves, or, at least, with a few folds
of satin, which answer the purpose. These will be a novelty if they
should be adopted, and will be charming for the evening with all thin
materials.

The illustration of two winter gowns shows one of the new skirts and a
bodice fastened at the back. The skirt is also fastened there in the
newest fashion; the trimming consists of rows of fine black braid, the
dress being of fine cloth, of a _pervenche_ blue. The bodice is trimmed
with points of velvet, of a darker shade of blue, and the same is used
for the bows at the back. The second dress is one of those tucked
throughout. It is of a soft satin cloth, of a pale shade of grey. The
revers are braided, and there is a front of dark-grey velvet and a
high collar, with the lining braided, like the revers. I hope you will
notice that this skirt opens on one side, usually the left, and it is
finished by a row of tiny buttons, or by a small ruching of ribbon.

A great deal of this ribbon ruching is seen, as well as much piping.
Silk braids, very fine and very narrow, in black and white, form a
feature of this year's decorations, and silver braids as well. Crystal
buttons are more liked than paste or steel ones, and there is a craze
for old lace and for mixing fur with it. Black and white are in as
much favour as this mixture has always found during the last four
years, and the two are constantly mixed in trimmings.

I think I mentioned in my last that the hair was worn low on the
neck--certainly far lower than has been the custom for some little
time. But I do not find that the knot of hair is quite so low just now.
Evidently the idea has not quite "caught on," as the slang phrase has
it, and most of the well-dressed heads I have lately seen have had the
coil of hair at the back of the head midway down. Perhaps, later on, we
shall see more of the low hair dressing than we do now.

Truly the swing of the pendulum has quite carried us away from the neat
and ever-becoming black stockings, and the new ones are a study in
colour and design. I think the tartan ones will be worn, and will look
well; but I cannot say I like the others; nevertheless, that may be
because one has grown used to a lack of colour for so long.

So far as boots and shoes are concerned, the most fashionable people
wear the American ones with their extremely pointed toes and narrow
feet, but it is open to the sensible to wear something more comfortable
if they do not mind a loss of style, for we cannot be really smart
unless our poor feet be pinched and pointed to the last degree.




OUR PROSPECTUS PUZZLE REPORT.


SOLUTION.

ANOTHER NAUGHT.

A ROUNDEL.

    Time hastens onwards to the day
      When our good, trusty printer ought
    Upon our numbers to display
                      Another naught.

      Oh! how tremendous is the thought:--
    A thousand weeks have passed away
      Since out our magazine was brought!

    We love our work, it is but play;
      "_Bon Voyage_" to the bark high-fraught;
    And printer, sing as you in-lay
                      Another naught.


PRIZE WINNERS.

_Ten Shillings Each._

    J. Hunt, 42, Francis Road, Birmingham.
    A. Phillips, 15, South Hill Park, Hampstead.
    Emily M. Wood, Woodbank, Southport.


_Five Shillings Each._

    Margaret Baggallay, 3, Clarence Lawn, Dover.
    Marie Behrendt, Scanthorpe, Doncaster.
    Lily Belling, Wribbenhall, Bewdley.
    Miss H. M. Brown, Longformacus, Duns, N.B.
    Charlotte D. Cole, 7, High Street, Beckenham.
    M. A. C. Crabb, Ipplepen, Alexandra Road, Hemel Hempstead.
    Agnes Dewhurst, 32, Lethbridge Road, Southport.
    Miss M. Hodgkinson, 2, Feversham Terrace, York.
    Benjamin Marcroft, High Legh, Grosvenor Drive, New Brighton.
    Nellie Meikle, 2, Newsham Drive, Liverpool.
    Henzell G. Robson, 7, Oxford Terrace, Gateshead-on-Tyne.
    F. A. Powell, 75, Hythe Road, Swindon.
    Anne Sifton, 230, Goldhawk Road, Shepherd's Bush.
    M. Stuart, The Shrubbery, Grove Park, Kent.
    Ellen C. Tarrant, 2, Palace Grove, Bromley.
    Violet C. Todd, Ford, Cornhill-on-Tweed.


_Very Highly Commended._

Mrs. Acheson, Eliza Acworth, Lottie R. Biddle, E. J. Cameron, Mrs. J.
Cumming, May Merrall, E. C. Milne, Lilla Patterson, Constance Taylor,
Connie E. Thompson, Daisy Tyler, Martha Wood.


_For Artistic Execution._

Maud Abbott.


_Highly Commended._

Annie A. Arnott, Fanny Ashby, Ethel M. Atkins, Margaret Bailey, Eva M.
Benson, R. S. Benson, E. K. Berry, Mary A. Blagg, Nancy Bolingbroke, M.
S. Bourne, May Burlinsay, Annie J. Cather, Mabel E. Davis, Mrs. Deane,
Edward R. Duffield, Alice M. Feurer, Emily Francis, Mrs. W. H. Gotch,
Mrs. Grubbe, Edith E. Grundy, A. Hughes, George L. Ingram, Annie G.
Luck, C. Y. MacGibbon, E. Mastin, Jessie Middlemiss, Mrs. Nicholls,
Percy J. Powell, Alice M. Price, Gertrude Saffery, A. C. Sharp, Isabel
Snell, Norah M. Sullivan, A. C. T., Phyllis Toker, Ann Toplis, Florence
Whitlock, Mrs. Wigglesworth, E. Wilson.


_Honourable Mention._

S. Ballard, Mary I. Chislett, Helen M. Coulthard, Mrs. H. Keel, K. H.
Ingram, E. M. Le Mottée, Charlotte Hayward, Florence Hayward, Ethel
C. Hobbs, Edith L. Howse, Annette E. Jackson, Alice E. Johnson, Fred
Lindley, Ethel C. McMaster, Elsa P. Neel, Charles Parr, Elizabeth A.
Reynolds, Annie Saunders, Dorothy Smith, Ellen R. Smith, Gertrude
Smith, May Tutte, Anna Walker, J. Walker, Julia Waltenberg, John R.
Whyberd, G. Watherston.

       *       *       *       *       *


EXAMINERS' REPORT.

The insatiability of an editor who is clamouring daily for our words
of wisdom compels us to be very brief. This is all the more to be
regretted because with such a subject to handle we could have risen to
great literary heights. But to work!

The title was not "Another aught," the reason being that aught is not
synonymous with naught. The difference between the two is considerable,
"aught" signifying anything, "naught" nothing. The importance of this
pleasing fact is often overlooked, especially by schoolchildren, who
frequently speak of a cipher as "an aught," or, as they in their
childish wisdom spell it "ought."

In many solutions the final letter of "onwards" was omitted. Doubtless,
"onward" is grammatically just as good, but as the "s" was in the
puzzle it was a pity not to transfer it to the solution.

The beginning of the third line seems to have caused trouble. Those who
failed to find the true solution generally gave "On our three figures,"
or "On our first numbers." Both readings are good interpretations of
the text, but the first is meaningless and the second is incorrect.
With "On all our numbers "--adopted by a few solvers--we have little
fault to find.

Many competitors kindly pointed out that the minus sign in line 6 ought
to have been the sign of division. Let us examine their contention
closely. Two weeks divided by two yields one week and the beginning of
the line would run "A thousand one week." Two weeks minus two yields
weeks, clearly, and we need pursue the instruction no further. Some of
the readings at this point were remarkable, _e.g._, "A thousand days";
"Twelve thousand days": "A thousand years," and "A million weeks."

We have always been accustomed to regard THE GIRL'S OWN PAPER with much
veneration, but the idea of its having first seen the light something
like fourteen thousand years before Adam is somewhat startling.

In the next line, "G. O. P." often took the place of "magazine." Our
dislike of such irritating abbreviations did not prevent us from doing
justice to the reading which is rhythmically correct.

The number of solvers who wrote "barque" for "bark" was amazing. The
latter was in the puzzle and signifies any small vessel. The former was
not in the puzzle and defines a vessel of a particular rig. And there
is really no need for more.




IN THE TWILIGHT SIDE BY SIDE.

BY RUTH LAMB.


PART III.

HOW TO GROW OLD.

    "They shall still bring forth fruit in old age" (Psalm xcii. 14).

When I was a child a dear old lady, who had been asking questions about
my lessons, laid her gentle hand on my head and said, "I see you love
school, my child. 'Learn young, learn fair.'"

You, dear girl friends, will be at no loss to understand the teaching
of the proverb. It says, in few words, that those lessons which are
early imprinted on our minds are likely to have an abiding place in our
memories and a lasting influence over our lives.

There is one lesson amongst many which we ought to be constantly
learning from the time that we can understand anything. It is, how to
grow old.

Do I see some of you smiling at each other, as if old age were such
a far-away subject that it ought not to be introduced to my great
gathering of girls? Why, if I could have spoken to you as children, one
by one, I would have asked, "Are you learning how to grow old?"

You ought to be, for the moment you began to live you started on the
path that leads to old age. From that path none of us can turn aside
and, perhaps without thinking much of the inevitable ending, we pursue
our course thereon steadily and uninterruptedly. We may start on many
other paths--those of duty, work, mental culture, etc.--and we may
take up certain pursuits and relinquish them at our will, but the one
onward journey is continuous. We travel by night and by day. Sleeping
or waking, resting or working, we are ever progressing towards old age,
whether we live to reach it or not.

It is often said that every age has its special beauty, and yet I
daresay many of you have never dreamed of associating the idea of
beauty with old age. You are apt to claim it as the special prerogative
of youth. Yet I believe that old age may be--and I assert that it ought
to be in certain senses--the most beautiful of all, despite the white
hair, the tremulous hand, the feeble step which seeks support from the
strong arm of the young, and the wrinkles on brows that were once as
smooth and fair as the fairest amongst yours.

The young often shrink from the very thought of being old. One hears
the girl in her teens whisper to her companion, as she glances at a
third who is not out of her twenties, "She is getting to look quite old
already. She might be five-and-thirty."

The tone is half pitying, half disparaging, as if the object of the
remark were somehow in fault because a few more years had passed over
her young head than over the speaker's.

Listen again to words from the lips of a girl who is just "sweet
seventeen." (Alas that seventeen does not always deserve the
adjective!) She has just stigmatised a friend of thirty as "a cross old
thing." And for what? She has only been trying to bring her good common
sense and sound judgment to bear upon the other's wilfulness. She is
anxious to save her from doing a foolish thing on which her childish
will is stubbornly set and which is certain to be followed by remorse
and trouble.

"Sweet seventeen" purses her pretty lips and tosses her foolish head
whilst saying, "As if I were going to be ordered about by her! Cross
old thing!" And she goes on her wilful way and pays for it.

Still we must acknowledge that a dozen extra years do not always bring
proportionate wisdom, any more than does the seventeenth birthday
invariably carry sweetness in its train. We have to learn to grow old
in such wise that each year's passage means also progress in everything
that is best.

It seems very strange--does it not?--that whilst everyone desires long
life, so many dislike to look forward to old age in connection with
themselves. Or, if they do, it is not so much in a frank and natural
manner as in a secret and stealthy fashion. If they speak of it at
all, they speak as of something which may be near to others, but is
still far, far away from themselves. Such people would never tell you
that they are learning how to grow old--striving each day after some
knowledge which will tend towards the attainment of a really beautiful
and lovable old age.

The need for such a study is ignored by so many up to and beyond middle
age, that one wonders little at its being ignored by the young. Yet
other questions occupy their earnest attention in connection with
increasing years.

How to ward off the semblance of old age, for the reality cannot be
deferred. How to look young in spite of it. How to conceal the number
of the years that have passed over their heads. How best to utilise art
so as to simulate the complexion of youth and to hide the marks of time
on their features.

Time is readily given in order to solve such questions to the exclusion
of those higher lessons, attention to which would make old age the most
beautiful and lovely of all.

Girls, dear girls! you are generally keen observers of externals, and
especially so in matters of female dress and adornment. If one of you
has been at a social gathering, whether amongst humble workers or
leaders in society, what is usually the first question asked by sisters
or acquaintances on her return? Is it not about the dresses worn? You
inquire how such a one looked, or if another again wore a dress which
is too well known on account of its age. You want to hear all about
novelties in the fashioning of new garments, and whether they were of a
mode likely to be becoming to yourselves. It may be you give a little
laugh as you say that such a girl would be sure to look dowdy, or
inquire if the good taste of another was as conspicuous as usual.

I am inclined to doubt whether you were as anxious to know how your
friend was impressed by the words and conduct of those with whom she
had been associating, or whether she had, during this little season
of social enjoyment, received impressions likely to influence her for
good. We ought to be learners in every place, but not merely in regard
to externals.

Now I want to ask you a question. I have given you credit for being
keen observers. Tell me, can you imagine a picture more truly pitiable
and contemptible than that of a woman on whose face is the stamp of
age, but who imagines that she has succeeded in hiding it by paint and
powder?

One who hugs the thought that she has rendered her wrinkles invisible,
or that her dyed hair, with its tell-tale line of grey near the roots,
or the cunningly arranged golden hued substitute for whitened locks,
deceives anyone but herself? All such shams make the old look older
still. They add to the appearance of age instead of taking from it, and
they rob old age of much of the beauty which is as real as that which
pertains to the youth it tries to simulate. I am alluding to externals
first because everyone sees them.

I have no doubt that you have all discovered my liking for proverbial
expressions. My native county is rich in these pithy sayings which
convey so much meaning in few words. The subject of our present talk
brings to mind one of these proverbs, which was often quoted in my
hearing when I was a girl. I recall one occasion especially. A ruddy
farmer turned to look after an elderly woman who had just passed him.
She was girlishly dressed, and she strove to trip along in youthful
fashion, feeling evidently well satisfied with herself, and claiming
admiration by every gesture.

What had our countryman to say about her appearance? He jogged his
neighbour's elbow, and quoted the proverb, as he indicated the
retreating figure with a jerk of his thumb: "Old ewe dressed lamb
fashion."

"Aye," said his friend, "and it's no good. Age will show in spite of
paint and finery. She was turned twenty when I was twelve, and I'm
over fifty-three to-day. Why, deary me! There's always somebody that
remembers."

These added words were as true as the proverb itself. There is always
someone, amongst our many acquaintances and kinsfolk, who has a good
memory for dates, and who can refer to the number of Life's milestones
we have passed with unerring accuracy.

I asked you if there could be anything more pitiable and contemptible
than the sight of an elderly woman trying to defy time and age by such
means as I have named?

I will answer my own question, "Yes, there is. The sight of a girl
who, possessing youth, health, and the share of good looks and
attractiveness which must accompany these two things, is ever striving
to improve Nature's handiwork by the use of unnatural means." Believe
me, my dear girl friends, the sight of a young face disfigured by
artificial colouring and unnaturally whitened by powder, of blackened
eyebrows and eyelashes, together with similar shams, excites in my mind
a feeling of true motherly regret. I love girls too well to say hard
things or to speak of contempt for such practices; though they ought to
be contemptible in the eyes of all pure and right-minded girls.

One associates the use of them with small minds and natures whose chief
end and aim are to gratify personal vanity and attract admiration,
instead of striving to win respect by the exercise of far nobler
powers. Can any girl be so self-deceived as to think she will win
honest affection by such means? She may win it in spite of them, but
it will be because the one who gives it is able to discover something
better and more deserving of love beneath this miserable upper crust of
deception.

One is always ready to recognise, with gratitude, even a mistaken
attempt made by the young with a view of giving pleasure to others. But
I am sure that self-pleasing and the gratification of vanity are, in
nearly every case, the incentives to such displays as I have condemned.

In looking round me, I have been struck with the fact that some of the
girls who use paint, powder, and what are, I am informed, known under
the general name of "make-ups," are just those to whom Nature has been
specially liberal in the gift of beauty.

Beauty, when joined to vanity, has an insatiable longing to add to its
attractions. It is more than conscious of all that it has, but it is
never satisfied, because it craves to combine, in its own person, the
attractions of every style which is, from time to time, commended in
its hearing. Hence all these useless and foolish efforts to improve on
Nature's handiwork.

Do not misunderstand me so far as to think I condemn the use of many
little toilet accessories, which add greatly both to comfort and
health. It would be insulting to the good sense of my girls, if I were
to specify what things are lawful and useful, and what are contemptible
and to be avoided.

You would smile, in pitying fashion, at the sight of an old lady, whose
grey locks having become too scanty to cover her head, had thought fit
to crown her wrinkled face with a wig and fringe of golden hair. But if
the addition matched what remained of her own growth, I hope you would
be glad to think that art had done something on behalf of comfort and
comeliness for old age, as well as for youth. Depend on it the natural
colour of your hair is that which agrees best with your features and
complexion, and if there is anything really wrong with the latter, it
will be better for you to consult your doctor than a manufacturer of
cosmetics.

I am glad to think I have not known many girls whose vanity led them to
spoil their appearance in the manner I hope you join me in condemning,
but we have all seen plenty of such. I picture two, however, both
rather exceptionally attractive. One had beautiful, glossy, dark hair,
with eyes to match, and a complexion like a blush rose.

I did not see her for some time, and when we met I was horrified at
the change. A mop of yellow, frizzled hair surmounted a face whence
the blush-rose tint had fled, or been hidden under glaringly false red
and white. All the dainty charm of the face was gone, and I am fain to
confess that I went a little out of my way to avoid a closer meeting
with my changed acquaintance. Happily I can tell of a pleasant sequel
in this case. Some good influence has been brought to bear, or perhaps
the girl's innate good sense has overcome her vanity, and she has found
out that such shams are unworthy of a self-respecting girl.

She has given fair play to Nature, and that just in time to save the
blush-rose complexion from ruin, and to be once more her bonny self.

The second girl possessed remarkable beauty especially of complexion,
and her vanity and greed of admiration were in proportion to it. These
impelled her to be ever experimenting on herself to produce greater
perfection, with the result that whilst still a girl she looked many
years older than her age, and I hear, though I do not see her now, that
she is daily becoming less attractive, though no less vain than of old.

Quite apart from the harm done to personal appearance by these foolish
practices, but of far greater importance, is the moral injury they
cause. One might call the exhibition of paint an acted falsehood,
because it is an attempt to make ourselves appear what we are not.

But such devices are too transparent to deceive. If begun, they become
more and more injurious and difficult to discontinue, and those who
practise them live in an atmosphere of anxiety and disappointment.
Age comes, despite all efforts to delay its progress, and it leaves
footprints which baffle art to disguise or obliterate.

Doubtless you have all heard this expression used in relation to
someone you know--"She knows how to grow old gracefully." You
understand it to picture one who accepts age as the natural and
inevitable sequence of youth; who is above the paltry vanity which
would hide it--or, rather, try to hide it--yet who neglects nothing
which can help to make it externally attractive, and especially to the
young. For, if age is to have its full legitimate influence over youth,
it must be beautiful in itself, both without and within.

I will not ask you, my dear ones, to look again at that pitiable
picture of Vanity battling with Age, despite the certainty of defeat
and disappointment. But be assured of this--that the girl who starts on
the same lines will reach the same goal; but it will not be that of a
beautiful and lovable old age.

Do not imagine that I undervalue externals. I would have you all be
habitually careful about them. Let your complexion be kept at its best
by scrupulous cleanliness. If your hair is beautiful and abundant, take
pains to dress it in the fashion that best sets off such good looks as
you possess. If you are less favoured in this respect, give the more
care and pains so as to make the best of what you have.

Exercise good taste in your dress, whilst carefully keeping your
expenditure within your means. The girl who dresses quietly and
becomingly will not make herself conspicuous in later years by the use
of glaring colours or fantastic garments.

Try to be graceful and quiet in your movements, and scrupulous
in avoiding all little ways and habits likely to be disturbing,
unpleasant, or offensive to others. And do not be offended if a
well-meaning friend ventures to point out a tendency to any growing
habit of the kind, knowing that if once established it will be almost
impossible for you to overcome it. Bear in mind that such a warning can
be only intended for your benefit and to help you on your way towards
growing old gracefully.

Study to modulate your voices so that the sound of them may fall
pleasantly, even musically, on the ear. Shrill, harsh, and loud
youthful voices become something too terrible when they accompany age.

I wonder if any of you have heard our dear Queen speak? I regret to say
that I have not, but friends have told me that they never heard a voice
which equalled hers for its melodious tone, perfect clearness, and
faultless enunciation.

Try to avoid affectation in gesture and movement, and any form of
facial contortion. Habit makes all these painful to witness, and age
exaggerates them. Sometimes a habit of knitting the brows is contracted
early in life, with the result that the forehead is furrowed and a
forbidding expression given to the face which permanently spoils it.
Age intensifies what is forbidding and disagreeable, but shows to the
greatest advantage all that is most lastingly attractive in us, just as
the flower fulfils the promise of the bud.

In this lesson on "How to grow old" I have confined myself to
externals. It is time for us to part, but when we meet again we will
study the subject from the highest standpoint.

Before then a new year will have dawned on us. Let me suggest as a
fitting motto for it, "I will go in the strength of the Lord God." May
it prove a very happy one to you all.

(_To be continued._)




"SISTER WARWICK": A STORY OF INFLUENCE.

BY H. MARY WILSON, Author of "In Warwick Ward," "In Monmouth Ward,"
"Miss Elsie," etc.


CHAPTER IV.

Granny 20 was in one of her most garrulous moods, but who was there to
listen? She tried to catch a nurse or probationer as they hurried by
the end of the bed, with a "Listen to me now, nurse." But a smile and a
nod and a "By-and-by, Granny," was all she got for her pains.

Her nearest bed-fellows were too sleepy for anything, and she had to
content herself with murmuring to an imaginary audience until Sister
had a moment's leisure, and came to her bedside.

"I was saying, Sister, that Mrs. 21 there is one with me. We both rue
our wedding-day! And we thought--bless yer!--we thought, when we stood
up so proud and made our vows, that we was the luckiest women in the
world."

"And it all turned out badly, Granny?"

"Oh, well! It might have been wuss for some of us. I won't say it
mightn't; but me was in too much of a hurry--that was the mischief.
Why, bless yer! Mrs. 21 there says she wasn't more'n sixteen when she
took a 'usband! And me? I was only just turned eighteen. We didn't know
no better. We were took by a 'andsome face."

"Well, Granny, I cannot err on the side of marrying too young, whatever
I do."

"Sister! You ain't never thinking of matrimoany? Don't 'ee, dear! Don't
'ee! Just take the advice of a old woman what _knows_. This is what I
say. If a man comes to you and seems true enough, don't trust him! No,
not if trust was to sparkle like a diamond from the end of every hair
on his head, don't trust him!"

Hardly knowing how to contain herself for laughter, Sister promised to
be very careful, and thanked Granny for her wise words.

"They aire wise. You may well say so," chuckled the old lady. "Now I
could tell you----"

"Another time, Granny dear--and see! Here's nurse with your tea. A cup
of tea! There's nothing like it, is there?"

"Bless yer--no!"

And Nurse Hudson--what of her? Had the episode of yesterday's
carelessness with the words of reproof that followed been the warning
Sister Warwick hoped? The watchful eyes could detect very little that
was amiss that day. But she was obliged to acknowledge that the nurse's
manner towards herself was not what it should be. With her new efforts
not to repel her nurses by the stiffness of her own manners she ignored
what she could. Later she felt glad she had done so.

After tea the medicines were given out. It was the staff-nurse's duty
to-day, and following the instructions on her chart, Hudson went to and
fro, pouring out the draughts, and bringing them to each bed in order.

Sister, seated by No. 10, watched her silently. But when she brought
the dose for this "typhoid," she took it from her hand to administer it
herself.

What instinct made her pause, before giving it, to ask:

"Is this the new medicine, nurse?"

"Of course it is, Sister!" The tone was offensive, but, ignoring it,
Sister Warwick leant forward to hold the glass to the girl's lips.
Again she paused. What was it stayed her hand?

She raised the glass, smelt it, and then put it to her own lips and
tasted the liquid, her eyes on the chart.

"This is an overdose!" she said sternly. "Here are four times the right
amount!"

For she knew in a flash what the nurse had done, and she shuddered
at the thought! Hudson had certainly, as she said, given the fresh
medicine the chart directed, but in her heedlessness she had not
looked to see if the quantity was altered too. She had poured out two
tablespoonfuls instead of two teaspoonfuls--a dose that would have
caused intense suffering, if nothing worse, to the sick girl.

Sister Warwick rose from her chair and looked Nurse Hudson full in the
face. Her utter scorn and indignation at this culpable carelessness
rendered her speechless.

But her glance was enough!

Turning on her heel, she carried the medicine-glass into her room,
placed it in a cupboard there, and locking it up, removed the key.

Nurse Hudson watched it all--miserable and self-condemned--knowing
what the action meant. Now that it was done, she would have given
anything to have been more careful. Her colour came and went. She
stood irresolute. Her better self was urging her to go at once and with
a humble apology plead for another trial with an earnest promise of a
different course in the future. But she could not bring herself to do
that. Pride and Selfishness had been too closely her companions lately,
excluding better impulses.

No, she would not believe that Sister Warwick meant to report her to
the Matron. Perhaps she would only ask for her removal to another ward;
there she could make a fresh start. But she did not ask herself with
what motive.

Nurse Hudson's work had always been tarnished with the discolouring
influences of her own low aims. No wonder now that she failed, and did
not take the one step that might have saved her nursing career.

She left the ward that evening without another word with the
Sister--miserable, self-pitying, undecided, little thinking that she
would never enter it again.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The whole affair shall be stopped at once!" The Matron's voice was
full of decision and very stern. "I will send for Hudson and tell her
I cannot keep her here any longer. Nor will I sign her certificate! I
am not justified, after all you tell me, in sending her away to pass
herself off as a qualified nurse."

"You take a harder view of her conduct than I do, Matron." And Sister
Warwick then and there began to plead for the nurse who had been such a
"thorn in her side."

"You will not move me, Sister! Hudson will go! It will seem right, from
many points of view, when you can look at it dispassionately. I am only
very thankful that we so rarely have such a failure among the nurses,
and thankful most of all that no worse harm has been done. We might
have had a case for the coroner."

Sister Warwick knew the Matron's words were just. She left her and
went back to her own room, sinking into her leaning-chair with the
consciousness that an upset like this "took it out of her" far more
than even an operation involving pain and suffering to one of her dear
ward babies. And, sad at heart, she began to think of Ellen Hudson's
future, then to search back in her own mind for possible opportunities
missed in the past when she might have helped her more kindly. She
realised bitterly that she herself might have done better too.

She sat forward then and wrote a little note and sent it round to the
Nurses' Home, timed to reach Nurse Hudson just after her interview with
the Matron.

It was to ask her staff-nurse to come and see her before she left. But
she never came. She passed out of Sister Warwick's life from that hour,
and her place knew her no more.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nurse Carden's bright face and ready sympathy were a pleasant
interruption to the Sister's mournful ruminations that evening. She
came in a little before her usual time, and the two had a quiet chat in
the "Sisters' Room" before the night work began.

Here Sister Cumberland joined them. These three women--so different in
character, so united in aim and purpose--felt then the sustaining power
of a friendship that was standing the wear and tear of life.

Seeing how worried the elder "Sister" was by the present, the other two
drew her thoughts back to the past and to their earlier experiences in
the ward.

"Do you remember?" was the introduction to many reminiscences Sister
Cumberland recalled that night on duty, when she fought her fiercest
fight with the craving for sleep.

Nurse Carden talked of Tommie the waif and his whimsical ways. He could
not be forgotten, for it was not many days since at the lodge-gate of
her own home she had seen the Tommie of to-day. Such a contrast! A
sturdy, ruddy, honest country lad, loving his life as a gardener's boy,
and always ready, if questioned, to say, "Oh, I belong to Nurse Carden,
I do! I ain't got nobody else! But she is good to me, she is!"

So the three talked until the hour struck which took them to their
various duties and closed the second of these days my pen has tried to
describe--days chosen not because they were remarkably different from
many others, but because they give an average picture of the cares
and anxieties, the pleasures and interests that belong to a hospital
Sister's life; because, too, they tell of an experience that had a
lasting effect in softening Sister Warwick's character and in extending
her influence over the nurses in her charge.

[THE END.]




GUS.


Ya want ti knaw aboot ma maate Gus? Set ya doon, then, an' ah'll tell
ya all aboot it.

Me an' Gus wer friends fra' t' first. 'E wer a shy, quiet soort o' lad,
an' t' other chaps didn't seem ti taake ti 'im at first, an' it wer
soort o' loansoom for a yoong chap lodgin' aloan i' a straange plaace,
specially as 'e didn't seem ti care mooch for t' public-'oose o' neets.
Soa wun evening, as we wer leavin' woork, ah says ti 'im, "Coom in an'
'ave a bit o' soopper wi' ma an' ma missus, lad."

'E looked real pleased, an' said 'e would coom, bud 'e wouldn't coom
straight 'oam wi' ma, as ah wanted 'im ti. Noa, 'e mun gang back ti 'is
lodgins an' fettle issen oop.

My missus weant best pleased when sha 'eard 'e wer coming; mebbe, theer
weant ower mooch for soopper, an' sha niver were fond o' straangers;
bud 'e 'adn't been i' oor lahtle room aboove 'alf a minute afoor ah
seed as sha'od taaken a fancy ti 'im. 'E com in rather shy an' bashful
loike, for all 'e'd maade 'issen soa graand wi' 'is Soonday coate an'
all, an' ma missus, she says--

"Set ya doon an' maak yersen at whoam, while ah get summat for ya ti
eat," an' 'e set doon reet theer by t' door, on t' edge o' 'is cheer,
an' 'adn't a woord to say for 'issen.

Oor lahtle lass Polly--she wer nobbut fooer year owd then--shoo com in
an' stood starin' at 'im wi' 'er finger i' 'er mooth, an' at sight o'
'er 'e foond 'is tongue.

"Coom 'ere, lahtle ma'ad," says 'e; "ah'm wonnerful fond o' childer.
Coom an' see what ah've got i' ma pocket."

Bud t' lahtle lass still stood beside ma, starin' at 'im as if 'e wer
summat i' a show.

Gus didn't saay nowt moor, but 'e oots wi' 'is knife an' a bit o' wood
and starts carvin' summat.

"Noo," says 'e, arter a bit, "what shall it be? Shall ah maak tha a
'orse, or a coo, or what?"

T' lahtle lass foond 'er toongue at that.

"A lad," says she, an' cooms a step nearer ti see what 'e wer at.

"Shoo'll be a rare wun for t' lads when shoo's a bit bigger, ah'se
warran'," says 'e, wi' a laugh; an' 'e goes on carvin' t' bit o'
wood in a waay 'at wer wunnerful ti me. Soon t' head an' shoolthers
appeared, an' then t' legs an' arms, an' all t' while t' tahtle lass
crept nearer an' nearer, an' by t' tahm t' lad wer doon, shoo wer
sittin' on 'is knee an' chatterin' awaay ti 'im as if 'e wer' an owd
friend.

That woon moother's 'eart, for shoo's powerful set on t' lahtle lass,
seem' shoo's t' oanly wun wi' 'ave--an' ah reckon ah weant far be'ind
'er i' that--an' befoor 'e left shoo'd arst 'im ti taake 'is dinner
wi' us Soonday next. Arter that, Gus wer in an' oot continual, an' 'e
an' t' lahtle lass wer as thick as thieves. It wer pratty ti see 'er
perched o' 'is knee, wi' 'is arm roond 'er, an' ti 'ear 'er pratty
prattle, all aboot 'er dolls an' toys an' sooch-like. 'E used ti call
'er 'is lahtle sweet-'eart, an' saay sha mun marry 'im when sha wer
growed a bit, an' t' lahtle lass 'ud look oop i' 'is faace, as graave
as graave, an' promise ti be 'is lahtle wife. 'Twer as pratty a pictur
as 'eart could wish to see them thegither, an' 'e niver seemed ti tire
o' 'er coompany, or care ti talk wi' me or t' missus when t' lahtle
lass wer theer.

Well tahm went on, an' t' job e'd coom doon 'ere for wer nigh
finished--layin' rails o' new line it wer--an' 'e wer talkin' o'
leavin', for 'e weant fra' oor parts; when wun daay--ah mind it wer t'
first o' April, for theer'd been soom foolin' amoong t' lads earlier
i' t' daay, an' t' blackthorn wer buddin' i' t' 'edges--we wer setting
on t' railway bank eatin' oor dinners. Gus wer moor talkative than
ordinary that daay; ah mind 'e'd been tellin' us o' t' waay they did
'arvestin' i' 'is parts--Lancashire waay--an' 'arvest-'oams, an'
sooch-like, when all of a soodden ah caught sight o' ma lahtle lass
runnin' along t' line. It did gie ma a toorn, for t' doon traain 'ad
been signalled two or three minutes sin', an' even as ah caught sight
o' 'er, ah 'eerd it roombling along i' t' distance.

"Ma God!" ah cried. "Look theer!"

Jack Wilson--'im as lives i' yon cottage wi' t' creepers doon by t'
church--shoots as lood as 'e could, "Get oft t' line, bairn! Get off t'
line!" Bud Polly, sha didn't taak noa 'eed ti 'im.

Then afoor ah 'ad got ma wits aboot ma, or 'ad ony idea what 'e wer
goin ti do, Gus 'ad joomped doon fra' t' bank, an' were roonnin' for
'is loife doon t' line ti meet t' lahtle lass. It wer awful to see 'im,
while every moment t' thoonder o' t' train com nearer.

"Is t' man mad?" cried Wilson. "It's certain death." An' even as 'e
spoke, t' train com roond t' corner.

Polly stood still, terrified, an' Gus ran on reet inti t' teeth o' t'
train. Ah turned deadly sick, for ah niver thowt 'e would be i' tahm,
an' it seemed nobbut a waaste o' two lives; bud 'e reached 'er joost
afoor t' train did. Ah seed 'im catch 'er oop an' toss 'er on ti t'
bank, an' then--then t' traan wer on 'im, an' we saw noothing moor till
it 'ad past. Then ah ran ti wheer 'e wer lyin', an' an awful sight it
wer. It 'aunts ma yet, thoo it's nigh on ten year sin. 'E wer livin',
poor chap, an' 'e looked up at ma wi' a smile, though t' death dews
were gathering on 'is faace.

"T' lahtle lass?" 'e asked anxiously.

"Saafe an' well," ah answered. "Eh, Gus, lad, tha' shouldn't 'a doon
it. Ah reckon she weant woorth it."

"Niver saay that!" 'e said. "Wheer is sha? Ah'd like fine to bid her
good-bye."

Polly wer cryin' wi' fright on t' bank cloas at 'and. Ah called 'er,
bud at first sha 'ung back, not knawin' as it wer 'er friend as lay
theer, a sickenin' sight, an' not fit for a bairn ti see.

"Niver mind, John," 'e said, sadly enough. "It's better soa. Ah
wouldn't like 'er ti think o' ma like this." But ah went an' fetched
'er, an' bade 'er ti thank 'im for saavin' 'er loife.

"Nay, nay," 'e said, smoilin' oop at 'er. "Good-bye, lahtle sweet'eart.
Tha'lt 'ave ti get anoother lad noo."

"Nay, ah'll waait for thee an' be thy lahtle wife," says Polly
sturdily, not un'erstan'in', poor lahtle lass, as 'e wer dyin'.

"Tha'lt 'ave ti waait till tha gets ti t' New Jeroosalem, then," 'e
answers, "if soa be as they'll let ma in." An' at that 'e looks serious.

Ah maade 'aste ti cheer 'im oop.

"Nay, lad, thoo need 'ave noa fear o' that," ah says. "Tha mind hoo He
said, 'Inasmooch as ye 'a doon it to wun o' t' least o' these, ye 'a
doon it unto Me.'"

Hoo 'is faace lighted oop at that word! Then a spasm o' agony crossed
it, an' t' death rattle began i' 'is throat.

'E couldn't speak, bud 'e maade ma a sign ti send t' lahtle lass away,
an' ah bade 'er roon 'oam ti 'er moother. Then ah knelt doon an' raised
'im in ma arms, an' it weant long--thank God, it weant long.

Well, it's ten year sin, as ah said, an' it's an owd story noo, an' t'
grass is green on 'is graave. T' lahtle lass keeps it rare an' gay wi'
flooers. Shoo's growin' a graat gell noo, an' it weant be long afoor
t' lads begin ti coom aboot 'er, for shoo's growin' bonny; bud shoo's
niver forgotten Gus, an' if shoo iver did, ah wouldn't oan 'er as ma
darter, that ah wouldn't!




ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.


MEDICAL.

FREDA.--Of the cause of exophthalmic goître but little is known for
certain. Worry or anxiety often precede the onset of the disease.
Unlike ordinary goître this affection is not limited in any way to
certain districts, but occurs in every part of the country. "Is it
curable, and if so, how long should a moderate case take to cure?"
Yes, many cases do recover. When the disease is very marked, recovery
is unusual. But now that surgeons have directed their attention to the
disease there is every reason to believe that the severer grades of the
affection may yield to operative treatment. We can no more tell you how
long an attack of exophthalmic goître will last than we could tell you
the day of your death. Sometimes the disease disappears in six months
or a year, often it drags on for many years. As a rule, if the symptoms
develop rapidly, the disease runs a rapid course. Men are comparatively
rarely attacked. We can, however, call to mind a fair number of cases
of exophthalmic goître in the male sex. Unmarried women of from twenty
to thirty years of age are the usual victims of this disease.

WORRIED.--1. In all probability your sister would get better and
stronger after marriage. Of course it depends a good deal upon the
cause of her malady. She had far better go to her family doctor and
get his advice upon the matter. We cannot take the responsibility of
giving a definite answer to your question from such a very scanty
amount of information.--2. There are so many books on travel and
science, suitable to ordinary readers, that it is rather difficult to
choose any particular volume. One of the best books on science for a
beginner--that is, a person who is beginning to read science--is a
little work called _Ants and their Ways_, by the Rev. Farren White. It
is a charming little volume which will instil into anyone who reads it
the habit of observation--so all-important in science. The book is very
moderate in price. It is published by the Religious Tract Society. If
you turn to the advertisement sheets at the back of this paper you will
see notices of a number of very good books on both science and travel.

MATRON.--Obviously the book you want is the _British Pharmacopœia_.
This gives definite instructions how to make up every official
preparation. There is a new edition just published. For the drugs which
are not in the _British Pharmacopœia_, Squire's _Companion to the
British Pharmacopœia_ may be consulted. You will do well to thoroughly
master the decimal measures, and to use them exclusively, as they
are now official and will alone be used in the future. The old and
confusing apothecaries' measures are now out of date.

ALTA.--For the bites and stings of midges, etc., rub a little dilute
ammonia on the bite. This usually relieves the pain instantly. It is
better to put a drop of dilute carbolic acid (about 1 in 100) upon the
bite after using the ammonia. The reason for this is that the trouble
from an insect's bite is dependent upon two causes. In the first place
the insect actually drops poison into the bite. This, which is usually
formic acid, makes the wound smart at once, but its effect passes off
in a little time. Ammonia neutralises this acid and so gives instant
relief. But there is a second cause of trouble which is far more
serious. The bite of a fly has caused more deaths than you would think,
and from this reason. Flies of all kinds are given to feed on garbage,
and as they have not yet learnt to use a toothbrush, their mouths are
always swarming with germs. Usually these germs are not of a very
virulent kind. But suppose that a midge has been eating the carcase of
an animal which has died from peritonitis. That fly is now more deadly
than a viper, for on its tongue it has a poison which is capable of
rapid increase if it ever finds a suitable home. If this fly bites you,
you may die from the bite. Everyone knows that often an insect sting
or bite does not ache or swell at first; but after several hours the
place becomes hot and swollen, and if the place bitten be the hand,
the arm begins to swell and the glands in the armpit enlarge. In this
case a mild dose of microbes has been innoculated. Ammonia will not
in most cases destroy these microbes. Therefore, we say, put a drop
of dilute carbolic acid on the place as soon as you can. The ammonia
simply relieves a little itching (for the poison of the insect itself
is rarely dangerous), but the carbolic acid destroys organisms which
are capable of great mischief. Rubbing the face and hands with oil of
eucalyptus, or paraffin, will sometimes prevent insects from coming
near you.

LILY, MY QUEENIE.--1. Is the skin round your eyebrows scarred? Hair
never grows on scars, nor can it be made to do so by any means in our
power. If there are no scars, try a little white precipitate ointment
applied carefully to the eyebrows.--2. Moles cannot be cured. They can
be removed by operation. If they are large and noticeable it is better
to have them removed. Otherwise leave them severely alone.

PEARL.--Take our advice and see a doctor at once. Severe headache is a
very common symptom, and though it is usually caused by some trivial
ailment, it is often the only subjective sign of a serious disease.
Your attacks suggest megraine, but they might be due to far more
serious things. Without a complete personal examination no man living
could diagnose your malady.

FOX.--What size corsets do you wear? Tight lacing is, or rather was,
a very common cause of fatness about the face. What age are you? It
is very common for women to get double chins and extra plump cheeks
when they have passed their thirtieth year. Very many diseases cause
fatness of the face. Kidney disease is one of the commonest of these.
All we can advise you to do is to be careful about your diet. Avoid
farinaceous puddings and sweets. Take plenty of exercise. No drug
is of much good in obesity of any kind. Some of the mineral waters,
especially Vichy, are sometimes useful to stout persons.

A WEARY AND CAREWORN GIRL.--We are exceedingly sorry that we could not
answer your letter earlier. The troubles that you have gone through are
enough to depress any girl of twice your age. We think that all your
sufferings are due to nervousness resulting from being "run down." What
the impediment in your speech is, is not quite clear from your letter.
Probably it is far less than you imagine, else your mother would
certainly have noticed it. The difficulty which you find in commencing
to talk is due to nervousness. As your health improves, and as you
grow older this will tend to disappear. We will publish an article on
blushing and nervousness next month. To the last of your questions your
clergyman would be more competent to give you an answer than ever we
could be. Go to your pastor and tell him your troubles. He is sure to
be able to comfort you in your affliction and to help you to bear your
cross with patience for the sake of Him who laid down His life for you.

CROYDEN.--The habit of taking acids to cure indigestion is greatly
to be deprecated. Acids and bitters are very useful in some forms
of indigestion, but they should never be taken unless ordered by a
physician. Alkalis, such as bicarbonate of soda, are on the other hand
of great value in the majority of cases of indigestion. Indeed we will
go further than this: we have never met with a case of indigestion
from any cause which was not benefited, sometimes only temporarily, by
alkalis. We have seen very few cases of indigestion which have been
relieved by acids. Our candid opinion is that the habit of taking acids
and bitters to cure disorders of the stomach or loss of appetite, is a
very fertile cause of the life-long indigestion so common nowadays.

BLACK EYES.--In an answer to "Fair Isobel," which was published some
months ago, the treatment of blackheads was thoroughly discussed.

EMILY PHELPS.--Your glasses do not suit you. Go to an oculist and get
his prescription for another pair. Your symptoms are very common in
people who use unsuitable spectacles.

BUTTERCUP.--Bunions are due to the pressure of badly-fitting boots. In
the human foot the great or innermost toe bends away from the other
toes. This gives to the inner border of the foot a direction slanting
inwards towards the middle line of the body. Most boots are made
with their inner border slanting outwards away from the middle line
so as to meet the outer border of the boots at a more or less acute
angle. We have therefore the great toe naturally tending to depart
from its fellows, and we have the boot forcing the great toe towards,
and possibly under or over, the other toes. The boot is an unyielding
structure. The inner border of the foot is also practically unyielding,
except at one spot, the joint of the great toe. The first toe is
therefore forced inwards and its joint projects as an angle. The boot
presses upon this joint, a corn forms, inflammation is set up, and
the joint becomes diseased, forming a bunion. When once a bunion has
developed, it is no good talking about its prevention. We must attempt
to cure it, and it is not so very difficult to cure it, and keep it
cured, if you fully understand how it originated. A bunion is caused by
pressure upon the joint. The cure of the bunion consists of removing
the pressure from the joint. To do this you should wear boots in which
the inner border slopes away from the centre of the boot. We advise you
to get a pair of boots of this shape made for yourself. If the bunion
is intractable, you may need a "post" in the boot between the great and
the second toe. Keep your foot scrupulously clean, and take a foot-bath
every evening.

J. S. N.--As your mother died from heart disease, it is no wonder that
you imagine your own symptoms to be likewise due to heart trouble; but
the symptoms you mention are all characteristic of simple dyspepsia;
not one of them is common in heart disease. When you say "at times my
pulse beats very fast and sometimes irregularly," we presume that you
mean that you feel your heart beating fast or irregularly, in other
words, that you have palpitation. When the heart is beating fast or
irregularly, as it frequently does in heart disease, it produces no
symptoms which might inform the sufferer of her state. It is only by
feeling the pulse that irregularities in its action can be detected. We
will not say that heart disease is not hereditary, but the importance
of this factor has been greatly over-estimated. Disease of the heart
is very frequently due to rheumatic fever; and the tendency to
rheumatism is; to a certain extent, hereditary. You will find plenty of
information about indigestion in our last year's volume.

ESTHER.--We can well understand that you feel a little nervous about
your chest, when you tell us that both your parents died of phthisis.
You know that the risk of your developing the disease is considerable,
yet it by no means follows that you will get phthisis. By no means are
you certain to get phthisis. You must be very careful about yourself,
and the least bit of a cough or cold which may attack you must be
carefully attended to. Indeed we advise you to call in your family
doctor the moment that you have any cough or other untoward symptom.
Certainly you would do well to spend your winters in Switzerland.

CANARY.--1. A little dumb-bell exercise every morning will improve
the form of your back and shoulders. The dumb-bells should be made of
wood and not weigh more than two pounds each. Heavy bell exercise is
very dangerous. It has always been considered beautiful for women to
possess broad hips.--2. Why? Why do so many of our correspondents call
themselves "constant readers"? Perhaps it is that they think that by
using that pseudonym they will get answered sooner, or perhaps it is
merely from lack of sufficient imagination to think of some phrase less
commonplace.

E. M. WALKER.--Cinnamon is more at home in the pantry than in pharmacy.
The only medicinal action it possesses is that of all aromatic
substances. It is occasionally used as a stomachic, but its chief use
is for flavouring. Sometimes it is given for diarrhœa as it is a mild
astringent. Cinnamon has no action on cancer, neither has any drug the
slightest effect upon the course of this disease. Indeed one might put
down the medicinal action of cinnamon at zero.

MABEL B.--It is not at all uncommon for the hair to fall out after a
severe illness. It is, however, rare for permanent baldness to result.
Usually after combing out in large quantities for some weeks or months
the hair grows quickly and luxuriously again. A mildly stimulating
hair-wash is often useful in these cases. Brilliantine, bay rum or
rosemary hair-washes are suitable. We much doubt whether taking
cod-liver oil would have any effect upon your hair, but it might help
to restore your strength.

FLORRIE.--1. We know of no recipe which will remove hairs from the face
without doing serious damage to the skin at the same time.--2. Try
sulphur soap for a shiny face. Do not use face powder.

HELENA.--Read the answer to "Florrie" above. The Laws of Libel prevent
us from giving you our opinion on the preparation which you mention. We
are allowed, however, to warn you to have nothing to do with any patent
medicine of which you do not know the composition. It has not been our
experience that peroxide of hydrogen makes the hair grow quickly.


STUDY AND STUDIO.

IRISH MAY FLOWER.--It is rather difficult to dispose of such sketches
as you describe. We should suggest that you took them to any picture
dealer in your neighbourhood, and asked him to try to sell them for
you. Or you might write to the Irish Ladies' Work Society, 47, George
Street, Kingstown, inquiring if that would be of any use to you.

MABEL ENTWISTLE.--We are very glad that you have been enabled through
our means "to make the acquaintance of two extremely nice French
girls." Your writing we like very much. It is clear, definite, and
has a character of its own. If we gave any hint for its improvement,
it would be to avoid the lapses in the middle of a word, making the
writing flow consecutively.

LA PETITE VIOLETTE.--We have not forgotten you, and are very glad you
have taken up some special study. We have placed your request in "Our
Open Letter Box."

WILD ROSE.--1. Your first quotation is from Tennyson's _In Memoriam_,
xxvii., stanza 4.

    "I hold it true, whate'er befall,
      I feel it when I sorrow most,
      'Tis better to have loved and lost,
    Than never to have loved at all."

2. Look through the poetry of Thomas Moore for your second extract, and
if you cannot find it there, send it again and we will place it in "Our
Open Letter Box."

CATALINA.--1. Apply to the Church Sunday School Institute,
Serjeant's Inn, Fleet Street, E.C., or to the Sunday School Union
(undenominational), 57, Ludgate Hill, and you will receive the fullest
information. The lessons for each Sunday are set forth in certain
inexpensive books in detail, with comments and information upon every
verse. In addition to these "lesson helps" you should read and study
books upon the Old Testament and upon the life of our Lord, such as
Farrar's _Life of Christ_. The Religious Tract Society has published
one (_The Life of Jesus Christ the Saviour_, by Mrs. S. Watson), which
is not too ambitious, and might help you. The net price is 3s. 9d.--2.
Your writing is good for your age, but might be improved if the tails
to your "g's," "y's," etc., were less straggling.

ERIN-GO-BRAGH.--1. We have inserted your request, but (as you give a
pseudonym) not your address.--2. Your handwriting is too upright and
irregular, but there is the foundation of a good hand in it.

EXILE OF ERIN.--The "Fragment" you enclose is above the average of
poems submitted to us, but your metre does not flow quite smoothly
enough. You should avoid too many monosyllables in these long lines.

L. A. T.--We should advise you to read Homer's "Odyssey," translated
by Butcher and Lang, and if you find difficulty in understanding it,
a "Primer" on the subject as well. But we think you will enjoy it. As
for Plato, read "The Trial and Death of Socrates," translated by Dean
Church, and consult a small history of Greece on the period (399 B.C.)
Do not attempt too much at once, nor read Plato's deeper "Dialogues"
to begin with. Your letter, which you ask us to criticise, is clearly
written, with only one mistake in spelling.

MISS BEALEY.--We undertake no communication by post (see "Rules" in our
November part and elsewhere). You will find the "Home Reading Union"
an excellent society; apply to the Secretary, Surrey House, Victoria
Embankment. Consult this column for amateur societies occasionally
mentioned.

MISS FLORENCE E. SMITH calls attention to the "Bedford Practising
Society," of which she is secretary. She will be delighted to send
particulars to any fellow reader of the GIRL'S OWN PAPER. Address to
her at Winfrith, The Crescent, Bedford.

HOFFNUNG.--Many thanks for your letter. By all means try again.


INTERNATIONAL CORRESPONDENCE.

MADEMOISELLE MARGUERITE GONTARD (address "Nikopal Mariopol Co.,
Mariopol, South Russia, Engineer Prauss for M. Gontard"), wishes to be
put into communication with a young English lady, resident in either of
the continents of Asia, Africa, America, or Australia. She desires to
correspond with her either in English or French. We thank Mademoiselle
Gontard for her pretty English letter. She may certainly write to us in
French if she prefers to do so.

"ERIN-GO-BRAGH" would like to correspond with a French girl of about
her own age--twenty-one.

FLORENCE writes a kind letter from which we quote a sentence. "I am
wondering whether some little girl belonging to the readers of our
GIRL'S OWN PAPER would care to have an older friend to write to; she
would receive in return sympathy if in trouble, and an interest would
be taken in all she might care to confide to one whom she could perhaps
learn to look upon in the light of an elder sister." We regret that
it is against our rules to undertake direct postal communication; but
if any little girl sends us her address, we will insert it here for
"Florence" to see. Perhaps some lonely, or motherless, or sad little
girls might be glad to find a friend.


OUR OPEN LETTER BOX.

LA PETITE VIOLETTE wishes to find a poem with a refrain to each verse
"Belle Marquise." She saw a quotation from it as a heading to a chapter
in a book entitled _Woman and the Shadow_.

MISS M. A. C. CRABB and ELPIS answer LENNOX by referring the verse she
quotes--

    "Alas! how easily things go wrong,"

to a poem in the 19th chapter of George Macdonald's "Phantastes: a
Faerie Romance." They agree in saying that the second verse is not by
the same pen.

PETERKIN, GERTRUDE ASHWORTH, KLONDYKE, B. D. WARD, M. E. BATES,
"STICK," R. M. COOKE, MABEL ENTWISTLE and "THE ELDEST GIRL," inform
Ethel Rimmer that Christina Rossetti's poem beginning--

    "When I am dead, my dearest,
      Sing no sad songs for me,"

has been set to music by Malcolm Lawson, and is entitled "Hereafter,"
in keys E♭ and G. It appeared in the June number of the _Strand Musical
Magazine_ for 1895. "A LOVER OF THE 'G.O.P.'" says it has been set to
music by C. A. Lee, either for a soprano or an alto voice.

R. C. R. suggests to GOLD DUST that the poem "Tit for Tat" is contained
in "Original Poems for Infant Minds," by Jane Taylor, her sisters and
brother. If this is the poem sought for, we may add that the volume is
published by Routledge.

ONE OF THE FIRST READERS, AZIE, asks for the author of a poem entitled
"Maggie and the Angels," containing two lines--

    "Maggie, are they the angels?
      And be they always there?"

PERSEVERANZA would be glad to know the publishers of a picture-book
of performing frogs or cats from which she could copy for painting on
dessert doyleys.

L B. N. R. wishes to know the author of the following lines--

    "There is a river which flows for ever,
      And the flowers that bloom on its banks
    Grow bright, as they glitter in grateful endeavour
      To vie in a perfume of thanks."


MISCELLANEOUS.

EDITH.--The origin of the Lions as a device on the Royal Arms we trace
to William the Conqueror, who introduced those of Normandy. These two
original Lions were supplemented by a third, added by Henry III., it is
generally supposed, for Aquitaine.

MATER.--To make an economical Christmas cake, take half a pound
of butter, place in a bowl, and break five eggs over it, stirring
continuously, while a second person sifts in slowly a pound and
a half of currants (well washed, dried, and carefully picked),
three-quarters of a pound of flour, and two ounces of citron peel
chopped to moderately small pieces. Place in a papered shape--not
buttered--several folds of paper being laid at the bottom of the tin,
and bake in moderately hot oven during three hours.

SEMPER PARATUS.--We answer two questions, and you have asked nineteen!
It is impossible to describe the several Scotch tartans otherwise than
by coloured illustrations. These you will find in a book published by
W. and A. K. Johnston (Edinburgh and London), entitled, _The Scottish
Clans and their Tartans_, now in its second (if not third) edition.
Some account of every Clan is given.

ANXIOUS.--Rheumatism will, no doubt, be made worse by exposure to damp
and draughts; but the origin is in acidity, which crystallises in the
joints and muscles. You should abstain for a time from butchers' meat,
and from sweet things. Attend to the action of the liver, which may
be torpid; and if the pain be in the arms and shoulders, you should
perform all kinds of exercises with them, and employ friction and
rubbing with suitable embrocation. If you do not perform exercises, the
joints and sinews will become stiff.

A. E. C.--_Noah's Ark_, by Darley Dale, is published as a book by F.
Warne, Bedford Street, Strand. Price 3s. 6d.

HELEN OF TROY.--You will find several families of the name
Marshall--though not necessarily related--in Burke's _Landed Gentry_.
Perhaps you can claim your connection with one of them. The first on
the list is G. H. Marshall, of Patterdale Hall, Westmoreland, descended
from John of Yeadon Hall, Co. York, who made a large fortune from
the mechanical improvements in a branch of the linen manufacture.
There is Marshall of Treworgley, Cornwall; Marshall of Penwortham
Hall, descended from M. of Ardwick, near Manchester; Marshall of
Ward End House, Co. Warwick, descended from M. of Perlethorp, Co.
Nottinghamshire; and Marshall of Broadwater, Surrey, apparently the
oldest family of that name, anciently spelt Marchal, and long resident
in that county. None of these families have the same arms, nor crest.
The first-named (of Patterdale) has none ascribed to them in the
_Landed Gentry_. You had better consult the second volume in some
library.




OUR PUZZLE POEMS.

A NEW DEPARTURE.


We are publishing Three Puzzle Poems in succession dealing with
accidents and the way to meet them, and the following is the second of
the series. The lines should be carefully committed to memory for the
sake of the valuable instruction they contain.

In addition to the ordinary monthly prizes THREE SPECIAL PRIZES are
offered for the best solutions of the whole series.

The first Special Prize will be THREE GUINEAS; the second Special
Prize, TWO GUINEAS, and the third Special Prize, ONE GUINEA.

A careful record of mistakes will be kept, and these prizes will be
awarded to those competitors who perpetrate the fewest in all three
puzzles.

If a winner of one of these prizes has already received an ordinary
prize in the series, the amount of the smaller prize will be deducted.
This will then be sent to the most deserving non-prize-winner in the
list relating to the puzzle for which the prize in question was awarded.


OUR NEW PUZZLE POEM.

[Illustration]

⁂ Prizes to the amount of six guineas (one of which will be reserved
for competitors living abroad) are offered for the best solutions of
the above Puzzle Poem. The following conditions must be observed.

1. Solutions to be written on one side of the paper only.

2. Each paper to be headed with the name and address of the competitor.

3. Attention must be paid to spelling, punctuation, and neatness.

4. Send by post to Editor, GIRL'S OWN PAPER, 56, Paternoster Row,
London. "Puzzle Poem" to be written on the top left-hand corner of the
envelope.

5. The last day for receiving solutions from Great Britain and Ireland
will be February 17, 1899; from Abroad, April 17, 1899.

The competition is open to all without any restrictions as to sex or
age.




OUR SUPPLEMENT STORY COMPETITION.


SELF OR FRIEND?

A STORY IN MINIATURE.


FIRST PRIZE (£2 2s.).

Margaret A. Fish, 49, Foregate Street, Worcester.


SECOND PRIZE (£1 1s.).

Rose Cook, 2, South Cliff, Lowestoft.


THIRD PRIZE (10s. 6d.).

Edith Ivens, Mayfield, Station Road, Llandaff, nr. Cardiff.


VERY HIGHLY COMMENDED.

Emily M. P. Wood, Woodbank, Southport.


HONOURABLE MENTION.

Mary Adamson, Eastbourne; Lucy H. Chapman, Weston-super-Mare; "Conor,"
Bonchurch, I.W.; Rose L. Connor, Greenock, N.B.; "Editha," Birmingham;
Kate Collins Ensor, Atherstone; "Excelsior," North Bow, E.; Annie F.
Hepple, N. Shields; E. Marian Jupe, Warminster; "Mignonette," New
Cross, S.E.; Edith Miller, Judd St., W.C.; Agnes Osborne, Sidcup;
Minnie Reeves, Twyford; Lucy Richardson, York; Enid G. St. Aubyn,
Retford; Mary Adéle Venn, West Kensington Park; L. M. Willis,
Harrogate; Mabel Wilson, Bedford Park.

       *       *       *       *       *


TO THE COMPETITORS.

MY DEAR GIRLS,--To the prize winners and to those of you also who
failed to gain prizes, I offer my hearty congratulations on the
excellent papers you sent in. The work of selecting the very best
was much less difficult than that of choosing a few for "Honourable
Mention," out of hundreds of really good ones.

It may interest you to know why some of you failed to obtain a place
in the list of honours. Twenty-eight competitors were disqualified
by breaking the rule as to size of paper and space to be filled.
Then there were several charming essays on the story which were not
miniatures of it. In a considerable number necessary parts of the
outline were omitted, hence the work was incomplete.

It gave me true pleasure to note how thoroughly most of you grasped the
lesson which the story was intended to convey.

Do not be disheartened. Try again. Such good papers cannot be called
failures, and the exercise will benefit you whether you gain prizes or
not.

    Your affectionate old friend,
        RUTH LAMB.

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR NEXT STORY COMPETITION.

STORIES IN MINIATURE.

_Subject_:--"THE G. O. P. SUPPLEMENT FOR JANUARY."


WHEN MY SHIP COMES HOME.

BY SARAH DOUDNEY, Author of "A Cluster of Roses," "A Flower of Light,"
etc.

We offer three prizes of TWO GUINEAS, ONE GUINEA, and HALF-A-GUINEA
for the three best papers on our "Story Supplement" for this month.
The essays are to give a brief account of the plot and action of the
story in the Competitor's own words; in fact, each paper should be a
carefully-constructed _Story in Miniature_, telling the reader in a few
bright words what THE GIRL'S OWN STORY SUPPLEMENT for the month is all
about.

One page of foolscap only is to be written upon, and is to be signed
by the writer, followed by her full address, and posted to The Editor,
GIRL'S OWN PAPER, in an unsealed envelope, with the words "Stories in
Miniature" written on the left-hand top corner.

The last day for receiving the papers is January 20th; and no papers
can in any case be returned.

_Examiners_:--The Author of the Story (Sarah Doudney), and the Editor
of THE GIRL'S OWN PAPER.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Note: The following changes have been made to this text.

Page 218--prevenche changed to pervenche.

Page 222--parafin changed to paraffin.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GIRL'S OWN PAPER, VOL. XX, NO. 992, DECEMBER 31, 1898 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


