The Project Gutenberg eBook of De Latino sine Flexione; Principio de Permanentia
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: De Latino sine Flexione; Principio de Permanentia

Author: Giuseppe Peano

Release date: April 9, 2011 [eBook #35803]

Language: Latin

Credits: Produced by David Starner, Jana Srna and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        book was produced from scanned images of public domain
        material from the Google Print project.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DE LATINO SINE FLEXIONE; PRINCIPIO DE PERMANENTIA ***




Produced by David Starner, Jana Srna and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)






  [ Transcriber's Notes:

    Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as
    possible, including inconsistencies in spelling and hyphenation;
    changes (corrections of spelling and punctuation) made to the
    original text are listed at the end of this file.

    Italic text has been marked with _underscores_.
    Letter-spaced text has been marked with ~tildes~.
    Greek letters theta and phi have been reproduced as [theta] and [phi].
  ]




DE LATINO SINE FLEXIONE

LINGUA AUXILIARE INTERNATIONALE


Lingua latina fuit internationalis in omni scientia, ab imperio Romano,
usque ad finem saeculi XVIII. Hodie multi reputant illam nimis
difficilem esse, iam in scientia, magis in commercio.

Sed non tota lingua latina est necessaria; parva pars sufficit ad
exprimendam quamlibet ideam.


§ 1.--Casus.

    «Nominum casus semper eliminari possunt substitutis in eorum locum
    particulis quibusdam».

    LEIBNIZ. Ed. Couturat a. 1901, p. 67.

Lingua latina exprimit nominum casus cum praepositionibus «_de_, _ad_,
_ab_, _ex_, ...» et cum postpositionibus vel desinentiis. Prima methodus
sufficit; ipsa sola invenitur in latino populare, a quo derivant linguae
neolatinae, ut italica, franca, hispanica, etc.

Sumimus nomen inflexibile sub forma simpliciore, quae est ablativus, vel
nominativus, vel alia.

Indicamus genitivo cum _de_, dativo cum _ad_, ablativo cum _ab_,
_ex_, ... Accusativo indicatur cum constructione, ut in linguis
neolatinis, scilicet cum serie: nominativo--verbo--accusativo, vel cum
serie: _qui_-accusativo--nominativo--verbo.

Vocabulario latino commune continet nominativo et genitivo de nomen.
Regula commoda haec est:

«Sumimus nomen inflexibile

  a) aut identico ad nominativo,

  b) aut nominativo, mutata desinentia _-us_, _-um_, _-u_, _-es_
                                    in  _-o_,  _-o_, _-o_,  _-e_,

  c) aut genitivo, mutata desinentia _-i_ in _-o_, _-is_ in _-e_.

  d) ad nominativo   _ego_, _tu_, _aliquis_,
  responde (ablativo) _me_, _te_, _aliquo_.»

Regula a) producit nulla ambiguitate, quae iam non sit in latino.

Regulae b) c) d) brevi exprimunt formatione de ablativo, cum reductione
de 4-a declinatione ad 2-a, et cum reductione ad forma unica de 3-a
declinatione.


§ 2.--Genere masculino, feminino et neutro.

    «Discrimen generis nihil pertinet ad grammaticam rationalem».

    LEIBNIZ.

Nomen isolato non habet genere. Quum volumus indicare ille, scribemus
explicite "mas, femina".

Ita "mater est _bona_" fit "mater est femina bono"; sed idea de femina
iam continetur in mater; igitur post simplificatione(1): "mater est
bono".

  (1) Juxta _Formulaire de Mathématiques_ a. 1902, p. 7, Prop. 3·1 et
  5·3.

Indicatione de genere evanescit saepe in lingua scientifica.

In lingua familiare sufficit conservare genere in uno pronomen "is, ea,
id", vel in antiquo "hi, hae, ho".


§ 3.--Numero singulare et plurale.

    «Videtur pluralis inutilis in lingua rationali».

    LEIBNIZ.

Nomen isolato non habet numero. Ad indicando ille scribemus explicite
"uno, plure".

  Ex.        "unum os habemus et duas aures"
  fit        "habemus uno uno ore, et duo plure aure",

et post simplificatione logico "uno uno" = "uno", et "duo plure" =
"duo", nam "duo" continet idea de "plure", propositio

  fit:       "habemus uno ore et duo aure".

Ex. "Omne homo est mortale, aliquo homo est nigro, multo homo est
pauper, pauco homo est divite, plure homo est sapiens".

  Propositione: "Romani eligebant duo consules"
  fit           "Populo Romano eligebat duo consule".


§ 4.--Conjugatione de verbo.

    «Personae verborum possunt esse invariabiles, sufficit variari
    _ego_, _tu_, _ille_, etc.».

    LEIBNIZ.

Lingua latino habet discurso directo, ut:

    "Amicitia inter malos esse non potest"

et discurso indirecto:

    "(Verum est) amicitiam inter malos esse non posse".

Si nos utimur semper de discurso indirecto, in verbo evanescit
desinentia de persona, de modo, et saepe de tempore.

Sumimus ergo nomen inflexibile, per persona modo et tempore, sub forma
magis simplice, qui es imperativo, activo et passivo. Regula es:

  «a) Ad forma inflexibile "es,  pote,  vol,   fi"
  responde infinito       "esse, posse, velle, fieri".

  b) Ad forma inflexibile de alio verbo adde _-re_, et te habe
  infinito, ut es in vocabulario latino.

  c) Ad verbo activo adde _-re_, et te habe passivo.

  d) Nos transforma verbo deponente in activo».

(Verbo "vol, dice, duce, face", et regula d) non es exacto latino
classico).

Nos indica persona cum "me, te, nos ...", modo cum "si, ut, quod, ...",
tempore cum "heri, jam, in passato, nunc, cras, in futuro, vol,
debe, ...".

Ex. "Me scribe.--Vos lege.--Cras me i ad Roma.--Cras me, postquam veni
ad Roma, scribe ad te.--Heri me lege dum te scribe et antequam Petro
veni.--Si te narra, nos audi.--Ut te vale."


§ 5.--Altero reductione de desinentia de verbo.

Exsta aequalitate logico:

  lauda-nte = qui lauda
  lauda-ndo = dum lauda
  lauda-to  = qui aliquo lauda

(hoc es: "quem aliquis laudat", juxta regula de § 1)

  lauda-turo = qui lauda in futuro
  Petro lauda-re ab Paulo = Paulo lauda Petro.

Si in loco de primo membro de uno ex hic aequalitate nos scribe secundo,
omne desinentia evanesce.

Sed aliquo desinentia, et non necessario, pote es utile, ut "-nte, -to",
desinentia "-vi, -bi" de passato et de futuro, et forma neolatino: "habe
ama-to, es ama-to, ...".


§ 6.--Vocabulario.

Vocabulario latino commune suffice ut nos traduce hic lingua. Sed si
plure auctore adopta "latino sine flexione", tunc es utile publicatione
de proprio vocabulario, qui:

1) Contine nomen et verbo, solo sub forma inflexibile.

2) Contine vocabulo internationale, ut "metro, dyne, ...".

3) Elige suo voce ex toto latinitate, etiam ex latino populare. Igitur
nos posse sume regula:

«Omne voce qui pertine ad duo lingua neolatino, p. ex. italo et franco,
es latino».

4) Simplifica derivatione et compositione de vocabulo.

De ultimo subiecto me hic breviter dice.

a) Substantivo diminutivo: "hortulo = parvo horto", etc.

b) Substantivo abstracto ex adiectivo vale adiectivo. Ex. "bonitas =
bono", "altitudo = alto".

c) Adiectivo qui deriva ab sustantivo vale genitivo: "aureo = de auro",
"vitulino = de vitulo", "Romano = de Roma", "chartaceo = ex charta",
"animoso = cum animo".

d) Substantivo abstracto ex verbo vale verbo.

"Laudatio" = italico "il lodare" = anglo "to laud", vel simpliciter
"laud".

"Vita est cogitatio" fi "vivere est cogitare", in discurso indirecto (§
4) "vivere esse cogitare", post reductione ad radice: "vive es cogita".

Ita "amor = ama", "gaudio = gaude", ...

e) "Lauda-tore = qui lauda", vel "qui sole lauda".

f) Adiectivo verbale: "erra-bundo = qui saepe erra", "tim-ido = qui sole
time", "mord-ace = qui sole morde", "ama-bile = qui aliquo pote ama".

g) Adverbio extracto ex adiectivo vale adiectivo. Ita in latino classico
"brevi, raro, ..." es adiectivo et adverbio.

h) In modo simile ad "ne-sci, ne-fasto, n-ullo" nos forma: "ne-facile =
difficile" "ne-digno = indigno" "ne-normale = abnormale" "ne-es = de-es"
"ne-multo = pauco", etc.

i) Alio praefixo, p. ex. "ab", indica oppositione.

j) In modo simile ad "agricola = agro-colente" "homicidio = homo-caede",
lice scribe: "auro-corona = corona de auro", "me-patre = meo patre",
etc.

Lingua sinense habe omne hic simplificatione, et alio.


§ 7.--Pronuntia de latino.

Pronuntia de latino non es uniforme in diverso populo. Forma meliore es
antiquo:

  _ce_, _ci_ ut italo _che_, _chi_, franco _que_, _qui_, germano _ke_,
        _ki_.
  _ge_, _gi_      »   _ghe_, _ghi_,    »   _gue_, _gui_,     »    _ge_,
        _gi_.
  _ti_            »   _ti_, non _zi_.
  _y_ ut franco _u_, germano _ü_.
  _ae_ ut _e_ aperto, franco _è_, germano _ä_.
  _oe_ ut franco _eu_, germano _ö_ (hoc es conventione).
  _th_ ut anglo _th_, graeco moderno [theta].
  _ph_, sono producto quando nos suffla flamma. (Deriva ex graeco antiquo
        [phi]; graeco moderno pronuntia _f_).
  _ch_, ut germano _ch_, etrusco _c_.
  _h_, aspirato, ut germano.
  _rh_, ut franco _r_.
  _qu_ sona ut _cu_ in neolatino; hic duo syllaba es differente et in
      positione, et in pronuntiatione antiquo(5).

  (2) Vide A. ~Meillet~, _Introduction à l'étude comparative des langues
  indo-européennes_, Paris a. 1903 pag. 56.

Omne alio litera ut in italo.


HISTORIA

Quum plure populo es in reciproco contacto, per ratione de politica,
scientia et commercio, semper se manifesta necessitate de inter-lingua.

Diverso populo, sub imperio Romano, adopta latino populare, qui es
latino cum simplificatione de caso (§ 1).

Populo Saxone, in contacto cum Anglo, forma lingua anglo moderno, qui
contine simplificatione de caso (§ 1), de genere (§ 2), et in parte
simplificatione de persona et de modo (§ 4). Lingua anglo tende ad
perdita de omne flexione et ad monosyllabismo.

Ita, in tempore historico, ori "Lingua franca" in porto de Mediterraneo,
"Pidgin" in Sina, "Urdu" in India, etc.

Hodie omne homo de Europa et de America, qui habe plure relatione cum
extero, clama lingua internationale. Nam suffice lingua nationale ad qui
habe solo relatione nationale. Conoscentia de tres aut quatuor lingua
principale suffice ut nos lege, in originale aut in versione omne libro
jam celebre. Sed hodie Russo, Polacco, Rumeno, Japonico, ... publica in
suo lingua libro originale, et non solo libro scholastico.

Adoptio, ut inter-lingua, de lingua vive-nte, non es possibile, per
causa de politica.

Plure homo propone latino classico. Vide:

Prof. A. VALDARNINI de universitate de Bologna, _Necessità d'una lingua
internazionale e lo studio del latino_, in "Primo congresso
internazionale latino", Roma a. 1903.

Hic congresso exopta:

«ut sermo latinus inter gentes universas communis habeatur, et
adhibeatur ad humanitatis commercium fovendum, augendum, tenendum».

Ibi congressista loque neolatino, ut italico, franco, provenzale, rumeno
et castellano, raro latino classico.

Et periodico "Phenix" in London, "Praeco latinus" in Philadelphia, "Vox
urbis" in Roma sustine idem idea; sed primo mori in anno 1892, et
secundo in 1902. Ergo adoptio de latino fi semper minus probabile.

Multo auctore, in vario tempo, propone lingua plus vel minus
artificiale.

Vir doctissimo, L. COUTURAT professore in Universitate de Toulouse, in
libro _La Logique de Leibniz_, Paris a. 1901 p. 608, expone:

_Ars magna_ de R. LULLE a. 1234-1315,

_Ars magna sciendi_ de KIRCHER a. 1669,

_Ars signorum_ de DALGARNO a. 1661,

_Philosophical language_ de WILKINS a. 1668.

Postea Leibniz diffuse et profunde stude hic subjecto; sed nihil
publica. Suo studio mane sepulto in bibliotheca de Hannover, usque ad
nostro die; primo Dr Vacca in RdM., postea Couturat in libro citato
detege et publica parte de hic manuscripto. Suo importantia magis pate,
et denique L. COUTURAT publica «Opuscules et fragments inédits de
Leibniz», Paris a. 1903, p. XVI-682, qui contine studio de Leibniz,
summe praetioso per constructione de Vocabulario philosophico.

Libro, nunc edito, L. COUTURAT et L. LEAU _Histoire de la langue
universelle_, Paris a. 1903 p. XXI+571, expone 56 projecto de lingua
artificiale.

Me hic breve loque de magis noto.

                   *       *       *       *       *

SCHLEYER, parrocho, in anno 1881 publica «Volapük», qui es
transformatione de lingua anglo, ut ipse dice.

Hic lingua regularisa declinatione de nomen, et conjugatione de verbo;
sed introduce nullo simplificatione rationale, qui Leibniz propone. Ille
contine immenso numero de conventione. Volapük sume in principio multo
diffusione. In anno 1888 habe 283 club, et 25 periodico, in omne parte
de terra. Plure conventione produce discordia inter sectatore, et post
congresso de Paris, in anno 1889, hic lingua decade et mori.

                   *       *       *       *       *

ZAMENOF, doctore in medicina, in anno 1887, publica «Esperanto», qui
contine simplificatione de genere (§ 2), de persona (§ 4). Sed non
contine simplificatione de caso (§ 1), de numero (§ 3) et de modo (§ 5).
Esperanto reduce toto grammatica ad 16 regula, de qui nullo es
necessario.

Et Esperanto contine magno numero de conventione, etsi minus quam
Volapük, et in grammatica, et in vocabulario.

Esperanto habe hodie 9 periodico; jam plure sectatore propone
simplificatione; ille seque via de Volapük.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Et notato-digno es «Langue bleue» de L. BOLLACK. Ibi, ex numero de
littera, nos vide si voce es vacuo, vel pleno, ut in sinense.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Nunc me loque de projecto cum pauco novo conventione.

                   *       *       *       *       *

«Lingua» de HENDERSON, a. 1888, es vocabulario latino, cum grammatica de
typo Anglo.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Dr Daniel ROSA simplifica idea de Henderson, et publica «Le
nov-latin»(2). Ille dice:

  (3) _Bollettino dei Musei di Zoologia e Anatomia comparata della Regia
  Università di Torino_, a. 1890.

«Le nov-latin non requirer pro le sui adoption aliq congress. Omnes
poter, cum les praecedént regulas, scriber statim ist lingua. ... Sic
faciént ils vol valide cooperar ad le universal adoption de ist
international lingua et simul ils vol poter star legé ab un mult major
numer de doctes quam si ils haber scribé in quilibet alter vivént
lingua».

Ex hoc resulta quod Novlatin conserva pauco flexione (plurale in _-s_, 2
participio, ...), et es quam proximo ad "lingua rationale" de Leibniz et
ad "latino sine flexione".

Domino George J. HENDERSON, in periodico, «The lingua franca of the
future», qui ille dirige, a. 1901, perfectiona suo projecto, et dice:

«Quare debe-nos non facere ex i Latine Lingue i Internationale Lingue?

«I Latine Lingue esse nimis difficile. Post decem annes de studere,
pauce discipules pote, legere facile, vel scribere accurate, vel loquere
aliquantulum i Latine Lingue.»

(_I_ articulo, plurale in _-s_, desinentia _-e_, ...)

                   *       *       *       *       *

Societate, qui habe nomen "Akademi internasional de lingu universal"
adopta vocabulo magis internationale, et post multo studio et
discussione, in a. 1902, publica "Idiom neutral".

«Idiom neutral es usabl no sole pro scribasion, ma et pro parlation.»

Ergo, principio de maximo internationalitate duce ad vocabulo latino.

                   *       *       *       *       *

"The American Philosophical Society" in an. 1887, pro formatione de
inter-lingua, propone abolitione de articulo (ut in latino et in russo),
de flexione de adjectivo, de caso de nomen, de persona et modo de verbo,
et, in modo dubitativo, abolitione de plurale de nomen, et tempo de
verbo.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Quaestio de inter-lingua nihil habe hodie commune cum ideographia, qui
nos adopta in «Formulario mathematico».

Ideographia es synthese; cum auxilio de pauco idea primitivo, circa
decem, ille compone idea complexo; ita _hodie_ cum ideographia nos pote
scribe toto mathematica, sed mathematica solo.

Lingua artificiale es analyse. Ille decompone idea de lingua commune in
alio idea plus simplice.

Si in futuro analyse et synthese invicem conveni, ut duo exercito de
minatore, qui labora tunnel ex duo extremitate, tunc «Lingua rationale»
et «Characteristica universale» de Leibniz fore idem.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Vide quoque:

H. DIELS, _Ueber LEIBNIZ und das Problem der Universalsprache_, Berlin
Sitzungsberichte d. Akademie, a. 1899 p. 579.

Prof. G. BELLAVITIS, _Pensieri sopra una lingua universale e su alcuni
argomenti analoghi_, Mem. dell'Ist. Veneto; vol. XI a. 1862, pag. 33-74.

                   *       *       *       *       *

_Délégation pour l'adoption d'une langue auxiliaire internationale_, qui
porta firma de numeroso scientiato de plure universitate, academia,
repraesentante de societate philosophico, de commercio et de sport. Ipse
delegatione declara:

«Lingua auxiliaria internationale

«1. posse servi ad relatione de vita sociale, de commercio, et de
scientia et philosophia.

«2. Omne homo, qui habe instructione elementare medio, facile disce hic
lingua.

«3. Hic lingua es proprio ad nullo natione.»

Prof. L. COUTURAT explica hic idea in opusculo: «_Pour la langue
internationale_» a. 1901. Periodico _Revue des questions scientifiques_,
Bruxelles a. 1902, t. 1, p. 547-586 reproduce scripto de Couturat, cum
observatione de P. P. PEETERS. Couturat responde in t. 2, pag. 213-230.
Nullo objectione de PEETERS vale per "Latino sine flexione".


CONCLUSIONE

Articulo, qui praecede, proba quod flexione de nomen et de verbo non es
necessario.

«Se, invece di dizionario latino, noi cercare ogni parola in dizionario
italiano, noi scrivere in italiano senza flessione.»

Articulo, qui seque, contine versione litterale de plure propositione
Germano et Anglo. Ille proba, quod suppressio de omne flexio non redde
discurso magis longo.

    G. PEANO.




PRINCIPIO DE PERMANENTIA

Exercitio de Latino recto


[Omne vocabulo es inflexibile.

Vocabulario latino commune, qui contine nominativo et genitivo de nomen,
infinito de verbo, contine omne vocabulo de hic Nota, aut identico, aut
cum abbreviatione:

  a) Si termina in _-a_, muta _-a_ in _-are_, vel in _-ari_, et es
     infinito de verbo.

  b) Si termina in _-e_, muta _-e_ in _-ere_, vel _-i_, et es infinito de
     verbo;
  vel muta _-e_ in _-is_ et es genitivo de nomen,
   »    »        » _-es_ et es nominativo de nomen.

  In loco de _me_, _te_, _aliquo_, quaere _ego_, _tu_, _aliquis_.

  c) Si termina in _-i_, muta _-i_ in _-ire_, vel _-iri_, et es infinito
     de verbo.

  d) Si termina in _-o_, muta _-o_ in _-us_ _-um_ _-u_, et est nominativo
     de nomen, vel muta _-o_ in _-i_ et es genitivo de nomen.

  e) _es_ quaere _sum_, _esse_.]

Aliquo auctore introduce numero negativo, fracto et imaginario, ut
applicatione de regula, qui ille dice "principio de permanentia". Hic
principio varia aliquanto prope diverso auctore.

Prof. SCHUBERT, in _Encyclopädie der Mathematischen Wissenschaften_,
t. 1, p. 11, expone hic principio sub forma claro sed erroneo. Ille
dice:

«_Princip der Permanenz_ in viererlei besteht:

«erstens darin, jeder Zeichen-Verknüpfung, die keine der bis dahin
definierten Zahlen darstellt, einen solchen Sinn zu erteilen, dass die
Verknüpfung nach denselben Regeln behandelt werden darf, als stellte sie
eine der bis dahin definierten Zahlen dar;

«zweitens darin, eine solche Verknüpfung als Zahl im erweiterten Sinne
des Wortes zu definieren und dadurch den Begriff der Zahl zu erweitern;

«drittens darin, zu beweisen, dass für die Zahlen im erweiterten Sinne
dieselben Sätze gelten, wie für die Zahlen im noch nicht erweiterten
Sinne;

«viertens darin, zu definieren, was im erweiterten Zahlengebiet gleich,
grösser und kleiner heisst».

Versione:

«Principio de permanentia ex quatuor articulo consta:

«1. ad omne signo-reunione(3) qui non repraesenta numero qui nos ante
defini, nos tribue tale senso, ut nos posse tracta reunione juxta idem
regula, velut si hic reunione repraesenta numero, qui nos ante defini;

«2. nos defini hic reunione ut numero, in lato senso de vocabulo, et ita
nos extende idea de numero;

«3. nos demonstra quod per numero in lato senso omne theorema vale, ut
per numero in non lato senso;

«4. nos defini, quod in campo de numero lato nos voca aequale, maiore et
minore».

  (4) Vide «Latino sine flexione» § 6 j).

Si omne regula et omne theorema super numero in senso non lato subsiste
super numero in senso lato, necesse es ut numero in senso lato es
identico ad numero in senso non lato. Nam duo ente es inter se aequale,
si omne proprietate de uno es quoque proprietate de alio. Hoc es ipse
definitione de aequalitate:

«Eadem sunt quorum unum in alterius locum substitui potest, salva
veritate» (Leibniz, vide Formulario § 2, P4·3) quod me traduce: «Plure
ente es idem, si nos posse substitue uno de ille in loco de altero, et
veritate (de propositione) es salvo».

Quum nos trans-i ab uno specie de numero ad specie magis lato, semper
debe omitte aliquo proprietate.

Relatione a + b > a es vero per numero absoluto, falso per numero cum
signo.

Si nos trans-i ab numero imaginario simplice ad quaternione, nos omitte
proprietate commutativo de producto.

Ergo definitione, qui nostro auctore da de 0, de numero negativo, de
fracto, etc. basa super principio absurdo. Hic definitione non es
legitimo.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Nos repete idem critica ad _Elementare Arithmetik und Algebra_ de ipse
Prof. SCHUBERT (Leipzig a. 1899, pag. 33) qui enuntia ipse principio cum
primo et secundo articulo.

                   *       *       *       *       *

HANKEL, _Theorie der Complexen Zahlensysteme_, Leipzig, a. 1867, quum
nancisce «principio de permanentia de lege formale», dice in pagina 5:

«Wenn b > c ist, ... die Subtraction ist ... unmöglich. Nichts hindert
uns jedoch, dass wir in diesem Falle die Differenz (c - b) als ein
Zeichen ansehen, welches die Aufgabe [(c - b) + b = c] löst und mit
welchem genau so zu operiren ist, als wenn es eine numerische Zahl aus
der Reihe 1, 2, 3 ... wäre».

Versione: «Si b > c es, subtractione es ne-possibile. Nihil obsta tamen,
quod nos in hic caso considera differentia (c - b) ut signo, qui resolve
quaestio, et cum qui exacte nos debe opera, ut si ille numero ex serie
1, 2, 3, ... es».

Contra hic modo de ratiocinio Gauss antea dice:

«Quodsi quis dicat, triangulum rectilineum aequilaterum rectangulum
impossibile esse, nemo erit qui neget. At si tale triangulum impossibile
tanquam novum triangulorum genus contemplari, aliasque triangulorum
proprietates ad illud applicare voluerit, ecquis risum teneat? Hoc esset
verbis ludere seu potius abuti». (Formul. pag. 219). Versione:

«Si aliquo dice quod triangulo rectilineo aequilatero rectangulo
impossibile es, nemo tunc es qui nega. Sed si aliquo velle contempla
tale triangulo impossibile tanquam novo genere de triangulo, et applica
ad illo omne alio proprietate de triangulo, an qui tene riso? Hoc es
lude cum verbo, vel potius abute».

                   *       *       *       *       *

Prof. CHRISTAL, _Algebra_, Edinburgh a. 1889, p. 6, re-dice idea de
Hankel:

«Assuming that the quantity +a - b always exists, we may show that the
laws of commutation and association hold».

Versione:

«Si nos assume quod quantitas +a - b semper existe, posse monstra quod
lege de commutatio et associatio mane».(4)

  (5) Nota analogia grammaticale de «show» cum «monstra».

Hoc es, si nos assume absurdo, non solo nos posse deduce lege de
commutatione, sed omne lege qui nos velle, nam ex absurdo omne
consequentia deriva.

Non sub forma de principio absoluto, sed sub forma de consilio, lice
quod nos dice:

«Quum nos introduce novo calculo, es multo utile quod nos sume
nomenclatura et notatione ita ut novo calculo fie quam maxime simile ad
calculo antiquo».

Me dice «quam maxime simile»; «identico» es absurdo.

Ita Algebra, qui indica cum idem signo +, ×, = ... operatione non solo
inter numero integro, sed etiam inter fracto, es magno progresso super
longo methodo de antiquo graeco; Algebra reduce toto libro X de Euclide,
noto per magnitudine et difficultate, ad uno pagina, qui professore sole
doce in uno lectione in Instituto tecnico (Vide Formul. p. 111).

In saeculo ultimo plure auctore indica cum idem signo +, sive summa de
algebra, sive resultante de vectore, et ita construe Calculo geometrico,
qui in respecto ad Geometria, es idem progresso quam Algebra in respecto
de Arithmetica graeco.

Tunc principio de permanentia idem es ac principio generale de
oeconomia, qui subsiste in linguistica, didactica et politica, ut
demonstra E. MACH, in capitulo de «natura oeconomico de progresso
physico» de _Populär-wissenschaftliche Vorlesungen_, Leipzig a. 1903.

    G. PEANO.




  [ Transcriber's Note:

    The following is a list of corrections made to the original.
    The first line is the original line, the second the corrected one.

    c) Ad verbo activo adde _re_, et te habe passivo.
    c) Ad verbo activo adde _-re_, et te habe passivo.

    _ge_, _gi_      »   _ghe_, _ghi_,    »   _gue_, _gui_      »    _ge_,
    _ge_, _gi_      »   _ghe_, _ghi_,    »   _gue_, _gui_,     »    _ge_,

  internationale latino", Roma a. 1903.
  internazionale latino", Roma a. 1903.

  contine simplicatione de genere (§ 2), de persona (§ 4). Sed non
  contine simplificatione de genere (§ 2), de persona (§ 4). Sed non

  Et notato-digno es «Langue bleu» de L. BOLLACK. Ibi, ex numero de
  Et notato-digno es «Langue bleue» de L. BOLLACK. Ibi, ex numero de

  Prof. L. COUTURAT explica hic idea in opusculo: Pour la langue
  Prof. L. COUTURAT explica hic idea in opusculo: «_Pour la langue

  Articulo, qui praecede, proba quod flexio de nomen et de verbo non es
  Articulo, qui praecede, proba quod flexione de nomen et de verbo non es

  cum abreviatione:
  cum abbreviatione:

  «erstens darin, jeder Zeichnen-Verknüpfung, die keine der bis dahin
  «erstens darin, jeder Zeichen-Verknüpfung, die keine der bis dahin

  definierten Zahlen darstellt, einem solchen Sinn zu erteilen, dass die
  definierten Zahlen darstellt, einen solchen Sinn zu erteilen, dass die

  Verknüpfung nach denselben Regeln behaldelt werden darf, als stellte sie
  Verknüpfung nach denselben Regeln behandelt werden darf, als stellte sie

  eine des bis dahin definierten Zahlen dar;
  eine der bis dahin definierten Zahlen dar;

  «drittens darin, zu beweisen dass für die Zahlen im erweiterten Sinne
  «drittens darin, zu beweisen, dass für die Zahlen im erweiterten Sinne

  grösser und minor heisst».
  grösser und kleiner heisst».

  «Wenn b > c ist, ... die Substraction ist ... unmöglich. Nichts hindert
  «Wenn b > c ist, ... die Subtraction ist ... unmöglich. Nichts hindert

  Versione: «Si b > c es, subtractione es ne-possible. Nihil obsta tamen,
  Versione: «Si b > c es, subtractione es ne-possibile. Nihil obsta tamen,

  physico» de _Populär Vorlesungen_, Leipzig a. 1903.
  physico» de _Populär-wissenschaftliche Vorlesungen_, Leipzig a. 1903.

  ]








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DE LATINO SINE FLEXIONE; PRINCIPIO DE PERMANENTIA ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


