The Project Gutenberg eBook of Ernesto Garcia Cabral: A Mexican Cartoonist
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Ernesto Garcia Cabral: A Mexican Cartoonist

Author: G. R. G. Conway

Illustrator: Ernesto García Cabral

Release date: September 1, 2019 [eBook #60214]
                Most recently updated: October 17, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Chuck Greif, ellinora and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ERNESTO GARCIA CABRAL: A MEXICAN CARTOONIST ***

                [Illustration: ERNESTO GARCIA CABRAL.]




                         ERNESTO GARCIA CABRAL

                                  -A-

                          MEXICAN CARTOONIST


                                  BY

                            G. R. G. CONWAY


                            [Illustration]

                  Issued for private circulation from

               Calle de Marsella No. 47, City of Mexico.

                               MCMXXIII


         Of this little book, one hundred and fifty copies
         have been printed for the amusement of friends,
         who will admire the genius of the famous Mexican
         cartoonist and at the same time forgive the shortcomings
         of the compiler.

         This copy, which is No. ____ is dedicated
         with friendly greetings

         to ____

         By ____


                                            _Xmas. 1923._




CONTENTS


                                PAGE

Biographical Foreword        7 to 13.


ILLUSTRATIONS

I. Ernesto García Cabral.

II. Sr. Ing. Don Alberto Pani.

III. Lic. Miguel Alessio Robles.

IV. Sr. Ing. Antonio Madrazo.

V. Lic. Benito Javier Pérez Verdía.

VI. Lic. Luis Manuel Rojas.

VII. Sr. Lic. Antonio Pérez Verdía F.

VIII. Sr. Don Carlos B. Zetina.

IX. Don José de la Macorra.

X. The late Don Genaro García.

XI. Sr. Don Carlos Meneses.

XII. Señora Eugenia de Meléndez.

XIII. Dr. Atl.

XIV. Hon. William Howard Taft.

XV. Ambassador Fletcher.

XVI. Mr. George T. Summerlin.

XVII. Mr. Matthew Elting Hanna.

XVIII. Mr. Oscar Maxon.

XIX. Mr. William Randolph Hearst.

XX. Mr. Henry Ford.

XXI. Ramón del Valle Inclán.

XXII. Josef Lhévinne.

XXIII. Anna Pavlowa.

XXIV. Mr. E. R. Peacock.

XXV. G. R. G. Conway.

XXVI. Mr. Claude Marsh Butlin.

XXVII. Georges Carpentier.

XXVIII. Jack Dempsey.

XXIX. Rodolfo Gaona.

XXX. Ignacio Sánchez Mejías.

XXXI. Juan Belmonte.

XXXII.-LVIII. Political, Social and Topical Cartoons.




                         Ernesto García Cabral

    _Once, on a glittering ice-field, ages and ages ago,_
    _Ung, a maker of pictures, fashioned an image of snow,_
    _Fashioned the form of a tribesman--gaily he whistled and sung,_
    _Working the snow with his fingers. Read ye the Story of Ung!_

    _Pleased was his tribe with that image--came in their hundreds to scan--_
    _Handled it, smelt it, and grunted: “Verily, this is a man!_
    _“Thus do we carry our lances--thus is a war belt slung,_
    _“Lo! it is even as we are. Glory and honor to Ung!”_

               .......................

    _Straight on the glittering ice-field, by the caves of the lost Dordogne,_
    _Ung, a maker of pictures, fell to his scriving on bone--_
    _Even to mammoth editions...._
                                          (_KIPLING_)


The art of the cartoonist was flourishing in the palaeolithic age, about
fifty thousand years ago. In the caves of Dordogne, in Southern France,
the early artist scraped and scratched his figures of reindeers and
mammoths, and colored them in red, white and black. He was a magic
worker, using his remarkable art to impress his less skilled brother.
The caricaturist belongs to a much later period; but he, too, was in
evidence in Greece during the days of Aristophanes, a century or two
before the artistic genius of the Maya race carved and modelled their
quaint, grotesque figures of men and animals. That the art of caricature
is an ancient one in Mexico we have abundant evidence. The artist
usually worked in clay, but he also made drawings with pointed obsidian
knives or charcoal on stone. Representations of his art craft can be
seen in many of the ancient codices. In Padre Sahagun’s illustrations
(the Florentine Codex) we find many whimsical and fantastic sketches,
grim with sardonic humor. Except here and there, on rare occasions, the
art of caricature which flourished in Europe during the Spanish Colonial
period, was dormant in Mexico. In the Codex of San Juan Teotihuacan,
which dates from the middle of the sixteenth century, we see the Indian
artist caricaturing the portly Augustinian friars, and revealing with
tragic earnestness the suffering of the poor natives whom the monks
compelled to build their beautiful churches to the “Glory of God.”

But the art of satirical expression can only be developed when some
degree of freedom obtains. Under Spanish rule and the rigid jurisdiction
of the Inquisition no freedom of thought was possible. With the changed
conditions brought about by the separation of New Spain from the mother
country there was liberty enough--and even license--for the
caricaturist, which he used with biting satire against the ever-changing
political heroes. To-day, the political cartoonist in Mexico is a
powerful factor in moulding public opinion against influential persons.
Since the fall of Porfirio Diaz the daily and weekly journals have been
enlivened by the cartoons of a brilliant group of young men--foremost
and leader of them all is Ernesto Garcia Cabral, the fertile genius who
has daily depicted and delineated every phase of Mexican life and
politics.

Cabral, who is quite young, was born in the year 1891, in Huatusco, a
picturesque village in the State of Veracruz. As a child of three or
four years he amused himself by tracing figures on the ground and before
the age of fourteen he delineated figures of animals and saints on the
walls of the village church. At that time he also discovered his future
artistic bent in making profile caricatures of his younger brothers and
school-fellows. His school teacher, early recognizing the ability of
the boy in draughtsmanship, persuaded the “Jefe Politico” of the
district to solicit a scholarship from Señor Don Teodoro Dehesa, the
enlightened Governor of the State. Señor Dehesa, a patron of art, who
frequently acted as a Maecenas to struggling artists, granted the young
Ernesto the coveted bursary which entitled him to enter the San Carlos
Academy in the Capital of the Republic. There he was able to improve his
technique, but the scholarship did not make him independent. To live and
continue his studies it was necessary for him to earn money. He
therefore commenced to draw for the public, collaborating in the
publication of a lithographed political paper called “La Tarantula.” In
this paper, directed by Fortunato Herrerías, he dedicated himself
exclusively to the art of caricature. At the end of six months he joined
the staff of the short-lived comic weekly “Frivolidades” which soon had
to stop publication for want of funds. The next important step in
Cabral’s career was his collaboration with Mario Vitoria, in the
well-known political weekly “Multicolor” and through the medium of this
paper his drawings became known to a wider and more influential circle.
“Multicolor” had great political influence during the three years it was
published (1911-1914), and helped very powerfully towards the making and
unmaking of the political idols of the hour.

It was during this period that the brilliant young artist came to the
notice of President Madero, who decided to send him to Paris to continue
his studies at the expense of the Mexican Government. Cabral settled in
Paris in 1912 and pursued his studies at the free academies of Colorossi
and the Grande Chaumiére. Cabral’s native land was soon afterwards
passing through the agonies of revolution and the tragic death of Madero
left the artist penniless, as the new Government stopped all the
bursaries of Mexican students then studying under official patronage in
Europe. Deprived of all means of subsistence, Cabral, as he once told
the present writer, was, for a time, actually starving. Some
amelioration came to him as the result of winning a competition
inaugurated by an official Academy of Painting at No. 80 Boulevard
Montparnasse, the prize being free admission to the upper class of
drawing from the nude. The competitors, who were fifteen in number, were
required to make in five hours--one hour a night--a crayon drawing of a
Greek statue. The starving artist’s success, ironically enough, was
communicated by the Mexican Consul in Paris, to the Minister of Public
Instruction and Fine Arts in Mexico, and the local press made Cabral the
subject of flattering comment. Cabral was then able to continue his
studies without expense, but was compelled at the same time to struggle
gallantly for a pittance, by selling the productions of his pencil
through the “Marchand de Tableaux”--and shortly afterwards he was taken
on the staffs of “Le Rire” and “Bayonette.”

When the Great War broke out, Cabral was again in difficulties. Paris
cared only for her own cartoonists, and it was then that he lived the
bohemian life of the Latin Quarter--that centre of cardiac
energy--described so graphically by Du Maurier and Murger, with the
usual companionship of a sweet, pious and self-sacrificing blonde
“Midinette” who shared the dark days of his misery. At that time, he has
told us, he was in the habit of casting lots with his bohemian
companions, to see who would procure sufficient funds for the satisfying
of their ravenous stomachs--a motley lot of comrades in adversity,
including would-be painters, musicians, poets and journalists. Garcia
Cabral had, on more than one occasion, the experience of resorting to
extraordinary stratagems to obtain sufficient food for their wants.

During 1918, when the Constitutional Government of Mexico was presided
over by Don Venustiano Carranza, there was residing in Paris as the
special envoy of the President, Lic. Isidoro Fabela, and under Sr.
Fabela’s generous protection Cabral was appointed an Attaché in the
Mexican Legation, his duties being the pleasant task of illustrating a
book of narratives which Señor Fabela was intending to publish. Shortly
afterwards, he accompanied Señor Fabela on his official missions to
Madrid and Buenos Ayres and in the Argentine capital they stayed fifteen
months. There, in the interest of a Mexican national propaganda, Cabral
contributed his cartoons to the principal newspapers and reviews,
achieving a very considerable reputation in the Argentine. In the
beginning of 1919, after an exile of seven years, Cabral returned to his
native land and his work immediately began to appear in the weekly
“Revista de Revistas” and in the influential daily newspaper
“Excelsior.” Since that time his career has been one of unbroken success
and of extraordinary popularity.

Cabral’s amazing drawings are worthy of taking rank with those of the
most distinguished foreign cartoonists. He can, with equal facility,
produce the most humorous of cartoons or the most satirical of
caricatures. In his cartoons of representative people, he seems to
extract by critical penetration--sympathetically--the quintessential
expression of his subject. He is always an artist, a consummate designer
and a psychological observer who analytically peers into the minds of
men and lays bare their personalities. His art is versatile. In line, he
excels as no other Mexican artist; but he is also a master of
chiaroscuro, and as an illustrator his understanding of the massing of
color is extraordinary.

During the past three or four years, Cabral must have produced several
thousand cartoons and caricatures. His cartoons of representative people
in Mexico have been drawn mostly from life, each sketched rapidly and
surely in a little over half an hour. His political, social and topical
cartoons form a kaleidoscopic history of contemporary Mexico. A great
political question, such as the official American recognition of
President Obregon’s Government, finds Cabral sympathetically
interpreting the international aspirations of the Mexican people. The
danger of Bolshevism in the State of Veracruz becomes a subject for many
convincing cartoons, of more influence than dozens of leading articles.
Mexico City, due to an exceptional drought, is called upon to economize
in its use of electric energy and daylight-saving is officially
established for a time. Cabral, during the crisis, daily illustrates the
necessity. He wages war upon incompetent medical men, portrays the risk
the pedestrian takes on the crowded streets of the Capital, the evil
effects of unlawful strikes, and so on;--every phase in the everchanging
life of the Capital is eloquently depicted. In some of his cartoons of
persons he subordinates caricature in favor of true portraiture, and in
others, the kindly sympathetic personality of the artist changes rapidly
into the satirist and cynical student of life with an ineradicable
memory of its shams and miseries.

For the selection of the cartoons reproduced in this book the writer is
responsible; it does not profess to represent Cabral’s best work, and he
himself would probably have chosen quite differently from the thousands
he has done. The cartoons have suffered by reduction and reproduction,
as the majority of them have been copied direct from the “Excelsior.”
Nos. I., XVII-XXIV and XXV, were reproduced from the original drawings.

The writer’s apology for a selection that may not represent the best of
the artist’s work is due to the cartoonist, as those reproduced have
been selected on account of their personal appeal to the friends for
whom this limited edition is intended. Cabral hopes, at an early date,
to publish a representative collection of his work--which all lovers of
his art will joyfully welcome.

A critical study of the Mexican cartoonist’s genius will some day be
attempted. This little book does not pretend to be anything more than an
appreciation by an admirer, who lacks the critical and artistic
knowledge to determine Cabral’s true place among cartoonists in Mexico
and abroad.

                                                     _G. R. G. CONWAY._

[Caption for following illustration: I.

ERNESTO GARCIA CABRAL.

As he sees himself.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: II.

SR. ING. DON ALBERTO PANI.

Has held the Portfolios of Foreign Affairs, and of Commerce and
Industry. Was formerly Mexican Minister accredited to France and is now
Minister of Hacienda. He is the “handy man” of the Mexican Government: a
cultivated engineer, a technical and political writer, and a lover of
art. A genial spirit, perpetually smiling and smoking.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: III.

LIC. MIGUEL ALESSIO ROBLES.

Recently Minister of Commerce and Industry. Formerly Mexican Ambassador
to the Court of Madrid.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: IV.

SR. ING. ANTONIO MADRAZO.

During President Carranza’s administration acted as Sub-secretary of the
Department of Finance; and under President Obregon has been Governor of
the State of Guanajuato.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: V.

BENITO JAVIER PEREZ VERDIA.

Lawyer, journalist and man of letters. One of the founders of the
Fascisti movement in Mexico.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: VI.

LIC. LUIS MANUEL ROJAS.

One of the originators of the Mexican Constitution of 1917; the founder
of the “Revista de Revistas” and a prominent mason.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: VII.

SR. LIC. ANTONIO PEREZ VERDIA F.

An eminent lawyer and Chairman of the Mexican Bar.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: VIII.

SR. DON CARLOS B. ZETINA.

A progressive and democratic captain of industry who realizes that the
old order passeth giving place to the new. Many of his friends would
like to see him a future President of the Republic; but he prefers a
more tranquil pathway along life’s pilgrimage.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: IX.

DON JOSE DE LA MACORRA.

A representative Spanish merchant and manufacturer of paper.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: X.

THE LATE DON GENARO GARCIA.

A scholarly historian of Mexico, who gave to the world for the first
time an exact transcript of the Guatemala manuscript of “The True
History of the Conquest of New Spain” by that lovable and garrulous old
conquistador, Bernal Diaz. Genaro Garcia’s fine library is now a
treasured possession of the University of Texas.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XI.

SR. DON CARLOS MENESES.

A notable Mexican musician. Founder of the School of Pianists and
organizer of the first symphonic concerts in Mexico; one who has done
much for the advancement of music in his native land.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XII.

SEÑORA EUGENIA DE MELENDEZ.

A well-known Mexican woman writer.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XIII.

DR. ATL.

Originator of the Casa Mundial (I. W. W.) of Mexico. As a writer and
teacher has done a great deal to popularize the minor arts of Mexico. Is
a painter with ultra-impressionistic tendencies, and well-known as an
intrepid climber of Popocatepetl.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XIV.

HON. WILLIAM HOWARD TAFT.

Twenty-seventh President of the United States; now Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XV.

AMBASSADOR FLETCHER.

Formerly Ambassador of the United States in Mexico; an authority on
Latin America; now Ambassador in Belgium. Has had long diplomatic
experience, his whole career having been spent in the service in many
lands.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XVI.

MR. GEORGE T. SUMMERLIN.

Counsellor of the American Embassy with Ambassador Fletcher when he took
office in 1917, and since January 1919 has been Chargé d’Affaires.
“Summie,” as his intimate friends affectionately call him, has served
his country well and has gained the respect and confidence of the
Mexican people. His friends hope that his expected promotion will take
him to the Court of St. James.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XVII.

MR. MATTHEW ELTING HANNA.

Has charge of Mexican affairs in the State Department of Washington.
“Joe,” as he is known to all his friends in Mexico City, was formerly
First Secretary of the American Embassy. He is a hard worker, a genial
host and a welcome guest and is greatly missed in the Capital.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XVIII.

MR. OSCAR MAXON.

Maxy is the wittiest American in Mexico City. Probably he would be
called in his own home town “a wealthy and prominent realtor.” He
collects many beautiful things and is always willing to open his packing
cases to show them to genuine lovers of antiques.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XIX.

MR. WILLIAM RANDOLPH HEARST.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XX.

MR. HENRY FORD.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XXI.

RAMON DEL VALLE INCLAN.

The most skilful musician among modern Spanish poets. As a visitor to
Mexico he received an indifferent welcome from his “paisanos” owing to
his outspoken remarks on the reigning Spanish monarchy.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XXII.

JOSEF LHEVINNE.

The eminent pianist who always finds a popular welcome in Mexico City.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XXIII.

ANNA PAVLOWA.

The Queen of dancers.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XXIV.

MR. E. R. PEACOCK.

A Canadian by birth and a graduate in arts of Queen’s University. About
20 years ago was a senior master in Upper Canada College, Toronto. From
there he entered the world of finance in London and now has the
distinction of being the first Director of the Bank of England appointed
outside of the esoteric circle of “the City”--a tribute not only to
himself but a compliment to Canada. Is actively interested in many
British enterprises in Mexico, Spain and South America.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XXV.

G. R. G. CONWAY.

“Cuando había agua.” (Excelsior, 11th February, 1921.)]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XXVI.

MR. CLAUDE MARSH BUTLIN.

The best all-round sportsman in Mexico. As becomes an Englishman he
excels in cricket; has been for many years tennis champion; a scratch
golfer and withal a fine player of the difficult game of pelota.]

[Illustration]

XXII

GEORGVE CARPENTER

The famous French puglist.

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XXVIII.

JACK DEMPSEY.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XXIX.

RODOLFO GAONA.

A Mexican “Torero” and the idol of the bull-fighting public. He is
reputed to be the bravest that ever appeared in the rings of New
Spain.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XXX.

IGNACIO SANCHEZ MEJIAS.

A very brave and ambitious bull-fighter from Seville. Formerly a student
of medicine, he abandoned his profession for the plaudits of the middle
and upper-class frequenters of the bull-ring, who adore him.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XXXI.

JUAN BELMONTE.

The “Phenomenon” from Seville, who thrills his excitable audiences with
his daring work near the horns of the bull.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XXXII.

FINAL CONSULTATION.

HE WHO IS POINTING (President Obregon): “Energy within the law!” ...

PUBLIC OPINION: “I have confidence in you, Doctor.”]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XXXIII.

INTERNATIONAL TAILORING.

President Obregon: When will you let me have the suit, boss?

Uncle Sam: We require many fittings (pruebas) yet, General.

(“Pruebas” in Spanish means both fittings and proofs.)]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XXXIV.

THE RECOGNITION QUESTION.

General Obregon, as Ford driver: Ready sir?

Uncle Sam: Does the car go well?

Ford Driver: Just examine (reconozca) it and you’ll see.

(“Reconocer” in Spanish means both examine and recognize.)]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XXXV.

WILL HE GIVE HER THE DEATH BLOW?

Cabral here depicts the strangling of Industry in the State of Veracruz
by Bolshevism.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XXXVI.

TAKE YOUR MUSIC ELSEWHERE.

The Average Man: “What a goat’s whiskers he’s got.”]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XXXVII.

WHAT A KNOCK IN THE EYE!

This cartoon refers to an insulting and threatening telegram sent by the
Strike Committee to General Obregon during a Tramways strike in Mexico
City, and the President’s vigorous reply.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XXXVIII.

Employer: I won’t give you work because you get drunk so often.

Workman: Not very often, boss; only when I celebrate my name day.

Employer: What’s your name?

Workman: Domingo. (Sunday).]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XXXIX.

INFALLIBLE FOR HEADACHES.

“Comment unnecessary.”

In Mexico City the jitney is a terror to the pedestrian. Upon this one
is an advertisement of a patent medicine “Infallible for headaches.”]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XL.

He: I am reading a sensational piece of news.

She: What is it?

He: An automobile knocked a man down and killed him.

She: That’s nothing; many people are knocked down every day.

He: Yes, but in this case they arrested the chauffeur.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XLI.

“Excuse me, sir, has the Colonia-Roma tram gone by?”

“Do you take me for a tram despatcher?”

“No, sir, I mistook you for a gentleman, that’s all.”]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XLII.

IS LIGHT NECESSARY?

“Shall we get accustomed to being without light, friend?”

“That is a matter of indifference to me as my wife gives a tremendous
lot of light.”

(In Spanish, the verb “To give light” means also “To give birth.”)]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XLIII.

EL CONFLICTO DE LUZ Y FUERZA

(The Light and Power Conflict)

Who gave you that, brother?

Luz, (Light) my wife.

What energy she used!

Naturally, seeing she has lots of motive power. (fuerza motriz.)]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XLIV.

THE OFFICIAL TIME.

Widow: He died at four in the morning, official time, without making a
will; he didn’t have time to do so....

... God’s will be done; but if he had died at four o’clock astronomical
time, everything would have been all right!]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XLV.

OFFICIAL TIME.

“I’m awfully sorry to tell you, old man, but on Saturday, at 11 o’clock
at night, I saw your wife with another man.”

“You lie, you idiot!”

“Man!--You insult me!”

“It was twelve o’clock. Don’t you know that we are an hour in advance?”

“You’re quite right--pardon me.”]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XLVI.

THE WATER CRISIS.

“Have you noticed that black shirts are fashionable?”

“Certaintly--it is the triumph of Fascismo.”

“Rubbish!--it’s on account of excess of dirt and want of water.”]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XLVII.

OUR RESTAURANTS.

Diner: Imbecile!--the fish you gave me a week ago was better.

Waiter: You are the imbecile--because I can prove to you it’s the
same!]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XLVIII.

1st kiddie: My parents bought me new shoes and a little brother in
Paris.

2nd kiddie: Oh well, mine didn’t bring me shoes because they bought me
twins.]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: XLIX.

SAFETY AT NIGHT.

The Young Fellow: My wife has just given birth to twins--at four o’clock
in the morning.

The Old Boy: Well, that’s very commendable caution. Few people care to
arrive alone in Mexico at that hour.]

[Caption for following illustration: L.

THE HENPECKED ONE.

Lunch time, and my wife so jealous! What the deuce am I to do to justify
my late arrival?]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: LI.

BETWEEN MILK VENDORS.

“How many liters of milk does your cow give, Don Pancho?”

“About eight liters, Doña Julia.”

“And how many do you sell?”

“Oh, not more than twenty.”]

[Caption for following illustration: LII.

“So you’ve finished crying at last!”

The Kid: “No!” (sniffling)--“I’m only resting a little.”]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: LIII.

IRONY.

He: After you Madame!]

[Caption for following illustration: LIV.

FAMILY DISPUTES.

He: And so you are capable of saying I am two-faced!

She: Heavens, no! The one you have is enough!]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: LV.

The Padre:--(Teaching his pupil the ten commandments) The fifth--‘Thou
shalt not kill.’

The Pupil: Not even when I have “fuero,” father?

(“Fuero” is a privilege granted to Congressmen and others which exempts
them from arrest for crimes committed when holding office.)]

[Caption for following illustration: LVI.

FATHERS OF THE COUNTRY.

“To think I have so many and am so neglected!”

(Congressmen in Mexico are called “Fathers of the Country.”)]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Caption for following illustration: LVII.

THE FAUX PAS.

“What do you think of my wife’s voice?”

“Excuse me, that woman’s making such a noise I can’t hear a word!--What
were you saying?”]

[Caption for following illustration: LVIII.

“Why don’t you marry Rose?”

“Nothing doing, old man. She’s bitterly opposed to divorce.”]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ERNESTO GARCIA CABRAL: A MEXICAN CARTOONIST ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


