The Project Gutenberg eBook of Motor Camping
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Motor Camping

Author: J. C. Long
        John D. Long

Release date: December 21, 2021 [eBook #66988]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Jeroen Hellingman and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net/ for Project Gutenberg (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MOTOR CAMPING ***

                             MOTOR CAMPING

                                   BY
                               J. C. LONG
                                  AND
                              JOHN D. LONG

                           WITH ILLUSTRATIONS
                              AND DIAGRAMS


                                NEW YORK
                         DODD, MEAD AND COMPANY
                                  1923








CONTENTS


                                                                   PAGE

Chapter I. Over the Horizon Line                                      1

    Introductory—Extent and Growth of Motor Camping—The Touring
    Spirit—The Economy of Motor Camping—Week-enders.

Chapter II. Saving Money by Motor Camping                             5

    How One Family Saved Money—How a Farmer Did It—A Boston Woman—Two
    New York Couples—Four Ohioans and Their Outfit.

Chapter III. The Week-end Camper                                     15

    Week-end Wild Men—Numerous Camping Sites Near the Large Cities—Camp
    Sites Near New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Cincinnati, Chicago,
    Boston, Denver, San Francisco, Los Angeles—The State
    Forester—Clothing—Bed—Bedding—Expense—Food—Fire and
    Fuel—Tools—Tents—Hammocks—Medical Kit—Children—Church.

Chapter IV. Camping With a Ford                                      31

    Number of Fords, Mobility of Fords, How to Camp with Them—The
    Foldaway Bed—The McMillan Bed—The Carefree Folding Outfit—A.B.C.
    Bed for Fords Only—Universal Car Bed.

Chapter V. A Home-made Camping Outfit                                38

    Standing the Test of an 8,000 Mile Trip—Good Water Supply
    Everywhere—Army Cots and Canvas the Basis of Outfit—Complete
    Directions—Mosquito Netting Sides Permit Adequate Ventilation.

Chapter VI. Equipment for the Journey                                46

    Motor Bungalows—Trailers—Tents: Those Extending from the Car; Those
    Resting upon the Ground, but Attached to the Car, and Tents
    Separate from the Car—How to Estimate Canvas Duck—More Elaborate
    Tents—Combination Tent-beds—Car Beds—Cooking Equipment—Wood, Oil,
    Gasoline and Alcohol Stoves—Campfires and How to Manage
    Them—Broilers and Grids—Cooking Utensils—Tools, Lights, etc.—Water
    Bags and Filters—Canvas Bungalows—Refrigeration.

Chapter VII. How to Choose a Camp                                    80

    Securing Permission—Church Grounds and School-yard Camp
    Sites—Municipal Camp Sites—Autumn and Winter Camping—Water
    Supply—Wells and Springs Doubtful—Selecting a Camping Site—Disposal
    of Refuse—Latrines—National and State Forest Camps, General
    Regulations—State of New York Regulations—New York State Parks and
    Forest Preserves—Adirondack and Catskill State Parks.

Chapter VIII. Fire and Food for the Camper                           96

    Raw Foods—Hotels—Various Fuels Compared—Fireplaces Provided at Most
    Camp Sites—Wet Weather Fire-making—Primitive Cooking
    Methods—Prepared Foods—Corrective Foods—Camp-fire Cooking—The
    Dingle Stick—Forestry Regulations Concerning Camp Fires—Coffee and
    Flapjack Making—Wayside Markets—Men Cooks—How to Cook a Quick
    Meal—Improvised Fireplaces—A Varied Dietary—An Ideal Meal—A
    Balanced Menu—Recipes for Camp Cooking—A List—Biscuits, Flapjacks,
    Corn Bread, Corn Meal Mush, Fish, Rabbits, Squirrel, Game Birds,
    How to Boil Potatoes, Baking in Clay, etc.

Chapter IX. Camp Health and Recreation                              122

    Making a Pleasure Rather Than a Business of Camping—Coöperation in
    the Camp—Rightly Selecting the Camp Site—Playing by the
    Way—Basket-ball, Quoits, etc.—Exercise—Emergencies, First Aid—Prone
    Pressure Method of Restoring the Unconscious—Poisons and
    Antidotes—Position of Tent—Supposed Hardships of Camping Mostly
    Illusory—Keeping Dry—Keeping Out Insects—Sample List for a Medicine
    Kit—Care of the Car—Evening Sports.

Chapter X. Sleeping Quarters                                        140

    Importance of Comfortable Sleeping Arrangements—Methods of Sleeping
    in the Car—Sleeping on the Ground—Beds of Boughs or Browse—Autumn
    Leaves—Folding Cots—Air Beds—Sleeping Bags—Combination Bags and
    Beds—Home-made Mattresses—Sleeping in Hammocks—Night-caps—The
    Touring and Sleeping Outfit of a Tourist Veteran of Ten Years’
    Experience—Driving Out the Sleep Disturbers, Flies and Mosquitoes.

Chapter XI. Primitive Camping                                       157

    How Two Adventurers Can Rough It—Simple Supplies—Making One’s Own
    Coffee Pot—Plentiful Food in the Wilds.

Chapter XII. Where to Go                                            168

    The Motor Camper’s Continental Range—The Consequent Need of
    Provision for All Touring Emergencies—The Great Continental
    Highways—East and West, Bankhead, Dixie, George Washington,
    Lincoln, Old Trails, National Parks, Pikes Peak, Ocean to Ocean,
    Old Spanish, Roosevelt, Theodore Roosevelt International, Park to
    Park, Yellowstone—North and South, Atlantic, Dixie, Jackson, King,
    Jefferson, Lee, Meridian, Mississippi Valley, Pacific, Pershing,
    Puget Sound to Gulf—Also Many Others of Less Importance Listed and
    Described—Description and Lists of National Parks and Forests,
    State Parks and Forests and a Few Leading Municipal Camping Parks,
    Followed in Next Chapter by a List of These Camp Sites Arranged
    Alphabetically by States—Description of Methods in Vogue in
    National Parks and Forests in Connection with Motor Campers, and
    Provision Made for Their Comfort—The National Parks Listed—Dates of
    Seasonal Opening of Various National Parks—State Parks and Forests
    in Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Maryland,
    Massachusetts, Minnesota, Michigan, New Jersey, New York, North
    Carolina, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Dakota,
    Vermont, Washington, Wisconsin—The Most Striking Municipal Camping
    Parks, Such as Boise, Idaho, Salt Lake City, Cheyenne, Wyoming,
    Denver, and Alameda, California—Desirability of Attracting Motor
    Campers.

Chapter XIII. List of Camping Sites by States                       204

    A List of About Two Thousand Camping Sites Arranged Alphabetically
    by States—Municipal Camp Sites, State Camp Sites, and Camp Sites in
    National Parks and Forests, Beginning with Alabama and Closing with
    Wyoming—This List Indicates in Tabular Form the Facilities Offered
    at Each Camp Site.

Chapter XIV. State Rules and Regulations for Motor Tourists         312

    Motor Laws of the Different States as Affecting Motor Tourists from
    Other States—States Listed Alphabetically—Also Trailer License Laws
    of the Several States, Each State in Alphabetical Order—Suggested
    Regulations for Camping Parks—Tabulation of Information Concerning
    the Fishing and Game Laws of the Various States—States Given in
    Alphabetical Order.








LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


    St. Louis Canyon, Starved Rock Park, Ill.              Frontispiece

                                                            FACING PAGE
    Equipment for the Family of an Iowa Farmer                        8
    Falls at Stony Brook, N. J.                                      16
    Pine Forests in Southern N. J.                                   16
    Two Views of the Foldaway Bed                                    32
    Beds for Use in Touring Cars                                     34
    Basis for Home-made Tenting Outfit                               40
    Framework of Home-made Camping Outfit                            41
    Tent Pattern of Home-made Camping Outfit                         44
    End Pieces of Tent                                               45
    Three Trailers                                                   50
    Moto-tents                                                       56
    Various Kinds of Cooking Apparatus                               66
    Automobiles at Grand Haven State Park, Mich.                     84
    Hotel Building at Orchard Beach State Park, Mich.                84
    Specially Built Touring Bungalow                                 92
    Hettrick Tourist Tent                                            92
    Scene in Yellowstone National Park                              114
    Camping Ground in Grand Canyon National Park                    114
    Types of Bed Equipment                                          146
    Children of Six States                                          196
    Camp Sites at Alhambra, Cal.                                    200








MOTOR CAMPING


CHAPTER I

OVER THE HORIZON LINE

    Introductory—Extent and Growth of Motor Camping—The Touring
    Spirit—The Economy of Motor Camping—Week-enders.


Most of us are possessed of the desire to be somewhere else. Since the
dawn of history hordes of men have pressed into new countries.
Sometimes the expeditions have been in search of food and plunder, but
mixed in with these motives has been the human passion for something
better, the hope for sunnier scenes lying over the horizon.

Hemmed in by the restrictions of modern business life, people no
longer, even in this Western World, move by tribes or companies into
new homelands. But the restlessness remains.

In the United States a new and increasing way of satisfying this desire
for recreation and adventure has swept over the country. Motor camping
has become a leading national pastime. Thousands play golf every year,
tens of thousands play tennis, hundreds of thousands engage in
baseball, but in the past few years millions have gone in for motor
camping. There are over ten million cars in this country. Each year the
number is increasing, and each year the number of families that join
the national horde of motor campers mounts higher.

The New York Times estimates that at least five million cars were used
in camping trips during the past year.

The number of visitors to the National Forests alone now mounts up into
the millions. As far back as 1917 the U. S. Forest Service reported a
total of three million tourists during the summer. In 1922 this had
increased to 5,350,000, of which 3,692,000 were motorists. The motoring
visitors to the National Parks during the past season totaled nearly
700,000. More than three-fifths of those visiting the National
preserves to-day come by motor car and a large proportion of these are
touring campers.

In Colorado during 1922 there were 1,173,000 motorists visiting the
parks and forests in that state, as compared with 277,000 who traveled
by other means.

The immense popularity of motor camping is easy to understand when one
realizes that this pastime is romantic, healthful, educative, and at
the same time economical.

Father can take the whole family for a two weeks’ or a month’s trip in
his car at virtually the same cost as staying at home. The room rent he
will have to pay on his trip will range from nothing to fifty cents or
a dollar a day for the family.

There are many thousands of acres of free camping grounds in the
national and state public playgrounds. In addition, nearly every town
west of the Appalachians has its camp site, while on the Atlantic
Seaboard there is a large increase in the number of municipal camp
sites every season. The approximately 2,000 civic sites, which are
listed elsewhere in this book, make no charge for accommodations or
merely a nominal one. The towns in addition to the spirit of
hospitality are anxious to have tourists for business reasons. The
Executive Secretary of the Denver Civic Association has written: “An
auto camp, in my judgment, is just as essential to any city, town or
community that wants to thrive and prosper and keep ahead of the times,
as a railway station.”

With provisions costing no more than at home, with moderate investment
for camping equipment which will last for several years, the family can
get a vacation in the open, can see other parts of the country, can get
an appreciation of the national life which could hardly be realized in
any other way. To the boy living in Connecticut, Georgia can become an
actual reality rather than an inch or two of space on the map. The
eastern family which has a full summer vacation can readily visit
California.

But an extended period of time is not needed in order to enjoy the
satisfactions of motor camping. There are wildernesses within a hundred
mile range or less of any of our large cities, with the result that
many motorists are becoming week-end campers. The New Yorker can find
near-by camp sites in the Catskills, and in the State Forests of
northern New Jersey. The Philadelphian may enjoy the wildernesses in
southern New Jersey. Baltimore has a Forest Reserve actually adjoining
the city, while near many of the western cities, such as Denver and Los
Angeles, are some of the beauty spots of the world.

This chapter has aimed merely to sketch briefly the extent and some of
the possibilities of motor camping. The following chapters discuss in
detail the subjects with which the motor camper is concerned, such as
preparation for the journey in the way of equipment, conditions he will
find, where to camp for short or long trips, laws to be observed.

Motor camping is simple. With a little foresight in preparing for the
adventure, and the observance of a few common sense principles in
traveling any family may start on its camping trip with the assurance
of happy days ahead.








CHAPTER II

SAVING MONEY BY MOTOR CAMPING

    How One Family Saved Money—How a Farmer Did It—A Boston Woman—Two
    New York Couples—Four Ohioans and Their Outfit.


Some motor campers carry an elaborate equipment of supplies and live in
the height of comfort at comparatively moderate expense. Motor camping,
however, is also a possibility for the very limited purse. It is the
purpose of this chapter to give a few specimen budgets and experiences
of campers.

Almost any way you may arrange it a motor camping trip can be made to
save your vacation money.

Even if you tour as luxuriously as is possible for a camper, you will
save a great deal of money over what your tour would cost traveling by
rail and stopping at hotels.

Details of different camping factors, such as equipment, are covered in
subsequent chapters.



How One Family Saved Money by Motor Touring

This family with guests numbered five adults. They made a motor camping
tour from Bemidji, Minn., to Kansas City, Mo., and return. They had an
inexpensive car, equipped with a modest camping outfit. They made the
excursion described in thirty-one days, traveling at the average
leisurely speed of seventeen miles an hour. Their total outlay for food
was $66.76, and the entire cost of gasoline and oil for the journey was
$34.27. This brought the total traveling expenditures for a party of
five adults from Bemidji to Kansas City and return to the sum of
$101.03.

Had this party taken the same tour by rail the cost would have been as
follows:


      Excursion fare Bemidji to Kansas City, 5 adults     $233.75
      Pullman berths, both ways for 5 adults                60.68
      Meals at $1.00 per for 5 adults, 31 days             465.00
      Hotels, 25 nights for 5 adults at $6.50 per night    162.50
                                                          -------
      Total                                               $921.93
      Cost of tour, motor camping                          101.03
                                                          -------
      Money saved by motor camping                        $820.90


The railroad expenses, as will be observed, are put very low, as there
is no allowance for such items as tips. And, furthermore, the party of
five are assigned to only three Pullman berths. The hotel expenses,
too, are drawn down as low as possible. In fact, had the trip been
taken by rail the estimates given would have been exceeded.




How a Farmer Did It

An Iowa farmer with a small car of popular make started out with his
wife and three children to see the Colorado mountains. He expected to
take a trip of about seven hundred miles out and back. Before they were
home again they had covered a distance of more than seventeen hundred
miles. By the way, fully fifty per cent of all motor campers are
farmers.

This farmer tells us that from start to finish of their motor camping
vacation, they did not sleep in a bed, eat off a table, or sit on a
chair.

Their equipment consisted of a small tent, the most necessary clothes,
a tin cup, a tin plate, and a tin spoon for each person. They had a big
butcher knife, one fork, a skillet for cooking meat, a two-quart pail
for other cooking and to serve as a coffee-pot; also a gallon pail in
which to carry water. A knife and fork per person were also provided.

For covering at night they took along a good supply of blankets. Their
food was bread, meat and canned fruit—all bought in the small towns
through which the family toured. In addition milk, butter and an
occasional chicken were purchased from farmers in the country as they
passed through.

Firewood for the cook-fire and straw for bedding in the tent they got
for the asking. The cooking was done over an Indian fire on the ground.

Their car was in good condition at the start. They drove moderately and
carefully, and their only expense on the car was for gas and oil. Their
vacation trip of seventeen hundred miles was taken at but little more
cost than the expense of staying at home. Any other kind of an
excursion trip for these people would have been out of question as they
could not have stood the price.




A Boston Woman

Now for some details of a motor camping tour taken by a Boston woman
and her friends. This trip involved much more elaborate preparation and
considerable more expense than the case just given, but nevertheless
was much more economical than a similar tour by rail and hotels.

This Bostonian after minimizing baggage as much as she thought possible
took along the following items: one light-weight cloth-tailored suit,
half a dozen tailored shirt-waists, one foulard gown to wear of an
evening should occasion arise, the necessary underwear, a motor coat
and bonnet. She also took extra wraps, steamer rugs and rubber coats.
The clothing was packed in suit cases. The party consisted of eight
people and took sleeping tents, each tent large enough for two. They
took hammocks and folding beds so constructed that they could be
bundled and tied on the rear of the car. The tents cost fifteen dollars
each. They had two luncheon or tea baskets and three thermos bottles.
The baskets used were circular in shape, about the size of a cart
wheel, and contained small silver, cups, saucers, and plates for eight
people, besides an alcohol cooking apparatus and numerous metal covered
dishes and china platters. When these baskets were closed they were
carried after the manner of extra tires.

With this outfit and two cars these motorists toured through New
England and a portion of Canada. They tented in open field or grove
wherever night overtook them. Fresh eggs, milk, butter, and
occasionally a chicken or two were obtained at moderate prices from
farmhouses on the way.

Some long trips are made with a surprising economy not only in the
matter of shelter and subsistence, but also in expenditure for motor
supplies. A school principal in Montana made an excursion from his home
to San Diego, Cal., and back. He logged a total distance of 2,503
miles. In doing this distance he used only 116 gallons of gasoline and
three and a half gallons of oil. These cost the sum of $39.35, making
his transportation cost him at the rate of a little more than a cent
and a half a mile (1.6 cents). His mileage on gas figured out 21.58
miles to the gallon. Of course, in these figures no account is had of
the wear and tear on the car or of depreciation.




Two New York Couples

Two New York couples forming a one-car touring party went motor camping
through the Hudson River country. Their outfit was somewhat elaborate,
and for the ladies consisted of toilet articles, underwear, flannel
underskirts, linen shirt-waists without collars, gray flannel
shirt-waists, sweaters, high water-proof shoes with heavy soles, woolen
kimonos, sun bonnets, motoring bonnets, heavy raincoats, khaki skirts,
flannel night-dresses, stockings (including extra pairs of heavier
weight), and slippers.

The men confined themselves to heavy flannel and khaki shirts, and two
silk and wool negligee shirts each. In addition they took regular
summer underwear and a set of woolens apiece. Besides khaki suits for
use when motoring, they took along old suits which had been discarded
for street and business wear.

Having sent for the catalogues of a number of sporting-goods houses,
they selected from them and bought two patent automobile tents made of
sea-island cotton and oiled in such a manner as to water-proof them.
Each tent had a telescopic tent pole. The center of the rear tent wall
was made to be guyed from the steering wheel of the car and the two
corners of the rear wall were guyed to front and rear car wheels, thus
providing two one-family houses, one on each side of the car.

This party was provided with a combination cooking outfit which
included four cooking pots, coffee-pot, tea-pot, two frying pans, and
four each of plates, cups, soup bowls, knives, forks, dessert spoons,
and tea spoons. All these articles were of aluminum except the frying
pans, and all nested in the large pot which was ten inches across and
eleven inches high. The frying pans had folding handles. There was also
a porcelain, salt, pepper and mustard set that nested together, and two
oblong cake pans, one slightly larger than the other. They took eight
woolen blankets, four camp stools, a patent grate, a three-quarter size
ax in sheath, a thirty-caliber rifle, a shotgun, fishing tackle and
collapsible table.

The provisions taken consisted of tobacco, prepared coffee, pea-soup
powder, tabloid tea, evaporated milk, flour, sugar, salt pork, bacon,
cheese, baking powder, baking soda, beef-tea cubes, sweet chocolate and
soda crackers.

The clothing was carried packed in four suit cases fastened to the
trunk rack of the car. The tents were carried in large duffle bags on
the running board, and the remainder of the outfit in bags placed in
the tonneau.

The party at each stop made “a real Indian fire,” as they called it, by
clearing a space on the ground about four feet across. Then with some
yellow birch bark which they had previously gathered they kindled a
small fire, later adding small branches, so that in a few minutes they
had a low fire of pure coals. Next, two forked sticks sharpened at one
end were driven into the ground, a cross pole was laid in the forks,
and by means of a couple of wire links the coffee-pot was hung from the
pole about eight inches above the fire. Soon the pot was boiling, and,
adding evaporated cream, the coffee was ready.

The beds were fashioned in this wise. They selected several small
saplings about an inch and a half in diameter, and cutting them off
just above a convenient crotch at the top, pointed the lower end,
leaving the stick about twenty inches long. These were driven about a
foot into the ground, forming thus four bed-posts. In driving the posts
it was arranged so that the crotches were toward each other. Across
were laid poles on each side. Again, across these longitudinal rails
were laid a row of birch branches about three-quarters of an inch in
diameter. While this foundation for a bed was being prepared the women
would industriously gather a sufficient supply of balsam twigs to cover
these improvised beds to a depth of eight inches. Over these last were
spread the blankets, and they had beds fit for a king.

The cooking experience of this party was also successful. They mixed
dough and put it in a greased cake tin. After raking away the coals
they put the tin in the hole where the fire had been. The other cake
tin was then placed on top, and the ashes and coals were heaped on over
it. In fifteen minutes the hot bread was cooked to a turn. Potatoes in
soaked newspapers were put under the ashes and came out in about half
an hour cooked to perfection.

Thus these New Yorkers went motor camping for two weeks up and down the
Hudson and Connecticut valleys at very small expense and with
health-giving enjoyment.




Four Ohioans Travel at $1.00 per Day Each

A party of four Ohians from Cleveland took a twelve-hundred-mile motor
camping trip through their own and one or two adjacent states. They
report that it cost them from a dollar to a dollar and a half a day to
run their car. They state that their meals for four averaged two
dollars and fifty cents a day. Lodging cost nothing. They had
delicacies, too. Their refrigerator basket kept the butter cold and
enabled them to have deliciously cool cantaloup, lettuce and tomatoes.

Personal baggage was kept down to the lowest possible amount. Two
double suit cases rode on the baggage carrier, and two large duffle
bags were placed in front of the suit cases. They also carried a tool
outfit including a spade, hatchet, pick-ax and a coil of strong rope;
also the usual repair kit for car and tires. The outfit just described
weighed two hundred and fifty pounds. This list was found to meet every
requirement and was easily packed in the car.

In addition to the articles already named the following items were also
carried:


    One canvas tent 8¾ feet square.
    One A tent 8 by 10 feet.
    Four folding stools and cots.
    Blankets, ponchos and pneumatic pillows.
    Two waterproof duffle bags.
    Canvas water bottle.
    Folding water bucket and basin.
    Two hatchets and clothes line.
    Aluminum cooking set.
    Alcohol stove and fuel.
    Two vacuum bottles and a refrigerator basket.
    Two electric flash lights.
    Camera and tripod.
    Fishing tackle.
    Canned provisions, coffee, sugar, etc.
    Tarpaulins and assorted straps.


From the experiences given the reader may see how widely equipment and
expenses may vary according to the choice or economic ability of the
motor camper. The equipment in addition to the car may range from
almost nothing to what is quite elaborate. But whether simple or
elaborate, motor camping is seen to be an economical way of taking
one’s vacation.








CHAPTER III

THE WEEK-END CAMPER

    Week-end Wild Men—Numerous Camping Sites Near the Large Cities—Camp
    Sites Near New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Cincinnati, Chicago,
    Boston, Denver, San Francisco, Los Angeles—The State
    Forester—Clothing—Bed—Bedding—Expense—Food—Fire and
    Fuel—Tools—Tents—Hammocks—Medical Kit—Children—Church.


Probably every dweller in civilization, whether of Main Street, Zenith
City, or the metropolis, dreams of breaking loose some time and getting
back to “fundamentals.” He wants to get off somewhere at the end of
things, near the “jumping-off place.” Or he pictures himself on some
long canoeing trip in Labrador. Perhaps his fancy turns to summer time
in Alaska, or to the mystic beauties of central Asia. At any rate he
wants a change. He wants primarily wild country and fresh air. He wants
to shake off confining routine.

But this dweller is an ordinary sort of chap leading an ordinary life.
He has perhaps but two weeks’ vacation during the year, which he finds
have, somehow or other, been scheduled for visits to his own folks and
to his wife’s relatives. So he puts away his dream of the wilderness
and lives with a sense of being thwarted.

To-day, however, thousands are finding that they can be week-end wild
men. All they need is to step into a motor car, make certain inquiries,
and they will soon be finding their way off the beaten path into the
longed-for wilderness. Within the week-end motoring distance, within a
distance of seventy-five miles, and usually much less, of the biggest
cities of the country may be found wide deserted areas where man can
commune with the stillness and the stars.




For New Yorkers

Take New York City, for example. Within sight of the upper part of
Manhattan Island and accessible by ferries is the Palisades Interstate
Park owned jointly by the states of New York and New Jersey. Of the
total area of more than thirty-six thousand acres New Jersey owns some
thousand acres of the section running for twelve miles along the
Palisades ridge. In this nearer section the motorist may find secluded
camping sites that seem almost out of the world of mankind, while in
the Bear Mountain portion of the park there are great stretches that
are a veritable wilderness.

Going further afield the week-ender from New York City can find camping
sites in the Catskills at such places as Chichester, westward of
Kingston. Up through the Westchester hills, too, are many beautiful and
secluded spots where the New Yorker may be “far from the madding crowd”
within a brief hour or two from the traffic of Fifth Avenue. If he is
willing to spend several hours going forth he can visit for his
week-end the State Forests of North New Jersey. In these reserves are
the ridge and western slope of a stretch of the Kittatinny Mountain
range which slopes down on the west to the Delaware River. At
Branchville as he approaches the State Forest he can call up the State
Forester, who will accord the camper the courtesies of his department
and assist the motorist in locating his camp site. Here camp sites,
spring water, trout fishing, and small game hunting in season are
offered without cost to the public. Three lakes where fishing, boating,
and hunting may be had are near by. Wild deer, which may be hunted in
season, exist in considerable numbers in the Kittatinny Mountains. The
camp sites here available are of several kinds; some of them near good
roads, some in clearings or old fields, and some deep in the woods. New
Jersey residents’ applications naturally receive first attention, but
there are thousands of acres, and visitors from other states are
welcomed.




For Bostonians

Every large city in this country has remote spots within easy motoring
distance where the week-end camper may be as far away from the crowd as
desired. The Bostonian will find camping accommodations at Wellesley,
or he can purchase a permanent site for his exclusive use not many
miles from the city. The State Highway Department is planning a number
of camp sites along Massachusetts roads.




For Philadelphians

The resident of Philadelphia can cross the Delaware and find solace in
the woods of South Jersey. The “Penn State Forest” of the South New
Jersey group is five miles east of Chatsworth on the Central Railroad
of New Jersey, and consists of 2,700 acres of pine and cedar forest in
one of the wildest sections of that state. In his own state the
Philadelphian will find not far away the ranges of the Blue Ridge
Mountains running northward toward the Pocono and the Delaware Water
Gap, and even these last are not altogether beyond reach of the
motorist faring forth for a week-end.

At Baltimore there is right at hand the Patapsco Forest Reserve on the
outskirts of the city where camp sites are given free to any who apply
for them. Permits are required, but no fee is charged. The State of
Maryland maintains a series of camp sites along the National Pike
between Baltimore and the Pennsylvania State Line. These camps are free
and are “established for convenience, comfort and use of the people of
Maryland and tourists who come into the state.” The nearest of these
camp sites to Baltimore is Conococheague, seventy-nine miles west of
the city.




Near Cleveland

Not far from Cleveland is the camping-ground of Marblehead, located on
a peninsula combining the advantages of water and woodland. There is
also another wooded camp site near by at Amherst, Ohio.




Near Detroit

There are thousands of square miles of woodland available at moderate
prices on the east coast of Michigan, but the motoring Detroiter who
does not own his own shack in the woods can find accommodations in the
many beautiful State Parks, those near by being Island Lake and Cedar
Hill.




Near Cincinnati

The Buckeye who abides in Cincinnati may find week-end camping sites
among the hills of southern Ohio or across the river in the State Parks
of Kentucky.




For the Chicagoans

The dweller in Chicago who desires to go forth in his car for a
week-end camping trip has a wide variety of choice as to location. He
may find camp sites of natural wildness within the park system of his
own city, especially along the Desplaines Valley. He may travel north
into the woods of Wisconsin as far as the Cushing State Park, near
Waukesha, or to the south he may reach the Indiana Turkey Run State
Park, near Marshall, Parke County, of that state. This last park,
almost due south of Chicago, is a tract of 470 acres, the largest tract
in the state that has never come under the woodman’s ax, and its trees
are the largest and finest in the Middle West. In addition it may be
said that there are dozens of towns in Illinois which have set apart
outlying woodlands where the Chicago man can find fresh air and outdoor
life.




Abundant Camps in West

As one works farther west, the possibilities for a quick journey into
the wilderness become increasingly easy. The Rocky Mountain National
Park is within ready motoring distance from Denver. California abounds
in free playgrounds. There is the Los Angeles National Forest near Los
Angeles, the Santa Barbara National Forest a little farther north, and
about seventy-five miles above San Francisco begin the Trinity National
Forests.

In the beginning of his experience the week-end camper would do well to
consult local motor clubs for maps and information regarding camp
sites. He may find it wise to initiate his experience in week-end
camping by going to those sites provided by various towns. There, save
in the eastern sections of the country, he will likely be able to find
stoves, shelter, sometimes even cut wood and electricity, already
provided. These municipal motor camping sites are now numbered by the
thousand, but they are not numerous yet east of Ohio. (Tabulation of
motor camp sites by states is given in another chapter of this book.)

One of the few of these motor camp sites in the east near New York City
is the one at Rahway, N. J., about twenty miles southwest of Jersey
City. This consists mostly of an open field in the City Water Works
Reservation along the banks of the Rahway River, which flows through a
wooded gorge about a hundred feet below the plateau of the camp site.
As yet almost nothing is provided in the way of camp conveniences
except camping space.

When the camper becomes less of a tenderfoot he may venture forth into
wilder areas. Then he can write to his State Forester and learn where
there are camp sites that he may occupy in the real wilderness within
reach of his week-end tether.

The State Forester is usually a man after whom other politicians might
pattern. There is not, as a rule, much money in his job. In the main he
is doing it primarily for the love of the work, and he will take pains
to help all those wishing to visit his domains. A State Forester of
California, for instance, has made a special study of the motor campers
requirements and makes these suggestions for his equipment.


    Equipment Recommended by State Forester

    “Clothing.—An old business suit of corduroy, khaki, or overall
    material. Include a sweater or mackinaw, and figure on
    medium-weight underwear. Underwear should be of wool, or two pairs
    of medium-weight cotton. Shoes should be easy on the feet and
    stout, with soles heavy enough for hobnails. A flannel shirt half
    size larger than usual should be worn. Leggins of canvas or leather
    are an advantage, and buckskin gloves without cuffs are best for
    general use. The hat may be of felt with a moderately wide brim.

    “Bed.—Air mattresses are the most comfortable beds for the
    mountains since they can be placed even on bare rocks. There are,
    however, a number of objections to them, one of which is their
    cost.

    “Bedding.—The most serviceable bedding is an eiderdown quilt, with
    an extra covering of denim, and two light wool blankets. The quilt
    can be pinned with blanket pins along the bottom and side to form a
    sleeping bag. Wool quilts can be substituted for eiderdown,
    although they are not quite as warm. A 7 by 7 foot 10 ounce canvas
    will make an excellent bed cover to be placed next the ground, and
    is also useful as a pack cover. In a pine forest, pine needles,
    raked up before building the fire and with the cones removed, will
    make a wonderful bed.”


In addition to their desire to help, the State Foresters realize that
besides its health values this camping movement is likely to have a
profound effect on our national economic policy. We have been
exhausting our timber supply. Every one knows about it, every one
believes that forestry is a good thing, but it has been a political
issue of such minor interest as to command little attention. As the
average man develops the camping habit, comes to know the Forest
Reserves, forestry will become a part of his life. He will meet the
officials or their deputies, learn some of the problems, and have the
same interest that he has in his home and his town. We may then see the
time when conservation will receive the same intent attention as the
income tax.




Keeping Expenses Low

The expense of a week-end spent in motor camping may be made very
slight. The equipment may be simple. Of course, the camper has a car to
start with, whether flivver or something more elaborate.

An outdoor week-end tent to pitch alongside his car may be bought as
cheap as $10.50. Or for about the same price he may get a bed to go
from end to end of the car that will supply comfortable sleeping
accommodations for two people. Special equipment of this sort is made
for Ford touring and sedan types (see Chapter IV). If the week-end
camper is ingenious he may rig up a bed of his own by disposing the
seat cushions and his suit cases so as to form a foundation on which to
lay his quilts and blankets. A bed inside the car is mighty convenient
in rainy weather, but in a small car the quarters are a little close
for complete comfort.

As for clothing, we have already had the advice of an experienced
forester. Mr. Average Citizen, however, can usually get along with an
old suit of clothes, an extra set of underwear and a second pair of
socks. After a little experience, the week-end camper will be surprised
to find how little he really requires in the way of extra equipment.




The Diet

When it comes to the matter of food, it is difficult to lay down rules,
as there is such a difference in the matter of taste and appetite. One
man will get along finely with some hard-tack or stale bread to which
he adds some canned beef and cheese. He will also take along some
seasonable fruit. Mainly for the sake of something hot he will take
along some ground coffee and a tin pail in which to cook it over an
open fire or on a Boy Scouts’ theroz stove. With several loaves of
bread, two pounds of the canned beef, a pound or two of cheese, and the
fruit and coffee he will fare finely over the week-end. Another man
must have his butter, hot meat, eggs, hot bread, etc., or he will
suffer.




The Stove

It is a convenience to have some sort of a regular camp stove of the
folding variety that will take wood fuel. An open fire may be made with
very little fuel, and is most camplike. In some places an open fire is
forbidden, and if permission to camp has to be secured from a private
owner of a site favorable action is much more likely if it is stated
that there will be no open camp fire. In rainy weather, too, the camp
fire is likely to be a problem. If it is intended to depend on the open
fire either under the shelter of a tent, if rainy, or in the open, it
will be well to take along a few pieces of dry wood that may easily be
split up for kindling.

The usual toilet articles will be taken along, and there will be some
provision for containers to hold clothing, food, etc. The week-ender
will not require anything extensive in the way of containers, but he
should have at least a suit case or two, or duffle bags. Of course,
clothing will be much less mussed if packed in a suit case. The suit
case or suit cases may be carried on the running board. Whatever is
carried outside the car must be fastened on with great care and
security, and well protected by water-proof covering against wet.

The week-ender will not need so much in the way of tools as one going
for a longer trip, but he should not fail to have his ax, shovel, and
huntsman’s knife in addition to his usual tools for the care of his
car. For eating he can make out with tin plate, tin cup, knife, fork
and spoon. Of course, he may take as elaborate a table outfit as he
pleases, but he will not get as fine a tang out of his outing as he
will if he roughs it a little. If he wishes to really rough it he may
sleep out in the open in a sleeping bag. In case of rain he can roll
under his car. Mr. Average Man, however, will not care to overdo in the
way of roughing it, yet as a rule he will get along with little,
particularly if he camps with a like-minded chum who with him mostly
wants change and fresh air for the week-end.

The week-end camper will follow his usual washing methods in summer,
but in winter, or when the temperature gets down to the frost level, he
will have to modify his washing methods a little if he does not wish to
suffer from cracked and chapped face and hands. When the mercury gets
down to frost or below, don’t wash, but rub on vaseline, and then to
remove the dirt wipe it off thoroughly with a towel. This will leave
the camper with a fairly clean appearance and with a smooth skin.




Family Camping

We have been all along considering this question of week-end motor
camping from the masculine angle. This is not necessarily the only way
to consider it. In many cases the motor campers are a man and wife, or
even a family including one or more children. Of course, when a woman
is along a little more preparation must be made; more clothing and
equipment, more complete and systematic provision in the matter of food
and cooking arrangements; more comfortable sleeping arrangements also
should be arranged. A group of four would need at least one extra
shelter tent. Such tents are very inexpensive and have the advantage,
since they have no poles, of folding up into a small space so that they
can readily be carried on the running boards.




Selecting the Site

The tents may be erected by stretching ropes from the top of the car to
near-by trees. Care should be taken to have the tent pins driven deep
and to attach the canvas close to the ground. If possible, the site
chosen should allow of drainage away from the tent in case of rain, and
should be, so far as circumstances will permit, on gravelly or porous
soil. In any event it is desirable to dig a shallow trench about the
tent to drain away the water that will run down the tent in case of
heavy rain. In selecting a site care should be taken to avoid a creek
bottom. We have seen motorists camping in a meadow by the side of a
stream below a road skirting the foot of a precipitous hill. We have
even seen such a camping site pictured as ideal. Ideal it would be in
fine dry weather, but a heavy summer shower, particularly at night,
would endanger the camp and its occupants. Such streams often rise with
great suddenness, and if nothing more the campers would be put to
extreme discomfort by having to move in haste, and in the wet, to
higher ground.




Making a Suitable Bed

A raincoat with blanket spread over it will form a convenient mattress.
Some campers, and the weight of tradition, recommend cedar boughs for a
bed, but the art of arranging and sleeping on them has to be acquired.
The only kind of boughs or browse that can be comfortably used as the
basis for a bed must be fine in quality, otherwise the corners of the
boughs will find the bones of the sleeper with infernal ingenuity and
make his rest very unsatisfying. Some campers prefer to sleep in
hammocks. In some cases where the body is of sufficient length these
may be slung from end to end in the car. Otherwise they may be slung
from the corners of the car top to near-by trees. A canvas fly may be
arranged overhead to keep off rain. It takes some experience to be able
to rest easily in a hammock, but once the habit is acquired there is no
more comfortable bed. The hammock is the bed of our sea jackies and
marines, and they thrive on that kind of a couch.

In summertime a raincoat and a pair of blankets for each person, with
hammocks, car beds, or tent, should care for the necessary sleeping
equipment so far as covering goes.




The Medical Kit

A medical kit should always be carried. This should include a Red Cross
first-aid outfit. In the absence of a physician it is well to have on
hand cascara or castor oil, sun cholera tablets in case of diarrhœa
which often develops from change of drinking water, Epsom salts to be
taken to clear out ptomaine poisoning, and mustard for external
application in case of cold. Iodex should be included to be used in the
event of sprains.

Mention has already been made of the inclusion of children on week-end
camping excursions. Yes, take them along—as many as the good Lord has
given you. It is the undying spirit of youth in you that makes you want
to pack your outfit and take to the open road. So why deprive the kids
of their rightful heritage, the right to fill their lungs with clean
country air and to stretch their strong little legs where there is
plenty of room for them to stretch?

They may get restless, but the week-ender will not be likely to travel
far enough for them to need anything more to occupy their attention
than the passing landscape until the destination is reached. Even take
the baby and swing a little hammock for it at one side or across the
car.

With children along a little more care should be taken as to what is
provided as food and drink. It will be safer to have all water boiled
and to have along a good supply of evaporated milk. Of course, where
infants are included in the camping party arrangements must be made to
supply the customary diet which they have been having.




Church

The last commandment of the Scout Law runs in part, “A Scout is
faithful in his religious duties.” Now, the week-end camper need not
neglect his religious duties, for in the East and South, as also in the
Middle States, the week-ender is not likely to camp in a place so
remote as to be more than a fifteen-minute, or thereabouts, motor ride
from a church of some denomination where he will be likely to get as
much good as he will be able to assimilate. If he is particular as to
his brand of religion he can pick his camping site accordingly. And,
furthermore, he is liable to be surprised at the excellence supplied at
the country church. He may miss the pomp and artistic quality of the
city church service with its excellent music and other features, but on
the other hand he may be led to realize that the old professor in the
theological school was right when advising his students who were
candidating for pulpits he said: “When you go to a city church wear
your best clothes, but when you go to a country church take your best
sermon.” And the country churches are by no means all deserted. There
is a country church in Orange County, N. Y., where any Sunday morning
fifty or sixty cars may be seen parked about it by the attending
worshipers—a church, too, that is by no means unique in its prosperity.

Week-end camping will tend to bring the town and the country into
closer acquaintance and sympathy to the mutual advantage of both. The
tendency more and more will be for the week-ender to take occasion on
his outing to stock up with fresh vegetables, eggs and fruit, thus
giving the farmer a more profitable market for his products and giving
the city and town dweller fresher and more wholesome food.








CHAPTER IV

CAMPING WITH A FORD

    Number of Fords, Mobility of Fords, How to Camp with Them—The
    Foldaway Bed—The McMillan Bed—The Carefree Folding Outfit—A.B.C.
    Bed for Fords Only—Universal Car Bed.


About half the passenger motor cars in this country are of the variety
known as Ford. Hence we may assume that a large proportion of the
readers of this book will want to know what can be done with a Ford in
connection with motor camping.

The little Ford can go most anywhere, but one reason for this is its
rather diminutive size. The motor camper can get around conveniently in
a Ford, but he must limit the equipment taken along with him pretty
closely.

If but two are going along, the problem will be easy of solution. Two
men or a couple ought to be able to get along with the contents of two
suit cases, one on each running board. The few tools required may be
stowed under the seat. A small tent or two hammocks and a fly may be
added to the suit case on one running board and a roll of blankets put
on the other running board, leaving space enough to enter or leave the
car.

Some campers are careful to trim the car, as it is called, by balancing
the load with about equal weights of equipment on each side of the car.
Roughly this may be easily done, but usually the passengers are stowed
without regard to balance or trim, and the camping outfit will not be
more disparate in weights than the passengers are likely to be. Unless
the difference is very great between the loading of the two sides it
will not matter much.




Different Colors for Different Goods

Considerable space may be saved by having duffle bags of the round
type, and smaller bags that will fit within the larger bags. These
small bags will pack better if of cheese shape, and there will be less
difficulty in locating the contents if they are of different colored
goods—a color for each classification of stuff; say, white for
underwear, blue for canned goods such as evaporated milk, and red for
dry groceries like coffee and flour. These duffle bags and the
contained bags may just as well be home-made with the resulting saving.
The outer bag may be made of heavy canvas, or even stout drilling.
Burlap, although a little coarse and rough, would serve if canvas or
drilling may not be had conveniently.




Need for Waterproof Protection

Whatever is to be carried outside the car must, of course, be wrapped
up in flexible oilcloth or other waterproof material, as the rain is
very successful in driving in through an ordinary box or suit case with
results disastrous to the contents.

No matter what car the motor camper may use there are at least four
things for him to consider. Perhaps most essential to determine in
advance is where and how he will sleep. Food, clothing, and car he need
not bother so much about. He has his car, whatever make it may be. His
clothes, too, can be made to do, no matter what they may be. His food
at a scratch he may pick up by the way, but as to sleeping quarters he
must take thought in advance.

If the Ford is a touring car or a sedan the camper or campers to the
number of two may arrange to sleep very comfortably in the car itself.

In a sedan the seat backs fold forward, and by setting up the two suit
cases alongside between the seats a foundation may be laid upon which
the blankets may be spread to form a bed. The suit cases may not be
quite a fit, and it may be necessary to fill in with some of the other
stuff so as to get a fairly level bed, but getting this done to one’s
satisfaction is half the good and fun of camping.

How a couple traveled for 9,000 miles in a Ford roadster, using a
home-made equipment, is described in the following chapter.

There are on the market to-day various devices for the Ford owner which
will enable him at slight expense to convert his touring car or sedan
into very comfortable sleeping quarters. The products mentioned here
are not necessarily the only good devices on the market. The aim is to
give one or two examples of various types of equipment, so that the
reader may have an idea of the range of material available.




Sedan Bed

One of these devices is the “Foldaway Bed,” for the sedan. The Foldaway
rolls into a bundle 4½ inches by 4 feet, weighs only 14 pounds, and
takes up less space than a golf bag. It is made of tough oak and double
strength canvas and will support two 250-pound people. The Foldaway has
a clever stringer suspension. The rear seat cushion is pushed up to the
front of the car, the seat beside the driver is removed by pulling two
cotter pins, and the back seat sets low on top of the driver’s seat
with cushions removed. The Foldaway may be set up in four minutes. The
camper may undress in the car by rolling back half of the bed, and
there is room under the bed for clothes and equipment.




Touring Car Bed

Another bed for the Ford, for the touring car, is the McMillan Auto
Bed. This may be bought for ten dollars or less for the Ford size. The
McMillan Auto Bed is based on the idea that you should use what you
have rather than load yourself and the car with a lot of things you
haven’t and don’t need. With the McMillan Auto Bed the cushions you sit
on during the day are the cushions you sleep on at night. With this
difference: Between your body and the cushions is a roll of smooth
heavy canvas and as many blankets as you see fit to use. The cushions
give, but do not sag. Your bed conforms to every curve of your body,
and it is wide enough, long enough, and strong enough for two grown
people or three—yes, at a pinch, four—children.

The McMillan Auto Bed is set up by removing both front and rear
cushions. The adjustable steel rods, on which the cushions rest, are
next hooked over the tops of the car seats, both front and back. Then
the cushions are replaced so that they will lie evenly on the rods, and
the canvas is attached by straps to the side brackets at the back and
in front to both sides of the wind-shield.




Roadster and Coupé Beds

For the roadster and coupé there comes what is called the “Carefree
Folding Outfit for Touring, Camping, Dining, Sleeping.” This is an
attachment weighing 160 pounds which is easily attached to the rear of
a roadster or coupé in half an hour by fastening four bolts. This
outfit gives the camper a comfortable elevated bed, a storm-tight
shelter, a folding dining table, handy while preparing meals and during
meals, a writing or work table between meals, plenty of room for suit
cases and camp equipment, a special food compartment, a separate
bedding compartment, a sun or rain shelter under extensible canvas
during the day, and three minutes’ time converts the outfit into a
thoroughly practical sleeping room.

One concern, the Auto Bed Manufacturing Company, makes what they call
“The A.B.C. Sleeper” for Fords only. It provides means for making a
real spring cushion bed for two adults in a car of this type. It can be
used with the top up or down.

This same concern makes what they term the “Universal Car Bed” for
every car, and which is also a perfect fit for a Ford. It is built on a
patented principle of sagless tension, and has a bed mat of heavy
canvas, olive drab in color. It is guaranteed not to scratch or mar the
car. This bed is priced at $18.00. The A.B.C. Sleeper, for Ford cars
only, is listed at $7.50. Prices referred to in this and other chapters
are taken from catalogues, but are subject to change and are given that
the reader may have a general idea of the cost.

The American Camp Equipment Company makes a car bed which is
comparatively inexpensive ($11.45) and will fit a Ford as well as a
Packard. It may also be set up outside of the car as a double cot for
use in a tent or house. This appliance is called the Moto Bed.

A convenient and inexpensive piece of equipment for a Ford car of any
model is the Carefree Luggagett. It fits on either running board. There
is no drilling. It is fastened with a strap hook. It affords a closed
tight space for carrying loose articles. It has a smooth retainer wall
with no rivets or lugs to tear or wear holes in luggage. Since
container space is closed, no strapping or tying is necessary. It
allows the doors to open over it. It may be attached or detached in a
minute. It is substantial and weighs only 7½ pounds.








CHAPTER V

A HOME-MADE CAMPING OUTFIT

    Standing the Test of an 8,000 Mile Trip—Good Water Supply
    Everywhere—Army Cots and Canvas the Basis of Outfit—Complete
    Directions—Mosquito Netting Sides Permit Adequate Ventilation.


One of the most interesting experiences in motor camping of which we
have known is that of Mr. Frederick W. Huntington of Brooklyn, N. Y.
His trip is of particular significance, not primarily in being
adventurous, but because it illustrates what any one can accomplish
through ingenuity at very moderate expense.

Mr. and Mrs. Huntington traveled from New York City to California, on
an 8,000-mile route, in nine weeks’ time, driving every day, and
camping every night without a mishap.

They encountered wind-storms and rain-storms, but their equipment stood
all the blasts and proved waterproof all the time. In some places the
mosquitoes sang in the vicinage by night, but were never admitted to
the society of the campers. The travelers report excellent roads all of
the way to the Mississippi, and passable highways all the way across
the continent. They were never more than forty miles from a good water
supply. They found camp sites in nearly all the towns beyond the
Appalachians, but seldom used them, preferring usually to camp in some
secluded spot near the roadside. In fact, they discovered that unless
one arrives fairly early in the afternoon, many of the camping parks
will be found to be crowded already, with little room for the
late-comer.

The striking feature of this trip is the tent equipment which Mr.
Huntington designed. It is simple and effective. With a little aid from
a local machine shop, or even a blacksmith shop, it can be made by any
prospective camper. Accordingly, a description is given herewith
showing just how Mr. Huntington constructed his outfit. The drawings
which accompany this chapter will serve to clarify the text.




Two Army Cots the Basis

The basis of the Huntington tent structure is two ordinary army cots
placed side by side, six inches apart. A hole is bored in each
crosspiece at the end near the adjoining cot, both at the head and at
the foot of the bed. The next step is to take two brass rods about
three-eighths inch in diameter and twelve inches in length. Have a
machinist bend each rod into the shape of a double-pointed
matting-tack, with the horizontal part eight inches in length. Thread
the ends of the two side pieces so that they become screw bolts. Then
insert these two devices into the holes aforementioned. Secure them
with nuts fitting the threaded ends of the rods, and you have the two
cots fastened securely together (Fig. 1).




The Improvised Floor

The next feature is the canvas trough which supplies a floor on which
one stands while getting into bed or dressing. This protects the feet
from the ground, and keeps insects from coming up from the ground. To
prepare for this trough, attach five tapes or strips of canvas about
nine inches in length in a row at even intervals along the cloth of
each cot about nine inches from the inner edge. Then take a piece of
tent canvas fifty-eight inches wide by six feet six inches long. Along
the outer edges of this attach tapes which are to be tied with the
tapes attached to the cot, giving a U-shaped trough six inches in width
and with a depth determined by the height of the cots from the ground,
with the edges overlapping six inches on the cots. The ends of the
trough are stopped by pieces of cloth eight inches wide by twenty-four
inches in length, the extra length permitting a six-inch flap at the
top of each end of the trough and the extra width allowing for seams
(Fig. 2).




Framework for the Tent

The framework of the tent is built up from the cots. To construct this,
first bore four three-eighths-inch holes, one at each of the outside
ends of the crosspieces of the cots. Then screw in four screw-eyes near
those holes through which the brass rods are inserted (Fig. 3). Next
take two strips of hardwood eighteen inches in length, using about
three-quarter-inch stuff; also two more similar strips three feet nine
inches in length. Bevel the ends of these pieces of wood so that when
joined they will appear as in Fig. 4, left. The joints for these tent
supports are the most difficult part of the construction. They will
probably have to be made at a machine shop. Each consists of a
one-quarter-inch brass rod (about the size of a fat pencil) with holes
drilled in the lower end for the attachment of wires. Passing through
and welded to each rod is a one-half-inch-wide metal strip extending
out about one-half inch at either side forming wings, with a hole
drilled through each wing. Slits or deep grooves about three-fourths
inch in depth should then be cut in the beveled end of each stick or
support into which the wings are fitted. Holes should be bored through
the sticks to correspond with the holes in the wings. Bolts are then
passed through the holes and hammered at each end so as to clinch them,
thus preventing their slipping out (Fig. 4, left).

In the lower end of each of the upright sticks of this device a
quarter-inch hole is bored and a piece of dowel stick glued into the
hole. A thin wire nail driven into the upright and a binding of copper
wire help to secure the dowel stick (Fig. 6).

You now have a framework secured by brass joints and fitted at the
lower end with wooden posts which rest in the outer holes at the ends
of the cots (Figs. 7 and 9). As the illustrations indicate, the
framework described must be made in duplicate, one for each end of the
tent.

From the holes in the two corner joints of this arrangement picture
wire is stretched to the screw-eyes at the inner ends of the
crosspieces and secured by snap-buckles (Fig. 8, left).

At each end of the tent a flat piece of brass, two and a half inches
long and three-quarter inches wide is the means employed for the guy
ropes and ridge wire. There are three holes in the brass piece, one for
the guy rope, the center one for the center post in the tent’s
framework, and the third for the ridge wire (Fig. 8, center and right).

The exterior of the tent is similar to that of an ordinary tent in
shape. It can be made from any quality of duck, but should be
waterproofed when completed. Waterproofing preparations can be bought
at most sporting goods or hardware stores.




Dimensions of the Tent

The slope of the roof of the tent on each side is three feet ten inches
by six feet six inches. The outside walls below the slope are
twenty-one inches by six feet six inches. These are the dimensions for
the outside of the tent and the pattern for its construction is shown
in Fig. 10. One feature that will be noted is that the outside flaps
are fitted with holes for tapes so that they may be tied back to the
ridge, permitting the freer flow of air.




Mosquito Netting Side Curtains

The inner side flaps are similar to the outer, except that a stretch of
sixteen inches of mosquito netting is inserted running from end to end
of the tent wall (Fig. 11). Top fits end of pole 10 again.

The bottom strip of the inner side-flaps referred to in the above
paragraph is of sufficient length so that six inches of it can be
turned in to lie along the outer side of the cot. The weight of
mattress, blankets or whatever is used to sleep on will keep this
turned-in flap from coming out.

Along the ridge on the inside of the tent is secured a seven-inch-wide
strip running the length of the tent (Fig. 11). By use of the clips or
pins this serves as a clothes rack at night.




Tent Ends

The only feature that remains to be considered is the ends of the tent.
These ends, illustrated in the upper part of Figure 12, are thirty-six
inches wide at the base, fifty inches high at the inner edge, twenty
inches high at the outer edge, and forty-five inches along the
shoulder. These dimensions permit an outside overhang of four inches at
the bottom. An eight-inch inside flap is sewed on four inches from the
bottom, and is turned under the mattress, or sleeping bag, when the
tent is closed.

It is advisable to make a waterproof bag in which to carry the tent.
This done, the equipment consists of the following main items:


                  2 army cots.
                  2 brass connecting rods with nuts.
                  1 trough.
                  1 tent.
                  1 bag.
                  2 rigging devices with ropes.
                  6 stakes.


The total outfit weighs under sixty pounds.

The Huntingtons carried this equipment in a two-compartment box on the
rear of a Ford roadster. The size of this box was 42¾ by 37⅛ by 20½
inches. One compartment was devoted to this equipment and the other
carried two suit cases, blocks and tackle, and water bottles. They also
carried a running board cupboard, the dimensions of which were 45 by 28
by 8¾ inches.

This outfit, with ponchos, blankets, and extra clothing, constituted
the entire equipment.

Cooking utensils were not a serious factor in this trip, as the desire
to cover a long distance in a limited amount of time caused the
travelers to purchase most of their meals en route rather than take the
time required for cooking.

The feature of the compartment described above is that the two
compartments are horizontal, the lower being covered by the false
bottom of the upper. Equipment not needed at every stop is kept in the
lower compartment and hence is not in the way when the campers are
packing or unpacking.

The Huntington compartment is covered with waterproof canvas affixed
with curtain cleats.








CHAPTER VI

EQUIPMENT FOR THE JOURNEY

(See Chapter V on a Home-made Camping Outfit)

    Motor Bungalows—Trailers—Tents: Those Extending from the Car; Those
    Resting upon the Ground, but Attached to the Car, and Tents
    Separate from the Car—How to Estimate Canvas Duck—More Elaborate
    Tents—Combination Tent-beds—Car Beds—Cooking Equipment—Wood, Oil,
    Gasoline and Alcohol Stoves—Campfires and How to Manage
    Them—Broilers and Grids—Cooking Utensils—Tools, Lights, etc.—Water
    Bags and Filters—Canvas Bungalows—Refrigeration.


Before going into details concerning the various articles in the way of
equipment, such as tents, bedding, cooking utensils, stoves and the
like that contribute to the comfort of the auto camper, it will be well
to consider somewhat the methods by which the car itself can be best
adapted to the purpose of motor touring. Prices referred to in this
chapter, though based on catalogues, can only be approximate, since the
market, as in other products, is variable. It has not been possible to
include here all of the desirable equipment on the market. Typical
examples of the more popular kinds of products are given, so that the
reader may have an idea of the range of the field.




Motor Bungalows

In these days when the gypsy habit is being contracted by many
thousands who tour to the southlands in the winter season and across
the continent during the summertime there are many who find it most
convenient to have special caravan car bodies which in effect are land
yachts or traveling bungalows. Some of a mechanical turn or training
will take one of the standard chassis and build upon it a bungalow top
to suit the owner’s needs and tastes. In other instances a special
bungalow body will be built to order by one or other of the automobile
manufacturers; and local car dealers will give the inquirer a list of
body makers who will undertake this kind of construction.

We give an illustration of a traveling bungalow built for a man
prominently identified with the automobile industry who uses the outfit
in his business, which takes him afar over this country, and also for
gypsy tours with his family in vacation time.

This outfit is a real home. Measuring seventeen feet long and six feet
wide, the house itself contains everything necessary for comfort. The
furniture is skillfully designed so that the tables fold and other
pieces nest into each other for economy in space.

The beds are made up at night from the seats in somewhat the same
manner that a lower berth takes shape under the deft hands of George,
the porter. But these berths are longer, wider and infinitely more
restful. Then the windows are large and can be raised without the aid
of a crowbar. The ventilation is perfect.

As one-third of human life is spent in sleep and a considerable portion
in consuming food, the dining apparatus of this portable home is
designed with the same care as bestowed upon the sleeping quarters. The
table, sufficiently large, folds neatly into a minimum of space. The
refrigerator is commodious enough to meet the expectations of the
keenest appetite.

This gypsy caravan contains five lockers, including one devoted to the
commander’s dress clothes, a tent to provide extra sleeping space on
the roof of the car, a thirty-gallon tank containing water under air
pressure for the shower bath, a writing desk, electric lights
throughout, a two-burner stove, fireless cooker and phonograph.

With this equipment the family toured New England in summer. The trip
totaled 1,666 miles and the entire expense for gasoline, tips, cleaning
and storage was only $66.44, or less than four cents a mile for the
journey.




Opinions Differ on Trailers

The matter of trailers is one of considerable dispute. Some tell of
seeing abandoned trailers left broken down along the roadside. Others
declare that they never knew motor camping comfort until they came to
use a trailer. Undoubtedly a trailer reduces the speed somewhat.
However, the pull of a good trailer only amounts to about twenty-five
pounds, and so will not interfere with reasonable speed. On the main
highways with wide roadways and easy grades a trailer will be a great
convenience and source of comfort and give no trouble. On the other
hand, where the grades are steep and the roads narrow and crooked the
trailer is quite likely to prove a large-sized nuisance. One can back
around a street corner with his trailer in the rear without great
difficulty, but to back one down a stretch of crooked mountain road to
a turn-out so that a descending car may pass him would be beyond the
power of the ordinary driver.

Trailer owners may find trailer regulations of the various states
tabulated in Chapter XIV.

There are several good makes of trailers at moderate prices. One firm
is planning to offer a snug little trailer to follow a motorcycle,
which has a number of points in its favor. As designed it can be
attached to any make of motorcycle, using the rear end of the chassis
as a connecting bar. The end of the trailer is fitted with a double
swivel which fits into a clamp on the side car chassis and is secured
there by a spring locking pin.




Motorbungalow, Junior

Among trailers there is the Motorbungalow which comes in two forms.
There is the Motorbungalow, Junior. This is a real folding house, with
kitchenette, wardrobe space, screened windows, comfortable beds, large
enough when erected to afford two bedrooms or dining-room in inclement
weather. The Motorbungalow, Junior, is light and compact. It will
follow an automobile almost anywhere, carrying all spare equipment. The
erecting of the Motorbungalow, Junior, is very simple for the walls and
roof are permanently secured to the folding frame. No canvas has to be
spread or fastened on during the pitching of the camp. The bed frames,
which are fastened to the sides of the trailer body, are turned over,
the top raised and strapped into position, and the house is ready for
occupancy. It can be done in the dark. The Motorbungalow, Junior, is
listed at $225.00. The Motorbungalow is built on somewhat the same
plans as the Junior of the same name. Both leave the motor camper with
the unimpeded use of his car. Both have a forged steel axle, roller
bearing wheels, 30 by 3½ inch pneumatic tires, and reënforced steel
frame and hardwood floor.

The Motorbungalow, however, is much more elaborate in its appointments
than the Junior. In interior dimensions there is an open floor space, 4
by 7 feet. The room size is 9 by 12 feet. There is a kitchenette
containing work table, pockets for knives, forks, spoons, etc. Special
shelves provide for jars and for cooking utensils. There is a large ice
box and an emergency water tank, both finished in white enamel. A table
finished in mahogany with white top acts as an inside door to
kitchenette when touring or when not in use. Then there is a permanent
table formed by the top of the wardrobe and kitchenette which is four
feet wide and triangular in shape. There are side curtains which are of
brown “Fabrikoid,” also curtains to the rear of the same; a large
wardrobe where clothes may be hung at full length, two beds four feet
by six feet two; cotton mattresses two and a half inches thick,
screened windows; back door and step—door locked by key from inside or
out.




Auto-Kamp Trailer

Another trailer but somewhat simpler than that just described is the
“Auto-Kamp” Trailer. The Auto-Kamp can be set up in a few minutes and
provides a tent 7 by 12 feet upon a frame that extends out from the
trailer when it is opened up. There are two windows with storm-proof
covers opened or closed from the inside. The beds simply fold over on
strong hinges, tent frame sets up in sockets, bed legs are fitted with
adjustable ends to take care of uneven ground so that beds will be
level. The beds are high and dry, each large enough for two adults—size
48 by 76 inches, sagless bed springs and felt mattresses. Four feather
pillows are furnished. There is a curtain for dividing the tent into
two sections. A comfortable bed can be made up on the floor of the
trailer for children and cots may be placed under the beds for extra
members of the party. The body of the trailer is made of selected woods
securely ironed and braced. The end gate is made to form a convenient
step when dropped. The floor is of matched lumber, put together with
white lead so as to exclude all dust on the road. The axles are 1¼-inch
solid drop-forged steel, fitted with automobile type ball-bearing hubs.
Standard 56-inch tread. Regular equipment is 30 by 3 pneumatic tires on
artillery wheels. There is also standard equipment of electric light
outfit complete with wire and plug for attaching in any socket on car,
folding table, folding shelf, two burner gasoline stove and electric
tail light outfit, with dry battery.




Chenango Camp Trailer

Still another notable trailer, which is known as the “Chenango Camp
Trailer,” provides outdoor comfort with privacy. This is listed at
$375.00. In a very short time this trailer can be converted into a 10
by 14 foot bungalow with two comfortable bedrooms, a kitchen equipped
with a two-burner vapor stove and oven, encased in a fireproof metallic
cabinet with ventilator, refrigerator of fifty pounds ice capacity,
kitchen cabinet capable of carrying a week’s provisions for a party of
four, four large dust-proof clothes lockers, running water, electric
lights, dining-room seating six, which is a reading and recreation room
at night and all that one could desire in a 10 by 14 foot camp. The two
bedrooms, which are ventilated by screened glass windows adjustable to
any angle, contain each a double spring, sagless bed with down
mattresses and are separated by a four-foot aisle. The bungalow has
9⅓-foot head room. Everything can be reached at a moment’s notice and
the entire outfit made ready for the road without any tiresome packing
in a few seconds. The trailer body is of hard wood tongued and grooved
and covered by 24-gauge sheet metal. The roof is made of collapsible
framework of quarter-inch steel tubing which by a simple operation
drops down into retaining sockets, allowing the sides of the bungalow
to fold up and the roof to collapse over all without disturbing the
contents of the bungalow. The trailer is supported on 30 by 3½
pneumatic tires and springs with roller bearings and demountable rims.
The weight is 850 pounds with equal carrying capacity. The axle is of
nickel steel with Timken roller bearings.




Tent Equipment

Many persons, however, do not find it feasible or desirable to have
either a convertible body or to own a land yacht for motor touring.
Others do not care to sleep in the car body, but prefer rather to pitch
a tent either in connection with the car, alongside, or near by. Such
will require something in the way of tenting equipment. In many aspects
a tent entirely separate from the car has its advantages. The car is
then simply parked near by and is available for side trips, journeys to
market, near-by sights, etc.

As for tents, the variety available is well-nigh infinite, and at
almost any price from several dollars up. The humble pup-tent, or the
army A tent (so named from its shape) will serve very well for those
who don’t mind roughing it.




Tents Attached to the Car

Of tents attached to the car there are those that do not touch the
ground and others that have a ground attachment. Still others are
entirely separate from the car and form independent units. Some tents
use poles and others are supported entirely by ropes. Where tent poles
are used they are as a rule in sections for convenience in packing.




Auto Bed Camp

Of sleeping tents that are attached to the roof of the car and extend
from its side without reaching the ground, save by the guy ropes and
the supporting frame, the Auto Bed Camp is a good example. These tents
come in units for two people, and are sufficiently rugged to
accommodate two large adults. The supporting frame is so constructed as
to increase the tension of the bed canvas in proportion to the weight
superimposed, thus preventing any sagging of the bed. The bed is
protected on all sides and screened windows admit sufficient air. Such
a tent bed is practically damp proof, as a tent with a floor cloth
resting on the ground cannot be.




Tents Attaching to Car

There are many styles of tents that attach to the car, some of them
extremely ingenious in construction. Many of these tents use no poles,
but are supported by ropes that fasten to the top of the car. Some of
these tents are very simple and are little more than canopies, while
others are quite elaborate with sod cloths for the floor, side walls,
flies, and folding cots.

An inexpensive tent thus attaching to the side of the car by ropes that
go over the top, a tent having walls but using no poles, and having no
floor, may be bought as low as $7.50 for the 7 by 7 foot size, $6.50
for size 5 by 7 feet. This tent can be set up either with or without
the auto. One has simply to throw the front flap over the car and
fasten to the wheels or stakes on the opposite side with guy ropes
which are furnished. To use without the car, with front flap closed,
two 6½-foot poles are required. This particular tent is styled a Double
Service Moto-tent.




How to Judge Weight of Canvas

It may be remarked in passing that in pricing tents on specifications
supplied by the manufacturers it will be well to keep in mind this
information. The United States Government Standard yard of duck is 29
by 36 inches. A piece of canvas this size that weighs eight ounces is
the “U. S. Standard” eight-ounce duck. If it weighs ten ounces it is U.
S. Standard ten-ounce duck. Many manufacturers, jobbers and dealers use
36 by 36 inches as their standard yard. On this basis six-ounce “U. S.
Standard” duck is called eight ounce, and eight-ounce “U. S. Standard”
is sold for ten ounce. This means that they are using a lighter weight
than the U. S. Standard, though using the same terminology as to weight
in ounces. The only basis for comparative purchasing is to determine
whether the statement of weight is based on a 29 by 36 or a 36 by 36
yard.




Scout Featherweight Tent

In small, inexpensive tents that stand apart from the car, tents
without floors, a quite satisfactory article is the Scout Featherweight
Shelter Tent.

The “Scout Featherweight” has a door at each end, and each door is
equipped with an overlapping lapel and double row of tie strings. Draw
the lapels together, tie them securely and the whole world is shut out
completely.

Two folding poles, six stakes and a pack-bag are supplied with each
tent. It’s no trick at all for a man or a boy to put the tent up in two
minutes. No ridge poles, no guy lines.

This tent is made of water-proofed aëroplane cloth—khaki color. The
cost of the “Scout Featherweight” in the smallest size is only $5.00,
with $1.50 extra if a sod cloth is desired. The smallest size is 7 by 5
feet, 3 feet high, with two poles and six stakes.

There is a larger Scout tent than the Featherweight which is made of
the same lightweight aëroplane khaki cloth. It is fitted with automatic
loop fasteners for the ridge pole or for a rope stretched between two
trees. It is supplied with necessary guy lines. Doors at front and rear
have double lapels and automatic button fasteners. Four ventilators,
one in each gable end and one in each side wall diagonally opposite
supply fresh air. The size is 6 feet wide, 6 feet high and 6 feet long,
with a 3-foot side wall and 9-inch sod cloth. It rolls into a bundle 6
by 18 inches and weighs only eight pounds. This tent may be bought for
$12.00, canvas packing bag fifty cents extra.




Overland Trail Camp Tent

A more elaborate type of tent, but still one comparatively inexpensive
in cost, is called “The Overland Trail Camp.” The occupants are
completely shut in. This tent also has a bed for two people raised
fifteen inches from the floor. The ground space covered is 8 feet 6
inches by 5 feet. The peak in front is 6 feet, and the back wall 30
inches. The space in front of the bed is 5 feet by 2 feet 6 inches.
There are three pockets on the side wall, with a netting door sewed to
the front wall. The smallest model is the one described, and it is
suitable for two people traveling very light, on long trips, making
overnight stops. The weight of tent and fixtures, including stakes and
pins, is only seventeen pounds. This tent is priced at $38.50.




Khaki Watershed Tourist Tent

One of the most recent tent outfits upon the market is a tourist tent
called the Khaki Watershed. This is priced at $22.50. As the name would
suggest, it is designed to afford full protection from rain and
moisture and to be mildew-proof. Rolled up with its jointed poles and
packed in its waterproof bag its weight is only eighteen pounds. This
tent supplies sufficient space for three cots and can be erected either
separately or attached to the car. When erected separately the front
flap may be used as an awning in front of the tent. The quickest and
usual way is to throw the flap over the car and the tent will be ready
for occupancy in a jiffy.

Those who wish something more expensive have a wide variety of tents to
choose from. Some of the more elaborate, and yet light in weight, are
made of silk balloon cloth. These are somewhat costly, but for those
who don’t mind a little expense they are extremely satisfactory. Lack
of space will not allow a description of these here, but any one by
writing to the leading dealers in sportsman’s supplies will be supplied
with catalogues which will show these more elaborate and costly
designs.




An Elaborate Tent

One of these larger tents that illustrate the more elaborate provision
that is made for the motor camper who desires this sort of thing is
called the Tentobed which may be set up without any external support. A
light collapsible frame made from cold drawn steel when erected
supports the canvas. A tent which folds up 4 feet long and 8½ inches in
diameter and weighing only sixty-nine pounds has a dressing or extra
room alongside full length of bed, 6 feet 4 inches long and 4 feet
wide, and may be completely inclosed. This room may be used for an
extra bed, double or single, or for serving and cooking lunch in case
of rain. The drop curtain is 6 feet square and may be extended out as
an awning if desired. The tent has two large ventilating windows with
storm flaps, adjustable from inside with draw cords, and special
marquisette net curtain full length of tent alongside of bed, secured
by buttons in double flaps, making the bed absolutely insect-proof. The
list price of this outfit, including tent, tent supports, new model
steel tube bed, rain and dust-proof carrying case and steel tube frame
for setting up independent of car, is $80.00.




Standard Wall Tent

A type of the old-fashioned ordinary tent with which we are all
familiar is called the Cabco Wall Tent. These tents come in five sizes,
ranging from 5 by 7 feet and 5½ feet high to 12 by 14 feet and 8 feet
in height. The side walls are 3 feet, save in the largest size, where
they are 3½ feet. These tents come with fly and jointed ridge-poles, as
also jointed uprights. Sod cloths are likewise provided. The largest
size weighs close to a hundred pounds and will cost in the neighborhood
of fifty dollars.




Beds and Bedding

Closely related to tents as part of the equipment of the motor camper
is that of beds and bedding. Of course, if resourceful and of economic
trend the motor camper may equip himself fairly from his home supplies.
With car cushions and suit cases he may arrange the foundation for a
bed in his car upon which he will spread blankets and comfortables or
such other bedding as he may find room for in his car.

But many will prefer the purchased rather than the home-made article in
the way of beds and bedding. For such the variety offered is large.

If the camper prefers to bed out of his car rather than within its
shelter he may get the De Luxe Comfort Bed, which is a combination of
tent and bed. This in the smallest size will cost him about a hundred
dollars. This outfit consists of a double bed with a tent over and
around it. The bed is a full-size forty-eight-inch double spring bed
which easily accommodates two full-sized adults. It is equipped with a
special spring tension regulator. The cotton floss mattress rolls up
into a light compact bundle. The tent is of the highest grade
waterproofed and mildew-proofed Emeraldite, very light of weight, yet
tough. At the side of the tent are screened windows, with shutters
adjustable from the inside, that give ventilation and light and
regulate both. They also afford complete protection from bugs and
mosquitoes. The tent is 6½ feet wide by 6½ feet deep, giving ample
dressing room when the front is closed. As the tent is supported by
four telescopic steel tubes mounted on the four corners of the bed, no
poles are required. Ropes are provided for fastening the tent to the
ground, but they are never needed except in case of severe storms.




Combination Outfits

There are a number of combination bed, tent and carrying case outfits,
some of them very cleverly designed and exceedingly complete, yet
compact. One of these which comes in several sizes is a combination for
use with any auto. It is equipped with clamps for instantly attaching
to the running board. There are no holes to drill. The bed has sagless,
non-stretchable springs which enable a heavy person and a light person
to lie comfortably without rolling together. The tent of waterproof,
mildew-proof material is olive drab in color and is four feet wide by
seven feet long. The tent fits close around the edge of the bed and
reaches the ground on all sides, shutting out all draft under the bed.
The storm-proof bobbinet insect windows, which operate from the inside
of the tent, allow plenty of ventilation. The complete weight is
sixty-three pounds. The carrying case has an extra flap to hold three
or four double blankets. Three straps hold the tent securely to the
auto top, and a rod through the tent top makes correct attachment for
either roadster or touring car. The back wall is a continuation of the
tent top. No rain can enter. No ropes or stakes are needed. The
combination is priced at $47.50.




Inside Car Beds

Of beds that may be used inside the car there are many. One of these,
called the “Utility,” is designed to serve many purposes, as it may be
used in any wall tent, auto tent, sleeping porch, cabin, inside most
touring cars, and as a spare bed in the home. The legs are adjustable
for use inside touring cars, to pass over the seat backs. No ropes or
fastenings are necessary. The bed is self-supporting, and the legs rest
upon the seat standards after the cushions are removed. The frame is
all steel, with an easy, quick-folding arrangement allowing a set-up in
three minutes. When set up this bed is 45 inches wide by 73 inches
long, and when folded measures 5 inches in diameter by 45 inches long.
It may be carried folded in the tonneau of most cars. The weight is
forty-eight pounds and the listed cost $18.50.




Hammock-Type Beds

Then we have beds which are somewhat similar to hammocks suspended from
end to end of the car. One of these hammock beds is called the
“Tour-bed” and rolls into a bundle four feet four inches long and only
four inches in diameter with a weight of twelve pounds. The bed is
really an apron of heavy duck stretching from the back of the car to
the front, over the wheel. It is said to be strong enough to carry two
people weighing together over five hundred pounds. The Tour-bed is
anchored to the axles, main springs or car frame, front and rear, so
that there is no danger of pulling anything loose. The sleeper can
adjust the bed to suit his own individual fancy as to rigidity, as the
anchorage straps pull against the springs of the car itself. The front
braces or legs rest on the floor and the rear braces on the floor under
the rear cushion. The price of this appliance is $15.00.




Beds Using Cushions of the Car

There are also several kinds of auto-beds made that will fit any car
and which make use of the cushions of the car over which the auto-bed,
made of heavy canvas, is stretched. The canvas is fastened to the four
corners of the car, and upon the canvas the autoist lays down as many
blankets as he can spare to put under him. Such a bed can be adjusted
in a few minutes and to most people is quite satisfactory.




Cooking Apparatus

When we take up the question of food preparation and the cooking
utensils required we have a great variety of appliances and a wide
range of preference. Some will manage without any cooking utensils and
will get along with an open fire on the ground. Naturally in such a
case the motor camper is liable to have more or less difficulty with
his fire in rainy weather. But notwithstanding the inconvenience due to
inclement weather there are some hardy and resourceful souls that, like
the wild Indians and trappers of former days, manage to make out very
well with an open fire, whether it rains or shines.




Solidified Alcohol a Convenient Heat

The average motor camper, however, will find it much more convenient to
provide himself with some sort of equipment for cooking or at least
heating part of his food and drink. If nothing more, he will carry with
him solidified alcohol in some form or other. Those little kits for the
use of alcohol in cubes or simply in a can do not give out a great deal
of heat and are not good for much except for making tea, coffee or
cocoa, or for heating up canned goods, such as beans. Yet they are
convenient and absolutely clean. They are also entirely safe and may be
used in the car itself. For short trips, such as week-ends, one can
make out pretty well with this sort of thing, but on longer tours the
motor camper will probably want to have something in the way of a
regular stove, either for wood, oil or gasoline.

And here there is extensive variety of choice. Take first what we may
term regular stoves.




Simple Stoves

About the simplest and least expensive of these is the “Rush Stove.” It
is simply a rectangular box-like affair that folds up flat. It will
burn any kind of solid fuel, but works best with wood. It costs about
five dollars, and can be set up in ten seconds.

This stove weighs but seven pounds and folds into a package only one
and a half inches thick. It may be packed under the seat of an auto or
strapped on the back of a motorcycle. Nevertheless, this stove is
thoroughly substantial, is made of 20-gauge sheet steel with four
thicknesses at the corners, where strength is needed.

Another very satisfactory stove for solid fuel is the “Livingood.” This
is somewhat more extensive and complete than the one just mentioned and
costs about twice as much money. The “Livingood” folds flat to a
thickness of four inches. It comes with oven, three-quart water
container, eight-cup coffee-pot and will roast a sizable potato in
thirty minutes. When set up the stove proper is roughly two feet long,
a foot wide and a foot high. It works best with wood or charcoal. In
material the top is 22-gauge black iron, the body and oven of 26-gauge
black iron, and the hinges of copper built with the body. The stove
alone without the extras comes to $7.50.




Oil Stoves

Oil stoves are pretty effective, but they are usually not collapsible,
accordingly bulky, and likewise are hard to keep clean, particularly
such types of them as use wicks. The best are those kinds that operate
under air pressure, like plumber’s torches, and without a wick. These
high-pressure wickless stoves are very efficient. One, called the
“Juwell,” will raise two pints of cold water—sixty degrees—to boiling
in three or four minutes at the outside. This stove is claimed to be
faultless in operation, also to make no noise, deposit no soot, and be
absolutely free from danger of explosion.

However, there are exceptions to all rules, and there is at least one
oil stove for campers which can be knocked down and packed up. It is
the Optimus Traveling and Camp Stove. It can be taken apart and various
parts packed into a small fiber box, which also has places for a bottle
of spirits, cleaning pins and a funnel. The oil tank is fitted with a
hermetical brass stopper which permits the stove to be carried full of
petroleum. The capacity is one quart of oil.




Gasoline Stoves

There are many kinds of gasoline stoves, but there is some danger
attached to their use, as this fluid leaks out very readily and is, as
all know, very volatile and inflammable. Of course, the great advantage
lies in the fact that it is a material that the motorist is sure to
have at hand, and a gasoline stove when working right certainly does
the work in short order.

One of the best gasoline stoves is the Colorado Sure Meal Camp Stove.
It burns with such a hot flame that the stove can be opened up and
water boiled in five minutes. The burners can also be easily regulated
and the fire controlled to a nicety. There are two burners solidly
mounted in the grate, making this part of the stove practically one
piece. There is nothing to get out of order. The stove has an
adjustable wind-shield. The Sure Meal Stove has its burners enclosed in
a heavy steel case, with grids at the top like an ordinary gas or
gasoline stove. The top is covered except for these grids, preventing
the flames from being blown out by the wind. The extra cover folds back
to form a shelf or warming oven. The tank rests outside the stove and
holds three pints of fuel. The legs may be folded up when not in use,
thus taking up little or no room. For carrying, the tank is detached
and placed inside the stove, the shelf folding over the top of the
stove as a cover, with a sure catch to hold it in place. The stove then
resembles a small suit case in shape and measures only 18 by 11 by 3½
inches. This stove may also be had with a folding oven which when in
use is set over the stove. A feature of this oven is the metal and
asbestos plate on the shelf. This plate is open on all sides to permit
the heat to radiate evenly to all parts of the oven. The asbestos
prevents food from burning on the bottom. The oven is collapsible and
can be set up or taken down in less than a minute. The front and side
are hinged—the top comes off and the shelf out. The oven packs in a
galvanized iron box, only 1¾ inches deep, which comes with the oven.
This stove is listed at $9.00 and the oven at $5.00.




Broilers

In addition to stoves, campers use various wire broilers that are
supported by legs and that stand on the ground. These cost very little
and are a convenience where open fires are used. Similar to the
broilers but more substantial are various kinds of camp grids which can
be stood over the coals and on which pots, pans and kettles may be
placed for cooking purposes.




Cooking Utensils

As to other cooking utensils, aside from stoves or other appliances to
be used in connection with cooking fires, the camper has the same wide
choice that he has elsewhere. He may have everything going or almost
nothing. He may use a skillet for both his coffee and his frying,
making the coffee first, and keeping it hot in his pail while he fries
his bacon. Then, with tin cup, plate, knife, fork and spoon he may make
out to his satisfaction. Another motor camper, however, will be
satisfied with nothing less than a complete folding kit of the latest
and best cooking outfit offered by the market. Naturally Mr. Average
Man will come somewhere in between the extremes noted.

Cooking utensils may be taken along from home, but such will mostly be
rather bulky and will not pack together well. There are many
comparatively inexpensive outfits that nest together and so take but
little room that will meet all the needs of the average motor camper.
Almost anywhere the motor camper may buy aluminum ware that nests
together and that will meet all requirements.

In buying aluminum ware for camp use it is well to remember that
aluminum cups have a tendency to burn the lips because the metal is
such a good heat conductor. So agateware cups will prove more
satisfactory for the camper’s use. Likewise an aluminum skillet for the
same reason is liable to burn on the bottom, and a steel skillet with a
folding or removable handle will fill the bill better for the motor
camper than one of aluminum. Aside from these cautions the motor camper
may go as far as he pleases in buying aluminum ware, and he will be
pretty sure to meet with satisfaction. There are, indeed, some campers
who feel that lightness compensates for the disadvantages named above
even in the case of cups.

A standard aluminum cooking set for two persons, to nest together in a
canvas bag eight inches high and nine inches in diameter will cost
about twenty dollars and weigh about five pounds. Such a set will
consist of 1 seven-pint cooking pot, 1 ten-pint cooking pot, 1
four-pint coffee-pot, 1 frying pan, 2 plates, 2 dessert spoons, 2 cups,
2 soup bowls, 2 knives, 2 forks and 2 teaspoons. As has been seen
above, it will be well to substitute for aluminum ware agateware cups
and a steel frying pan. These sets come also for three, four and six
persons with a corresponding increase in the number of utensils.




Essential Tools

As for tools, the motor camper will include the usual number of spare
parts and repair and adjustment implements for his car. If his trip is
to be at all extensive, or even more than for the week-end, he should
not fail to include such items as a good towing line and other
equipment to extricate himself if need be from mud holes and other
difficulties. In addition the motor camper should have along with him
at least a camp ax, a shovel, and a hunting knife. A standard camp ax,
“Quarter Ax” size, may be bought for $1.25. This has a nineteen-inch
handle. If a larger one, half, three-quarter, or full size is desired,
the cost will be a little more. If the camper intends to cut browse for
his bed he had best supply himself with a machete. This will cost him
in the neighborhood of three dollars for one with a full-size blade of
about twenty-two inches.




Necessary Lights

The car will have its own lights and perhaps a spotlight that within
some range will be adjustable. Also the motor camper may be provided
with insulated wire, lamp sockets and lamps with which to light his
tent and the vicinity of his car. But in addition it will be convenient
for him to have a lantern or two. If he lives in the country he may
already be provided with lanterns that he may take along. Otherwise he
will have use for one of the many camp lanterns that are on the market
at small cost.

The temptation for the tenderfoot camper will be to load up with
equipment which will burden him and for which he will have small use.
These extras he will learn to discard. And yet there are some things
that he will find mighty useful and convenient which at first he hardly
thought of at all. Such articles as waterproof water bags, folding
basins, folding bucket and the like may be included in the above.




Water Bags

In the so-called “Egyptian Sanitary Self-cooling Water Bag” water is
kept cool by the principle of refrigeration by evaporation. A small
amount of water exuded by the bag evaporates slowly and keeps the
contents cool. Colder water can be obtained by exposing the bag to the
air on all sides, as when hung up.

Waterproof folding basins come in weight of seven ounces to fold in
one-half inch thickness. One such basin costing sixty-five cents is
made of brown waterproof duck; capacity, 1 gallon; diameter, 12 inches;
height, 3 inches.

It is bound with linen braid and has a wire rim. A canvas folding
bucket which costs ninety-five cents is made of the same material in
the same way and with a stout rope handle, with a capacity of three
gallons. The diameter of this is 9 inches; the height 12 inches, and
the weight 8 ounces.




Filters

An excellent thing to take along for safety’s sake as a protection from
contaminated water is the Army Filter Pump known the world over. This
weighs three pounds and has a capacity of a quart a minute. The filter
consists of a brass case nickel plated, containing and protecting a
cylinder made of infusorial earth. This must be put in water and, by a
pump attached at the side, water is forced through the filtering
cylinder out through a goose neck tube at the top. The filtering
cylinder should occasionally be removed and washed off with a cloth or
soft brush.




Water Supply Generally Available

Everywhere, save in the eastern states and unpopulated parts of the
west, the motor camper will find municipal camp sites in nearly all the
towns and cities or in their close vicinity. These for the most part
are supplied with public water of good quality. In most of them the
motorist will also find electricity for light, and in many places gas
for cooking. In others he will find fireplaces and fuel for his use. If
the motor camper plans to use these public facilities, so numerously
supplied, he will not have to depend upon his own resources for the
same and so may correspondingly limit his camping equipment.




A Canvas Bungalow Carried on Running Board

There is a camping outfit for motor campers that differs from all
others in being a substantial canvas bungalow which is set up by itself
like a house. It affords larger quarters than any trailer, but packs up
so compactly and is so light that it may be carried upon the running
board. This is the Rietschel Camping Outfit. The structure can be
erected in a few minutes and stands on its own feet like a house. The
cost is listed at $98.50 and the weight is only 150 pounds. It has one
full-sized bed and two benches that will accommodate six people. The
two benches can also be used for children to sleep on. In addition
there is a 36-inch table, 55 inches long. The floor space is 6 feet 8
inches by 9 feet. There is no stooping to get in and head room
everywhere. Windows on four sides give plenty of ventilation. It is
water tight and wind-proof. This entire outfit packs in a box that
forms the table and fits on the running board of any car.




Refrigeration

Nothing has been said hitherto on the matter of refrigeration. Where
the motor camper wishes to take fresh milk, or meat, or such articles
as butter or berries, along with him it will be essential to have some
means of keeping these in good condition, and about the only thing that
will meet such a situation is some kind of a refrigerator.

Some motor campers take along one of the small nursery ice-boxes that
most people have who possess babies. These little ice-boxes will not
hold much, but where small infants are members of the party they are
quite essential, especially where the infants are bottle-fed.

Others take along their fireless cookers, and put a piece of ice inside
in place of the hot iron. Fireless cookers make very good refrigerators
when so used.

Probably the most convenient arrangement for the motor camper is the
refrigerator basket.

A refrigerator basket, called the Hawkeye, is made in several designs
and sizes and ranges in price from $6.50 to $24.00. The most expensive
one is a strong, light-weight rattan basket with nickel-plated zinc
lining, a layer of asbestos and a layer of felt. There is a small
removable ice compartment. In size this basket is twenty-five by
fourteen inches and ten inches deep. It weighs nine pounds. The
cheapest style is twenty-one by ten inches in size and twelve inches in
depth. It is not only smaller but less expensively made.




A Home-made Ice Box

One motor camper had an ingenious arrangement for keeping the baby’s
milk cool. He made two wooden boxes, one six by six inches in size, and
the other six inches by nine in size. They were both eight inches deep.
These were inside measurements. The lids had an extra block of the same
thickness as the box (13 by 16 inches) which fitted down inside the
box. These boxes were provided with a galvanized-iron lining seven
inches deep and fitting snugly inside the boxes. He would ice the boxes
to pre-cool them. Then the bottles, filled with the prepared milk,
carefully stoppered and wrapped in paper to prevent breakage, were
packed in the boxes in chipped ice. These would keep the milk ice cold
in ordinary weather for two days with the initial icing. Sterilized
nipples were carried in an extra empty bottle.

To heat the baby’s milk water was drawn from the radiator of the car
into a pound-size baking-powder can, and the bottle containing the milk
was placed in this bottle until sufficiently heated, after which the
water was returned to the radiator.

Probably the most satisfactory method of carrying “grub” is to put your
dry foodstuffs, such as flour, corn meal, sugar, cereals, dried fruit,
etc., into paraffined muslin bags which measure about eight inches
across and which sit one on top of the other, in a waterproof canvas
bag with a double throat for double protection from dust and insects.
The little bags should be plainly labeled on their sides for such
articles as coffee, tea, cooking fat, and the like. Use friction-top
tins, which are made broad and flat to fit a cylindrical bag, for
greasy foods, such as ham and bacon.

Wooden salt and pepper shakers are the best, because salt will not
suffer hydration in a wooden shaker, but the grains will keep dry and
separate.




Cautionary Suggestions

It should hardly be necessary to remind the motor tourist that such
adages as “Safety First,” “It’s Better To Be Safe Than Sorry,” and a
“Stitch in Time ...” supply a wise basis of conduct for the motor
tourist.

We sometimes hear a tourist boasting the speed at which he “hits it
up,” “giving the other fellow the dust,” etc.; or telling how he made
his forty per right along, and with a trailer, too. All such talk is
supremely silly.

Watching for crossings, breaks in the road, and other wise precautions
involve going at a moderate pace. The “Speed Fiend” is a peril to
himself and a danger to every one who crosses his path.

One objection to speed is the effect on the tires. The thoughtful
tourist will seek to lessen tire heat as much as possible on long
tours. Run the wheels through water wherever convenient. Keep to the
shady side of the street wherever possible. If there is a dirt
side-road run on the dirt slowly and so cool the tires of your machine.

Keep the tires well inflated, the radiator full, and the fan belt
sufficiently taut. On hot days coast down the slopes with your engine
shut off. If the engine heats, wedge open the hood at the back so as to
get better ventilation.

In the hilly regions of the Northeast, and among the mountains of the
West, it is all-important to have both brakes in prime condition. On
some of the Western roads the much advocated use of the engine as a
break is almost positively essential. However, elsewhere most hills may
be negotiated with the brakes alone, thus avoiding strain on the
driving mechanism. Approach a descent slowly, so as to avoid heating up
the breaks by a sudden checking of speed. Alternate in the application
of the brakes and thus avoid heating. Do not lock the hand brake, but
hold it in your hand tensing and relaxing as required.

Watch your spark lever. The driver who leaves the spark lever fully
advanced, irrespective of grades, road conditions and speeds, imposes
unnecessary strain on the engine, and does not get the efficiency he
should in car performance. It pays to regulate the spark to suit the
load and speed of the engine so that ignition does not take place
either too early or too late for smooth running and a steady flow of
power.

In rainy or misty weather the wind-shield becomes obscured. There are a
number of more or less successful devices for cleaning off the
accumulated moisture. It is claimed by those who ought to know that a
sliced onion rubbed over the surface of the glass will prevent the
gathering of moisture upon it. Others are equally confident that a
moistened plug of ordinary chewing tobacco is an efficient wind-shield
cleaner if rubbed over the surface of the glass. There are soaps and
other substances that are sold for the purpose of cleaning the
wind-shield, and like the above-mentioned articles are more or less
effective. The squeegee mechanical cleaners that work back and forth
are probably the most efficient cleaners. A mechanical cleaner is the
only kind efficient with snow. At any rate, keep your wind-shield clear
and you will drive more safely.

Always stop for street cars or omnibuses, unloading or loading. In most
cities this is required by local ordinances, and in some states the
traffic laws impose the same requirement.

Motorists should spread the gospel of good roads to all men, and great
will be their reward in tire-saving.

Women drivers of vehicles should be given special consideration, and,
some say, watching.

A small amount of shellac will stop small leaks in radiators.

Any kind of grease (butter, lard, etc.) is good to soften road tar
adhering to fender, bumpers, etc., for easy removal.

To heat a tent on a cold night, fill a bucket with stones piping hot
from the camp fire. Invert and cover with bucket. Good as a stove.








CHAPTER VII

HOW TO CHOOSE A CAMP

    Securing Permission—Church Grounds and School-yard Camp
    Sites—Municipal Camp Sites—Autumn and Winter Camping—Water
    Supply—Wells and Springs Doubtful—Selecting a Camping Site—Disposal
    of Refuse—Latrines—National and State Forest Camps, General
    Regulations—State of New York Regulations—New York State Parks and
    Forest Preserves—Adirondack and Catskill State Parks.


Securing Permission

It will be obvious that the camper should not camp or even park his car
on or in front of private property without asking permission of the
owner or occupant of such property. Of course, where the motor camper
is in a wild and uninhabited region it may not be practicable to seek
permission, and in such a case he may take a chance on trespassing. But
as a rule this cannot be advised as either right or wise.

So many motor campers in the past have abused the hospitality of
farmers by carelessly and even wantonly breaking down shrubbery,
leaving rubbish, injuring trees and otherwise comporting themselves as
nuisances that in some sections the farmers are hostile to the motor
camper and so the decent, law-abiding man has to suffer for the sins of
the vandal.

Notwithstanding the abuse of hospitality on the part of some motor
campers, the good citizen and gentleman will not find it difficult to
deal with the average farmer, who will be as quick to appreciate fair
and courteous treatment as he is ready to resent the misconduct of
those who abuse his hospitality.

In some communities where there are no public facilities for motor
campers schoolhouse yards are available or church grounds and sheds.
Naturally the schoolhouse sites will be available only during vacation
time, or outside of school hours.

The motor camper who is content to follow the beaten ways and the main
highways need, as a rule, not go far to find a municipal camping park.
The tabular list of these parks, given elsewhere, will indicate in the
main the privileges and facilities offered by each of these parks. In
the great majority of cases, even where no fee may be charged, the
motor camper is required to register and secure permission to camp.

Most of the municipal motor-camping parks have facilities for cooking.
Where there are no fireplaces other provision is likely to be made. Gas
ranges with quarter meters are found provided at many camping parks.
Sometimes wood stoves are at the service of the motor camper, and free
fuel.

The question of water supply is very important. The municipal camping
parks usually provide city water which is almost sure to be safe. The
water from the wayside well with the old oaken bucket may seem safe,
and may be cool and sparkling. But farmers are entirely too careless
about the location of the house or barn well with reference to the
barnyard and the manure pile for such sources of water supply to be
used without careful examination. Furthermore, the farmhouse itself may
be a source of peril to health because the family well may receive the
drainage of a leaky or overflowing cesspool. Or there may be no toilet
within doors and the outdoor privy may stand on higher ground than the
well with dangerous results.




Boil the Water

The wayside spring is by no means a safe source of water supply, as it
often receives drainage from barnyards or from fields upon which manure
has been spread. The same may be said of the small streams which abound
in some sections of the country. The larger streams also are open to
the suspicion of impurity. What then is the camper to do in case he
wishes to camp elsewhere than in a public motor camping park? There is
only one safe thing to do when you must use water that has not been
tested and certified, and that is, boil all the water you drink. Of
course, boiled water is not very tasty. It is apt to be flat and dead
to the taste, but better drink flat and dead water than take poison
which you will surely imbibe if you drink much of the water referred to
above. One sure way to get good water is to drink only boiled drinks,
or drinks, such as tea and coffee, made with water that has been
boiled. In fall, spring and winter boiled water, when cooled, really is
not bad. Neither is it so in summer after it has been hung up to cool
in a canvas bag or filter. This last has considerable value in
purifying water, but it is not certain, as some bacterial impurities
are so small that they will pass with the water through the ordinary
filter.

Aside from the matter of contamination, water sometimes is unsuitable
for drinking because of its being mineralized. In the western section
of this country, particularly the Rocky Mountain and arid sections,
there may be so much alkali in the water as to make it useless for
drinking. Also, in some of the middle states the water from certain
wells will contain enough sulphur to make it taste unpleasant to the
stranger, and even when there is not enough sulphur to taste there may
be enough to act rather severely upon the bowels of many people. This
will often be so, even when the natives do not seem to mind the water
or to get from its use any undesirable results. The alkaline water may
be neutralized by the addition of a small amount of hydrochloric acid,
but don’t put in enough to make the water taste sour. The addition of
lime water to the water impregnated with sulphur would tend to
eliminate the difficulty. That, however, is inconvenient, and about the
only thing to do is either to find water that is free from sulphur or
else motor away from the region where the water is bad.




Where to Camp

If the desire is to camp elsewhere than in a municipal motor camping
park certain conditions must be considered in making the selection of a
camp site. Considering that the motor camper will tent and have a
regular camp fire, wood and water are prime essentials. Seek high,
well-drained land. Avoid stony or rocky ground or shallow soil. Do not
camp in a pine or hemlock grove, at least in summer, as fire is liable
to creep and spread in the fallen pine needles and hemlock leaves. If
possible camp near hemlocks, firs, spruce or other evergreens, as these
have great value for the camper. The air from evergreen trees has an
aromatic quality which is both grateful and healthful.

Should the camp be on a hillside dig a shallow trench above the tent
and on both sides to carry off the water when it rains. Camp if
possible where fallen or dead timber is near to serve as fuel, and
where there is no brush or weeds that will be hard to clear away. White
birches are very useful to the camper because the bark when peeled off
the dead trunks makes splendid kindling. For tent pins use steel pegs,
the longer the better. If steel pins are not used, cut maple or birch
pins an inch in diameter and at least eighteen inches long. Cut these
pins off across a log with two short blows of the ax, cutting at an
angle.




Disposing of Refuse

In disposing of refuse, dig a good-sized hole into which it may be
thrown. Before leaving fill up the hole completely with earth.
Meanwhile, each time refuse is thrown into this hole, throw upon it
several shovelfuls of earth so as to prevent flies, insects, and odors
from developing. Never cast refuse into ponds, lakes or streams. It is
unsightly and dangerous to health. Clean up at once after each meal. If
you have no hot water scrub your plates and kitchen utensils in a brook
or lake, using a handful of sand, moss or sod for a dish rag.

The location of the latrine is a matter of great importance both from
the standpoint of health and convenience. The motor camping parks
established by municipalities as a rule provide toilet facilities.
Where the camper does not have these facilities some provision must be
made. In many instances a small tent is carried along which provides
shelter for a chemical closet. This tent is pitched back of the car and
the living tent, if there be one, in as convenient and sheltered a
place as can be secured. Still further away, a deep trench or hole
should be dug into which the contents of the chemical closet may be
thrown from time to time. There should be a quantity of earth at hand
which may be shoveled into the hole as often as the contents of the
chemical closet are emptied into it.

If the campers have no toilet tent and no chemical closet, the best
that can be done will be to locate the latrine in as well-screened and
out-of-the-way spot as possible, digging a deep trench which may be
used as a toilet and into which, whenever the trench is used for toilet
purposes, earth may be shoveled. It would be a help in avoiding odors
and securing proper disinfection to have a can of chloride of lime,
some of which should be thrown into the trench each time before casting
in the earth.




Permission to Camp in Forests

In the vast national forests of this country “Camping is free,” to
quote from one of the bulletins of the U. S. Forest Service, “and
generally requires no permit. You may choose your own camp ground and
help yourself to dead wood.... You may fish or you may hunt with gun or
camera. On most of the forests there are no restrictions other than
those imposed by the game laws of the states in which the forests are
situated. You can find out what these are from forest officers or state
game wardens.” (In another chapter of this book the readers will find a
tabulated compilation of these game laws.)

To camp in a state forest a permit is usually required, which may be
secured as a rule from the local forester. The camper in a state forest
is subject to a number of regulations, none of which are unreasonable
or onerous. The State of New York, which has more than two million
acres in its numerous forest reservations, has perhaps the most
comprehensive set of regulations which are typical, and for this reason
they are given below:


    “General Regulations

    “The following rules and regulations are of general application to
    the state land administered by the Conservation Commission, and are
    to govern all those who make use of this land. Regulations of
    special or local application may be adopted from time to time:

    “1. No fires except for cooking, warmth or smudge purposes are
    permitted. No fire shall be lighted until all inflammable material
    is removed to prevent its spread.

    “2. Lighted matches, cigars, cigarettes or burning tobacco must not
    be deposited or left where they may cause fires.

    “3. No official sign posted, or structure maintained under permit,
    shall be defaced.

    “4. Peeling bark or injuring trees is prohibited.

    “5. Dead or down wood may be used for fuel by temporary campers.

    “6. Camps and adjacent grounds must be maintained in a clean and
    sanitary condition. Garbage and refuse must be either buried,
    removed or burned. Waste materials must not be thrown into the
    waters, or waters polluted.

    “7. Each camper on Lake George islands, St. Lawrence Reservation or
    other much frequented place, must provide a plentiful supply of
    chloride of lime and dirt, for disinfecting and covering any
    latrine used by him. All latrines must be cleaned and the contents
    burned or buried at frequent intervals, in such manner as to
    prevent offensive odors, and above all to avoid pollution of the
    water supply.

    “8. Canvas tents without platforms for use during short periods may
    be placed without a permit, but not in a trail or within 150 feet
    of any spring used for water supply.

    “9. No tents (except those under rule 8) or wooden structures shall
    be erected or maintained in the Forest Preserve, except under
    written permission from the Conservation Commission (located at
    Albany, N. Y.). Tar paper shall not be used, except for roofs of
    open camps erected under permit. The structures for which permits
    may be granted are as follows. Those erected under (a), (b) or (c)
    become the property of the state.

    “(a) Open camps for use of travelers, not to be occupied by the
    same person or persons more than three nights in succession or more
    than ten nights in any one year.

    “(b) Open camps for use of campers, hunters or fishermen, may be
    occupied for reasonable periods.

    “(c) Permanent tent platforms for summer camping purposes. Permit
    granted to use while occupied in good faith. Platform to be left
    for future use. When not in use permits may be given others to use.

    “(d) Temporary tent platforms for summer camping. The platform to
    be erected and removed simultaneously with the tent.

    “(e) Portable canvas houses for summer camping.

    “10. No one may claim any particular site from year to year or the
    exclusive use of the same.

    “11. The use of the Forest Preserve or the improvements thereon for
    private revenue or commercial purposes is prohibited.

    “12. Any unoccupied tent or structure may be removed by the
    Commission.

    “13. At St. Lawrence Reservation, where fireplaces are provided,
    fires must not be kindled elsewhere, nor shall tents on these parks
    be pitched less than two hundred feet from any public fireplace or
    boat landing.

    “14. No boat is entitled to the exclusive use of any dock built by
    the state. There must be free access for boats at all times.

    “15. Dancing in any building erected by the state is prohibited.

    “16. All campers will be held responsible for compliance with these
    rules, and any person responsible for injury of state property will
    be held liable for damages and penalties.”


In the matter of fire the New York Conservation Commission adds these
cautions:


    “The great cause of forest fires to-day is carelessness in its
    numerous forms. Many fires are due to smokers and to abandoned camp
    fires. Many people use the woods who do not appreciate that the
    forest floor is nothing but decayed vegetation and that after a few
    days of continued dry weather it becomes so dry that the dropping
    of a match, cigarette or burning tobacco is as likely to cause a
    fire as if the same burning material was dropped into a basket of
    dry waste paper. Underneath these dry leaves is in most instances a
    heavy mat of rotted leaves. After periods of drought, this
    material, called ‘duff,’ becomes very dry and inflammable, and will
    hold fire for a long time. Under no circumstances should camp fires
    be set on this kind of soil.

    “A camp fire should be set on a brook bed or shore, or on some
    camping ground where there is no ‘duff,’ and in all cases the
    inflammable material around the edge of the fire should be removed,
    so that it cannot spread. Every camper should be sure the fire is
    out before it is left.”


Special attention is paid to the New York State Parks and Reservations
because New York is our most populous state and because its system of
parks and reservations is one of the most extensive. The New York
system of parks but illustrates the great wealth of opportunity open to
the motor camper.

In addition to the Interstate Palisades Park, with its thirty thousand
acres administered by an interstate commission, the State of New York
has no less than thirty-two state parks and also eight great forest
reserve parks, most of which are administered by the Conservation
Commission through the Superintendent of State Forests, his assistants
and deputies.

The parks proper are not very extensive and are mainly for the
preservation of points of historic interest, such as the Stony Point
Battlefield (35 acres), Bennington Battlefield (171 acres), Lake George
Battlefield (35 acres), Washington Headquarters at Newburgh, and
locations of scenic beauty such as Watkins Glen (103 acres), Niagara
Falls State Reservation (112 acres). Some of these parks are not
administered by the Conservation Commission, but by special
commissions, like the last-mentioned, which is administered by five
commissioners appointed by the Governor.

The forest preserves proper of New York are mainly:

First, the Adirondack Park, which comprises 3,313,564 acres, of which
forty-nine per cent is owned by the people of New York State;
twenty-two per cent is owned by lumber and pulp companies; fifteen per
cent is in private parks; six per cent is in small private holdings;
two per cent is held by companies interested in minerals; and six per
cent is improved lands. For purposes of comparison it may be said that
the Adirondack Park is slightly larger than the State of Connecticut.

Second, the Catskill Park, which is readily accessible to the motorists
of the Metropolitan District of New York City, and which includes
576,120 acres, of which the state owns 116,364 acres. This park
includes the central portion of the Catskill Mountain region. While of
less extent than the Adirondack Park, the Catskill Park contains a
wealth of wonderful scenery. Excellent macadam and dirt highways enable
the motor camper to reach almost all parts of the Catskill Park. There
are at least twenty-six delightful camp sites, all provided with
fireplaces, that are open to the motor-camping public. A complete list
of these public camp sites is given in Chapter XIII, where will be
found a tabulated list of public camp sites throughout the United
States. There are also half a dozen other Forest Reserve Parks of
lesser extent than the two above-mentioned.




Winter Camping

People usually think of motor camping as a diversion of the summertime.
To be sure, camping is simpler and easier in warm weather, and that is
also the season when most folks can get vacations.

But summer camping is not the only seasonal camping. The fall season is
one of the pleasantest times to camp. The nights may be cold and even
frosty, but the sharp tang in the air will make the experience all the
more delightful. In fact, some who are seasoned to motor camping hold
that it is only when the leaves begin to fall that nature puts at the
disposal of the autoist a copious supply of material by which more
satisfactory sleep can be secured. These assert that with a few armfuls
of leaves a camp bed can be created that will make the house bed feel
like a row of boards in comparison. Another advantage which is adduced
by the autumn camper is the comparative exclusiveness that can be
secured. A great many of those who tour in summer, not appreciating the
enjoyment to be had during the autumn, will stay at home week-ends, or
attend the football games. This will give those who do venture forth
less crowded roads on which to drive and doubtless exclusive use of
their favorite places. Some are selecting semi-permanent sites, which
they expect to improve each week-end, and they are fairly sure that on
their return to them each time they will not be occupied by others, as
would be apt to be the case in the summer.

While most of the summer campers may not admit that they are
inconvenienced in any way by mosquitoes, bugs or insects of any sort,
those who contemplate camping in the fall are quick to agree that one
advantage of this sport in cooler weather will be the absence of many
such pests. They advise, however, that motorists should take along with
their tents a few extra blankets as a protection against the nippings
of Jack Frost.

In the winter time motor camping is mostly confined to the crowd of
motor campers who to the number of many thousands follow the sun to the
Southland. In some places that are central, and, so to speak,
crossroads of this travel, as at Tampa, for example, the “tin can
tourists,” as those driving a popular make of car are sometimes called,
and this, with their own hearty acceptance of the term, have assembled
in convention to the number of thousands. One winter these “tin can
tourists” assembled in the city just mentioned to the number of several
thousand and formed an organization entitled “The Tin Can Tourists of
the World.” This organization was rather informal and seems to have
gone out of active existence.

As time goes on the number of motor campers trekking South each winter
is bound to increase, for those who can spare the time to get away from
home will sally forth and head their cars loaded with camping equipment
into the South so as to escape the rigors of the season in the North. A
few days’ cruising will take the motor camper away from winter into
summer and at a cost about equivalent to that of staying at home,
particularly when coal bills are taken into consideration.

But there is another class of winter campers. We refer to those whose
blood is warm and who can rough it a little even in the face of snow
and ice. These hardy souls enjoy camping out during the winter season
with a zest that summer cannot afford.

The winter week-ender gets a spice and a thrill from life in the open
under the frosty skies of winter that the summertime cannot supply.

When camping during the wintertime seek a sheltered place protected
from the wind. In mid-winter the swamps are found the best of places
for camping. The mud and water are frozen hard. If possible get under
the lee of a dense growth of underbrush, hackmatack or other conifers
to keep the wind from blowing the camp fire smoke into your eyes.

The winter camper should not fail to dress as warmly as possible. The
best way is not to wear overcoats and thick, heavy underclothes. Much
better, put on two, three or even four suits of light underwear and
they will keep you warmer than heavy ones. As many as five light
jerseys may be worn without making the body bulky and without
interfering with your activities in walking, climbing or swinging the
ax. The advantage of this arrangement is that you may peel them off
like the skins of an onion as you grow warm; and put them on again as
you grow cold. Don’t go burdened with too much truck. Take two good
blankets, your poncho and your shoes, well oiled, or wear rubber-footed
boots, such as may be secured from Boy Scouts Headquarters in New York.
Wear two or three pairs of good woolen stockings. If you can secure a
pair of buckskin mittens, they will keep your hands warm when pulled
over woolen gloves. Take along some stubs of candles, not to burn at
night, but with which to light your fires. It does not require much
skill to light a candle, even on a windy day, but it sometimes requires
a great deal of patience to light a fire on the same sort of a day.

If the winter camper likes he may provide himself with an Indian tent—a
circular tent with a hole at the top. With such a tent the fire for
cooking may be made on the ground within the tent. The smoke will draw
pretty well out of the hole at the top of the tent. The miner’s tent,
which is conical in shape, with the pole in the middle, can with little
difficulty be used in the same way as the Indian tent. If you are going
to have any fire in the tent, other than in an oil or gasoline stove,
it will be wise to fireproof the tent. To fireproof a tent all that is
required is to get a few cents’ worth of alum at any drug store.
Dissolve the alum in water and soak the tent fabric in the solution
until it is thoroughly wetted, after which dry it out.

Whether you sleep in your car or sleep out in a tent, you will find in
cold weather that a good sleeping bag is a great source of comfort.
They come in many varieties and are fully described elsewhere in the
book. Here suffice it to say that a mighty comfortable and inexpensive
home-made sleeping bag may be constructed by taking flexible, enameled
oilcloth, a high-grade horse blanket or a pure wool house blanket.
Continue the bag back of the head and neck so as to form a hood over
the head. This bag can be improvised with large safety pins to hold it
together. Have the flexible oilcloth in two pieces. Pin the pieces
together, roll in the blanket and slide in. Change your stockings if
you would avoid cold feet.








CHAPTER VIII

FIRE AND FOOD FOR THE CAMPER

    Raw Foods—Hotels—Various Fuels Compared—Fireplaces Provided at Most
    Camp Sites—Wet Weather Fire-making—Primitive Cooking
    Methods—Prepared Foods—Corrective Foods—Camp-fire Cooking—The
    Dingle Stick—Forestry Regulations Concerning Camp Fires—Coffee and
    Flapjack Making—Wayside Markets—Men Cooks—How to Cook a Quick
    Meal—Improvised Fireplaces—A Varied Dietary—An Ideal Meal—A
    Balanced Menu—Recipes for Camp Cooking—A List—Biscuits, Flapjacks,
    Corn Bread, Corn Meal Mush, Fish, Rabbits, Squirrel, Game Birds,
    How to Boil Potatoes, Baking in Clay, etc.


The motor camper will always require fire because food and drink cannot
be properly or palatably prepared without the assistance of fire. It
may be thought that this rule like others admits of exceptions, and
perhaps this is so. There are some people who do not seem to believe in
fire, at least in connection with the preparation of food. Their
religion seems about the opposite of that professed by the “Fire
Worshipers.” As the Brahmins of India will not eat anything that has
ever been alive, so these people will not eat anything that has been
cooked. We might term those we have in mind the “Raw Food Worshipers.”
They are not very numerous, still there are enough of them to make it
worth the while for grocers to carry the products they demand in the
way of raw wheat crackers, raw oat biscuit and the like. We have met
these people on the road, and it must be confessed that they appear to
be a well-fed, well-fleshed folk, whether made so because of a diet of
raw food or not is somewhat uncertain as sequence is not always
consequence. These people, naturally, will not need instruction
concerning camp fires.

There are still others met with along the road who are not interested
in the subject of fire and the preparation of food. We refer to those
motor tourists who tour but do not camp—those who always travel on
until a hotel is found where they may eat and lodge. This is an easy
and from some standpoints an attractive way of traveling, but very much
more expensive than motor camping.

In some circumstances it may be the wise way of procedure. We have
known of many bridal couples that have spent their honeymoons motor
touring. We would not advise a newly married couple to try motor
camping. While motor camping may offer more adventure and real
enjoyment than motor touring with its eating and sleeping at hotels en
route, it is more perilous in its effects upon the disposition. The
infinite variety of experience that motor camping offers is likely to
bring some things that will tend to cloud the honeymoon, and the young
couple had best have a year or two of experience in trying out the
problem of living together before undertaking camping. It may here be
remarked that where a camping party includes more than the family it
would be well to be sure in advance that all composing the party are
congenial and ready to work together in harmony.

Coming to the question of fire, it may be said that the easiest thing
to do is to take along a stove of some sort.

The gasoline stove has one advantage, the advantage that lies in the
fact that its fuel is the same as that used in the engine of the car.
There are disadvantages, too. Gasoline is somewhat dangerous, and being
very thin leaks very readily. Gasoline will leak through a seam that
will be sufficiently tight to hold oil. The jolting that is inevitable
in connection with motoring, particularly with some of the more popular
cars, has a surprising efficiency in opening up the seams of an
ordinary gasoline stove. There have been many instances where small
leaks have led to the explosion of these stoves. These explosions often
have resulted in severe burns, and sometimes in death. Village
tinsmiths along the motor highways testify that they frequently have
gasoline stoves brought to them by motorists to have leaks stopped.

The various kinds of gasoline stoves specially designed for the use of
the motor camper are described in Chapter VI.

Oil stoves have their advantages. They are safe, convenient and
reliable. The fuel is readily obtainable almost anywhere, and is
economical. Oil stoves, however, have the disadvantage of requiring
more attention in the line of cleaning than gasoline stoves because the
oil is not as volatile as the gasoline, and so will remain on the parts
of the stove and gather dust. This combination is sure to make the
stove smelly and a sort of a nuisance in camp. Scrupulous attention in
keeping the stove always clean will obviate almost completely the
tendency to smelliness. Stoves using a wick are much greater offenders
in the way of smelling than the stoves that operate without a wick. The
motor camper will find the wickless stove, especially the pressure oil
stove, by far the most satisfactory oil stove to use.

Wood stoves, and stoves that will burn any solid fuel, are offered in
wide variety by the various dealers in sporting goods. Most of these
are very convenient, and the collapsible kind take up very little room.
These stoves operate very well with twisted newspapers. If the motor
camper instead of throwing away, burning up, or almost giving away his
old newspapers to the rag man will bundle up fifty pounds or more of
them in a flat package he will have a week’s supply of first-class fuel
for his camp stove. Pick up a paper, fold it across once or twice,
twist it up tight and hard, thrust it in the stove, light it, and the
result will be a good hot fire.

The most useful types of these wood stoves are also discussed and
described in Chapter VI, which deals in part with camp equipment. In
the same chapter appliances using solidified alcohol are described
likewise. These little devices are convenient and very useful for the
purpose of heating milk or water for tea or coffee. They are also
invaluable where a baby is with the campers. The Theroz and Sterno
outfits use this solidified alcohol. The former offers the fuel in the
form of cans filled with small cubes of the article, the latter in
small cans filled with the fuel in undivided bulk. The little kits
which use this kind of fuel are inexpensive, and are mentioned in
Chapter VI.

Most motor-camping parks provide either fireplaces or stoves of some
sort. In many of the state and national forests the sites set aside for
motor campers are provided with fireplaces. Open fires are not usually
permitted at these camping sites where fireplaces or other facilities
for fire are already provided. But where no provision has been made to
help the camper with his fire, there is no objection to his providing
himself with an open fire. Those in charge of state and national
forests strongly advise the motor camper to supply himself with a
stove. The foresters say: “Camp stoves should be taken wherever they
can be transported. They are safer than open fires, more convenient,
require less fuel, and do not blacken the cooking utensils.... In the
absence of a stove an open fire must be built. A safe and serviceable
fireplace can be made of rocks placed in a small circle so as to
support the utensils. Where rocks are not obtainable poles may be
used.”

If the camper stops with his car in an ordinary bit of woods he is
almost sure to find plenty of dead wood for his fire. When gathering
these dead sticks do not take those lying flat on the ground as they
will be damp and so will burn poorly.




Preparing the Ground

When preparing the ground for an open fire without a fireplace, see
that the ground is cleaned bare for several feet around the spot where
the fire is to be built. If the surface soil of the ground is humus or
in any way resembling peat, it will be best to dig down to the sand
clay or rock underneath. At least go down to clear soil and do not
build a fire on ground containing vegetable matter. Fire will creep in
some of the lighter forms of loam after a prolonged drought, and the
camper must make sure that his fire is built upon ground that will not
burn.




Kindling Fire in Wet Weather

Usually there will be no difficulty in kindling the fire unless the
weather be wet. In this latter event, particularly in a rainstorm, it
may be very difficult to start a fire in the open. If the camper has
brought along some short pieces of dry wood which he can whittle into
coarse shavings, or if he has along a store of dry pieces of birch
bark, he may shelter the spot where he means to start a fire under the
skirt of his raincoat, get together a few of the driest pieces of wood
that he has, and then piling together under the shelter mentioned some
of the shavings, light them and as they start to burn gradually add
small pieces of the driest wood, sheltering it until it gets well
started. Starting a fire under the circumstances just described will
not be easy, and several attempts may fail before success is attained.
Making a fire in the wet is an art that must be learned through trial
and experience like any other art, and is not achieved easily.

When the weather is fair and the ground dry a fire in the open is
easily kindled. If the weather be dry and windy, great care must be
taken lest sparks or embers from the fire blow away and start up a fire
at a distance. It is surprising how far sparks or small embers will
carry on the wind and start fires. The camper cannot be too careful
with his fire. When he breaks camp and leaves he should not only see
that his fire is out, but he ought to get a pail or two of water and
drown out the last possible remaining spark. Unfortunately some campers
are very careless with the open fires that they kindle. Because they
leave fires that seem to be out when they are not, these fires often
burn up again after the camper has gone on his way and spread
disastrously. For this reason farmers and foresters look with marked
disfavor on all open camp fires.




How to Summon the Flames

The wise motor camper will keep his matches in waterproof boxes, and
will also use wax matches, or at least those whose stems have been well
paraffined. In the absence of matches a cigar lighter can be used to
start a fire. A somewhat more difficult method of kindling a fire is to
use a steel and flint lighting set. Still more difficult to accomplish
is to start a fire the way the Boy Scouts do with two pieces of wood.
To do this successfully it will be necessary to get one of those
fire-making outfits sold at National Boy Scouts Headquarters. There are
many Boy Scouts that can quickly, i.e., within a minute, make a fire
with one of these outfits, but the scout is rare indeed who can make
his drill from a cottonwood root, get his base of harder wood, gather
his punk, string his drill bow, and start a fire with nothing but these
implements. If the motor camper wants some real fun out of the process
of building his fire let him buy one of the Boy Scout outfits for
making fire from wood and try, try, try again until he becomes expert
at such fire-making. He will feel as proud as Prometheus bringing fire
from heaven.




Cooking Over an Open Fire

There are two ways of cooking over an open fire. The pot may be slung
over the fire from a hook on a pole, or the pan may be set over the
fire, resting upon a support underneath. In the latter way the fire may
be confined between two green logs and the pan placed across the logs
close to the fire. Or a folding wire broiler may be set across over the
fire and the stew pan, camp kettle, or coffee-pot put on the broiler.




A Small Fire Adequate

The beginner usually makes too big a fire. A very small fire, carefully
fed as required, will cook better than a large fire which is apt to
make a lot of smoke and blacken and burn everything put over it.




A Simple Outdoor Meal

The ingenious and resourceful motor camper can cook a great variety of
very appetizing food with almost no utensils to help him, using simply
an open camp fire. Any one who has been a boy in the country knows how
to roast potatoes in hot ashes. If not careful the potatoes will be
burned, but probably not so badly as to entirely spoil them for food.
But a burnt potato will not taste bad by a camp fire. Why, after the
camper has been out for a week he will almost be able to eat, like, and
digest gravel.

If the camper has taken along a few packages of prepared self-raising
flour, let him cut a green club about four feet long. Then peel off the
bark at one end for about the distance of a foot. Next hold or prop the
bare end of this club slant-wise over the fire until it is roasting
hot. Take some of the prepared flour and mix it with water into a very
stiff dough. Mold this dough into a long strip, and when the club is
almost burning hot wrap the strip of dough around it. Replace the club
over the fire, turning it now and then to prevent burning, and to get
the dough cooked evenly. In fifteen minutes or so—depending upon the
heat of the fire—you will have as fine a piece of hot biscuit as any
one could wish.

For successful camp cooking one should know how to make fresh
breadstuffs, palatable soups, good, nourishing stews, and a few tasty
desserts. The camper should know also how to make such beverages as
tea, coffee and cocoa; how to broil wild meats and fish of all kinds;
how to make flapjacks and fritters without burning them or getting them
greasy. Furthermore, the camp cook should know how to serve these
things without letting them get cold and indigestible.




A Delightful Dessert

Speaking of desserts, here is one that is both palatable and
corrective. The last word refers to the need of the camper for food
that will be slightly laxative to counteract the effects of the
concentrated foods that he is likely to use. Take dried apples,
apricots, peaches and prunes—all in a dried condition—soak in water
overnight. Mix all together, adding water and sugar. Stew slowly for
twenty minutes and you will have a tutti-frutti stew that will give a
dessert which the camper will eat with rapturous relish.




Cooking Over the Fire

The most common way of cooking over a camp fire is to cut two forked
stakes or small posts and drive them into the ground far enough away
from the fire so as to be in no danger of burning. The crotch of each
fork is open to the fire, and in this crotch, which should stand a
couple of feet up from the ground, a pole an inch or so through is
laid. Over this pole above the fire is placed an iron hook, or a couple
of hooks, with which the camper has provided himself at a hardware
store before starting forth on his tour. From the lower loop of the
hook hang the camp kettle or other utensil for cooking.

The dingle stick is another device sometimes used by the motor camper
in cooking over his camp fire. This stick is an inch-thick sapling with
one end stuck into the ground and the other end adjusted over the fire
to a proper height by two forked stakes. Have brass chains with pot
hooks attached to hang from the end of the stick. If there are no
chains or hooks use forked, short branches with a notch in the lower
end to take the bail of a pail.

Two small logs side by side and two short ones laid across underneath
them and a small fire of twigs between the logs will do nicely for
cooking emergency rations.

Whatever may be said in favor of stoves and the more artificial methods
of preparing food for the motor camper, it must be said that food
cooked on the open fire will taste best. But, on the other hand, when
it rains pitchforks, the little stove in the tent is a friend in need
and a friend indeed.

Besides there are not only the state and national forestry regulations
that apply to open fires. In addition to these in some states the
counties take a hand in the matter, and in one open fires will be
permitted, while in the county adjoining they may be taboo.

The two-burner Theroz kit burns solid alcohol that will not melt, and a
thirty-cent can of cubes lasts the two burners about an hour. The heat
from Theroz is not quite so hot as gasoline, but it can be put out
instantly and what remains unburnt may be put away for the next time.
Furthermore, any sort of solid alcohol is absolutely clean and sweet,
with no appreciable smell. The fuel alcohol stove that is used in a
single burner outfit arranged like a gas range is convenient, although
not as safe as solid alcohol, and is hot enough to boil water in seven
minutes. Such a stove comes with an alcohol reservoir that holds a
quart, and the whole outfit weighs about ten pounds.




Essential Food Supplies

Returning to the subject of food for the camper, it will be agreed that
the menu is largely a matter of personal taste. But there are certain
items which are included in every outfit and which are regarded by all
as necessities, no matter how widely personal tastes may differ with
regard to other supplies. No one can imagine a camp without coffee, and
the smell of boiling coffee is as much a part of the camp atmosphere as
the rustle of the leaves among the trees.

A popular custom in the West, where so much camping is done, is to
measure the coffee—ground coffee is preferable, thus eliminating the
coffee mill—a heaping tablespoon to the cup, and two cups to the
person, and to tie it up in double cheesecloth bags. The advantage of
this is that the coffee is clear and not so apt to boil over. Besides,
any unskilled or hurried cook can measure the water and drop the bag.

In the East prepared coffee is coming to be used in preference to
coffee in the bean. There are several kinds of this prepared coffee,
such as the Mouquin and George Washington brands, which come in cans
and are about equal in price and quality. The only difference in
quality is that the former of those mentioned is a little more on the
order of “French coffee,” namely, it is a little more bitter. This
prepared coffee is somewhat more expensive than coffee in the bean, but
all that is required to prepare it for drinking is to take a
teaspoonful of the coffee, place this in the cup and fill up with
boiling water, adding milk, cream or sugar to the taste.

After coffee come flapjacks. “Add water and bake” sounds good even at
home, and out in the woods it has a special appeal. There are a number
of prepared pancake flours on the market which make light, nourishing
flapjacks.

Another important item is eggs. Plainly, they are not built for
roughing it; but taken out of the shell and dried they become an
altogether dependable article for the camper. Care should be taken,
however, in making a choice of an egg powder, for many substitutes are
on the market that never had any relationship to a hen. Real egg powder
when cooked can hardly be told from the genuine article made from a
fresh egg. It can be scrambled or made into an omelet that will be in
every way satisfactory.

Both enjoyment and health require a varied menu for the camper. The
numerous wayside markets which may be found every mile or so along the
main highways afford the camper an opportunity of picking up a variety
of supplies which will serve to diversify the camp menu.

To the average person much of the enjoyment of motor camping will
depend upon the quality of the meals that are supplied. If the day be
started with a good breakfast of steaming coffee, a rasher of crisp
bacon with hot flapjacks and crisp fried potatoes, the day is well
begun and everything else is likely to pass off delightfully. But begin
with dish-water coffee, lukewarm in temperature, soggy, half-done
flapjacks, soft, stringy bacon and limp, greasy potatoes, and the rest
of the day will be equally distasteful.




Man a Better Camp Cook Than Woman

The reason why as a rule a man will make a better camp cook than a
woman is because he has had no experience as a cook in the use of
modern conveniences. The woman who cooks splendidly in the home, with
gas range and electric cooking utensils always at hand, is likely to be
lost when out camping in the woods she tries to prepare breakfast with
the limited equipment of a camp cooking kit, or a camp fireplace. She
is still more in the wilderness as an efficient worker if she has
nothing more than an open camp fire to work with. But, man or woman,
the camp cook can live and learn, and the simpler and cruder the
facilities with which to work the more zest there will be in getting
the cooking done well. And food never tastes quite so good as when
flavored with a dash of wood ashes and the pungent savor of wood smoke
from a camp fire.

A camp meal for a party of three or four is comparatively simple to
prepare, and it can be speedily and effectively served as well. It need
not be elaborate, but it should be hot. Circumstances oftentimes demand
that the whole process of preparing and serving breakfast be brief.
When the fish are jumping one had almost rather do without his cup of
hot coffee than spend twenty minutes making fire and bringing the water
to a boil. But when one learns how, he finds that such delay is not
necessary. A substantial breakfast of eggs, bacon and coffee can be
prepared in from ten to fifteen minutes, and the fire built, even in
the rain, within this time limit. Few motorists know the essentials of
a successful fire for cooking. A fire that could be built within the
limits of an ordinary soup plate will cook quicker than the bonfire
that the motor camper usually builds. What is needed is not a big fire
for warmth or for drying out wet clothing.




A Typical Process of Getting a Meal

Three or four cobblestones, bricks or even tin cans will do for a
fireplace. If no stones, bricks or even cans are at hand, dig a small
hole in the ground. All that is necessary is to find something that
will support a skillet or frying pan in a steady and even position. A
small fire directly under the skillet will work wonders. There is not
much heat, but what there is goes right to the spot where it is needed
to do the work. The camper soon learns how to make this small fire,
feed it bit by bit, and control it even in rain or wind. To be sure of
this little fire under all circumstances it will be advisable for the
camper to have along with him a few short pieces of dry wood which can
easily be split up. Should rain be falling when the fire is being made
these small pieces of split wood can be kept dry as they are being fed
to the fire by covering them with a piece of rubber cloth or oilcloth.

With a bright blaze started in this the miniature fireplace, the next
thing to do is to heat water for the coffee before the rest of the
cooking begins. The skillet being clean and free from grease, the water
can be brought to a boil without receiving any taste from its
container. A quart thermos bottle should be filled with water, and when
the fire has been started the water should be poured into the skillet
as it rests on the stones over the fire. In a surprisingly short time
the water will be hot and the coffee may be made in the skillet, or if
a prepared coffee is to be used, the scalding water may be returned to
the thermos bottle to be kept hot until the meal, when it will be added
to the prepared coffee in the cup. In either case the hot fluid is
returned to the thermos bottle. Using the skillet to heat the coffee
water will save much time and insure the coffee being in a steaming
condition when needed.

The coffee being made, the hot skillet goes back over the fire to
receive the bacon, eggs or whatever else is to be cooked. The skillet
can be used with equal success for frying, stewing, boiling, or even
for making flapjacks, as required. A surprisingly large variety of
dishes may be successfully prepared with this simple cooking utensil.
In fact a skillful camper needs only a skillet, and finds all other
pots and pans simply burdensome. The skillet will serve all needful
purposes in cooking.

When the cooking is done the skillet should be wiped free from grease,
filled with water and placed over the fire. By the time the meal is
over the water will be sufficiently hot to be used in washing the
dishes.

Many people feel unsatisfied and uneasy unless they can sit down to
their three square meals a day. In the three square meals are included,
as a rule, an oversupply of some food elements and an insufficiency of
others. This lack of balance in the diet of the average man has much to
do with the various ills to which his body falls heir.

Not a little of the benefit to be derived from a motor camping trip
will be the benefit derived from the simple fare that will be had on
the camping trip. He will get all the more good from it if the party
adopts the Indian plan of two meals a day—breakfast and supper, morning
and night.




A Balanced Diet

Some wise motor campers sally forth with hampers stuffed with fruit,
sandwiches, grape juice, loganberry juice, lemons, sugar, dates,
raisins, nuts, olives, powdered cereal coffee, malted milk, evaporated
milk, and salt. A small oil stove and some “canned heat” are included.
Fresh eggs, cottage cheese, and vegetables that do not require cooking,
like lettuce, radishes, cucumbers, tomatoes and also fruit, can, as a
rule, be bought at farmhouses along the way. Bread may be bought as
needed. Whole wheat bread also may be bought in some places, for there
is coming to be a demand for this real life-sustaining bread.

Stopping in some attractive place with these supplies, thoroughly
sustaining and well-balanced meals can be provided with little work.
Eggs may be cooked, and cereal coffee made or hot malted milk prepared.
This sort of a menu may not seem like a real HE camplike layout, but it
will supply a better balance of diet and in addition to the fresh air
that the camper gets will do him a vast amount of good both physically
and otherwise.

Such a meal consisting of one or two eggs or cottage cheese, a few
nuts, whole wheat bread, olives, lettuce, radishes, tomatoes, apples,
pears or peaches, with some dates or raisins, will supply the body’s
needs and have as sustaining qualities as meats and rich desserts.

A menu of this description will supply in abundance the iron and lime
and other mineral salts, as also the life-promoting vitamines. It will
in addition give natural encouragement to bowel activity, and the
camper will not have to resort to pills for this purpose.

The change from the usual heavy meals to this simpler and lighter diet
will do the average man a world of good.

Then, too, while journeying through the country the motor camper may
with profit add to his diet from the green growing things which may be
eaten raw. The so-called “raw food fiends” have a degree of fact back
of their theory concerning the superior value of raw foods from a
nutritive standpoint. Children like to eat the tender young peas that
they shell to be cooked for dinner. Most country children like to eat
raw turnips, those of the white variety. They also like to nibble
tender young carrots, and young sweet corn is sweeter and more tender
raw than cooked. Let the motor camper try out these foods in the raw.
They can be secured from the farmers along the way.

We are aware that most campers will scoff at these suggestions, but if
they will test them it will be found that one of the greatest benefits
derived will be the laxative effects of this kind of fare.

Those who look upon the suggestions given above as faddish have already
found full instructions for preparing the more conventional fare.

Most vegetables may now be bought in the dehydrated form, and these
after soaking in water overnight are almost as good as when fresh and
form a most desirable addition to the camp menu. As is well known, they
have very little weight, and so a large supply may be carried along.

Many prefer powdered milk to the evaporated form for the camp supply
box. A supply of sweet chocolate is taken along by many as a quick and
satisfying nutriment.

The amount of food to be taken will vary greatly, twelve or fourteen
pounds of all kinds per person per week is usually an ample total.




Camp Cooking

Recipes. The quantities given are for but two people. When the number
is greater, corresponding quantities of materials should be used.

Biscuits. There are many brands of prepared flour which contain baking
powder, shortening and other ingredients. These flours require nothing
more than the addition of enough water to make a soft dough before
baking. The baking may be done in a skillet, by simply placing the
dough on the bottom of the skillet after greasing and heating. When
done on one side the dough should be turned.

If the camper has a reflector oven or a stove oven, roll out or even
pat out with the hand the dough to a thickness of half an inch; then
with the top of a baking powder can cut out the biscuits one by one and
bake until brown. If there be no baking-powder can at hand the biscuits
may be roughly shaped with the hand.

If the flour used is not “prepared,” mix in a pan one pint of ordinary
flour with a heaping teaspoonful of baking powder. Add a tablespoonful
of fat (butter, lard, or other shortening), half a teaspoonful of salt,
and three tablespoonfuls of evaporated milk, putting in also just
enough water to make a soft dough. Handle the dough as little as
possible. Rub flour on the bread board, or, lacking a board, on the
bottom of a pan or any flat surface, and then cut out as above. A knife
can be used for cutting if nothing else is at hand. Put into a greased
pan and place baker before the fire. If there is a good hot fire, the
biscuits will be done in about twelve minutes. Stick in a fork, and if
no dough sticks to it when withdrawn the biscuits are done.

Flapjacks may be mixed up as biscuits, but the dough should be thin
enough to run. This dough is then to be poured or dipped onto the hot
skillet, griddle, or pan, baked until one side is done and then turned
with a turner, unless the camper is skillful enough to turn his
pancakes by tossing.

The prepared flour is by all odds the best for pancakes because all you
have to add is water. But if the camper prefers to do his own mixing
let him mix as for biscuit, but in addition put in a tablespoonful of
dried eggs. A large spoonful of batter will make a moderate sized
pancake.

Corn Bread. The best corn bread is made by taking the old-fashioned
whole corn meal, and buttermilk or clabbered milk, with baking soda.
All that was necessary was to take a quart of buttermilk, a couple of
pinches of salt (according to taste), a teaspoonful of baking soda, and
then add the corn meal until there was a thick batter. This was then
poured into a deep pan which had been greased and baked for half an
hour. The difficulty with this recipe is that the fundamental
ingredient is unobtainable. The corn meal that can be bought in stores
is almost always a bolted, devitalized stuff that is very
unsatisfactory for corn bread. In some rural districts one can, once in
a while, come across a country miller who grinds the old-time corn
meal. If the camper comes across such an one, let him buy some of this
meal and try it out as above.

Here is one of the modern recipes for what is called corn bread. Into a
bread pan put one half pint of flour and one half pint of corn meal,
thoroughly mixed with a heaping teaspoonful of baking powder, and half
a teaspoonful of salt, a dessert spoonful of desiccated eggs, a half
teaspoonful of sugar, and a tablespoonful of cold pork fat, lard or
vegetable substitute. Add three dessertspoonfuls of evaporated milk and
sufficient water to make a thick batter. Stir well, pour into a greased
pan and place baker before fire of hot coals.

Corn Meal Mush may be made by pouring slowly into a quart of boiling
water to which has been added a half teaspoonful of salt, one cupful of
corn meal, stirring constantly. If you wish to avoid its being lumpy,
better feed in the corn meal through your fingers, so as to scatter it
as it reaches the water.

Fish is best broiled. Rub fat on the grid to prevent sticking. If the
fish is large remove head and entrails, split down the back and lay on
the broiler with slices of bacon or pork placed across. Pepper and salt
to suit taste. To fry small fish, put in pan with plenty of bacon or
pork fat. Turn frequently to insure thorough cooking. When done spread
with butter and brown for a few minutes. To bake small fish wrap each
in wet paper and cover in hot ashes.

Squirrels should be broiled, using only young ones. After skinning and
cleaning, soak in cold salted water for an hour. Wipe dry and place on
a grid with slices of bacon laid across for basting. To fry old ones,
parboil slowly for half an hour in salted water and fry in fat or
butter until brown.

Rabbits, after being cleaned and skinned, should have the head removed.
Then cut off the legs at the body joint and cut the back into three or
four pieces. Parboil in salted water. To stew leave in pot, add pepper,
a tablespoonful each of rice and beans and a teaspoonful of dried
onions. Add water so that the pieces of meat keep covered and boil
until the meat will separate from the bones. To fry, remove from the
pot when parboiled, sprinkle the meat with flour and fry in butter or
fat until brown. Use only young animals for frying. To roast, remove
from pot and place in pan, spread a piece of pork on each piece of
rabbit, and baste frequently until done.

Game Birds should first be plucked, then cleaned, singed, and the head
and legs removed. To fry, cut into convenient pieces and parboil until
tender. Sprinkle with pepper, salt, and flour. Fry in pork fat. When
done stir into frying pan a half cupful of flour until dark brown, add
some of the liquor in which the bird was parboiled and bring to a boil.
Pour this gravy over the bird on the dish. To broil, split the bird up
back and place on the grid. Baste with drippings from a piece of pork
held above on a stick. Cuts of larger birds like ducks or prairie
chickens may be sliced off and held over the coals on sticks. To
fricassee, cut into convenient pieces and parboil. When tender, drain
off the water and sprinkle the pieces with salt, pepper, and flour. Fry
some slices of pork and add to the fat some flour, stirring until
brown. Pour into this the liquor in which the bird was parboiled and
bring to a boil. Put the pieces of bird in a hot dish and pour the
gravy over them.

How to Boil Potatoes. This may seem superfluous, but of a truth most
campers do not have much success in boiling potatoes, but get a soggy
product which is anything but appetizing.

Peel the potatoes and allow them to stand in water for a short time.
Then place the pot over hot coals. When boiling add salt and when the
potatoes are done drain off the water thoroughly. Put the pot with the
lid on back over the fire for a minute. Then, holding the lid on
firmly, shake the pot well, and turn out the potatoes. They will be
mealy and delicious. To bake potatoes, wrap each potato in wet paper
and place in hot ashes until done, which will be in about half an
hour—depending somewhat on the size of the potatoes and the heat of the
ashes.

To make mashed potatoes, take a cup of dried (dehydrated) potatoes and
a cup and a half of boiling water. Boil and stir for three minutes, and
then add a dessertspoonful of evaporated milk. Salt, pepper, and butter
to taste. To make potato cakes, prepare as above, add a teaspoonful of
flour and form into small cakes. Sprinkle with flour and fry in pork
fat.

Pork fat is frequently mentioned in these recipes. A vegetarian will
perhaps be better satisfied by using a vegetable substitute.

Baking in Clay where clay is procurable gives satisfactory results.
Cover bird or fish drawn, or undrawn, with a coating of wet clay a
couple of inches thick. Place in live coals and cover with hot ashes.
In about an hour the clay will be baked hard. Crack open lengthwise and
remove the meat, which will be tender, well-flavored and juicy. If
baked undrawn the entrails should be removed after baking.








CHAPTER IX

CAMP HEALTH AND RECREATION

    Making a Pleasure Rather Than a Business of Camping—Coöperation in
    the Camp—Rightly Selecting the Camp Site—Playing by the
    Way—Basket-ball, Quoits, etc.—Exercise—Emergencies, First Aid—Prone
    Pressure Method of Restoring the Unconscious—Poisons and
    Antidotes—Position of Tent—Supposed Hardships of Camping Mostly
    Illusory—Keeping Dry—Keeping Out Insects—Sample List for a Medicine
    Kit—Care of the Car—Evening Sports.


A motor-camping trip is not a business trip, but a journey whose object
is recreation and rejuvenation. Consequently the pace should be easy
and the intervals of rest frequent. Those who push on relentlessly,
driving forward from morning until evening, and then camp for the night
only to journey on again the next day, miss much of the good that may
be gained from a camping tour.

The trip should be by easy stages, without definite objectives for each
day. The aim should be enjoyment and leisure rather than “to get
there.” If a place proves unattractive tarry but for a night, but
otherwise camp for several days, or until the local attractions have
been sufficiently explored for satisfaction.




Organize the Work

Whether the party be large or small, it will be wise to have it pretty
carefully organized. Divide up the chores, so that each one will have
his part to perform in connection with the common enterprise. When the
stop is made for the night have it understood in advance just what each
one is to do in arranging for the camp and the preparation of the
evening meal. Even each small boy who may be along should have his
appointed task to perform. He will enjoy the outing all the more and
instead of being a burden will prove a valuable help. As in the
evening, so in the morning light, everything should be ordered and
every one should have a part in the day’s order.

The motor camper who coöperates with his fellow campers on the basis of
“self-service” will get the real fun and enjoyment which a camping trip
can supply. The camper who is unwilling to “help out” had best arrange
his trip with those who patronize the hotels and travel on the ten
dollar a day per capita basis.

The camping site should be as carefully selected as may be. If the stop
is made at one of the camping parks, there will be small choice save in
the matter of the park, because in most of these public parks there
will be some one who will assign each camper his appointed place. Where
the park is large, and some of them include many acres, there may be
considerable choice of location. This will be more likely to be true
early or late in the usual camping season of summertime, for then the
parks are not likely to be crowded. At the height of the season,
however, some of the more popular parks along the main cross-continent
motor-ways are obliged from lack of accommodations to turn many cars
away.




Choosing the Camp Site

It is well while moving to cast about for a suitable camping site by
mid-afternoon. If the intention is to make use of a public motor park,
and the first one found does not seem altogether desirable in point of
being roomy, shaded, or in the provisions made for the comfort and
convenience of campers, drive on to another and keep on until the best
camp site available is found. This advice applies all the more to the
camper who intends to camp by himself on private property and who will
have to arrange for camping permission, etc., before settling himself
for the night.

A location by a stream, lake or bay is desirable. Such a location is
important, if feasible, because of the attractiveness of a water view,
and, still more, because bathing facilities are conducive to both
health and happiness. The importance of bathing facilities is pretty
well understood by almost every one. Some motorists pack along folding
canvas bath tubs, and these are certainly very convenient. But, if a
stream is alongside or near by the camp site, or there is other water
suitable for bathing, it will be much easier to bathe in this water
than in the little bath tub. Of course, unless the water is very shoal
those who cannot swim should exercise great care. For that matter those
who cannot swim might well take advantage of the leisure of a camping
trip to pitch camp where there will be a chance to learn this very
healthful and vitally important art.




Water Supply

In selecting a camp site, other than in a camping park provided with
water, as these mostly are, the question of a water supply for drinking
purposes is exceedingly important. As mentioned elsewhere, the wells of
the countryside and the wayside springs are more or less open to
suspicion. So, too, are the brooks, as they may receive drainage from
farmhouses near their course or from barnyards. If the camp is near a
swamp, the water there may be dark, but that is no sign of especial
impurity as the color may be due to discoloration from the vegetation
and turf of the bog. This bog water is quite likely to be free from
contamination. But no matter what the source of supply, an attitude of
suspicion is the wise one, and the water should only be drunk after
boiling. In extremity the writer has drunk unboiled water out of
ditches and stagnant ponds without ill results, but this is not
advised, and the motor camper will, as a rule, have facilities for
boiling his drinking water. We have heard of motorists, when hard put
to, drawing hot water from the radiator of their machine in order to
get a hot drink, but seldom, indeed, would there be any such necessity.




Games

There are many forms of recreation that the motor camper may enjoy,
particularly when camping away from the crowd. A basket ball may well
form part of the camping equipment. It will not be hard to find two
trees sixty feet apart. If baskets have been carried along with the
ball, they may be attached to these trees at the regulation height of
ten feet, with wire nails which will not injure the trees, and a lot of
fun may be had from the games played on the hazards of an uneven court
in the woods. If no regular baskets have been brought along, slender
branches of underbrush may be cut and bent into hoop form, and, ends
being tied up or otherwise secured, quite satisfactory baskets may be
had by fastening these hoops to the trees at the right elevation.

Then, too, where there are any boys along a ball and bat of the
baseball sort will not be lacking and quite a bit of sport and exercise
may be had by the campers in the evenings from this source.

If there is water near, swimming will give a lot of recreation and
contribute to the health of the campers.

In fact, a little ingenuity will discover many games and exercises that
will contribute to the interest and enjoyment of the evening camp.

The municipal motor camps often have entertainments arranged for those
using these camp sites. Often music, usually band music, will be
provided. In some places the camp managers get the campers together of
evenings for all sorts of amusement, and in other cases the campers get
together for acquaintance and entertainment spontaneously on their own
initiative.




First Aid

Another thing that the motor camper should not forget is provision for
emergencies. He should know how to render first aid in case of injury,
how to resuscitate those who have been drowning, how to treat various
forms of common poisoning with a knowledge of the antidotes for these
poisons. This subject cannot be gone into fully in this book. There are
books entirely devoted to the promotion of safety and assistance to the
injured when the emergency arises. As for drowning, many people who
have been in a condition of suspended animation owing to submersion in
the water have been allowed to die who might have been resuscitated had
those present known how. And it is not necessary to have appliances,
such as a pulmotor, at hand. In fact, the best method of resuscitating
the drowned is the prone-pressure method in which no apparatus whatever
is employed. The old method of rolling the drowned person over a
barrel, or the later method of sending for a pulmotor was mistaken.
Both have been abandoned by progressive physicians and the Red Cross
Life-saving Department.

The motor camper is quite unlikely to have a physician anywhere near by
who can be summoned, and so should know what to do in an emergency,
particularly when one of the party has apparently been drowned. For
that matter, sending for a physician in case of drowning is usually
entirely futile, for it is seldom that a physician can be brought until
it is too late to succeed with resuscitation. The prone-pressure
method, which we are about to describe, has succeeded where animation
has been suspended until after more than two hours of effort. There
have been many cases where it would most likely have saved life, where
life was lost, because, instead of promptly applying this treatment, a
physician and pulmotor were sent for and neither could be procured
until the lapse of considerable vital time.


The Prone-pressure Method of Resuscitation

1. Lay the patient on his stomach on a flat surface. Draw the arms
above the head. Bring the right wrist under the forehead so that it
will support the head and turn the head slightly to the left. Be sure
that the nose and mouth do not touch the ground.

2. Clean the patient’s mouth of mucus, blood, chewing gum or other
extraneous matter by a stroke of the finger. The prone position
facilitates the removal of liquids from the mouth by causing the tongue
to fall forward.

3. Kneel astride the patient, facing his head, and place your hands on
his lowest ribs, with your fingers curving close to his body. Be
careful to avoid pressure on the pelvis and to keep your hands away
from the spine.

4. Lean forward, keeping the arms straight, and put the weight of the
upper part of your body on your hands. The pressure should be applied
gradually, not in a sudden thrust. The Boy Scout Book suggests saying
alternately as the hands go down and back again, “Out Goes the Water,”
“In Comes the Air,” exerting and relaxing pressure to suit the words.

5. Keep this up steadily about twelve times a minute. Follow your own
regular rate of respiration—count or use a watch. The downward pressure
forces the diaphragm up into the chest cavity, decreasing the air space
and forcing the water out of the lungs. When the pressure is relaxed
the diaphragm goes back into place and the air rushes in.

6. Do not cease your efforts as soon as your patient begins to breathe.
Continue until the breathing is quite regular. Then when the patient is
able to sit up, stimulants, such as aromatic spirits of ammonia, may be
given in spoonful doses. The stimulant should be given in water. After
this the wet clothing should be removed and the patient put to bed.

If the patient is not revived at the end of an hour do not give up.
Keep him warm and continue. Many persons have been resuscitated after
two hours and more of uninterrupted effort.

It will be a good plan, if the camping place is near the water and any
swimming is to be done, or even bathing only, to practice the prone
pressure method as a game until practice makes perfect. With children
the method may be dramatized and made very interesting to them.

The prone-pressure method of resuscitation is the best to employ in
case of unconsciousness from lightning stroke, other electric shock, or
poisoning by the inhalation of gas.




Poison Antidotes

As for poisons, it is assumed that the motor camper will not carry with
him the more violently poisonous disinfectants, such as carbolic acid,
corrosive sublimate or even formaldehyde. The limit in the disinfectant
line should be a can or two of chloride of lime. Some of the household
cleaning and polishing materials contain poisons such as oxalic acid.
Carbon tetrachloride and chloroform are frequently mixed with gasoline
for cleaning purposes. This sort of a fluid is not inflammable when
properly prepared, but may cause anesthesia. The most dangerous poisons
to have about the camp are white arsenic, which is found in fly poisons
and rodent poisons, and Paris green, which is used to poison various
plant pests such as potato bugs. The motor camper, however, will not be
likely to suffer exposure to these poisons.

It is the children that most frequently get poisoned, and on a camping
tour they are most likely to get poisoned by things found in the woods
or near the camp. The most common source of poisoning is the poison
ivy. This is sometimes very painful, but seldom dangerous to life.
Pokeberries are said by some authorities to be poisonous, but in some
sections of the country poor people gather them and use them as filling
for pies, the same as elderberries, without any apparent ill results.
In some regions the deadly nightshade, with its attractive but very
poisonous purple berries, is fairly plentiful, and when eaten by
children, as it sometimes is, proves quickly fatal.

When you have reason to suppose that any one has been poisoned by
something that has been eaten, lose no time, but proceed at once to
take steps to expel the poison from the victim’s system. Effective
emetics are mustard and warm water (one tablespoonful of mustard to a
quart of water), salt and water, ipecac and water (one teaspoonful of
ipecac to a quart of water), or even warm water. If you have no warm
water at hand, give cold water to dilute the poison till you can heat
warm water. If neither warm nor cold water is available immediately,
vomiting may be induced by thrusting a finger down the patient’s
throat. Give from two to four glasses of fluid to dilute the poison.
Milk, tea, soda water, will do if no plain water is at hand. About ten
minutes after the vomiting has been produced, give another dose of
emetic to make sure that the poison is out of the system.

The treatment is slightly different in the case of acid and alkaline
poisons. Alkali is neutralized by acid and vice versa. For instance,
suppose the baby drinks a bowl of lye water (alkali), dilute vinegar or
lemon juice in water and make him drink as much of it as possible. An
acid usually becomes comparatively harmless as soon as neutralized by
an alkali. Nevertheless, the system should be cleansed by a good
purgative. Castor oil is effective. Since both acids and alkalis are
harmful to the interior of the stomach, some other substance should be
taken after the antidote. Milk, oil, white of eggs, flour and water may
be used. There are a few exceptions to milk and oil, but it is always
safe to give whites of eggs in any kind of poisoning. Stir the whites
of four eggs into a quart of water. Make the patient drink it all, if
you can.

The fumes of ammonia may be useful in the case of acid poisoning, as
they will tend to neutralize any acid that may have entered the
respiratory tract. Always put the ammonia on a handkerchief or piece of
cloth, and give only enough to relieve the patient.

In case the hands and feet of the patient become cold, the lips turn
blue, or cold perspiration appears on the forehead, put him to bed.
Cover him up warmly, use hot water bottles, and give him a cup of
strong tea or coffee as hot as it can be taken.

Where poisonous mushrooms have been eaten, as is sometimes done by
children, or where there is ptomaine poisoning from bad food, the use
of emetics is not advised, although their use can do little harm, and
sometimes the poison may not have yet passed beyond the reach of such a
remedy. As a rule, however, the symptoms of these vegetable poisons, as
they usually are, will not appear in acute form until the poisoning
agent has passed into the lower digestive tract. Then about the only
thing to do is to give large and repeated doses of Epsom salts to drive
the poison down and out of the system as soon as possible.

The above suggestions are not intended to take the place of treatment
by a skilled physician, but they are for emergency use by the motor
camper who cannot be reached quickly by any physician.




The Medicine Chest

The contents of the motor camper’s medicine chest will depend somewhat
on his preference as to the school of medicine. Yet certain simple
remedies will doubtless be acceptable to any of the medical systems. A
Red Cross First Aid Kit should, of course, be included in the camper’s
outfit. So, too, should Epsom salts and some other cathartic, such as
cascara tablets or castor oil. Spirits of camphor taken in small doses
helps most people to stop or throw off a cold. Sun cholera tablets are
of value in diarrhea, which often develops from a change of drinking
water. Mustard is valuable for external application as a counter
irritant in case of colds, or when needed to mix with water as an
emetic. An excellent remedy for sprains is the iodine emollient known
as Iodex. It relieves the sprain and will not burn and blister as will
the tincture of iodine, which is also poisonous.

If the reader has a family physician, it would be well to ask this
physician to make up a medicine kit for the camping trip.

The articles mentioned above are harmless, and about all that the motor
camper should use without the expert advice of a physician.

There are some who may prefer something more elaborate than the simple
articles previously mentioned. A camper of many years’ experience
itemizes the following as the requisites of a medicine kit:


    Quinine pills or tablets.
    Rhubarb pills or tablets.
    Bicarbonate of soda or soda mint tablets.
    Bismuth subnitrate.
    Chlorate of potash.
    Warburg’s tincture.
    Sun cholera pills.
    Small rolls of antiseptic bandages.
    Box zinc ointment.
    Bottle tincture of iodine.
    Permanganate of potash.
    Bottle of iodoform.
    Some powerful stimulant.
    Adhesive surgeons’ plaster, but not court-plaster.


The stimulant is included to relieve those faint from loss of blood,
drowning or injury. Permanganate of potash solution will relieve pain
from insect bites and poison ivy. Antiseptic tablets are for slight
scratches, cuts or bruises.

Be careful to have everything plainly labeled and poisons marked in
heavy black letters and with skull and cross-bones.




Location of the Tent

There are a number of little things in connection with the arrangement
of the camp and its tent which are not likely to occur to the
inexperienced camper which nevertheless are quite important when it
comes to his comfort. One of these little things is the exact location
of the tent and its position. If there is any option in the matter it
will be well to have the tent face a little south of east. This brings
sunshine into the tent’s entrance the first thing in the morning at a
time when it is most needed and welcome. This position of the tent also
insures considerable protection against cold northwest winds. The
camper will be more comfortable under all weather conditions if his
tent is pitched in this position.

Then again, be careful to choose a well-drained and fairly open
situation for the camp—one well exposed to sun and air, and yet look
out for shelter. In case of wet weather the open situation will allow
the tent to dry out sooner, and a fringe of timber to the west or
northward will often enable the tent to safely weather a blow that
would otherwise send it kiting.

Be careful not to camp near dead timber which might be liable to blow
down on you in a storm with unfortunate results.

Until the camper has had a little experience he is apt to exaggerate
the hardships of camping. Colds and minor ailments are not apt to
attack those who have taken to the open in a camping trip. Even a
drenching is likely to be more unpleasant than dangerous to health,
provided the precaution of getting into dry clothing and shoes as soon
as possible is followed. If the shoes are wet and there is no dry
article to change to, the chill of the wet may be cured and the shoes
made warm as toast by heating a few small stones in the camp fire or on
the camp stove, and then placing these in the shoes for a few minutes.
Be a little careful not to heat the stones hot enough to burn the
shoes.




Keeping the Tent Dry

If the camper is careful to keep the inside of his tent dry he will not
mind a day or two of wet weather. The tent if not of waterproofed
material should be protected by a fly to make sure of keeping it dry.
Still the ordinary tent of duck without any fly can be kept dry if the
occupant is careful not to allow anything to touch the inside surface
of the tent, and thus start a drip.

It is a good plan to raise the sides or walls of a tent during the heat
of the day so as to thoroughly dry it out, particularly if there has
been a wet spell.

The matter of insect pests is of importance. A tent with a good floor
cloth will help to keep out mosquitoes, which are likely to be the most
obnoxious pest encountered by the motor camper. Mosquitoes, however,
are by no means found everywhere. There are many sections of the middle
and mountain states where one has to travel hundreds of miles to find
one of these pestiferous songsters, but along the coast, especially the
Atlantic coast, they are pretty sure to be bothersome. They are hard to
get used to, and hard to keep out of tent or car at night. Screens are
of some avail, but are not altogether a specific. Neither are the
various mosquito lotions. About the best thing to use is the oil of
citronella, which may be bought at any drug store and which is
inexpensive. Sometimes a smudge of punk or browse is fairly effective
in keeping the creatures out, but the remedy is about as bad as the
disease, unless one does not mind having his tongue taste like ham for
a good part of the day. Citronella, too, is very offensive to some, but
most people get used to it, and find it a very good protection against
the activities of the mosquito.

The ordinary mosquito net is not much protection against most of the
mosquito tribe. Scrim or bobbinet is much closer in weave and so much
more effectual in keeping these insects out.




Exercises

It may be asked, what about taking exercise while motor camping? In
these days most every one has his “Daily Dozen,” or two dozen flexes or
genuflexes, that he takes in order to keep fit. Now, should these be
kept up when in camp? Really, each one will have to settle this for
himself according to his bent. Most campers will have considerable
exercise in keeping the car fit, and that exercise will go a long way
at the same time in the direction of keeping the car owner fit. Even if
the car is in perfect mechanical condition, the chassis, the body, the
upholstery will require no small amount of cleaning, washing, rubbing
and dusting or brushing if it is to be kept from quite speedily showing
the signs of travel. If the car should develop temperamental
tendencies, such as even the most expensive cars occasionally exhibit,
the question of sufficient exercise will not become acute.

If the camper uses a tent, as most campers do, there will be no small
amount of exercise involved in setting it up, driving in the pins and
seeing that all guy lines are taut and secure.




Care of the Car

Many campers are inclined to neglect the care of their cars, as is very
evident by the unkempt and dusty appearance that so many of them
present. They are likely, too, to be equally careless and disorderly in
securely adjusting the tent and in keeping everything in the way of
tools in an appointed place so as to be always findable, until after
waking in the night a time or two in a wind and rain storm to find the
sleeping tent ballooning because of a loosened stake, and then being
carried away while the rain comes down, soaking everybody, because the
ax has been mislaid and there is nothing to use as a means of pounding
down the stakes that hold the tent except bare fists. After one or two
such experiences the importance of order and its advantages over
disorder are likely to be quite clearly realized.

Aside from the exercise afforded by the effort employed in regularly
tightening up any parts of the car and its gear that may have been
loosened by travel, the gathering of food for the fire and other chores
involved in camp life, the camper will often go hunting or fishing when
in a region where hunting and fishing may be had.

In the evening, after the meal and the chores are done up, if the
campers are not all too old and stiffened, there will be exercise in
the way of playing ball, tossing quoits and other games for which the
camper should provide in advance by including the necessary bats,
balls, quoits, etc., along with the other supplies taken for the trip.








CHAPTER X

SLEEPING QUARTERS

(See also Chapters IV, V, VI)

    Importance of Comfortable Sleeping Arrangements—Methods of Sleeping
    in the Car—Sleeping on the Ground—Beds of Boughs or Browse—Autumn
    Leaves—Folding Cots—Air Beds—Sleeping Bags—Combination Bags and
    Beds—Home-made Mattresses—Sleeping in Hammocks—Night-caps—The
    Touring and Sleeping Outfit of a Tourist Veteran of Ten Years’
    Experience—Driving Out the Sleep Disturbers, Flies and Mosquitoes.


In the Car

As Sancho Panza remarked, “Blessed be the man who first invented
sleep.” Certainly sufficient and restful sleep is a prime essential if
the motor camper is to enjoy his camping trip and is to get full
measure of profit from his experience.

In the selection of sleeping accommodations in a motor-camping tour
much depends upon the familiarity of the campers with outdoor
conditions. There are some people who can curl up under a thick blanket
on the bare ground, and there sleep in perfect comfort. There are
others who shiver and stay awake even though completely inclosed in a
warm, soft sleeping bag under a waterproof tent; and there are still
others who find rest and comfort only when sleeping snugly in the car
itself. For these last it may be enough to remove the tonneau seats,
place them lengthwise and thus provide the foundation for sleep.

Every one of the variations just mentioned may be found within the
average motoring party of four or five people: one will want to sleep
in the car, one in a bag, and the others on and under blankets in a
tent. Therefore, a sleeping bag, a removable tonneau seat with the back
of the front seat folding down so as together to form a couch, and a
couple of small folding cots are desirable on a camping trip.

Comfortable sleeping arrangements are most essential. The arrangements
for comfort, especially in the matter of keeping warm, will depend a
little on where the tour is to take the camper. If he tours through the
state of Maine he will find the nights cool and must provide
accordingly. If his destination takes him through the middle states
south of the Great Lakes and west to the Missouri River and somewhat
beyond, or in the Middle Atlantic States from New York south and
including New York, he usually will find the nights in summer warm. If
the tourist travels through a mountain region, even the Catskill
region, he will need to take an amount of thought concerning covering
by night that is entirely unnecessary where the night temperatures are
mild and balmy. Should the camper tour through the Rocky Mountain
region he will find the nights cold and in the high Rockies even
freezing.




Woolen Blankets Needed

Good bedding, beds, and proper shelter are very important both for
comfort and health. Blankets or sleeping bags are essential, and the
blankets should be of pure wool. Some blanket safety pins should be
included in the equipment for the night. In cold weather sleeping bags
are a decided advantage over blankets. A comforter, especially one
filled with wool, is warm and provides a satisfying protection against
the chill of a cold night. Such a comfortable may be bought at a
reasonable price in almost any fair-sized department store; or it may
be home-made where the wool batting with which to fill it can be
procured. This last, however, is not always the case, although in most
city stores this article is obtainable. Such a comfortable should be
inclosed in an outer covering of light, washable material, otherwise it
will very soon become very much soiled.

For the sleeper who prefers to roost high and dry in his auto body
there is considerable choice of arrangements. He may do as already
suggested, turn around his cushions, and with suit cases and duffle
bags make out a pretty good foundation on which to sleep. Nevertheless,
by making a comparatively modest investment, he may get a folding bed
which can be packed into a small roll so as to take little room when
not in use, but which when used will give him a bed incomparably more
satisfactory than one made of cushions and other odds and ends.

One of these car beds, called the “Utility Auto Bed,” will fit any car
from Fords to Packards. It is very comfortable. No mattresses are
needed. It is made of heavy, olive drab canvas. The frame is made of a
strong but light-weight material. The whole folds into a small bundle
which weighs twenty-three pounds. This bed is listed at $15.00. This
bed can also be used out of the car.

Another very comfortable article is the Red Seal Auto Bed. It is truly
a luxurious bed, affording with its strong spring flexible mattress
complete rest and homelike comfort. It has a strong steel frame, light
but rigid, constructed in a manner that makes erection or folding a
simple and quick matter. The mattress is of high-grade duck and
non-stretchable webbing, reënforced with leather where attached to the
springs. This bed is also equipped with strong tensile steel springs
that prevent sagging of the mattress, thus assuring perfect
satisfaction and comfortable sleep. It can be used as an extra bed in
the house. This bed when on a floor stands 17 inches high, with a
length of 6 feet 4 inches and a width of 47 inches. It rolls into a
bundle 47 inches in length with a diameter of 5 inches. The weight is
46 pounds, and the list price $24.50.




In the Tent

Where the camper prefers to do his sleeping in a tent, he has the
choice of the tent floor for a bed, a bed made for the occasion by
laying blankets over straw, leaves, cedar boughs, hemlock fans, or
other browse, or, finally, a camp cot.

If the ground is dry with a gravel or sandy foundation a sleeper can be
quite comfortable lying on a canvas spread directly on the ground
itself. This is true particularly during July and August in those
regions where the nights are warm. The writer has been very comfortable
with nothing under him but a canvas tarpaulin spread on the ground of
his tent over the gravel surface of the tent floor. This, with a single
blanket, has been all that he found necessary for comfortable sleep.

Many prefer to make up a bed of leaves, cedar boughs or other springy
material, which is thrown upon the tent floor and covered with
blankets. To properly confine this foundation within the bounds of the
bed it is well to stake out the map of the bed, and then lay poles cut
to the right lengths within these stakes to bound the bed and keep the
bedding of boughs or leaves in place under the blankets. In the autumn
leaves can easily be gathered in quantities, and these certainly make a
fine easy bed. Boughs form a more problematical material for bedding.
Small cedar branches or twigs well covered with blankets make a good
springy bed with a refreshing balsamic odor. Hemlock fans are a little
rougher than cedar and so do not make as soft a bed. Sometimes where
evergreens are not found, other browse, such as male fern, is used. The
male fern will make an easy bed, but its odor is offensive to some.




Folding Cots

There are any number of varieties of folding cots for those campers who
prefer to sleep in that way. Many of these are quite inexpensive and
fold up very compactly. There is a “Gold Medal Cot,” listed at $4.50,
which folds into a package 4 inches by 5 inches by 3 feet 2 inches long
and weighs 17 pounds. This cot is made of the highest grade olive duck
and will support a weight of over 1,000 pounds.

What is called “The Improved Yankee Cot” is another strong, convenient
and comfortable camp cot. It folds into a package 32 by 4 by 5 inches,
weighs 16 pounds and is guaranteed to support 600 pounds. This cot,
when opened, is 6½ feet long, 27 inches wide and 18 inches high. It is
made of twelve-ounce double-filled brown duck. The woodwork is of
air-dried rock elm, and the steel supports are 14-gauge and all
japanned.




Sleeping Bags

There will be no need of bed or cot where the camper prefers a sleeping
bag. This may be laid down on the tent floor, or even placed out in the
open.

There are sleeping bags which are designed to be used in the open and
which supply their own protection of the head from the inclemencies of
the weather. When the weather is fair many prefer sleeping with no
covering below the stars.

The “Kenwood Sleeping Bag and Tent in One” has 4½, 5½ or 6½-pound inner
bags of soft, warm, new wool. For very cold weather these bags can be
arranged to nest one within the other so that the camper sleeping out
may add or remove the thicknesses of his covering as the temperature
may change. There are special double flaps over chest and shoulders,
and no rest-breaking buckles, snaps, buttons or lacings. A 5½-pound
waterproof canvas cover with extra long fly gives complete outdoor
protection. This sleeping bag is generously roomy. It is 7 feet long by
5 feet 8 inches around. The canvas fly is propped up, forming a dog
tent above the head of the sleeper.




Camp Mattresses

Another combination camp and bed is the “Airtube Camp Mattress.” This
is a mattress with a shelter tent attached. It is impervious to
moisture, and the camper can sleep on the wet ground. The mattress is
formed of 3½-inch Rubber Pneumatic Tubes, incased in separate cells, in
a light, serviceable cover. It is easily filled by lung power, and
requires only about fifteen pounds air pressure. It conforms to the
body and to uneven ground. The tent is made of army khaki cloth and
completely covers and incloses the bed at both the head and foot, the
peak being at the head, with a triangular screened window in the face
of the tent-head for ventilation.

There is a combination sleeping air bed and sleeping bag called the
“Perfection.” When the air bed is deflated it rolls up into a small
compact bundle. The distinct feature of this combination is that
mattress, blankets and bag are three separate articles that make one
complete outfit and still can be used independently. Thus the mattress
with its separate cover can be removed from the bag and used in the
home or otherwise when not wanted in the open. The lining, also being
removable, can be taken out for cleaning and drying, which is an
advantage not to be overlooked, as where the lining is fastened to the
bag it is nearly impossible to get it thoroughly dry when once wet.
This sleeping bag is made of the best quality eight-ounce waterproof
Densol Cloth in a dark brown color, and is closed with a row of braided
loops which insures a tight and strong bag when laced, yet one that can
be instantly opened and spread to the air. The lacing can be ended
anywhere desired. Thus in cold and rainy weather it can be laced all
the way up, leaving only a small opening for the head, and in warm
weather can be left partly open. At the top of the cover is an extra
flap, which can be drawn over the head when used in the open.

There are a number of very good air beds and air pillows on the market
which need not be described, as they are familiar to the public. In
inflating an air mattress a tire pump may be used, but most of them can
easily be inflated by lung power, and the exercise involved will be
good for the camper’s lungs.

Another portable bed is the “Army Bed Roll.” As the name suggests, it
is a bed that rolls up. The outside is of heavy waterproof khaki duck.
The mattress is filled with curled hair. When spread out on a tent
floor it makes a very comfortable bed.

There are mattresses made of Kapok which are in favor with some campers
because of the extreme lightness of the material which gives these
mattresses their name. Kapok is a product of the East Indies. It is a
silky fiber similar to the silk found in the pods of the ordinary milk
weed of our fields. It is about the lightest substance known, at least
of the fiber sort. It is many times lighter than cork, and so is used
in the best grade of life preservers. Kapok beds are very light and
soft and so are attractive to the motor tourist both on the score of
convenience and comfort because so easily portable and restful. Kapok
mattresses when used in sleeping bags serve to make them exceptionally
warm.

Cots if made without a mattress, as most of them are, will need as much
covering beneath the sleeper as above him if the weather be cold.
Newspapers laid on the canvas of a cot will make it much warmer when
warmth is an object. The same is true when newspapers are spread
between blankets, or upon a rubber sheet laid on the ground. If the
ground is not perfectly dry a rubber sheet or rubberized canvas will be
needed if the sleeper wishes to sleep on the floor of his tent.

In the West they have an arrangement that they call a “Slab,” which is
a bag the exact length and width of the cot and is laid upon it as a
mattress and serves fairly well to keep the cold from striking up. This
bag is made of what is called ticking and is similar to the mattresses
still used in some sections, which are bags the size of the bed filled
with straw or corn husks. In fact, except for the bulkiness, such a
home-made mattress serves many very satisfactorily. In almost any part
of this country east of the Missouri River the camping tourist can
readily get some straw from a near-by farmer and fill his bed tick with
it. Where the stay is to be for some days this will involve very little
trouble. To get straw each evening would be rather bothersome.

The insulating properties of the air make an air mattress warmer than a
cot, but in cold weather the air mattress is cold, unless reënforced
with plenty of blankets on its surface.

In cold weather there are many advantages in sleeping in the car. If it
gets cold the engine can be run a while to warm things up a little. In
addition to those car-body beds previously described there are several
others on the market which are excellent for the purpose. Any one with
tools and a little ingenuity can rig up his own sleeping outfit and
without infringing on any patents have as good a bed as the market
affords.

Sleeping in the car gets one away from the intrusion of the creeping
and crawling things that abound on the ground, and which will succeed
more or less in getting into the tent where that is used for sleeping
quarters. Then, too, in time of wet and storm the car is sure to be
dry. On the other hand, the sleeping quarters in the ordinary car are
very close and crowded. There will be no trouble about ventilation, but
pretty much all the space in the tonneau will be occupied by the bed.




Hammocks

Some motor campers get along finely by sleeping in hammocks slung from
the sides of the car at the ends to near-by trees or even to tent
poles. There are some wide hammocks that answer very well as beds. The
snug hammocks that are used in the navy are of strong canvas, but they
are very hard to get into and at first quite uncomfortable. It takes
several nights to get used to one of these hammocks, and some people
never get to enjoy them.

There are really no very satisfactory sleeping hammocks on the market.
The navy hammock can be bought of dealers in navy supplies. The
ordinary porch hammock can be bought almost anywhere, but it is not
very satisfactory as a bed. However, one can buy a wide hammock made of
heavy canvas of tan color with metal spreaders and cotton ropes for
about five dollars which will make a pretty good sleeping hammock for a
camper. Where a hammock is used care should be taken to have the head
higher than the foot and to have it strung as taut as possible,
otherwise the sleeper will be doubled up something after the manner of
a jack-knife.

Although sleeping in a hammock is attended with some difficulty, any
fairly active man or youth ought to find it quite satisfactory in fine
weather. In bad weather some provision will need to be made to secure
shelter from the rain. In the winter season no one will want to sleep
in a hammock because it would be very difficult to keep warm in one in
freezing weather.

A very useful article in cold or chilly weather is a night hood, or
night cap. This should be of wool. Such a protection is mighty
comfortable of a cold night. Also, in cold weather, the best way to
have warm feet is to take off the shoes and day socks and put on heavy
sleeping socks.

Perhaps we should not leave the subject of sleeping accommodations
without describing one or two other interesting outfits for the tourist
camper. One of these is the “Comfort Sleeping Pocket.” This is a
luxurious puncture-proof air bed in a water and wind-proof felt-lined
covering. The outer covering or pocket is made of “Wearproof” duck,
lined with heavy red felt, wind and waterproof, light and strong. It is
shaped to the body to save weight and bulk, but is very roomy. There is
“lots of room” to “turn over,” for blankets, circulation, etc. There is
one opening only, which is closed by snap buttons and an overlap. While
cold and weather-proof, it allows for throwing the pocket open for
airing. An extension flap at the head, 25 by 36 inches, may be used as
a wind-shield, storm hood or head covering. The inside air bed is made
with a patented longitudinal device which prevents the “rolling”
sensation common in old-style air beds. The inside air bed is four feet
long, four inches thick at the top, gradually diminishing toward the
foot. There is no abrupt drop at the end. A pump is not needed as lung
power is sufficient to inflate the bed. As an added protection, the air
bed is inclosed in a felt sub-pocket.

There is also an air pillow, felt covered, 11 by 16 inches, which is
fastened to the bed with snap buttons and which is a part of this
outfit.

The other device which we mention here is a light tent of the lean-to
type with what is called the “Brownie Camp Pad” to support the head,
shoulders, back and hips of the sleeper. The “Brownie Camp Pad” is an
abbreviated air bed which is placed on the sewed-in floor of what is
called a Utility Combination Tent. This is an air-bed combination for
the fellow who goes “light but right” and who requires something light,
strong, practical and inexpensive. The entire combination weighs only
eleven pounds, and when rolled up makes a very small compact package.

When the motor tourist camps in one of the municipal camping parks he
will seldom, if ever, receive assistance in the matter of sleeping
quarters, but these public camping sites are usually lighted with
electricity, they have public comfort stations, and many other features
which are detailed elsewhere. They usually provide, too, a degree of
shelter against bad storms, which have a habit of coming up in the
night to the dismay of the camper. These public camping places are not
only sheltered from the wind, but are well drained and mostly wooded,
so that in a night storm the camper has little to fear from the
elements.

An auto camper who has been at the camping game for the past ten years,
who has kept at week-end camping right along and who has crossed the
continent a couple of times, camping along the route, has out of his
long experience reached this as his standard outfit. He takes an “Auto
bed” with a 7 by 7-foot tent; a six-pound cotton pad or mattress for
the bed; a two-burner gasoline camp stove; one heavy double blanket;
one wool-filled quilt; a blanket roll; two eight-quart milk cans for
water; and a refrigerator basket. The whole affair packs into very
small space.

The tent and bed appeal on account of the roominess of the tent and the
spring feature of the bed. The outfit is heavier than some, but can’t
be beat, he says, “for sleeping comfort.” He considers the bed and tent
the main part of any auto camping outfit, as an uncomfortable selection
of either one will probably do more to discourage the new camper than
anything else. The outfit, bed, tent and pad, fold into small space.
Everything is carried clamped to the running board and weighs about
seventy-five pounds.

This camper uses half of the double blanket under the sleeping pad,
then the bed is made up and the other half of the blanket is pulled
over the top. This makes a sort of a bag and prevents the clothes
pulling out at the foot. One wool blanket and a wool-filled comfort he
has found to be warmer and less heavy than two blankets.

For a blanket roll he took a piece of heavy canvas about seven feet
long by thirty-five inches wide and sewed lighter pieces or wings on
each side and end, then waterproofed the whole thing. The blankets,
folded lengthwise, will just fit in the center when the roll is spread
out. Then the sides can be folded over and the ends rolled up. A couple
of small pillows can be carried inside. It has been found that this
roll keeps dust and wet from bedclothes better than any other way.

The other items of this veteran camper’s outfit consist of a tin
cooking set which nests into a six-quart pail and is somewhat heavier
than an aluminum outfit, but was chosen because the wife preferred it
with its steel frying pan. For a table he used the rack, which is under
and supports his rear seat cushion, for a model, and cut a new one out
of one-half-inch board to take its place. It has folding legs of
three-eighths-inch iron rods sharpened at the end so that they can be
pushed into the ground. For chairs he uses the cushions.

An extra plug socket in the tonneau makes an easy way to get a
connection for a trouble light to hang up in the tent at night. An
extra rear view mirror is clamped to the rear top bow and serves as a
toilet mirror. Other units which this camper advises, but which he does
not always bother with himself are vacuum bottles, folding canvas pail
for wash basin, and a roll of paper towels. These towels may serve as
napkins, and a strip utilized as a table cover.

Rainy weather and chilly nights drive flies into the tent in swarms
which prove a great nuisance in the early morning when the camper is
trying his best to sleep. The best way to get them out is to darken the
tent as much as possible, open the entrance on a wide crack and shoo
them out, using towels vigorously for this purpose. This is fine
exercise and is recommended as a substitute for the “Daily Dozen.”

Mosquitoes seek shelter from the hot sunshine by day, when the camper
is in a region where these winged creatures abound, and are drawn by
artificial light by night. It is easiest to get them out in the early
morning, as they are highly sensitive to light and atmospheric
conditions. In the early morning, too, after having dined well upon the
camper by night, they feel more like taking the air. But, seriously
speaking, always remember that mosquitoes prefer cool, moist air and
dim light rather than darkness or sunshine. If there are any lurking
inside during the day to avoid the hot sunshine they may be driven out
just at dusk without much trouble—in fact, they will go out voluntarily
if an opening is provided. But they are more stupid than flies and need
some gentle persuasion to start them moving and aid them in finding an
exit. Some importance attaches to choosing just the right time for this
operation and closing the exit before twilight, when it becomes a
matter of indifference to the mosquito whether he is indoors or out.








CHAPTER XI

PRIMITIVE CAMPING

    How Two Adventurers Can Rough It—Simple Supplies—Making One’s Own
    Coffee Pot—Plentiful Food in the Wilds.


Although most campers prefer some of the comforts of civilization even
when in the wilderness, there are adventurous souls who like to reduce
the trappings of their everyday life to a minimum. This chapter is
written to indicate how the woods can be made to yield nearly all that
the camper may require if he is sufficiently ingenious, informed, and
anxious to rely on his own resourcefulness.

A couple of husky young fellows need take nothing more with them than a
couple of pup-tents, or hammocks for beds, or, again, if they have a
flivver they can sleep nicely in a bed arranged over the seats of a
touring car or sedan. In fact, by hinging the front seat-back of a
touring Ford, and piecing out the car cushions with a suit case or two,
it is possible to make out quite comfortably without any further
sleeping equipment aside from blankets or comfortables. Another way to
go it cheap is to have a hammock apiece to swing from the car to a
near-by tree. A canvas fly stretched from the top of the car to a tree
or trees sufficiently near, and over the hammocks, will serve to keep
off the rain.

These several suggestions might be multiplied indefinitely, and they go
to show how infinitely various are the simple arrangements that may be
made by the economically inclined motor camper.

If the husky young fellows already mentioned wish to go it wild as well
as cheap, if they are willing to hustle and rough it a little, they can
camp almost anywhere east of the Rocky Mountains, and in most sections
of the Pacific Slope, and live off the land without other supplies. Of
course, they will have to be somewhat resourceful, and not too much of
tenderfeet.

Here is how to do it. For simple equipment they will naturally require
blankets, ax, hunting knife (Boy Scout knife will do), skillet, tin
pail, tin plate, knife, fork, and spoon apiece.

As for safety’s sake it will be best to drink boiled water, it will be
well to take a supply of ground coffee in tins. Most people find boiled
water taken in the form of coffee more palatable.

If not sufficiently sturdy to make a fire without them, matches in a
waterproof container should be included. However, the real pioneer can
make out without pail, skillet or matches. If he is doubtful of his
skill at making fire without matches, he may provide himself with one
of the fire-making outfits sold for about a dollar by the Boy Scouts’
supply house in New York. This outfit will enable him to make a fire
from two pieces of wood in about a minute. If the motor camper has to
make his own fire with pieces of wood, he will be better master of his
fire, will use it more skillfully, and extinguish it more carefully.




Making His Own Coffee-pot

He will need a container in which to make coffee or boil food. The tin
pail would answer, or the skillet. But we are supposing that these have
been discarded. If so, the pioneer camper can make his own container
from a short length of log. It can be done. It has been done. Here is
how to make a dug-out coffee-pot in which coffee can be made or food
boiled. Cut a small log of young maple or black birch (cottonwood or
other soft wood will do) about two feet long and six inches through.
Flatten this on one side. Chamfer out on this side a shallow hollow or
trough one and three-quarter inches deep, three and a half inches wide,
and fourteen inches long. Finish it out with a knife and hot coals.
This trough or container will hold one quart of water. Cut a pouring
lip at one end.




Boiling Water in Wood

Now you are ready to proceed. First fill your container with water.
Next heat six stones about the size of a hen’s egg in the camp-fire
until they are red-hot. Quartz stones are the best. You will be likely
to find some in the bed of any near-by stream, or in any gravel
formation. Slip these hot stones into the water carefully, one at a
time, and at the end of your wooden pot. Six of these stones will bring
to a boil a quart of water in less than five minutes. Of course, in
winter with water ice-cold it will take a little longer. It will
probably take you an hour or more to make the wooden bowl as described.
However, the bowl does not wear out, and you can keep it for future
use. On the other hand it may be more fun to make a new bowl at each
camp.

To make coffee or tea put a pinch of tea or a small spoonful of coffee
in your drinking cup, pour it full of the boiling water, let it stand
for four or five minutes, and it will be ready to drink.

Soup may be made in one of these wooden bowls from prepared soup stock
such as Erbswurst, or from any other of the prepared, dried soups on
the market. To make soup place two teaspoonfuls of the powder in your
bowl, pour in a quart of water, stir up, and then begin slowly adding
your red-hot stones, one at a time, at one end of the trough. Ten
stones will keep the soup boiling for ten minutes—stones, as mentioned,
the size of a hen’s egg. In about fifteen minutes one-half of the soup
will be boiled away and there will be left a pint of rich, satisfying
soup.




Cat-tail Roots Are Good to Eat

However, we have been supposing that this pioneer camper proposes to
live off the country, and that he has taken no supplies with him,
unless it be his coffee, tea, and tobacco. In such a case he will have
to find wild food. This is more easily done than might be thought. For
example, in almost every section you will not have to travel far
without finding the common cat-tail reeds. You will find them along the
coastal shores. They are almost sure to be growing in the swampy spots
found in the folds of the landscape or in the marshes along the rivers
and the margins of lakes. Wherever there is a swamp, there you are
pretty sure to find some of these cat-tails. They usually stand in the
muck or in very shallow water.

Dig out some of these cat-tail stalks with your hand-ax, or grub them
out with your fingers. If you have a shovel along the job will be
easier. Dig up some of these cat-tails and you will find running from
each clump of these reeds to the next clump a root about an inch in
diameter; botanically this root is called a rhizome. The root will be
covered with a brown fibrous bark which can easily be stripped off. The
core within this bark can be boiled like an Irish potato, is more
nutritious, and tastes better. During the starvation times of the
Valley Forge winter Washington’s soldiers discovered that these
cat-tail roots were good to eat and partly lived on them.

After you have procured some of these cat-tail roots, slice them across
with your knife into thin slices, and boil in your wooden pot as
directed for soup and you will find them both satisfying and
appetizing.




The Blue Flower Water Lily Is Tasty

There are other roots, too, besides the cat-tails. Alongside most
streams, ponds, or swamps the arrow-leaf, blue-flowered water lily will
be found growing. This grows in shallow water, and the roots, or rather
tubers, lie practically on the surface of the bottom of the water, and
are very easily dislodged. Being lighter than water, too, they will
float up to the surface when torn loose. These tubers reach about the
size of black walnuts, and may be cooked as the cat-tail roots and with
equal satisfaction. The tubers of the yellow water lily are good also,
but as they lie under from two to four feet of water they are not so
easily gotten at.

Still another root that makes fair eating is the bulb of the wood lily.
These may be found in clearings and at the edges of forests. A slightly
different variety of the same plant is somewhat frequent in open fields
and is known as the meadow lily. These bulbs are rather loose in
formation and may be easily pulled apart. They cook quickly.

For those who like something pungent, wild onion and wild garlic will
fill the bill.

The motor camper who is going it wild and living off the country can
find much that is edible if he will keep his eyes open. For example,
there are the berries, varying with the season—wild strawberries,
raspberries, blackberries, blueberries; even elderberries and
pokeberries are not to be despised. The writer is aware that some
people think the pokeberry poisonous, and in fact it is so
characterized in some books. Nevertheless, in some sections of the
country the poorer folk use them as filler for pies, and the children
eat them raw without any apparent ill effects. However, they are not
especially palatable, being rather tasteless.




Wild Rice Is Palatable

In many localities east of the Rocky Mountains, and particularly in the
Northwest after September, what is called wild rice will be found
growing in shallow lakes or ponds. This is not the white rice of
commerce, but its little stick-like seeds are far more nutritious, and
more tasteful also, than tame rice. Two young fellows in a canoe or
sharpie, one to row, while the other with a stick knocks off the rice
into the boat by striking the heads, can gather a bushel of the grain
into the bottom of the boat in the course of a forenoon. However, this
rice takes about an hour to boil until done, and it is difficult to
cook it successfully without a skillet or other metal container. If
parboiled for fifteen minutes in the wooden pot already described, and
then left to soak overnight, it can be cooked done the next morning in
another fifteen minutes.

The wild motor camper, if he looks about him, will find many appetizing
herbs which he can boil in his skillet. He can find such herbs as
yellow or curly dock (which tastes like spinach), the dandelion, the
young pokeberry shoots, which may be treated in cooking like asparagus,
and numerous other herbs, according to the section through which he
journeys.

This wild camper, naturally, will take along gun and fishing tackle.
One thing he must not forget, and that will be to familiarize himself
with the fishing and game laws of the state through which he tours. In
another part of this book general information will be found concerning
the fishing and game laws of the various states, the open and closed
seasons for the different kinds of fish and game, as also the fees
charged for licenses to fish or hunt. Yet, as these laws are constantly
changing from time to time, it would be wise for the prospective fisher
or hunter to write to the State Fish and Game Commissioner for the
latest information.




Muskrats Are Plentiful

We are aware that in many sections of our country the fish are few and
the game equally scarce. Yet there is nearly always some kinds of fish
that may be found and taken lawfully, as also some kinds of game.

Then, too, there are some kinds of toothsome fish and game that the
hunter or fisherman is not likely to consider. In the game line take
the humble musquash. This is the only wild animal that is holding its
own against man, and is actually increasing in numbers in the settled
sections of this country. It is usually called a muskrat, but it is not
a rat and has no musk. It tastes like squirrel and is equally
palatable. It is nocturnal in its habits, and about the only way to
take it is to trap it. This last is not especially difficult, but the
average wild motor camper probably does not know how. To catch the
musquash it is necessary to use a small steel trap which should be
placed in the water at the entrance to the burrow of the animal which
can be located at the edge or bank of stream, pond, or lake by watching
for the little tracks which the animal makes in the mud.

Another wild creature is a shell fish which the ordinary motor camper
would never think of. We refer to the crawfish which is found in almost
all the muddy streams of the Mississippi Valley, and can be netted, or
caught on a hook. This little animal when boiled gets red like a boiled
lobster, and tastes better than lobster. Of course, almost everywhere
along the seashore one may find clams, mussels and the like for food.
Shell fish may also be found in some fresh-water streams.

The fish or game after being scaled or skinned and dressed may be fried
in the skillet, or even boiled in the sort of wooden pot already
described. However, the most satisfactory way to prepare it if you are
motor camping wild is to roast it on a wooden spit. The spit may be a
wooden rod or stick from which the bark has been peeled. This may be
thrust through the fish or game, and the roasting done in front of or
over the camp fire. Fish should be secured to the spit by being tied on
with string or strips of bark. Otherwise as it cooks it is likely to
fall off into the fire, or to the ground.




Jerusalem Artichoke a Food

The resourceful and observant wild motor camper will discover many
sources of food in addition to those already alluded to. In many parts
of the country he will find the tall stalks of the Jerusalem artichoke
(really a variety of sunflower), also known as the Indian potato. The
potato-like tubers of this plant were eaten by the Indians who
cultivated the Jerusalem artichoke for these tubers. They are good
boiled, and even raw they taste much better than raw Irish potato. This
plant has a yellow flower, looking somewhat like the yellow daisy or
black-eyed susan, except that the central button is yellowish green.




Acorns Can Be Made Edible

Still another source of food for the wild motor camper are the nuts.
These, of course, are not available until fall. The most easily
obtainable nuts, if we may call them nuts, are the different varieties
of acorns. Some of them are quite astringent, but acorns from the white
oak are least so, and even those most astringent may be dried over the
fire, pounded up, placed in a cheese-cloth bag, and leached by pouring
water through the mass until it runs clear without any yellowish tinge.
Boil what remains to a mush and it will be found quite eatable and
nourishing.

Late in the summer the globular mushroom may be found on grassy slopes.
It is called the beef-steak mushroom. When dried it becomes the common
puff-ball. Sliced and fried it is better and more nourishing than the
egg plant. It is not untasty raw. When old and dry, this mushroom makes
a valuable fire-punk and will carry fire for a long time. When young
and fresh, it is solid white all the way through, and may be easily
peeled and sliced.




Beware of Certain Mushrooms

Other varieties of mushrooms had best be viewed with suspicion, unless
you are expert at distinguishing them. Never eat mushrooms with white
or yellow gills growing out of a bulb or cup—they are deadly.








CHAPTER XII

WHERE TO GO

    The Motor Camper’s Continental Range—The Consequent Need of
    Provision for All Touring Emergencies—The Great Continental
    Highways—East and West, Bankhead, Dixie, George Washington,
    Lincoln, Old Trails, National Parks, Pikes Peak, Ocean to Ocean,
    Old Spanish, Roosevelt, Theodore Roosevelt International, Park to
    Park, Yellowstone—North and South, Atlantic, Dixie, Jackson, King,
    Jefferson, Lee, Meridian, Mississippi Valley, Pacific, Pershing,
    Puget Sound to Gulf—Also Many Others of Less Importance Listed and
    Described—Description and Lists of National Parks and Forests,
    State Parks and Forests and a Few Leading Municipal Camping Parks,
    Followed in Next Chapter by a List of These Camp Sites Arranged
    Alphabetically by States—Description of Methods in Vogue in
    National Parks and Forests in Connection with Motor Campers, and
    Provision Made for Their Comfort—The National Parks Listed—Dates of
    Seasonal Opening of Various National Parks—State Parks and Forests
    in Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Maryland,
    Massachusetts, Minnesota, Michigan, New Jersey, New York, North
    Carolina, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Dakota,
    Vermont, Washington, Wisconsin—The Most Striking Municipal Camping
    Parks, Such as Boise, Idaho, Salt Lake City, Cheyenne, Wyoming,
    Denver, and Alameda, California—Desirability of Attracting Motor
    Campers.


The American motor camper has a continental range. Since the
construction of the great transcontinental highways our people have
roamed back and forth east and west from coast to coast and north and
south from the Canadian border to the Gulf.

The summer touring is mostly from East to West and vice versa. In
winter the movement is from North to South and back again with the
approach of warmer weather.

A transcontinental tour is now a comparatively easy matter, provided
the motorist carries along the necessary equipment. Formerly a motor
trip across from coast to coast was somewhat hazardous, and sure to be
at least an expensive and a tiring undertaking. Rapidly improving road
conditions on the main routes of travel are fast making the
transcontinental journey one of enjoyment and interest.

The camper, for an ocean to ocean trip, requires but little, if
anything, more in the way of equipment than is needed for a week-end
tour. With the steady increase of cross-country travel the traveler can
secure all necessary supplies in practically every village along the
main highways.

In taking such a long tour as across the continent it is well to pay a
little more care to the camping outfit. Here the increased comfort will
fully compensate for some added outlay. It is recommended also that the
tourist be sure to have along a shovel, ax, one hundred feet of
five-eighth-inch rope, and a tarpaulin. The likelihood of mud on some
of the trails east of the Rocky Mountains makes this equipment
advisable. Two desert water bags should be taken along if the route
leads through arid country. They may be hung at some place on the car
where the evaporation of the water which soaks through will cool the
contents. Fill with soft water whereever that is procurable, and at
every opportunity.

For a long tour load the car light. You will not need to load up with
gasoline or oil cans. Remember that you will have no difficulty in
obtaining gasoline along the main traveled routes, and need not carry
an extra supply. But it will be well to fill your tank at every
station, whether it is empty or not, for thus you will be sure to have
a sufficient supply of gas until you reach the next place. Of course it
will be wise to have extra parts, and before starting on such a long
tour the car should be equipped with new casings on all wheels and two
spares with the addition of a few good inner tubes. If you have bad
luck with blow-outs, new casings can be bought at almost any town along
the route.

You will be able to buy needed food supplies along the route, but it
will be just as well to carry some emergency rations, such as chocolate
bars, seeded raisins and malted milk tablets.




The Main East and West Highways

The main east and west highways in alphabetical order are:

The Bankhead Highway, from Washington, D. C., southwesterly to San
Diego, Cal., a distance of 3,450 miles, and leading through Richmond,
Raleigh, Atlanta, Birmingham, Memphis, Little Rock, Dallas, Fort Worth,
El Paso, Douglas, Tucson, Phœnix to San Diego. The colors are yellow
and white bands with letters B. H. on white band.

The Dixie Overland Highway, from Savannah to San Diego, a distance of
2,814 miles, and passing through Montgomery, Meridian, Shreveport,
Dallas, Fort Worth, Roswell, El Paso, Douglas, Bisbee, Tucson, Phœnix
to San Diego. Colors: Black letters D. O. H. on yellow and black sign.

George Washington National Highway, from Savannah northwesterly to
Seattle, 3,943 miles, and going through Atlanta, Memphis, St. Louis,
Kansas City, Omaha, Sioux City, Sioux Falls, Deadwood, Butte, Spokane
to Seattle. Colors: Red, blue and red bands with white letter W on wide
blue band.

Lincoln Highway, from New York to San Francisco, 3,323 miles, through
Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, Canton, Lima, South Bend, Chicago Heights,
Cedar Rapids, Omaha, Cheyenne, Salt Lake City, Sacramento, Oakland.
Colors: Red, white and blue bands with letter L on the white.

National Old Trails Road, New York to Los Angeles, 3,281 miles, passing
through Philadelphia, Hagerstown, Wheeling, Columbus, Indianapolis, St.
Louis, Kansas City, Denver, Santa Fe, Albuquerque, Flagstaff, Pasadena.
Colors: Red, white and blue bands.

National Parks Highway, from Chicago to Wenatchee National Park, 2,436
miles, passing through Milwaukee, Minneapolis, St. Paul, Fargo,
Bismark, Dickinson, Billings, Butte, Missoula, Kalispell, Spokane.
Colors: Red and white bands.

Pikes Peak Ocean to Ocean Highway, New York to San Francisco, 3,606
miles, through Newark, Reading, Harrisburg, Pittsburgh, Columbus,
Dayton, Indianapolis, Springfield, Chillicothe, St. Joseph, Colorado
Springs, Salt Lake City, Ogden, Reno, Sacramento, Oakland. From New
York to Pittsburgh known as the William Penn Highway. Colors: Red and
white bands. The Pershing transport route.

Old Spanish Trail, Jacksonville to Los Angeles, 2,956 miles, reaching
Tallahassee, New Orleans, Lake Charles, Houston, San Antonio, El Paso,
Douglas, Tucson, Phœnix, San Diego to Los Angeles. Colors: Red and
yellow bands.

Roosevelt National Highway, Washington, D. C., to Los Angeles, 3,368
miles, via Richmond, White Sulphur Springs, Huntington, Lexington,
Louisville, Vincennes, St. Louis, Jefferson City, Kansas City, Topeka,
Denver, Grand Junction, Salt Lake City, Los Angeles. Colors: Orange,
black and orange bands.

Theodore Roosevelt International Highway, Portland, Maine, to Portland,
Oregon. Via. Montpelier, Burlington, Plattsburg, Oswego, Rochester,
Niagara Falls, London, Ont.; Port Huron, Mich.; Bay City, Duluth, Grand
Forks, Spokane, Seattle to Portland, Ore. Colors: White, red and white
bands with letters T. R. in white on wide red band.

Yellowstone Trail, New York to Seattle, 3,594 miles, via Albany, Utica,
Syracuse, Rochester, Buffalo, Erie, Cleveland, Toledo, South Bend,
Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul-Minneapolis, Billings (Livingston to
Yellowstone Park), Butte, Missoula, Spokane to Seattle. Colors: Black
letters on yellow sign.

Then there is the great highway that circles around by way of a number
of the national parks which is called:

The National Park to Park Highway, which begins at Denver and returns
to the starting point (4,403 miles) via Rocky Mountain National Park,
Cheyenne, Casper, Yellowstone National Park, Great Falls, Glacier
National Park, Spokane, Seattle, Tacoma, Mount Ranier National Park,
Portland, Crater Lake National Park, Sacramento, Yosemite National
Park, Roosevelt National Park, Los Angeles, Zion National Park, Grand
Canyon National Park, Flagstaff, Mesa Verde National Park, Colorado
Springs to Denver again.




North and South Highways

The national highways running north and south are fully as numerous as
those that are transcontinental. Arranged in alphabetical order, the
leading ones are:

Atlantic Highway, from Calais, Maine, to Miami, 2,308 miles, via
Portland, Boston, Providence, New Haven, New York, Philadelphia,
Baltimore, Washington, Richmond, Augusta, Macon, Jacksonville, St.
Augustine, Palm Beach, Miami.

Dixie Highway, East Division—Detroit to Miami, 1,561 miles, via Toledo,
Dayton, Cincinnati, Knoxville, Chattanooga, Augusta, Savannah,
Jacksonville, Palm Beach, Miami. West Division—Chicago to Fort Myers,
1,672 miles, via Indianapolis, Louisville, Nashville, Chattanooga,
Atlanta, Macon, Americus, Thomasville, Tallahassee, Orlando, Kissimmee,
Fort Myers. Colors: White and red, with letters D. H. on red.

Jackson Highway, Chicago to New Orleans, 1,066 miles, via Indianapolis,
Louisville, Nashville, Columbus, Meridian to New Orleans. Colors: Black
letters J. H. on white band.

King of Trails, Winnipeg, Canada, to Laredo, Tex., 1,991 miles, via
Grand Forks, Fargo, Sioux Falls, Sioux City, Omaha, Kansas City,
Muskogee, Dallas, Waco, Austin, San Antonio to Laredo. Colors: Black
letters K. T. on yellow band.

Jefferson Highway, Winnipeg, Canada, to New Orleans, 2,277 miles, via
Minneapolis, St. Paul, Des Moines, Kansas City, Joplin, Muskogee,
Denison, Shreveport, Baton Rouge to New Orleans. Colors: Blue, white
and blue band with letters J. H. combined on the white.

Lee Highway, Washington, D. C., to New Orleans, 1,155 miles, via
Staunton, Roanoke, Bristol, Knoxville, Chattanooga, Birmingham,
Meridian to New Orleans. Colors: Blue letters “Lee” on diagonal white
band with blue and red background.

Meridian Highway, Winnipeg, Canada, to Galveston, Tex., 1,908 miles,
via Grand Forks, Fargo, Yankton, Wichita, Enid, Wichita Falls, Fort
Worth, Waco, Houston to Galveston. Colors: White band with red band
added at turns.

Mississippi Valley Highway, Duluth to New Orleans, 1,635 miles, via St.
Paul, Cedar Rapids, Burlington, St. Louis, Cairo, Jackson, Macon,
Meridian, Hattiesburg to New Orleans. Colors: White and orange bands.

Pacific Highway, Vancouver, British Columbia, to Tia Juana, Mexico,
1,807 miles, via Seattle, Tacoma, Olympia, Portland, Salem, Medford,
Sacramento, Oakland, San José, Santa Barbara, Los Angeles, San Diego.
Colors: Black letters on white signs.

Pershing Way, Winnipeg, Canada, to New Orleans, via Crookston, Mankato,
Waterloo, Cedar Rapids, Hannibal, St. Louis, Memphis, Little Rock,
Opelousas to New Orleans. Colors: Red, white and blue bands with letter
P. on wide white band.

Puget Sound to Gulf, Seattle to Corpus Christi, 2,791 miles, via Walla
Walla, Baker City, Boise, Twin Falls, Ogden, Salt Lake City, Cheyenne,
Denver, Pueblo, Amarillo, San Antonio to Corpus Christi.




Branches of Main Highways

Many of these main highways have important branches which have not been
indicated in this brief summary. There are other important trunk line
routes, such as the Albert Pike Highway from Hot Springs, Ark., to
Colorado Springs, Colo.; The Alton Way (white, black and white bands),
from Chicago to St. Louis, 295 miles; the Arrowhead Trail (marked with
arrowhead in circle), from Salt Lake City to Los Angeles, 853 miles;
and the Big Four Route (yellow, black and yellow bands), Terre Haute to
St. Louis, 211 miles; and to Hannibal, Mo., 343 miles.




Other Important Trails

Other important trails for the motor tourist which are now available
are:

The Black and Yellow Trail (black and yellow bands), Chicago to the
Yellowstone National Park, 1,610 miles.

The Black Diamond Trail (black diamond on white band), from
Springfield, Ill., to Nashville, Tenn.

The Black Hawk Trail (black head on white band), from Dixon, Ill., to
Beloit, Wis., 60 miles.

The Black-Hills-Denver-Diamond Highway, from Denver, Colo., to
Deadwood, S. Dak., 460 miles.

The Blue Grass Trail (white, blue and white bands), across Illinois
from Momence, Ill., to Burlington, Iowa. And across Iowa from
Burlington to Omaha.

The Blue Trail (marked with blue bands), from Glacier Park Station,
Mont., to Banff, Canada, 327 miles.

Boone Way, from Lexington, N. C., to Louisville, Ky.

Buffalo Trail, from Great Falls to Billings, Mont., 253 miles.

California-Banff Bee Line Highway, from Los Angeles, Cal., to Banff,
Canada, via Spokane, Wash.

Cannon Ball Trail (black ball on white band), from Chicago, Ill., to
Hannibal, Mo., 341 miles.

Caterpillar Trail (green name on orange band), from Peoria to Pontiac,
Ill., 60 miles.

Chicago, Kansas City and Gulf Highway (black letters C. K. C. G. within
red cross on white band). From Chicago to Galveston.

Corn Belt Route (white band with yellow ear of corn), from Effner,
Ind., to Burlington, Iowa.

Cross-State Highway (white cross on black band), from Hannibal to St.
Joseph, Mo.

Custer Battlefield Highway (red, white and red bands), from Omaha,
Neb., to Glacier National Park, Mont.

Denver-Yellowstone Highway, from Denver to south entrance of
Yellowstone Park.

Diamond Trail, from Freeport to Galesburg, Ill., 124 miles.

Dixie Bee Line (yellow letters on black band), from Danville, Ill., to
Louisville, Ky.

Egyptian Trail (black figure on yellow band), from Chicago to Cairo,
Ill., 497 miles.

F. F. F. Highway (letters F. F. F. and arrows), from Fort Worth, Tex.,
to Las Vegas, N. M., 639 miles.

Fort Smith, Paul’s Valley and Wichita Falls Highway, Fort Smith, Ark.,
to Wichita Falls, Tex., 331 miles.

Geyser-to-Glacier Highway, from Yellowstone to Glacier National Park,
546 miles.

Grant Highway, from Chicago, Ill., to Portland, Ore., via South
Entrance Yellowstone Park.

Great White Way (wide white band), across Iowa from Davenport to Omaha,
337 miles.

Hawkeye Highway (blue letter H. on white band), across Iowa from
Dubuque to Sioux City, 340 miles.

Indian Head Trail, from Galesburg, Ill., to Minneapolis, Minn., 413
miles.

Kansas-Oklahoma-Texas and Gulf Highway, from Florence, Kan., to Dallas,
Tex., 514 miles.

Kickapoo Trail (white, red and white bands), from Peoria, Ill., to
Muscatine, Ia.

Lakes-to-Gulf Highway (black letters L. G. on white bands), from
Duluth, Minn., to Galveston, Tex., 1,826 miles.

Lee Highway, from Gettysburg to New Orleans.

Lewis and Clark Trail, from Lewiston, Idaho, to Missoula, Mont.

Liberty Highway (red bands), from New York to Erie, Pa., 496 miles.

Logan-Lee Highway (red, white and blue bands with L. L. H. on white),
across Illinois from Rock Island to Paducah, Ky., 441 miles.

Mackinaw Indian Trail (black figures on white band), from Peoria to
Bloomington, Ill., 42 miles.

Mark Twain Route, from Chicago to Kansas City, 555 miles.

Mohawk Trail (red bands), from Albany to Boston, 182 miles.

North Iowa Pike, across Iowa from McGregor to Sioux Falls.

Omaha-Lincoln-Denver Highway (black letters O. L. D. on white bands),
from Omaha to Denver, 627 miles.

Omaha-St. Louis Highway (red, white and red bands), from Omaha to St.
Louis, 476 miles.

Ozark Trail, from St. Louis, Mo., to Las Vegas, N. M.

Perry Highway, from Pittsburgh to Erie, Pa., 136 miles.

Park-to-Park Highway, from Yellowstone to Glacier National Park via
Missoula.

Potash Highway, from Grand Island to Alliance, Neb.

Rainbow Trail, from Pueblo to Grand Junction, Colo., 238 miles.

Red Ball Route (marked with red ball), from St. Paul, Minn., to St.
Louis, Mo., 487 miles.

River-to-River Road (white, black and letter R.), across Iowa from
Davenport to Omaha, 349 miles.

Robert E. Lee Highway, from New Orleans to San Diego.

Scott Highway, from Duluth, Minn., to Fort William and Port Arthur, 210
miles.

Southwest Trail (black letters S. W. on white bands), from Chicago to
Laredo, Tex., 1,706 miles.

Utah-Idaho-Yellowstone Highway, from Salt Lake City to West Entrance of
Yellowstone Park, 360 miles.

Waubonsie Trail (black, white and black bands), across Iowa from Keokuk
to Lincoln, Neb.

Yellowstone Highway (yellow and gray bands, black letters Y. H.), from
Denver to East Entrance of Yellowstone Park, 638 miles.

Y-G Bee Line Highway, from Yellowstone to Glacier National Park via
Great Falls, 355 miles.




Great Variety of Camping Sites

The National Parks and Forests, the State Parks and Forests, and the
Municipal Camping Parks offer a great variety of camping sites for the
motor-camping tourist. The accommodations offered in the National Parks
and Forests are, for the most part, more remote than any other class of
camping sites, and the facilities offered consist mainly of fireplaces,
and, in some cases, of simple shelters also. The State Parks and
Forests are much more limited in extent than the National Parks and
Forests, but they are becoming very numerous. The State Parks and
Forests, however, usually do not offer much more than camping
privileges, though some states—New York, for example—make some
provision for campers, building fireplaces and rude shelters.

It is the municipal camping parks that are most numerous and that make
most extensive provision for the comfort of the touring camper. Many
cities like Denver and Los Angeles expend large sums of money in the
equipment of extensive camping parks that in the course of a season
entertain many thousands of campers.

These various sorts of camping sites with the facilities offered are
shown in tabulated form by states in the following chapter, so that the
reader by looking for a given state in its alphabetical place can see
what National Parks and Forests it may have, what State Parks and
Forests, and what municipalities within its bounds make provision for
campers. The tabulated list will also show what accommodations are
offered by each site listed.


The National Parks and Forests—Four Times the Area of New England

Few people realize the extent of our National Parks and Forests. They
embrace an area of about one hundred and seventy-five million acres,
which is equivalent to nearly four times the area of New England.

While located mostly in the Rocky Mountain region and in the states of
the Pacific Slope they are also found in some of the states of the
Atlantic Coast.




The Forests

There are one hundred and seventy-one separate National Forest tracts,
and these one hundred and seventy-one forests are found in twenty-nine
states and territories. The territories are Alaska and Porto Rico.

The administrative arrangement of these tracts is by districts, of
which there are eight. The First District contains twenty-six forests
situated in Idaho, Montana, South Dakota and Washington. In the Second
District there are twenty-seven forests located in Colorado, Minnesota,
Nebraska, South Dakota and Wyoming. District Three has fourteen forests
which are found in Arizona and New Mexico. The Fourth District includes
thirty-five forests in the states of Arizona, Colorado, Idaho, Nevada,
Utah, and Wyoming. In District Five we have twenty-one forests which
are in California and Nevada. District Six holds twenty-five forests
situated in Oregon and Washington. The seventh district includes
forests in Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Maine, New Hampshire,
North Carolina, Oklahoma, Porto Rico, South Carolina, Tennessee,
Virginia and West Virginia. District Eight covers the forests of
Alaska.

If you go into almost any city west of the Great Plains and pick up a
telephone book the chances are that you will find a number entered in
it for the “Forest Service.” And if you should go to the address
recorded with the number you will probably find an office building in
the business part of the town, within which somewhere is a glass door
carrying the name of a National Forest.

There are such offices in Seattle, Portland, and Los Angeles; in Denver
and Salt Lake City; in Missoula, Mont., and in Tucson, Ariz. Also there
are National Forest headquarters in dozens of little places of which
you may never have heard.

Besides trails suitable for foot passengers and pack animals there are
within the Forests other hundreds of miles of roadway fit for
automobiling. Much of this mileage has been built by the Forest
Service, usually in coöperation with local (county or State)
authorities. But, however financed, the finished roads lie far and
tempting through the forests. Thither the camping tourist in his
automobile may take his way and linger for days and weeks at a time.
The mountains, streams, and woodlands are laid open to many thousands
of persons in this way, and no one counting their crowding procession
can doubt their appreciation of the opportunity.

A typical example of this provision for public service is found in the
Park-to-Park Highway running between the Yellowstone and National Park
and Glacier National Park, constructed by Forest Engineers and passing
over the Great Divide and through the Beaverhead and the Bitterroot
Forests. The most famous example is certainly the Columbia River
Highway which, though not designed or built by the Forest Service,
passes for miles through the Oregon National Forest.

Along these automobile trails camps are in strong demand. Many trail
tourists do not mind patronizing the hotels a part of the time, but for
the rest they greatly prefer the tent and the camp fire. To meet their
needs the Forest Service has laid out and equipped a large number of
camps. These are always located where good water is available, and
usually a practicable wood supply is an item of the equipment. Simple
provisions are made for sanitation, and cement fireplaces are often
installed. Sometimes telephone service is made available. Such camps
are extensively used by travelers, especially along the more popular
through routes. To a certain degree they prove a protection for the
forests, since the camp fires of the tourists, instead of being set in
out-of-the-way and dangerous places, are made in safe areas. It is
found, moreover, that the campers, once their interest and coöperation
is aroused, become a volunteer fire guard of no mean efficiency. In
hundreds of instances these tourists report incipient fires or assist
in putting them out.

The number of visitors to the National Forests now mounts up into
millions. Of these over three and a half million last summer were motor
tourists.




The National Parks

National Parks. In addition to and distinct from the National Forests
there are a list of notable National Parks, some of them, as, for
example, the Yellowstone, of vast extent. These parks for the most part
ask motor visitors to register. Campers are required to register. The
registration of cars for the season of 1922 reached a total of 198,515
cars and 695,614 motorists. This number has since had a considerable
increase. The figures just given are those reported by the Director of
the National Park Service.

The National Parks are Hot Springs, Middle Arkansas; Yellowstone,
Wyoming, Montana, and Idaho; Sequoia, Middle East California; Yosemite,
Middle East California; General Grant, Middle East California; Mount
Rainier, West Central Washington; Crater Lake, Southern Oregon; Wind
Cave, South Dakota; Platt, Southern Oklahoma; Sullys Hill, North
Dakota; Mesa Verde, Southwestern Colorado; Glacier, Northwestern
Montana; Rocky Mountain, North Middle Colorado; Lassen Volcanic,
Northern California; Grand Canyon, North Central Arizona; Lafayette,
Maine Coast; and Zion, Southwestern Utah. There are two others, Mount
McKinley, Alaska (2,200 square miles), and Hawaii (118 square miles).
They are both inaccessible to the ordinary motorist. The largest of
these National Parks, as already noted, is the Yellowstone with 3,348
square miles—about a thousand square miles more than make up the state
of Delaware, which has an area of 2,370 square miles. Lafayette Park,
which consists of the group of granite mountains upon Mount Desert
Island, has only eight square miles of area. The other larger parks are
Glacier, 1,534; Yosemite, 1,125; and Grand Canyon, 958 square miles.
The total National Park area to date is 10,859 square miles for the
nineteen parks.

Most of the National Parks, like the National Forests, have numerous
motor trails, with frequent camping sites along these trails, many of
which have considerable equipment and offer convenient facilities of
various sorts to the motor camper.




Opening Dates of Parks

One thing for the motor tourist to ascertain when planning to visit one
of the National Parks is the dates at which the parks open. All the
National Parks are open during the summer months of July and August.

The usual dates of opening and closing as officially announced are as
follows: Crater Lake Park, July 1 to Sept. 30; General Grant Park, May
24 to October 10; Glacier Park, June 15 to September 15; Lassen Park,
June 1 to September 15; Mesa Verde Park, May 1 to November 1; Mount
Rainier Park, June 15 to September 15; Rocky Mountain Park, June 15 to
October 1; Sequoia Park, May 24 to October 10; Wind Cave Park, South
Dakota, June 1 to September 30; Yellowstone Park, June 20 to September
15; Zion Park, May 15 to November 1. Other National Parks not mentioned
above are open all the year.




State Parks and Forests

We come now to The State Parks and Forests. Most of the states own more
or less extensive areas of land, much of which is in forest. Most
states, too, have a forestry department. Where states have state-owned
land there is usually no objection to campers using it temporarily. In
many states, however, and particularly where provision has been made
for the accommodation of campers, a permit is required which may be
obtained from the local official of the Forestry Department. There is
usually no charge made for the temporary use of a state camping site.

The following states have state lands which are available for motor
tourist camping:

Alabama has state-owned forests which are in the control of the
Department of Conservation, but has no State Forester and has no
information relative to the state forests.

Arkansas has a Tourist Division of the Bureau of Mines, Manufactures
and Agriculture, which issues a sumptuous booklet entitled “Playgrounds
of Arkansas,” bearing the invitation, “Let the State of Arkansas Help
You Plan Your Vacation Trip.” This work gives valuable general
information about the state and its climate. It is also copiously
illustrated, and mentions the resorts that have camping parks for
motorists. Obtainable on application to Tourist Division, etc., State
House, Little Rock, Ark.

Florida is hospitable to motor tourists and has four State Parks. They
are the Royal Palm State Park; the Natural Bridge State Park; the Port
St. Joe State Park; and the Dade Memorial Park.

Illinois has a few State Parks under the supervision of the Department
of Public Works and Buildings. These parks are mostly of a
commemorative character and offer little in the way of accommodations
for the motor camper.

The largest of these parks is Starved Rock Park, on the Illinois River,
with an extent of approximately nine hundred acres. This park has much
scenic beauty and is equipped throughout with artesian water, electric
light and a sewerage system.

Indiana is interested in motor campers and issues a pamphlet entitled
“Automobile Camps in Indiana,” which lists both the State Parks
available for the camper and also the municipal motor camps. Obtainable
on application to Department of Conservation, Indianapolis. The State
Parks apparently number only five, of which the largest, the Clark
County State Forest, is a tract of 2,800 acres.

Iowa has a Board of Conservation which maintains sixteen State Parks,
the largest of which, Backbone Park, has an area of 1,279 acres and is
situated on the Maquoketa River. Lacey-Keosauqua Park is nearly as
large—1,222.1 acres. These and several other of the larger parks are in
the care of custodians who look after the requirements of campers.

Maryland.—The Maryland State Board of Forestry issues a pamphlet under
the title “The State Reserves of Maryland, A Playground for the
Public.” The most important of these reserves are the reserves of
Garrett County on the crown of the Blue Ridge in the western part of
the state, a reserve embracing about 2,000 acres. Permits are issued to
campers without charge upon the applicant signing an application in
which he agrees to abide by the regulations laid down by the Board.

Massachusetts has fifteen State Forests aggregating 50,000 acres. The
greater part of them are not of much benefit to motorists, as they are
not located on state highways, and many of them are in fact almost
inaccessible to motor cars on account of the condition of the roads.
There are three forests on the main highways, the Mohawk Trail Forest,
the Erving Forest and the Otter River Forest. Improved camp sites in
these forests await a legislative appropriation for the purpose.
Massachusetts has five State Parks which are owned by the state, but
maintained by the counties, and so under county jurisdiction. These are
the four mountain parks: Wachusett (1,200 acres), Greylock (8,000
acres), Sugar Loaf (150 acres), Everett (1,000 acres), and Tom (1,600
acres).

Michigan issues an illustrated pamphlet entitled “The Parks of the
People,” which are under the control of the State Department of
Conservation. There are twenty-three of these State Parks, mostly of
modest size. The largest of these parks is the Hanson Military Reserve
with an extent of 15,000 acres. No other exceeds several hundred acres.
The appointments of the Michigan State Parks are excellent for campers.
All State Parks are equipped with such conveniences as are necessary to
make the camper enjoy his stay. The bathing beaches have public bath
houses equipped in such a way that the bathers may place their
belongings under lock and key. Outdoor fireplaces constructed of
concrete will be found in all the park sites. An ample supply of good
drinking water is also provided. There are also receptacles for waste
paper and other rubbish, as also sanitary convenience stations.
Michigan is not only surrounded on three sides by water, but, with a
single exception, is said to have more small lakes than any other
state. All of the State Parks are accessible by well-built state
highways.

Minnesota has an area of some 350,000 acres in what is known as the
“New State Forests.” With the advent of good roads and the increase in
the number of automobile tourists a number of good camping grounds have
been established in the Forest. These grounds are easily accessible and
have a good supply of wood and water. The State Forester warns campers
that “it is unlawful to burn in this state when the ground is not snow
covered without first obtaining a burning permit from the local Fire
Warden or other authorized Forest Officer.”

New Jersey has state forests exceeding 17,000 acres in extent. The
largest of these is the North Jersey State Forest of 7,200 acres. There
are six others of lesser size. Camping privileges may be secured in
each of these, without charge, upon application to the local forester.
All these forests are fairly accessible by automobile.

New York has an imperial system of State Parks and Reservations. There
are some thirty-three parks administered in various ways which are
mostly of a commemorative character, such as Washington’s Headquarters
at Newburgh, and a number of battlefields. The largest of the parks is
the Palisades Interstate Park of 30,000 acres along the Hudson. The
Conservation Commission of the State of New York administers the
extensive forest preserves of the State. The largest of these, the
Adirondack Park, embraces an area of nearly three and a half million
acres and is slightly larger than the state of Connecticut. The
Catskill Park has more than half a million acres, more than a hundred
thousand acres of which are owned outright by the state. There are some
seven forest tracts owned by the state. In these forest reserves,
particularly in the Catskill Park, the state has constructed many
trails, and along these trails there are many camping sites, but
usually not much more is provided than a fireplace.

North Carolina has one State Park which is reached through the property
of the Mount Mitchell Development Company and is named the Mount
Mitchell State Park. This park comprises 1,200 acres of rough mountain
land, including the summit of Mt. Mitchell, the highest peak east of
the Mississippi River. This park is accessible by motor, and the
company owning the road makes a toll charge of $1.00 per person for all
automobiles using the road. The company also rents tents at the end of
the road which reaches the park.

Oregon owns 78,000 acres of woodland about equally divided between the
eastern and western sections of the state. Little attention has been
paid to providing camping sites in these State Forests, as many of them
are inaccessible to motorists. However, a number of wardens whose
districts include popular camping regions do erect fireplaces and
devote some time to fixing up suitable camp grounds and keeping them in
order for tourists.

Pennsylvania. The Department of Forestry of the State of Pennsylvania
has developed and equipped eight public camp grounds in the State
Forests for automobile tourists who carry camping outfits with them.
All that is asked is that the camper be careful with fire and that he
leave the camp as he would like to find it. These eight public camp
grounds have been equipped with a space for tents, a fireplace, a
supply of pure water, two comfort stations, four garbage containers,
four tables and eight benches. Where public camp grounds are adjacent
to state-owned telephone lines, public telephones are installed.

Rhode Island issues “A Guide Book to the Reservations of the
Metropolitan Park System of Rhode Island” which is illustrated and
describes eighteen parks, the largest of which is the Lincoln Woods
reservation with 458 acres. In most of these parks shelters and
fireplaces have been located for the use of such camping parties as
have applied for and received permission for such use.

South Dakota prides itself on its State Park among the peaks of the
Black Hills and issues an illustrated pamphlet setting forth its
beauties. The park is eight by twelve miles in extent and has an area
of 61,440 acres. The park is called the Custer State Park.

Vermont has a list of thirteen State Forests ranging in size from the
Groton Forest, 15,000 acres, down to the Arlington Forest of 225 acres.
The only forests of more than a thousand acres, however, aside from the
Groton, are the Mansfield, 5,000 acres, and the Putnam, 1,400. No
provision has been made by the Department for campers.

Washington has a State Parks Committee which reports that “camp sites,
not including those maintained by various municipalities throughout the
state, are now being established through four agencies, namely, the
State Forestry Department, the State Parks Department, the Washington
Forest Fire Association (an association of large timber land owners),
and those established by private land owners.

“Camp sites prepared by the State Forestry Department are generally
upon lands leased by the department, such lands being situated upon
public highways and usually adjoining running streams of pure water,
fireplaces and free wood being provided. There are twenty-one of these
sites, mostly in counties in the western portion of the state. There
are sixteen state parks, upon some of which camping sites have been
established, and others will be provided.”

Wisconsin has eight State Parks, with the establishment of four others
under consideration. The largest of these parks is the Peninsula State
Park of 3,400 acres fronting on Green Bay. The state issues an
illustrated pamphlet describing these parks, but no mention is made of
camp sites, though probably such exist.

The rising tide of motor tourists has led most municipalities from the
Middle States westward to lay out camping parks. In many cases no fee
is charged. Mostly, however, there is a small charge per day, averaging
probably not more than fifty cents.

California leads in the number of these motor-camping sites provided by
municipalities. But while the California camping parks exhibit every
quality of attractiveness, they cannot exceed the appeal of many of the
camping parks of the Rocky Mountain States, or even of those farther to
the eastward.




Boise’s Attractive Park

Take the camp at Boise, Idaho, as an example of an attractive motor
park. In Boise the camp is situated at a natural hot water spring—a
spring, by the way, which furnishes heat sufficient to warm practically
all the business blocks and residences in the city. Thus this camp has
hot water service. Practically all the equipment is electrically
operated, including stoves, laundry machines, etc. The land of the
Boise camp is city owned and loaned by the city council. The Chamber of
Commerce took hold and got the coöperation of the rest of the city.
Power and light were furnished free by the utility corporation.
Materials were donated for construction and the labor unions gave their
labor for the construction of the buildings and equipment.




A Model Site in Salt Lake City

The Salt Lake City camping park is another example of a most attractive
camp site. The camp comprises eight acres and will accommodate 400
cars. It is equipped with water, sewers, arc lights, a wash rack for
cars, free firewood and a commissary building at which tourists’
larders may be replenished. Signs posted on the fence invite the
tourists to stop and rest as guests of Salt Lake City. Hundreds of tall
shade trees help to make the place an ideal camping ground.

Practically every community of any size along the Lincoln Highway west
of Omaha offers to the motor tourist the use of a camp site, if it is
only an open lot in which the tourist is free to park for the night. No
accurate figures can be compiled of the number of motor campers, partly
because many never register or use the more popular municipal camping
parks, and partly because even where registry is required there is no
central bureau to which the figures can be reported. Even were it
possible for one to visit the two thousand or more camping sites of
various kinds that are used throughout the country he could not obtain
any accurate figures of the number of campers entertained.

But take a single park in a city along the Lincoln Highway, the city of
Cheyenne, Wyoming, and one can get a little idea of the vast multitude
taking to the open road at the height of the camping season. A visitor
to this camp ground of forty acres on the edge of a little lake near
this city on July 28, 1921, at the peak of travel for the season made a
careful census of the cars in the park on that day and found a total of
763 cars and 2,540 people from thirty-two states. In addition to the
people camped inside the forty acres, it was estimated that about 500
more people were outside, unable to get in. Of course, Cheyenne is a
crossroads community where a main north and south road from Denver to
the Yellowstone crosses the Lincoln Highway. However, many other
popular camping parks turn thousands away because of being taxed to the
limit of capacity, and this despite the fact that many motor campers
avoid the crowds at municipal camping parks and always prefer to camp
in more secluded spots.




Denver’s Remarkable Overland Park

One of the most noted camping parks is Denver’s quarter million dollar
automobile park. This park includes some seventy-five or eighty acres
covered with fine groves of cottonwoods, maples and other trees. It was
formerly the Overland Country Club, and is now called the Overland
Motor Park. The former clubhouse, a three-story building containing
twenty-four rooms, was remodeled for the convenience of tourists. The
first floor contains a modern grocery store and meat market, kitchen,
grill and lunch counter, steam table from which prepared foods are
dispensed, billiard room, barber shop, men’s showers and comfort
station and a laundry room, containing eight tubs for women campers.
Both the laundry room and the showers are equipped with hot and cold
water. On the second floor are located a large lounging room, equipped
with a phonograph, where visitors may dance, a restaurant and soda
fountain. The balconies of the building are also fitted with tables and
chairs where refreshments may be served. On the third floor are located
the rooms of the concessionaire who handles the commercial features of
the house, and the women’s showers and comfort station and lockers.

The campers register at the gate and are given written permits to
occupy a certain lot in the park for a period of two weeks. After the
expiration of this time, if the grounds are not crowded, the permit may
be renewed. The city engineers have surveyed 800 camp lots, each 25 by
35 feet. These are marked by posts driven in the ground and numbered.
The camp area, however, may be extended to any required size upon short
notice.

Pipes have been extended from the city water mains, so that no camper
is more than 150 feet from a water hydrant. The camp is also lighted by
powerful incandescents from the city lighting system. Several strictly
modern comfort stations have been erected at various points in the
grounds. Overland Park was at one time the site of an interstate
exposition, and several of these exposition buildings have been
utilized in the scheme of development. One of them houses an automobile
repair shop and a garage, as well as a moving picture theater seating
400 people. At the entrance of the park is an automobile filling
station, where gasoline, oil and motor accessories may be obtained.

It is obvious that a great many of these accommodations are put in for
the convenience of the camper, but must be conducted as concessions.
However, the free service the camper receives includes the following:
Camp lot, water and electric light, hot and cold showers for men and
women, sanitary conveniences, laundry, lounging and dancing room. The
grounds are well policed night and day by park authorities.

So much for a motor-camping park in and conducted by a great city.
However, the great Overland Camping Park of Denver does not surpass in
completeness of service some of the parks maintained by small
localities. Take an example. Alhambra is situated six miles northeast
of Los Angeles and three miles from Pasadena. Alhambra boasts that it
has the most complete auto camp in California, and California is the
land of auto camps. It is situated for rest and comfort in a clean and
sanitary location amid a stately grove of eucalyptus trees. The entire
camp is well graveled, smooth, level, no mud, no dust, no fog,
electrically lighted, under police protection.

The camp has an amusement hall, inclosed, with new player piano and
fine dancing floor for the free use of guests. Also free to campers is
an electric laundry room with concrete floor, hot and cold running
water, sewerage, large new electric washer and wringer, other washers,
tubs, drying rack, ironing boards, electric iron connections, etc.

Further, the campers have free use of community kitchens, inclosed,
new, sanitary, with water, screens, electric light and gas stoves for
cooking. There is open plumbing. There are free shower baths, with hot
and cold water. There is also a free rack and hose for cleaning autos.
There is no time limit. Each car is allotted a space twenty feet
square, and the charge for camping space is fifty cents for each
twenty-four hours. This appears to be the only charge.

These camps just described are but typical of a multitude of other
camping parks, many of which are quite as attractive as those
mentioned.

Most municipalities court the motor camper, and when the contrary is
the case it is felt as a fault. One chamber of commerce secretary in an
Indiana town writes, “We have no motor camp site. We are made up of a
bunch of retired farmers, the most unprogressive lot of folks on
earth.” The secretary of a Pennsylvania municipal commercial club gives
the information, “This darn town don’t seem to want visitors as far as
I can see.”

No doubt some motor campers are undesirable. One communication to a
sporting publication says: “It is difficult to believe that people of
even moderate intelligence can be as unsanitary as are many motor
campers. Many auto campers pay no regard whatever to the game laws.
Many auto campers steal. It is stealing for melons, corn, potatoes, and
other vegetables and fruit to be taken from the fields.”

The above is one side of the picture and a very small side. Most motor
campers are decent, kindly folk whose presence is appreciated by the
communities that they visit. Many places have found their motor-camping
parks veritable gold mines. Aberdeen, S. D., reports that during the
recent season tourists spent over $175,000 in the town. The great
profit that may derive from the wandering motor camper who proves to be
an angel not at all disguised may be seen from a report rendered to the
American Automobile Association a couple of years ago to the effect
that in a single season 460,000 tourist cars had visited the state, and
that their occupants had spent in the state a sum of not less than
$40,000,000.

As indicated above, much of the tabulated information is new. In
addition to the questionnaire already alluded to much information
relating to motor-camping sites has been obtained from state and
national sources. Use has also been made of lists of municipal camping
parks already published, and corrections made in the information
supplied from such sources when necessary.




Standardized Camping Parks

At a recent convention held at Long Beach, Cal., which was attended by
representatives from about a hundred towns and cities in Southern
California, it was decided to draw up a list of facilities which each
motor camp ground should give to visitors, and also to draw up a list
of rules which the visitors, as a return courtesy, should abide by.

It was decided that each municipal auto camp must have showers for men
and women, it must have gas for cooking, telephone service, public
comfort stations, water, and electricity for lighting.




Motor Inns

There is coming to be a new development in connection with motor
touring which is designed to meet the requirements of those who desire
a little more luxury than can be had in ordinary camping, but who do
not care for either the formality or the expense involved in putting up
at the average first-class hotel.

To meet the demands of this class what are called Motor Inns are
springing up in hundreds of localities, some of them being operated on
the chain principle, thus securing uniformity of operation and
standardized service and equipment.

One of the most complete of these motor inns is one that is in
operation at Los Angeles. Like others it combines in many respects the
features of both an automobile camp and a hotel. The plant consists of
an office, a community building, and a group of bungalows, numbering at
present some fifteen. Each bungalow has four bedrooms fitted up for two
persons, many of the rooms with private bath. These rooms rent for
$1.50 and $2.00 per night, accordingly as they are without or supply
baths.

This inn represents an investment of about $90,000, and one of the same
scope and cost, the second in a chain that is to dot the state, has
been established at Fresno.

The California motor inns for the most part consist of a group of four
apartment bungalows, garages, main building, and pavilion on spacious
landscaped grounds. Usually the bungalow apartments consist of a single
room with toilet and bath. Thus under one roof there will be but eight
persons, at most, housed at one time.

The price of entertainment also includes a garage for the car, and the
use of the kitchen and its equipment, such as gas stove, sink, running
water, tubs and the like. The kitchen is located in the community
house. The rooms are as large as one finds in first-class hotels. Those
without private bath adjoin so as to provide toilet and bath between
the two rooms.

The community building provides a well-furnished reception room, and
also a dining-room with tables for the guests. The motor inn is really
a first-class hotel with a large degree of self-service.

Ample furniture is supplied for both the bedrooms and those in the
community house. Naturally, however, kitchen utensils and dishes are
not furnished for the guests. In effect the guest continues to be a
camper, but a camper with hotel conveniences.








CHAPTER XIII

LIST OF CAMPING SITES BY STATES

    A List of About Two Thousand Camping Sites Arranged Alphabetically
    by States—Municipal Camp Sites, State Camp Sites, and Camp Sites in
    National Parks and Forests, Beginning with Alabama and Closing with
    Wyoming—This List Indicates in Tabular Form the Facilities Offered
    at Each Camp Site.


(Note: So rapidly is the camping movement growing that any list of
sites is subject to continual addition. The following list, however, is
the result of a thorough canvass of all state and national forest and
park officials, and of all towns and cities in the United States. A
large percentage of the civic authorities in replying to inquiry either
omitted to give details concerning the camp site in their locality, or
else stated that the provision of facilities was as yet undetermined.
In such cases the line following the name of the site is left blank. A
number of facilities may be available at such points, but statement of
the accommodations is given in this chapter only where the authors have
a definite record on the various points noted.)

F indicates “Free.”

C indicates “a moderate charge is made.”

Y indicates “Yes, the facility referred to in the column heading is
available.”




ALABAMA

Municipal Camp Sites


   Town or City Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace or Lights Bath or
                Free             Water    Stove               Shower
   Albany       F         Y      Y        Y            Elec.
   Anniston     F         Y      Y        Y            Elec.  Y
   Athens
   Attala       F                Y        Fuel         Elec.
   Birmingham   25c.      Y      Y        Y            Elec.  Y
   Brundidge
   Calera
   Clanton
   Cullman      F                Y
   Decatur      F                Y                     Elec.
   Dothan       F         Y      Y        Y            Elec.  Y
   Huntsville   F         Y      Y        Y
   Luverne      F         Y      Y        Y            Elec.  Y
   Montgomery   F         Y      Y        N            Elec.
   Ozark        F                Y        Fuel         Elec.
   Talladega    F         Y      Y        Fuel         Elec.  Y
   Thorsby
   Tuskegee     F                Y
   York         F                         Fuel


The State of Alabama has a Department of Conservation, but no Forestry
Department, and can supply no information as to possible camping sites
on state-owned lands.

The Moulton National Forest is situated in the State of Alabama, and
the local forester would doubtless welcome motor campers.




ARIZONA

Municipal Camp Sites


  Town or City     Charge or  Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                   Free              Water    or Stove         Shower
  Ajo              F          Y      Y        Y         Y
  Bisbee (2 camps) F                 Y        Y         Y      Y
  Chloride         F          Y      Y        Y         Y
  Douglas          F          Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Florence         F          Y      Y        Fuel
  Globe            Permit     Y      Y                  Y
  Grand Canyon
  Phœnix           50c. day   Y      Y        Y         Y
  Prescott         F          Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  St. Johns        F          Y      Y        Y         Y
  Snow Flake       Permit     Y      Y        Fuel
  Thatcher         F                 Y        Fuel
  Tucson           50c. day   Y      Y        Brick     Y      Y
                                              Stoves
  Yuma             50c. night Y      Y        Y         Y



National Parks and Forests

It is hardly necessary to mention that the Grand Canyon National Park
is situated in Arizona, and that campers will find facilities by
applying to the Superintendent.

Arizona has ten of the National Forests within its borders, and as
several of the transcontinental highways pass through the state those
that are approached or penetrated by these highways offer camping
sites. The Kaibab National Forest, bordering the Grand Canyon, is one
of the most accessible.

The National Forests in Arizona are the Apache (1,182,782 acres),
Coconino (1,601,598 acres), Coronado (1,307,461 acres), Crook (870,130
acres), Dixie (17,680 acres), Kaibab (1,072,900 acres), Prescott
(1,433,366 acres), Sitgreaves (659,337 acres); Tonto (1,994,239 acres),
Tusayan (1,602,750 acres).




ARKANSAS

Municipal Camp Sites


  Town or City    Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace or Lights Bath
                  Free             Water    Stove               or
                                                                Shower
  Alma            F                Y        Wood                Y
  Arkansas City   F                Y        Wood
  Batesville      F                Y        Wood
  Bentonville     F         Y      Y        Wood         Y
  Coal Hill       F                Well     Wood
  Cotter          F                Spring
  Cotton Plant    F                Y
  Eureka Springs  F                Springs  Wood
  Fayetteville    F                Y        Y            Y
  Fort Smith      F         Y      Y        Y            Y      Y
  Gentry          F         Y      Well     Wood
  Green Forest    F         Y      Y        Wood         Y
  Jonesboro       F         Y      Y        Y            Y
  McGehee         F                Y
  Marmaduke       Permit F                  Wood
  Mineral Springs F         Y      Y        Y            Y
  Springdale      F                Y
  Star City       F         Y      Springs  Wood
  Van Buren       F         Y      Y        Y            Y      Y


While there seems to be no system of State Forests in Arkansas and camp
sites therein for the motor camper, Arkansas abounds in beauty spots,
in mineral springs, and mountains where the camper is welcomed and
where he may camp delightfully. Campers find attractive camping sites
which may be freely used at such places as the city of Little Rock,
Eureka Springs, Mena, Mt. Magazine, Mt. Nebo, Sulphur Springs, Mammoth
Springs, Hardy Spring River, and Lake Chicot.

The Hot Springs National Park, in central Arkansas, is one of the most
interesting spots in the country, and the vicinity is attractive to
motor campers.

There are in the State of Arkansas the Arkansas National Forest near
Hot Springs and the Ozark National Forest; the former has an area of
626,746 acres, nearly a thousand square miles, and the latter about
half as large, 291,840 acres. The National Government has constructed
good motor roads through these forests and provided hundreds of camping
sites.




CALIFORNIA

Municipal Camp Sites


Town or City       Charge or    Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath
                   Free                Water    or Stove         or
                                                                 Shower
Alhambra           50c. day     Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Alturas            F            Y      Y        Y
Anaheim            50c. day     Y      Y        Y         Y
Anderson           F            Y      Y        Y                Y
Arbuckle           F            Y      Y
Arcata             F            Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Arroyo Grande      F            Y      Y        Fuel      Y
Atascadero         F
Auburn
Bakersfield        50c. day     Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Barstow            F            Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Beaumont (2 camps) 1 Free       Y      Y        Y
                   1 25c.
Benicia            F            Y      Y        Y         Y
Bishop
Blythe                                 Y                  Y
Brentwood
Buena Park                             Y        Y
Calistoga          F            Y      Y
Ceres              F            Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Chico              F            Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Chino              F            Y      Y
Chula Vista
Cloverdale         F            Y      Y        Y         Y
Clovis             F            Y      Y        Fuel      Y
Coachella
Coalinga           F            Y      Y        Y         Y
Colfax
Colton             50c. day     Y      Y        Free gas  Y
Colusa             50c. day     Y      Y        Free gas  Y
Compton            Free permit         Y
Corning            F            Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Corona             F            Y      Y        Y
Covina             F            Y      Y        Y
Crescent City      F            Y      Y        Y
Daly City          F                   Y                  Y
Davis              C            Y      Y
Delano             F            Y      Y        Y
Del Mar
Downey             F            Y      Y
Dunsmuir           F            Y      Y        Wood
Dutch Flat         F            Y      Y
Dyerville          F            Y      Y        Y                Y
East San Diego     F            Y      Y        Y         Y
Echo               F            Y      Y
El Cajon           F
El Centro          F
El Modeno          F                   Y        Y
El Sinore          F                   Y
Escondido          F
Etna Mills
Eureka             50c. day     Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Exeter
Fairfield          F            Y      Y        Y         Y
Fallbrook                              Y
Ferndale
Fillmore
Fortuna            C            Y      Y        Y         Y
Fowler
Fresno             F            Y      Y        Y         Y
Fullerton          F 3 days     Y      Y        Y         Y
Gardena
Gilroy             F            Y      Y                  Y
Glendale           50c. day     Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Glendora           F 5 days     Y      Y        Y         Y
Grass Valley       C            Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Gridley
Half Moon Bay      C                   Y
Hanford
Hayward            F
Healdsburg         F            Y      Y        Y         Y
Hemet
Hermosa Beach
Hollister
Holtville          F            Y      Y        Y         Y
Hornbrook          F            Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Imperial           50c. day     Y      Y        Y         Y
Independence       25c. day            Y        Y         Y
Indio              25c. day            Y        Y
Jackson            F            Y      Y        Y         Y
Kelseyville        C            Y      Y        Y
Kennett
King City
La Jolla
Lakeport           F            Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Lancaster
La Verne
Lindsay            C            Y      Y                  Y      Y
Livermore
Lodi
Long Beach         50c. day     Y      Y        Y                Y
Los Angeles        50c. day     Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Los Gatos          60c. day     Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Lower Lake         F            Y      Y        Fuel
Loyalton
Madera
Maricopa
Marysville         F            Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Mayfield           F            Y      Y        Y
Mecca              F
Merced             F            Y      Y
Modesto            50c. day     Y      Y        Y
Mojave
Monterey           F            Y      Y
Morrow Cove        F            Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Napa               F            Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Needles
Nevada City        F            Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Newhall            F                   Y
Newport Beach      25c. day            Y
Oakdale            F            Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Oakland            $3–$6 wk.    Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Oceanside          25c. day     Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Ontario            25c. day     Y      Y        Y
Orland             F            Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Oroville           F            Y      Y        Y                Y
Oxnard
Pacific Grove      F            Y      Y        Y
Palo Alto          25c. day     Y      Y        Y                Y
Pasadena           50c. day     Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Paso Robles        50c. day     Y      Y        Y         Y
                   $2 week
Perris
Petaluma           F            Y      Y        Y         Y
Piru
Placerville        F            Y      Y        Y         Y
Pleasonton
Pomona             25c. day     Y      Y        Y
Porterville        F            Y      Y        Y
Quincy             F            Y      Y        Y
Randsburg
Red Bluff          F            Y      Y                  Y
Redding            F            Y      Y        Y                Y
Reedley            Tent 50c.           Y                  Y
                   day F
Redlands           F                   Y        Y
Redondo Beach      50c. day     Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Rialto
Richmond           F            Y      Y        Y                Y
Riverside          F            Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Rocklin            50c. day
Roseville          F            Y      Y        Y         Y
Sacramento         F            Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Salinas            25c. day     Y      Y        Y
St. Helena         C            Y      Y        Y                Y
San Bernardino     F            Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
San Diego          C            Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
San Fernando
San Gabriel
Sanger             F                            Fuel
San Jacinto        F                   Y        Y
San Jose           $1 day       Y      Y        Y
San Luis Obispo    F            Y      Y        Y         Y
San Pedro
San Rafael         F            Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Santa Ana          50c day      Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Santa Barbara      50c. day     Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
                   and $1
Santa Clara
Santa Cruz         50c. day     Y      Y        Y         Y
Santa Maria        F            Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Santa Monica       F                            Y
Santa Monica B’ch
Santa Paula
Santa Rosa         50c. day     Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Seal Beach
Sebastopol         25c. day     Y      Y        Y         Y
Sisson             C            Y      Y        Y
Sonoma
Sonora             F            Y      Y        Y
Stockton           F            Y      Y        Y         Y
Susanville
Taft
Temecula
Thermal
Tracy              F            Y      Y        Y         Y
Tulare             F            Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Turlock            25c. day     Y
Trinity Center     F                   Y        Y
Ukiah              F            Y      Y        Y
Upland             25c. day     Y      Y        Y         Y
Vacaville
Ventura            F            Y      Y        Y
Victorville
Visalia            F            Y      Y                  Y
Watsonville        50c. day     Y      Y        Y         Y
Weaverville        F            Y      Y        Y
Westwood           F            Y      Y        Y
Whittier           50c. day     Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Williams           C            Y      Y
Willits            50c. and     Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
                   25c.
Woodland           F            Y      Y        Y
Willows
Yreka              F            Y      Y        Y         Y      Y


California is the land of National Parks and Forests. Within the state
boundaries there are three of the great National Parks, viz.: Yosemite
National Park, General Grant National Park and Sequoia National Park.
In these parks the U. S. Government has arranged facilities for
motorists to camp, either using their own equipment or renting tents
and utensils after arriving in the parks.

Of the 171 National Forests no less than twenty are found either wholly
or in part within the State of California. These California National
Forests have a combined area of nearly eighteen million acres—more than
twenty thousand square miles, equal to all the New England states,
leaving out Maine and Vermont. The figures given after each of the
names of the California National Forests represent the acreage. These
forests are: Angeles (820,980), California (807,444), Cleveland
(547,981), Crater (46,977), Eldorado (549,392), Inyo (1,269,980),
Klamath (1,470,841), Lassen (936,877), Modoc (1,182,986), Mono
(784,620), Monterey (316,058), Plumas (1,144,835), Santa Barbara
(1,688,571), Sequoia (1,882,980), Shasta (803,448), Sierra (1,489,934),
Siskiyou (349,069), Stanislaus (810,399), Tahoe (542,226), and Trinity
(1,430,547).

The U. S. Forestry Department is authority for the statement that
during the season of 1921 “over one and one-half million visitors
entered the National Forests of California, most of whom traveled by
automobile and were prepared to camp.” This number was exceeded in the
season of 1922.

Much of the National Forest area is accessible to automobiles and more
roads are being constructed all the time by State or National agencies.
Owing to the activities of the Forest Service and the automobile clubs,
California can now claim to have the best signed mountain roads in
America.

The Forest Service has arranged a great number of camping places for
motor tourists.




COLORADO

Municipal Camp Sites


Town or City         Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath
                     Free             Water    or Stove         or
                                                                Shower
Alamosa              F         Y      Y        Y         Y
Arriba
Ault                 F         Y      Y        Y         Y
Berthoud             F         Y      Y        Y         Y
Boulder              F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Brush                F         Y      Y        Y         Y
Buena Vista          F         Y      Y        Y
Burlington
Canon City           F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Castle Rock          F         Y      Y        Y
Cheyenne Wells       F         Y      Y        Y
Colorado Springs     25c.–50c. Y      Y        Fuel      Y
                     a day
Creede (2 parks)     F         Y      Y        Y         Y
Cripple Creek        F         Y      Y        Y
Denver               F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Eagle
Flagler
Florence             F         Y      Y        Y         Y
Fort Collins         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Fort Morgan          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
Fowler               F         Y      Y        Y         Y
Fruita
Glenwood Spr’gs      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
Grand Junction       F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Greeley              F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Green Mountain Falls
Holyoke              F         Y      Y        Y         Y
Hotchkiss            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
Idaho Springs        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
La Veta              F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Leadville
Limon
Littleton
Loveland             F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Manitou
Matheson
Meeker               F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Monte Vista          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
New Castle
Ordway               F         Y      Y        Y         Y
Ouray                F         Y      Y        Y         Y
Pagosa Springs       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
Palisades
Peyton
Pueblo               F         Y      Y        Y         Y
Ramah
Red Cliff
Rocky Ford
Silverton            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
Simla
Starkville           F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Steamboat Sp’ngs     F         Y      Y        Y         Y
Sterling             F         Y      Y        Y
Trinidad             F         Y      Y        Y         Y
Victor               F         Y
Windsor              F         Y      Y        Y         Y
Woodland Park



State Parks

Colorado has no State Parks, but the claim of the state authorities is
that “every town and community in Colorado has an auto camp.” The City
of Denver has a Mountain Park system that is unmatched. It consists of
a series of plots aggregating about four thousand acres distributed
over a region embracing approximately one hundred square miles,
connected by some seventy-five miles of mountain boulevards, and
providing many camping spots. Denver offers every possible hospitality
to the auto camper. The Executive Secretary of the Denver Civic and
Commercial Association writes, “An auto camp, in my judgment, is just
as essential to any city, town or community that wants to thrive and
prosper and keep abreast of the times as a railway station.” Denver
business men say that the months of July and August instead of being
the dullest months are now, next to December, the best months of the
year. For over seven weeks during the summer of 1921 Denver had a
little city of 5,000 people a night at the auto camp.



National Parks and Forests

Colorado possesses two of the National Parks, the Mesa Verde Park and
the Rocky Mountain Park. During the season of 1921 the Rocky Mountain
Park was visited, according to the report of the Forest Service, by
120,388 people who came in 30,264 cars. A majority of these were auto
campers.

There are now seventeen National Forests in Colorado, with acreages as
indicated, viz.: Arapahoe (634,903), Battlement (651,227), Cochetopa
(905,723), Colorado (847,328), Durango (614,129), Gunnison (908,055),
Hayden (65,598), Holy Cross (576,905), La Sal (27,444), Leadville,
Montezuma, Routt, San Isabel, San Juan, Uncompahgre, White River, Pike,
and Rio Grande. The combined area of these National Forests totals more
than thirteen million acres.

These National Forests are free to the public, and all that the Forest
Service asks of the visiting camper is care with fire and proper camp
sanitation.

Colorado is called “The Switzerland of America,” and the National
Forest system of splendid roads gives access to pretty much all the
finest scenery, almost all of which is included within the bounds of
the National Forests. This system of roads connects up these Forests,
so that the motor tourist can readily reach any one of them. To guide
tourists the Forest Service has laid out a system of fifty-four logs,
or routes of travel for the auto tourist.




CONNECTICUT

Municipal Camp Sites


    Town or City Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                 Free             Water    or Stove         Shower
    Bristol      F         Y      Y
    Danielson    F         Y      Y
    Madison
    New Haven    F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Wallingford




FLORIDA

Municipal Camp Sites


   Town or City   Charge or  Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                  Free              Water    or Stove         Shower
   Apalachicola   F                 Y                  Y
   Apopka         F          Y      Y                  Y      Y
   Bradentown
   Brandford      F          Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Brooksville    F                 Y                  Y
   Campbellton
   Cocoa          F                 Y                  Y
   Dade City      F                 Y                  Y
   Deland         35c. day
                  $1.50 week Y      Y        Y         Y
   Eustis         25c. day   Y      Y        Y         Y
   Ft. Lauderdale F          Y      Y        Y         Y
   Ft. Pierce     C
   Ft. Myers
   Gainesville    F          Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Jacksonville
   Lakeland       F          Y      Y        Y         Y
   Lynn Haven     F                 Y        Y         Y
   Manatee        F          Y      Y        Y         Y
   Marianna
   New Smyrna     F          Y      Y
   Orlando
   Plant City     F
   Pensacola      F          Y      Y                         Y
   St. Augustine  C          Y      Y                  Y
   St. Cloud      F          Y      Y                  Y
   St. Petersburg $4 week    Y      Y                  Y      Y
   Sarastota
   Sebring        Permit     Y      Y                  Y
   Stuart                    Y      Y                  Y
   Tallahassee               Y      Y
   Tampa          F          Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Tarpon Springs F          Y      Y        Y         Y
   Umatilla       F          Y      Y
   Valparaiso     C          Y      Y                  Y      Y
   W. Palm Beach  25c. day   Y      Y                  Y      Y
   White Springs  F          Y      Y




GEORGIA

Municipal Camp Sites


    Town or City Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                 Free             Water    or Stove         Shower
    Abbeville    F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Adel         F         Y      Y
    Adrian       F         Y      Y
    Ashburn      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Atlanta      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Barnesville
    Brunswick—2  F         Y      Y                  Y
    Calhoun
    Canon        F         Y      Y                  Y
    Carrollton   F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Columbus     F         Y               Y
    Dalton       F         Y      Y                  Y
    Dublin       F         Y      Y                  Y      Y
    Fitzgerald   F                Y
    Glenville    F         Y      Y                  Y
    Griffin      F         Y      Y                  Y      Y
    Harlem       F                Y
    Lafayette
    Macon        F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
    Madison      F         Y      Y                  Y
    Meigs        F                Y
    Millen       F         Y      Y                  Y
    Milltown     F         Y      Y        Y
    Moultrie     F         Y      Y
    Nicholls
    Poulan       F         Y      Y
    Rochelle     F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Rome         F         Y      Y        Y
    Royston      F                                   Y
    Savannah     F         Y      Y
    Statesboro   F         Y      Y                  Y
    Summerville  F                Y                  Y
    Sylvester    F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Tennille     F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Thomasville  F                Y                  Y
    Valdosta     F                Y
    Vidalia
    Waycross     F                Y        Y
    Wrightsville F         Y      Y


Georgia contains two of the National Forests which are gradually being
improved by the Forest Service, and where fast as roads are constructed
motor campers will have access through them and will find the Foresters
glad to aid them in locating camping sites. The two Georgia National
Forests are the Cherokee Forest and the Nantahala Forest. Motor
tourists may obtain detailed information regarding these forests by
addressing the Department at Washington, D. C.




IDAHO

Municipal Camp Sites


    Town or City  Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                  Free             Water    or Stove         Shower
    Boise         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
    Bonners Ferry F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Burley        F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
    Caldwell      F         Y      Y        Y
    Cœur d’Alene
    Harrison      F                Y        Y         Y
    Hope
    Idaho Falls   F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
    Kellogg                 Y      Y        Y         Y
    Lewiston                Y      Y        Y         Y
    Mullan        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Nampa         F         Y      Y        Y                Y
    Parma         F                Y
    Payette       F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
    Pocatello     F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
    Preston       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Rathdrum      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Sandpoint     F         Y      Y        Y
    Shoshone      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Twin Falls    F         Y      Y        Y
    Wallace       F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
    Weiser        F         Y      Y        Y         Y



National Parks and Forests

A portion of one of the National Parks lies in Idaho, the Yellowstone,
and nineteen of the National Forests, namely: Boise (1,058,941), Cache
(492,668), Caribou (681,540), Challis (1,259,237), Clearwater
(785,103), Cœur d’Alene (662,611), Idaho (1,193,439), Kaniksu
(198,757), Lemhi (1,095,924), Minidoka (509,536), Nezperce (1,624,582),
Fayette (831,926), Pend Oreille (676,014), St. Joe (493,925), Salmon
(1,621,707), Sawtooth (1,203,387), Selway (1,693,711), Targhee
(977,847), Weiser (562,609). The figures tell the number of acres in
each forest.

The National Forests of this region offer exceptional opportunities for
automobile campers. The Forest Service has as yet done little in this
district to improve camp sites, but everywhere one finds spots of rare
natural beauty where the autoist may camp at will. A certain class of
people enjoy getting out of the beaten trails and finding out spots for
themselves. To this class the National Forests of Idaho especially
appeal.




ILLINOIS

Municipal Camp Sites


  Town or City        Charge  Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath
                      or Free        Water    or Stove         or
                                                               Shower
  Albion              F       Y      Y                  Y
  Altamont            F       Y      Y                  Y
  Amboy               F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Arthur              F       Y      Y                  Y
  Assumption          F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Atlanta             F              Y
  Atwood              F       Y      Y                  Y
  Aurora              F       Y      Y        Y
  Barry
  Belvidere           F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Bloomington         F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Bridgeport          F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Brookfield          F       Y      Y        Y
  Buda                F       Y      Y                  Y
  Camargo
  Canton—2            F              Y
  Carrollton          F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Carthage            F       Y
  Casey               F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Charleston          F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Chester             F
  Chicago—a number in F
  outskirts
  Chicago Heights     F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Chrisman            F       Y      Y
  Christopher         F       Y      Y        Y
  Clinton             F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Crescent City       F       Y
  Danville            F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Decatur             F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Dekalb              F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Depue               F              Y        Y
  Des Plains          F       Y      Y                  Y
  Dixon               F       Y      Y        Y
  East Dundee         F              Y        Y
  East Peoria         F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Effingham           F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Elburn              F       Y      Y                  Y
  Eldorado            F       Y      Y
  El Paso             F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Erie                F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Farmer City         F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Farmington          F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Freeport            F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Fulton              F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Galesburg           F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Galena              F       Y      Y        Y
  Galva               F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Girard              F       Y      Y
  Grafton             F              Y                  Y
  Granite City        F              Y        Y         Y      Y
  Greenfield          F       Y      Y
  Griggsville
  Hammond             F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Homer               F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Hoopeston           F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Hume                                                         Y
  Jacksonville        F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Joliet              F       Y      Y        Y
  Kankakee            F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Kewanee             F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Lacon               F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Ladd                F                                 Y
  La Salle (Starved   F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Rock)
  Lena                F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Lewistown           F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Litchfield          F       Y      Y
  Lyons               F       Y      Y
  Macomb              F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Marengo             F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Marissa             F       Y      Y
  Marshall            F                       Y         Y
  Martinsville        F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Mason City          F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Mattoon             F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Mechanicsburg
  Milford                            Y                  Y
  Millstadt           F       Y      Y                  Y
  Moline              F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Momence             F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Monmouth            F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Monticello          F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Morris              F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Morrison            F       Y      Y        Y
  Morrisonville       F                       Y
  Mound City          F              Y        Y         Y
  Mt. Carmel          F       Y      Y
  Mt. Carroll         F              Y        Y
  Murphysboro         F              Y        Y
  Nauvoo              F
  Neoga               F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  New Baden           F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  New Berlin
  Newman              F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Normal              F
  Oakland             F       Y      Y                  Y
  Obey                F       Y      Y
  Ottawa              F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Palatine            F       Y      Y                  Y
  Pana                F       Y      Y
  Paris               F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Pearl               F              Y        Y
  Pekin               F       Y      Y                         Y
  Peoria              F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Peru                F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Petersburg          F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Plainfield          F       Y      Y                  Y
  Pontiac             F       Y      Y        Y
  Prophetstown        F       Y      Y                  Y
  Quincy              F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Ridgway             C              Y
  Robinson            F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Rochelle            F              Y                  Y
  Rockton             50c.           Y        Y
  Rock Island         F              Y        Y
  St. Anne            F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Sandoval            F       Y      Y
  Sandwich            F       Y      Y        Y
  Shawneetown         F       Y      Y        Y
  Shelbyville         F              Y        Y         Y
  Springfield         F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Steger              F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Sterling            25c.    Y      Y        Y         Y
  Stewardson          F       Y      Y                  Y
  Streator            F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Tuscola             F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Urbana              F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Vandalia            F       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Vermont             F                       Y
  Warren              F              Y
  Watseka             F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Wayne City          C       Y      Y
  Wilmington          F              Y        Y
  Windsor             F              Y                  Y




INDIANA

Municipal Camp Sites


   Town or City      Charge  Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath
                     or Free        Water    or Stove         or
                                                              Shower
   Albany            F       Y      Y                  Y
   Attica            F       Y      Y        Y         Y
   Batesville        F       Y      Y        Y         Y
   Bedford           F       Y      Y
   Brownstown
   Canaan
   Claypool          C              Y        Y
   Clifty Falls
   Columbus          F       Y      Y        Y         Y
   Corydon           F       Y      Y        Y
   Covington         F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Crawfordsville    F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Delphi            F       Y      Y        Y         Y
   Elkhart           F       Y      Y
   Elwood            F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Farmersburg       F       Y      Y
   Franklin          F       Y      Y        Y         Y
   Gary              F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Goshen            F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Greenfield        F       Y      Y        Y         Y
   Hamlet
   Hobart
   Indianapolis      F       Y      Y        Y         Y
   Jasonville        F              Y                  Y
   Knox              F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Kokomo            F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Lebanon           F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Ligonier          F       Y      Y
   Lowell            F       Y      Y        Y         Y
   Madison           F              Y                  Y
   Marengo           F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   McCormick’s Creek C       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Canon
   Michigan City     F       Y      Y        Y         Y
   Middlebury        F       Y      Y        Y         Y
   Middlefork        F       Y      Y        Y         Y
   Milltown                  Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Montezuma         F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   New Castle        F       Y      Y        Y         Y
   New Harmony       F       Y      Y                  Y
   Osgood            F              Y                  Y
   Oxford            F              Y                  Y
   Pendleton         F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Peru              50c.    Y      Y
   Petersburg        F       Y      Y        Y
   Plymouth          F       Y      Y        Y         Y
   Portland          F              Y
   Princeton         F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Remington         F       Y      Y        Y         Y
   Richmond          F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Rockville         F              Y
   St. Paul          C       Y      Y        Y         Y
   Seymour           F       Y      Y        Y         Y
   Shipshewana       F       Y      Y        Y         Y
   South Bend        F       Y      Y        Y         Y
   Spencer           F       Y      Y        Y         Y
   Spiceland         F       Y      Y        Y         Y
   Union City
   Valparaiso        F       Y      Y        Y         Y
   Vernon            F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Turkey Run Park 2 C and F Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Vinegar Mills     F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Wabash            F       Y      Y        Y         Y
   Warsaw
   Washington        F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Waveland          F       Y      Y        Y         Y
   Winamac           F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Wolcott           F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Wolcottville      F       Y      Y


Indiana has none of the National Parks or Forests, but the state itself
maintains four State Parks and a State Forest. In all of these,
provision is made for motor campers to which all tourists are welcome.
These parks and the forest are not extensive in area, but are well
worth a visit by the tourist. The State Parks are: Turkey Run State
Park (470), McCormick’s Creek Canyon State Park (350), Clifty Falls
State Park (400), and Vinegar Mills State Park (100). Figures indicate
acreage.

The Clark County State Forest (2,800) is open to the public and is of
especial interest to people who wish to see what is being done by the
State of Indiana in scientific forestry.




IOWA

Municipal Camp Sites


   Town or City    Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath
                   Free             Water    or Stove         or
                                                              Shower
   Adel            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Akron           F                Y                  Y
   Albia           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Allison         F         Y      Y
   Anamosa         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Armstrong       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Atlantic        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Boone           F         Y      Y        Y
   Burlington      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Carlisle        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Cedar Falls     F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Cedar Rapids    F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Centerville     F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Charles City—2  F         Y      Y        Y                Y
   Charter Oak     F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Chatsworth      F
   Cherokee        F                Y
   Clarinda        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Clinton         F
   Colfax          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Columbus Junc’n F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Corydon         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Council Bluffs  F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Davis City      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Decorah         F         Y      Y        Y
   Denison         F         Y      Y                  Y
   Des Moines
   De Witt         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Dows            F                Y        Y
   Dubuque         50c.      Y      Y        Y         Y
   Edgewood        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Eldora          F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Elkader         F         Y      Y        Y
   Emmetsburg      F         Y      Y                  Y
   Estherville     F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Farmington      F         Y      Y
   Fonda           F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Fort Dodge      F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Gladbrook       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Greenfield      F                Y                  Y
   Grinnell        F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Guthrie Center  F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Guttenberg      F         Y      Y        Y
   Hawarden        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Humboldt        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Ida Grove       F                Y
   Indianola       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Iowa City       F         Y      Y        Y
   Iowa Falls      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Jefferson       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Jewell          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Keokuk          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Keosauqua       F         Y      Y        Y                Y
   Keota           F         Y      Y                  Y
   Kingsley        F         Y      Y
   Knoxville       F         Y      Y
   Lake Mills      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Lake View       F                Y
   Lamoni
   Laporte City    F         Y      Y                  Y
   Legrand         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Leon            F                Y        Y         Y
   Lowden
   McGregor        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Maquoketa       F         Y      Y                  Y
   Marshalltown—2  F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Mason City      F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Missouri Valley F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Mitchellville   F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Mondamin
   Montezuma       F         Y      Y        Y
   Mount Pleasant  F         Y      Y        Y
   Nashua          F         Y      Y        Y
   Nevada          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Newton          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   North Vernon    F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Northwood
   Odebolt         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Oelwein         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Onawa           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Oskaloosa       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Pella           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Red Oak         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Riceville       F                Y
   Rock Rapids     F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Sac City        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Salix
   Sheffield
   Shellsburg      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Shenandoah      F         Y      Y        Y
   Sidney          F         Y      Y        Y
   Sioux City      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Sloan
   Spirit Lake     F         Y      Y        Y
   Storm Lake      F                Y                  Y
   Tabor           F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Tama            F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Valley Junction F         Y      Y                  Y
   Villisca        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Vinton          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Waterloo        F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Webster City    F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Westfield
   West Liberty    F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Whiting
   Williamsburg    F                Y
   Woodbine        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Woodward        F                Y                  Y
   Zearing


List of State Parks

The following is a list of the State Parks of Iowa, with their location
and acreage. Each of these parks is in charge of a custodian, and there
are camping opportunities in them.

Backbone Park, Delaware County, on Maquoketa River, twelve miles
northwest of Manchester, 1,279 acres.

Oakland Mills, Henry County, four miles west of Mt. Pleasant, 110
acres.

Morehead Caves, Jackson County, eight miles northwest of Maquoketa, 10
acres.

Lacey-Keosauqua Park, Van Buren County, near Keosauqua, 1,222.1 acres.

Dolliver Memorial, Webster County, eight miles south of Ft. Dodge, 457
acres.

Ledges, Boone County, five miles south of Boone, 570 acres.

Pilot Knob, Hancock County, three miles southeast of Forest City, 203
acres.

Eldora Steamboat Rock, Hardin County, near Eldora, 231 acres.

Fort Atkinson, Winneshiek County, at Fort Atkinson, small historic
area.

Farmington, Van Buren County, at Farmington, 102 acres.

Anamosa, Jones County, near Anamosa, 168 acres.

Theodore F. Clark, Tama County, four miles northeast of Traer, 25
acres.

Lepley, Hardin County, near Union, 9 acres.

Roosevelt, Floyd County, near Greene, 15 acres.

Gitchie Manitou, Lyon County, Sioux Falls granite, in northwest corner
of state, 40 acres.

Palisades, Linn County, some ten miles southeast of Cedar Rapids on
Cedar River.




KANSAS

Municipal Camp Sites


  Town or City      Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath
                    Free             Water    or Stove         or
                                                               Shower
  Almena            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Arkansas City     F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Ashland           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Atchison          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Belleville        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Beloit            F         Y      Y        Y
  Blue Rapids       F         Y      Y                  Y
  Brewster          F                Y                  Y
  Burlington        Y         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Caldwell
  Clayton                                     Y         Y
  Caney             F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Centralia         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Chanute           F                Y        Y
  Cherryvale        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Chetopa           F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Clyde             F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Coffeyville       F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Columbus          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Concordia         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Conway Springs    F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Cottonwood Falls  50c.–75c. Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Dodge City        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Effingham         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Emporia           F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Eudora            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Eureka            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Fairview
  Fort Scott        F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Frankfort         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Fredonia          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Girard            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Goodland
  Great Bend        F         Y      Y        Y
  Greensburg        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Halstead          F         Y      Y        Y
  Hanover                     Y      Y        Y         Y
  Hayes             F         Y      Y        Y
  Herington         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Hiawatha          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Highland          F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Horton            F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Hutchinson        F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Iola              F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Jennings
  Jewell            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Junction City     F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Kanorado          F         Y      Y        Y
  Kansas City       50c. day  Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Larned            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Lawrence          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Leavenworth       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Liberal           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Lindsborg         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Little River      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Louisburg         F                Y        Y
  Lyons             F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  McPherson         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Manhattan         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Marion            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Marysville        F         Y      Y                  Y
  Meade             F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Medicine Lodge    F         Y      Y        Y
  Miltonvale        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Minneapolis       F                Y        Y
  Mound City        F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Moundridge        F         Y      Y                  Y
  National Military F 1 day   Y      Y                  Y
  Home
  Newton            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Norton
  Oakley            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Osawatomie        F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Osborne           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Oswego            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Ottawa            F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Paola             F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Parsons           F         Y      Y                  Y
  Peabody           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Pleasanton        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Pittsburg         F         Y      Y        Y
  Pratt             F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Sabetha           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  St. Paul          F                Y        Y
  Salina            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Scandia           F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Sedan             F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Sedgwick          F
  Seneca            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Smith Center      F                Y        Y
  South Cedar       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  South Haven
  Spring Hill       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Stockton          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Topeka            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Troy
  Valley Falls      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Wamego            F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Washington
  Wellington        F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  White Cloud       F
  Wichita           F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Winfield          F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Yates Center      F         Y      Y        Y         Y




KENTUCKY

Municipal Camp Sites


    Town or City  Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                  Free             Water    or Stove         Shower
    Barlow        F
    Bowling Green F                Y
    Guthrie       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Henderson     F         Y      Y        Y
    Lancaster     F         Y      Y        Y
    Louisville    F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
    Mayfield      F
    Mount Vernon
    Pembroke      C         Y      Y        Y
    Wickliffe     F         Y      Y




LOUISIANA

Municipal Camp Sites


    Town or City Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                 Free             Water    or Stove         Shower
    Alexandria   F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Baton Rouge  F                Y        Y
    Bogalusa     F                Y                         Y
    Bunkie       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Delhi        F                Y        Y
    De Ridder    F                Y        Y
    Houma        F         Y      Y        Y
    Jonesboro    F         Y      Y        Y
    Lafayette    F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Marksville   F                Y
    Monroe       F                Y                  Y
    Natchitoches F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Ponchatoula  F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
    Rayville     F                Y
    Shreveport   F                Y




MAINE

Municipal Camp Sites


Town or City        Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                    Free             Water    or Stove         Shower
Auburn              F                Y                  Y
Augusta             F         Y      Y        Y         Y
Bangor              F
Bar Harbor          F
Bath                C
Belfast             F         Y      Y                  Y
Carmel              C
Dover               F
Lake Cobosseecontee F
Lewiston            F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Norway (Leavitt     F
Park)


Lafayette National Park, situated on Mount Desert Island, two miles
from Bar Harbor, offers the motor tourist a number of splendid camp
sites.

The only State Park in Maine is the Katahdin Park Game Preserve, in
which motor tourists are free to camp subject to the regulations of the
game wardens.




MARYLAND

Municipal Camp Sites


    Town or City Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                 Free             Water    or Stove         Shower
    Baltimore    F         Y      Y                  Y
    Boonesboro   F                Y
    Frederick    F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
    Frostburg    F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
    Hancock      F         Y      Y                  Y


The State Forests of Maryland offer a list of first-class camping sites
for motorists which are free to any who apply for them. Permits are
required, but no fee is charged. These camp sites are listed below.



Forest Camp Sites


   Town or City   Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                  Free             Water    or Stove         Shower
   Bellgrove      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Conococheague  F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Cooksville     F         Y      Y        Y
   Elkridge Farm  F         Y      Y        Y
   Negro Mountain F         Y      Y        Y


Patapsco Reserve.—This is adjacent to the City of Baltimore. Maryland
here owns 916 acres, chiefly wooded land, with the addition of over
1,000 acres which are open to the public, with full park privileges in
return for the protection which the Board gives to its respective
owners in the matter of patrol against trespass and fire. The entire
reserve is essentially a protection and a recreation forest. There are
numerous camping sites in this reserve and the State Forester, who can
be reached by telephone in Baltimore, will be glad to be of assistance
to the motor camper.




MASSACHUSETTS

Municipal Camp Sites


   Town or City    Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                   Free             Water    or Stove         Shower
   Athol           F         Y      Y        Y
   Boston (Revere)
   Fall River      F         Y      Y        Y
   Gloucester      F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Marlboro        F         Y      Y
   Northampton     F         Y      Y        Y
   Pittsfield
   Salem           F         Y      Y        Y
   Saugus Center
   Springfield     F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Wellesley       F


The fifteen Massachusetts State Forests, aggregating 50,000 acres, are
mostly off the main highways and almost inaccessible to motorists.
However, three of the State Forests are on main highways, the Mohawk
Trail Forest, the Erving Forest, and the Otter River Forest. In these
more accessible forests the Department of Conservation is planning to
establish camp sites as fast as the Legislature provides funds.

The five State Parks, Mt. Wachusett (1,200 acres), Mt. Greylock (8,000
acres), Mt. Sugarloaf (150 acres), Mt. Everett (1,000 acres), and Mt.
Tom (1,600 acres) have no public camp sites, but all except Everett
have a hotel or casino at the summit, and Greylock and Wachusett have a
good auto road to the top.




MICHIGAN

Municipal Camp Sites


Town or City          Charge   Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath
                      or Free         Water    or Stove         or
                                                                Shower
Adrian                F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Albion                F               Y
Allegan               F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Alpena                F               Y        Y
Amasa                 F                        Y
Baraga                F        Y      Y        Y
Battle Creek          F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Belding               F
Benton Harbor         F        Y      Y        Y
Bessemer              F                        Y
Boyne City            F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Cadillac              F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Calumet               F               Y        Y
Champion              F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Charlevoix            F
Charlotte             F        Y      Y        Y         Y
Cheboygan             F        Y      Y        Y
Coldwater             F        Y      Y        Y         Y
East Tawas            F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Escanaba              F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Evart                 F        Y      Y        Y         Y
Frankfort             F        Y      Y                  Y
Flint                 F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Gaylord               F        Y      Y
Gladwin               F        Y      Y        Y                Y
Glenn Haven           F        Y      Y        Y
Grand Haven           F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Grand Rapids          F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Grayling              F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Hancock               F        Y      Y        Y
Harbor Beach          F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Harrison              F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Harrisville           F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Hart                  F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Hermansville          F        Y
Indian River and Burt F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Lake
Interlochen           F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Iron River                     Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Kalamazoo             F        Y      Y        Y
Kalkaska              F        Y      Y        Y
Lake Odessa           F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Lakeview              F        Y      Y        Y         Y
Ludington             F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Manistee              F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Manistique            F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Marine City           F
Menominee             F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Michigamme            F        Y      Y        Y                Y
Midland               F        Y      Y        Y
Munising              F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Muskegon
Heights               F        Y      Y        Y                Y
Onaway                F        Y      Y        Y                Y
Ontonagon             F        Y      Y        Y
Otsego                F        Y      Y        Y         Y
Paw Paw               F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Pent Water            F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Petoskey              F        Y      Y
Plainwell             F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Port Huron            F        Y      Y
Posen                 F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Saint Joseph          50c. day Y      Y        Y
Sand Lake             F        Y      Y                  Y      Y
Sault Ste. Marie      F        Y      Y        Y
Schoolcraft           F        Y      Y        Y         Y
Shelby                F        Y      Y        Y         Y
South Haven           F        Y      Y        Y         Y
Sparta                F               Y
Stambaugh             F               Y        Y         Y
Standish              F        Y      Y        Y         Y
Tecumseh              F
Union City            F               Y                  Y
Yale                  F        Y      Y


Michigan has a list of twenty-three State Parks, in each of which
provision is made for the comfort of motor campers.

The Conservation Department opens Michigan’s State Parks to all,
whether residents or non-residents of the State.

Campers are permitted to fish in adjacent waters in accordance with the
law, and to make use of any of the conveniences, such as outdoor
fireplaces, tables, benches and pavilions, when not in use by other
visitors.

Non-residents may secure fishing licenses from care-takers.

Campers are permitted to use the dead wood or driftwood for fireplaces.

Tourists are permitted to camp for less than one week without a permit,
but for a longer period a permit must be secured from the custodian of
each park.

Automobiles may be parked in spaces provided in each site.

The public bath houses are for the use of visitors as well as the
rowboats which may be rented in those parks having boating facilities.



State Parks

Cadillac State Park, William W. Mitchell State Park, Cadillac.

Cedar Hill State Park, Lenawee County, near Clinton.

Cheboygan State Park (formerly Obrien’s Grove), Cheboygan.

Charles Mears State Park, Pentwater.

D. H. Day State Park, Glen Haven.

Dunes Park (located on Silver Lake) Oceana County, near Hart.

East Tawas State Park, East Tawas.

Frank W. Fletcher State Park, Posen Township, Presque Isle County.

Gladwin State Park, Gladwin.

Grand Haven State Park, Grand Haven.

Hanson’s Military Reservation, Grayling.

Harrisville State Park, Harrisville.

Indian River State Park, Indian River.

Interlochen State Park, Interlochen.

Island Lake State Park, Island Lake.

Onaway State Park, Onaway.

Orchard Beach State Park, Manistee.

Otsego Lake State Park, Otsego County.

Paw Paw State Park, Paw Paw.

Traverse City State Park, Traverse City.

White Cloud State Park, White Cloud.

Wilson State Park, Harrison.

Young’s State Park, Boyne City.




MINNESOTA

Municipal Camp Sites


  Town or City      Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath
                    Free             Water    or Stove         or
                                                               Shower
  Ada               F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Albert Lea        F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Alexandria        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Anoka
  Appleton
  Austin            F                Y        Y         Y
  Bagley            F
  Barnesville
  Baudette          F                                   Y
  Bemidji           F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Benson            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Brainerd          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Breckenridge      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Canby             F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Cass Lake         F         Y      Y        Y
  Champlin
  Chisholm          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Crookston         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Dassel            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Delano            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Detroit           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Duluth            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Elk River         F         Y      Y        Y
  Excelsior         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Eveleth           F         Y      Y        Y
  Faribault         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Fergus Falls      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Fulda             F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Grand Rapids      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Gully
  Hallock           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Hawley            F         Y      Y
  Hector            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Hinckley          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Hutchinson        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Jackson           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Jordan            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Lake City         F
  Litchfield        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Little Falls      F                Y        Y
  Mankato           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Marshall          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Melrose           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Minneapolis       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Montevideo        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Moorhead          F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  New Richland      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  New Ulm           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Northfield        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Norwood
  Ortonville
  Osakis            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Osseo
  Owatonna
  Park Rapids
  Paynesville       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Pelican Rapids    F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Princeton         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Red Lake Falls
  Red Wing          F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Redwood Falls     F         Y      Y        Y
  Renville          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Reowina           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Rochester         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Roseau            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  St. Cloud         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  St. Joseph
  St. Paul          F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Shakopee          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Staples
  Stephen           F         Y      Y        Y
  Stillwater        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Thief River Falls
  Tower             F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Trail
  Two Harbors       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Virginia          F                Y
  Wabasha           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Wadena            F                Y        Y
  Warren            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Warroad           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Waterville        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Wegdahl
  West St. Paul     F
  Wells             F                                   Y
  White Bear Lake   F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Willmar           F         Y      Y                  Y
  Winona            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Winthrop          F         Y      Y        Y         Y


Minnesota has more than two million acres of state owned lands, much of
which contains beautiful lakes and other attractive features. A great
deal of this territory is not readily accessible to the motor camper.
The New State Forests are located mostly in the extreme northeastern
corner of the state, and when the highway development now planned is
completed they will offer a wide range of camping sites to the auto
tourist. The State Forester and his department offer every
encouragement to the visitor from other states.

Two National Forests are situated in Minnesota, the Superior National
Forest (857,255 acres) and the Minnesota National Forest (190,602
acres). Ely, which makes a specialty of furnishing accommodations for
tourists, is the headquarters of the Superior National Forest Service.
The roads leading from Ely are with few exceptions suitable for
automobile travel, and three good roads lead directly into the National
Forest. The Superior Forest also can be reached from Duluth by
automobile. Fine camping sites are abundant in the Superior Forest.
Specific information will be gladly furnished tourists by the Forester
at Ely.




MISSISSIPPI

Municipal Camp Sites


   Town or City   Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                  Free             Water    or Stove         Shower
   Coldwater      F                Y        Y
   Electric Mills F                Y        Y
   Greenville     F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Gulfport       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Meridian       50c.      Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
                  Regist’n
   Pascagoula     F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Richton        F                Y        Y
   Sumner         F


Mississippi has a great deal of land that belongs to the state, but it
has not been designated as “State Forests” and no provision seems to
have been made thus far for camping sites.




MISSOURI

Municipal Camp Sites


  Town or City      Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                    Free             Water    or Stove         Shower
  Adrian            F                Y                  Y
  Albany            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Anderson          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Bethany           F                Y        Y
  Bevier            F                Y        Y         Y
  Bonne Terre       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Boonville         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Breckenridge      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Brookfield        F         Y      Y        Y
  Bucklin           F                Y        Y         Y
  Cameron           F                Y        Y         Y
  Carterville       F                Y        Y
  Carthage          F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Chamois           F         Y      Y
  Chillicothe       F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Clarence          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Eagleville        F                Y        Y
  Excelsior Springs F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Fornfelt          F                Y
  Fulton            F         Y      Y
  Golden City       F                Y        Y
  Hamilton
  Hannibal          F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Independence      F         Y      Y
  Joplin            F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Kansas City       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Kirksville        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  La Clede
  Lancaster         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Lebanon           F                Y                  Y
  Lockwood          F                Y        Y         Y
  Macon             F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Maryville         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Meadville         F                Y
  Mexico            F         Y      Y
  Moberly           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Monett            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Monroe City       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Mooresville       F                Y
  Nevada            F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  New Cambria
  Osborn
  Osceola           F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Palmyra           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Pattonsburg       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Poplar Bluff      F         Y      Y        Y
  Republic          F         Y      Y                  Y
  Ridgeway          F         Y      Y        Y
  Rock Port         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  St. Charles       F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  St. Joseph        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  St. Louis         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Sedalia           F         Y      Y                         Y
  Shelbina          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Springfield       F         Y      Y
  Stanberry         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Stewartsville     F         Y      Y        Y
  Sweet Springs     F         Y      Y        Y
  Trenton           F         Y      Y        Y                Y
  Union Star
  Webb City         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Winston




MONTANA

Municipal Camp Sites


Town or City           Charge   Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath
                       or Free         Water    or Stove         or
                                                                 Shower
Alhambra               F
Anaconda               F        Y      Y        Y         Y
Armington
Augusts                F        Y      Y        Y
Baker                  F        Y      Y        Y         Y
Barkell Hot Springs    F               Y
Basin                  F               Y        Y
Belgrade               F        Y      Y        Y         Y
Belt                   F        Y      Y        Y         Y
Benchland
Big Timber             F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Billings               F        Y      Y        Y
Bole
Bonita                 F        Y      Y        Y
Boulder                F        Y      Y        Y
Bozeman                F        Y      Y                  Y
Bridger                F
Broadview              F
Brockton               F
Browning               F               Y        Y
Butte—2 camps          F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Bynum                  F
Camas Hot Springs      F        Y      Y
Chester                F        Y      Y
Choteau                F        Y      Y        Y         Y
Clarks Fork
Clyde Park             F               Y        Y
Columbus
Crow Agency            F               Y                         Y
Culbertson             F
Deer Lodge             F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Drummond               F        Y      Y        Y         Y
Dupuyer                F        Y      Y
Eureka                 F               Y
Elkhorn Hot Springs    F               Y
Fairfield              F
Fallon
Forsythe               F        Y      Y        Y         Y
Fort Benton            F        Y      Y
Frenchtown
Geyser
Glacier N’l Park       F
Glendive               F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Grass Range            F
Great Falls            F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Gregson Hot Springs    F        Y      Y        Y
Gilman                 F
Glasgow                F        Y      Y        Y         Y
Hamilton               F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Hardin                 F        Y      Y        Y
Harlem                 F
Harrison
Havre                  F        Y      Y        Y         Y
Helena—2 camps         F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Hobson
Hysham
Hunter’s Hot Springs   F
Ismay
Kalispell              25c. day Y      Y        Y         Y
Laurel                 F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Lewiston               F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Libby                  F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Livingston             F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Gateway to Yellowstone
Park
Lodge Grass            F
Malta                  F               Y        Y
Manhattan              F        Y      Y        Y         Y
Mason City
Mildred
Miles City             F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Missoula               50c. day Y      Y        Y         Y
Moccasin
Moore                  F               Y
Philipsburg
Pipestone Hot Springs  F        Y      Y        Y
Plevna
Polson                 F        Y      Y        Y         Y
Poplar                 F        Y      Y
Potosi Hot Sp’gs       F        Y      Y        Y
Ravalli                F        Y      Y        Y
Raynesford
Reed Point             F
Rochester
Ronan                  F        Y      Y        Y
Rosebud
Roundup                F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
St. Ignatius           F               Y
St. Joseph
St. Regis              F        Y      Y        Y         Y
Saltese                F        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Sheridan               F        Y      Y        Y         Y
Stanford
Stevensville           F
Superior               F        Y      Y        Y         Y
Terry                  F        Y      Y        Y
Thompson Falls
Three Forks            F        Y      Y        Y         Y
Townsend               F        Y      Y        Y
Troy
Virginia City          F               Y
Westmore
West Yellowstone       F               Y
Whitehall              F        Y      Y        Y
Wibaux
Willow Creek
Windham                F               Y
Wolf Point             F        Y      Y        Y
Wyola


The National Forests of Montana are exceptionally attractive to auto
campers. During the summer months there is usually little rain. The
weather is cool, especially at night, but it is seldom necessary to
provide more than a light tent and sufficient blankets for warmth. Many
of the tourists passing through this country use folding cots or air
mattresses, but many simply spread their blankets on a piece of canvas
placed next to the ground. Owners of Ford cars commonly have the back
of the front seat hinged in such a manner that it may be folded back at
night, making a very comfortable bed. Such a bed is a little short for
an adult, and should be lengthened by a piece of board at the foot. By
putting up the side curtains a person has as much privacy as he
desires. Some of the larger cars use patent beds which stretch across
the tops of the seats. The patent auto tents are also very popular.

What are called “Road Homes” are coming to be seen very frequently. A
typical road home as seen along the Montana trails usually consists of
a small cabin built upon a truck chassis. Many of these appear to be
home-made.

A part of the Yellowstone National Park is in Montana, as also the
whole of the Glacier National Park.

There are eighteen of the National Forests in this state; the list
which follows also shows the acreage. They are: Absaroka (842,467),
Beartooth (662,537), Beaverhead (1,337,223), Bitterroot (1,047,012),
Blackfeet (865,077), Cabinet (830,676), Custer (428,922), Deerlodge
(833,178), Flathead (1,802,905), Gallatin (564,855), Helena (687,983),
Jefferson (1,039,766), Kootenai (1,336,061), Lewis and Clark (811,161),
Lolo (850,677), Madison (958,691), Missoula (1,031,529), Sioux
(96,743).

Among the regions of this state which offer exceptional opportunities
for the motorist may be mentioned the Beartooth National Forest,
located just northeast of the Yellowstone Park. Here is a region of
rugged mountains, glaciers, and lakes unrivaled for mountain scenery
except by Glacier National Park. This country is easily reached by the
motorist over excellent roads.

The canyon of the West Gallatin River is traversed by an excellent
motor road. The trip between Bozeman and the west entrance of the
Yellowstone National Park over this route is justly famous for the
grandeur of its scenery.

An excellent road leads north from Livingston through White Sulphur
Springs and the Jefferson National Forest to Great Falls, and thence to
Glacier National Park. It passes through a region of ranches, mining
camps, rugged canyons, and broad bench lands, and gives the traveler
unacquainted with the West a chance to see much which he has read about
but never seen.

Missoula, “The Garden City of Montana,” is located in a region rich in
scenery and historic interest. The famous Bitterroot Valley extends to
the south for a hundred miles. The road up this valley is one of the
best in the country. From the head of the valley the Forest Service has
constructed a road over the Continental Divide into the Big Hole Basin.
This road is a link in the Park to Park Highway, extending from Glacier
to Yellowstone National Park.

To the north of Missoula is the Flathead Indian Reservation, now the
home of the Selish tribe of Indians. Still further to the north is
Flathead Lake, a beautiful sheet of water thirty-five miles long and
twelve miles wide, upon which steamboat service is maintained during
the summer. Glacier Park lies still further to the north and is reached
over excellent roads.




NEBRASKA

Municipal Camp Sites


   Town or City     Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath
                    Free             Water    or Stove         or
                                                               Shower
   Ainsworth        F         Y      Y                  Y
   Alma             F         Y      Y        Y
   Arapahoe         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Ashland          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Beaver City      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Blair            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Bruning
   Central City     F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Chester          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Columbus         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Crawford         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Elgin            F                Y
   Elm Creek        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Fairmont         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Falls City       F         Y      Y        Y
   Fremont          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Friend           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Fullerton        F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Geneva
   Gering           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Gibbon           25c. car  Y      Y        Y         Y
   Gordon           F         Y      Y
   Gothenburg       F         Y      Y        Y                Y
   Grand Island     F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Harrington       F         Y      Y        Y
   Hastings         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Holdredge        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Humboldt         F         Y      Y
   Lexington        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Lincoln          F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Lyons            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Madison          F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Minden           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Mitchell         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Nebraska City    F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Neligh           F                Y        Y
   Nelson           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Norfolk          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   North Platte     6 days F  Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Oakdale          F         Y      Y
   Oakland          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Omaha            F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Orleans          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Osceola
   Pender           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Plainview        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Ponca            F                Y
   St. Paul         F         Y      Y        Y
   Seward           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   South Sioux City F         Y      Y                  Y
   Stromsburg       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Tecumseh         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Valentine        F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Wahoo            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Wakefield        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Walthill         F         Y      Y                  Y
   Wausa            F         Y      Y
   York             F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y


The Nebraska National Forest (206,074 acres) is the only National
Forest in the State of Nebraska. The headquarters of the Supervisor is
at Halsey, and inquiries regarding forest trails and camping sites may
be addressed to him.




NEVADA

Municipal Camp Sites


    Town or City Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                 Free             Water    or Stove         Shower
    Beatty       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Carson City  F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Elko         F                Y        Y
    Fallon       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Lovelocks    F         Y      Y        Y                Y
    Reno         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
    Sparks       F                Y        Y         Y
    Winnemucca   F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Yerington    F         Y      Y        Y         Y


Nevada has a sparse population, and in consequence road construction is
correspondingly limited. The state is best reached by the Pikes Peak
Ocean to Ocean Highway, along which are found Elko, Winnemucca,
Lovelock, and Reno.

Nine of the National Forests are included wholly or in part within the
State of Nevada. These National Forests, with their areas in acres,
follow: Dixie (282,543), Eldorado (400), Humboldt (1,301,073), Inyo
(72,817), Mono (464,315), Nevada (1,250,929), Tahoe (14,853), Toiyabe
(1,907,280),




NEW HAMPSHIRE

Municipal Camp Sites


    Town or City Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                 Free             Water    or Stove         Shower
    Berlin
    Dover—2      F         Y
    Keene        F         Y      Y                  Y
    Laconia      F         Y      Y        Y
    Portsmouth   F         Y      Y                  Y


New Hampshire includes a part of the White Mountain National Forest.
This National Forest was not acquired by the Government until 1918, and
in consequence the Forestry Department has not done much yet in the way
of road construction. The portion of the White Mountain Forest included
within the boundaries of New Hampshire has an area of 241,878 acres.
Through this forest there are a number of good roads which run to the
numerous summer resorts of this region and along which there are many
natural camping sites. The Supervisor of the White Mountain Forest may
be addressed at Gorham, N. H., for information regarding camping sites
and permits.




NEW JERSEY

Municipal Camp Sites


   Town or City  Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                 Free             Water    or Stove         Shower
   Newark        Camp site on grounds of N. J. Auto and Motor Club
   Rahway        F                      Y


New Jersey has a number of State Forests that are open to motor campers
without charge on application to the local Forester. They are:

The Stokes State Forest, near Branchville, 7,200 acres on Kittatinny
Mountain.

The Lebanon State Forest, 5,000 acres of pine, oak and cedar along the
Buddtown Road from Ong’s Hat, six miles southeast of Pemberton.

The Penn State Forest, 2,700 acres of pine and cedar forest, between
the Papoose and Breeches Branch Forks of Wading River—five miles
southeast of Chatsworth.

The Bass River State Forest, 1,600 acres of pine and cedar forest, two
miles north of the town of New Gretna.

The Mount Laurel State Forest, 20 acres of mixed hardwood forest, three
miles southeast of Moorestown.

The Jackson State Forest, 40 acres of pine forest just east of
Cassville.

The Forest Rangers in charge of these forests may be reached by
addressing Branchville, Pemberton, and New Gretna, N. J.




NEW MEXICO

Municipal Camp Sites


  Town or City Charge or Free Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                                     Water    or Stove         Shower
  Albuquerque  5 Camps 2 Free Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
               others 50c.
               day
  Artesia      F                     Y                  Y
  Carrizozo    F              Y      Y        Y         Y
  Clovis       F              Y      Y        Y         Y
  Deming       F              Y      Y        Y         Y
  Gallup       25c.           Y      Y        Y         Y
  Laguna       F              Y      Y        Y         Y
  Las Cruces   F              Y      Y        Y         Y
  Messilla Dam F              Y      Y        Y                Y
  Raton City   F              Y      Y        Y         Y
  Roswell      F              Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  San Marcial  F              Y      Y                  Y
  Socorro      F              Y      Y                  Y
  Taos         F              Y
  Vaughn       F              Y      Y        Y         Y


There are now six National Forests in New Mexico comprising an area of
approximately nine and one-half million acres.

The Forest Service is rapidly improving transportation and
communication facilities in the New Mexico Forests. Under the new law
about half a million dollars was spent on National Forest Roads in New
Mexico during 1922.

Persons who desire to camp in the National Forests of New Mexico may do
so without charge or other restrictions. They are required only to be
careful with fires and to leave clean camp grounds upon departure. In
some localities public camp grounds, with such facilities as
fireplaces, etc., have been set aside for the convenience of tourists.

A good road has recently been completed from Taos up Taos Canyon to the
top of the divide, where it joins the road to Cimarron. The Red River
Road, from Ute Park, west over the divide, and down Red River to
Questa, thence to Taos, has now been finished.

Good roads recently built by the Government and state into portions of
the Sacramento Range and into the White Mountains have opened up areas
for recreation. Among these is the beautiful Ruidoso Creek, now reached
over an excellent road from the Pecos Valley and through the
Mescalero-Apache Indian Reservation, and the area at the north end of
the Capitans recently chosen by Roswell for a municipal camp.




NEW YORK

Municipal Camp Sites


  Town or City     Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                   Free             Water    or Stove         Shower
  Albany
  Auburn
  Chichester       F                Y        Y
  Corning          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Dunkirk          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Elmira           F         Y      Y        Y
  Fredonia
  Glens Falls      F         Y      Y        Y
  Hancock
  Ilion            F         Y      Y        Y
  Ithaca           F         Y      Y        Y
  Lake George
  Lake Placid
  Le Roy           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Lyons            F                Y        Y
  Medina           F         Y      Y
  Penn Yan         F         Y      Y        Y
  Oneonta
  Owego            F         Y      Y        Y
  Peekskill
  Perry            F         Y      Y
  Plattsburg       C
  Port Jervis      C
  Poughkeepsie
  Pulaski          F         Y
  Salamanca        F         Y      Y        Y
  Saratoga Springs F         Y      Y        Y
  Schenectady      F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Sherman          F         Y
  Syracuse         F         Y      Y        Y


The New York State Conservation has laid out a number of marked routes
in the State Forests, and along these has established a series of
equipped camp sites.



Adirondack Highways and Camp Sites Accessible by Automobile

Route 1.—One fireplace between Warrensburg and Chestertown about three
miles north of Warrensburg.

Route 1.—Two fireplaces between Aiden Lair and Newcomb, at Boreas
Bridge, about one and a half miles north of Aiden Lair.

Route 1.—Two fireplaces at south end of bridge over Fish Creek Pond,
about three and one-half miles north of Wawbeek Turn.

Route 1.—One open camp and three fireplaces one-eighth mile west of
north end of bridge over Fish Creek Pond.

Route 1.—Two fireplaces near Follensby Clear Pond, about one and
one-half miles north of Fish Creek Pond Bridge.

Route 2.—One fireplace between Indian Lake and Blue Mountain Lake at
John Mack Brook, about six miles from Indian Lake.

Route 3.—One fireplace on State Road, North Hudson, at Sharp Bridge.

Route 3.—One fireplace on State Road at watering trough, about one mile
south of Underwood.

Route 3.—One fireplace between Elizabethtown and Keene, about three
miles from Elizabethtown.

Route 3.—Three fireplaces about three and one-half miles from
Wilmington and just below High Falls.

Route 3.—One fireplace about five miles east of Lake Placid, where
outlet of Owen Pond joins Ausable River.

Route 3.—One fireplace about three miles east of Lake Placid at iron
bridge.

Route 3.—One fireplace near Chubb Hill in forest plantation.

Route 4.—Six fireplaces between Northville and Wells, about thirteen
miles from Northville.

Route 4.—Four fireplaces at Perkins Clearing, about seven miles north
of Speculator.

Route 4.—One open camp and three fireplaces at Mason Lake, about ten
miles north of Speculator.

Route 4.—Six fireplaces at Lewey Lake Bridge, about fourteen and
one-half miles north of Speculator.

Route 4.—Four fireplaces at Falls Brook, about fifteen miles north of
Speculator.

Route 4.—One fireplace at Willow Brook on shore of Indian Lake, about
sixteen miles north of Speculator.

Route 4.—One fireplace at Forks Brook, about seventeen miles north of
Speculator.

Route 7.—One fireplace between Cooks and Cranberry Lake, about one mile
from Cooks.

Route 7.—One fireplace between Cooks and Seveys at Dead Creek, about
five miles from Cooks.

Route 7.—One fireplace between Gale and Piercefield, about three miles
from Gale.

Route 8.—Seven fireplaces between McKeever and Thendara.

Route 8.—One fireplace between Old Forge and Eagle Bay, about three and
one-half miles from Old Forge.

Route 8.—One fireplace between Eagle Bay and Raquette Lake at Uncas
Road.

Route 8.—One fireplace between Eagle Bay and Raquette Lake at Upper
Brown Tract Pond.

Route 20.—One fireplace between Seveys and Hollywood, about three miles
north of Seveys.

Route 20.—One fireplace between Seveys and Hollywood, just north of
Seveys.

Route 32.—One fireplace at Mt. Poke-o-Moonshine Cliff, seven miles from
Keeseville.

Route 44.—One fireplace at foot of hill, about three miles south of
Lake Placid on road to Cascade.



List of Public Camp Sites in the Catskills

On marked routes and accessible by automobile.

Route 1.—Fireplace between Acra and East Windham, about two miles west
of Acra.

Route 1.—Fireplace near Silver Lake, just off main road from East
Windham to Windham, about one mile from East Windham.

Route 2.—Fireplace between Hensonville and Hunter, about three miles
from Hensonville.

Route 2.—Fireplace between Hunter and Phœnicia, just south of Stony
Clove.

Route 3.—Fireplace between Lexington and Hunter, about one mile from
Lexington.

Route 3.—Fireplace at head of Platte Clove on side of road about five
miles out of Tannersville.

Route 4.—Fireplace south side of reservoir, about one-fourth mile west
of West Shokan post office.

Route 4.—Fireplace between Mt. Tremper and Willow, about two miles
north of Mt. Tremper.

Route 4.—Fireplace between Mt. Tremper and Phœnicia, about one mile
west of Mt. Tremper.

Route 4.—Fireplace in Woodland Valley about two miles south of Woodland
post office.

Route 4.—One open camp and fireplace in Woodland Valley at foot of
Wittenberg trail, about four and a half miles from Phœnicia.

Route 4.—Fireplace between Shandaken and Big Indian, about one mile
west of Shandaken.

Route 4.—Fireplace between Shandaken and Big Indian, about one and a
half miles from Shandaken.

Route 4.—Open camp and fireplace in Rider Hollow, off Dry Brook Road,
about seven miles from Arkville.

Route 5.—Fireplace between Westkill and Shandaken, just south of Deep
Notch.

Route 6.—Fireplace between Saugerties and Woodstock, about four miles
west of Saugerties.

Route 10.—Fireplace between Grahamsville and Claryville at top of Wyman
Hill, about three miles from Grahamsville.

Route 10.—Open camp and fireplace on Red Hill Road, east branch of the
Neversink, about five miles from Claryville.

Route 10.—Fireplace on Red Hill Road, east branch of the Neversink,
about six miles east of Claryville.

Route 10.—Open camp and fireplace between Claryville and Big Indian on
south side of divide, about eleven miles from Claryville.

Route 10.—Fireplace between Claryville and Big Indian on north side of
divide, about fifteen miles from Claryville.

Route 12.—Fireplace between Roscoe and Cooks Falls, about four miles
west of Roscoe.

Route 12.—Fireplace on highway about one mile north of East Branch.

Route 12.—Fireplace between East Branch and Hancock, about three miles
from East Branch.

Route 12.—Fireplace between East Branch and Hancock, about seven miles
from East Branch.

Route 15.—Fireplace between Margaretville and Andes, about one mile
north of Dunraven post office.

Open camps and fireplaces can be used for reasonable periods.
“Reasonable” is construed to mean such time as is necessary and proper,
and does not exclude others who might be entitled to use the camp,
provided the former occupant has used it for a “reasonable” period. The
idea is to give no one an exclusive privilege, but to insure to all a
fair share of enjoyment.




NORTH CAROLINA

Municipal Camp Sites


   Town or City   Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                  Free             Water    or Stove         Shower
   Ashboro        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Ashville       25c. day  Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Carthage       F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Charlotte      F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Cornelius      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Hamlet
   Henderson                       Y
   Hendersonville
   Hickory        50c. day  Y      Y        Y         Y
   Marshall       F                Y                  Y
   Mount Airy     F                Y        Y
   Raleigh


North Carolina includes wholly or in part these National Forests with
areas indicated in acres: Pisgah (53,810), Mount Mitchell (54,715),
Nantahala (45,354), Savannah (31,780), and Boone (1,181).

With the exception of Pisgah these forests were acquired by the
Government Jan. 1, 1918, and there have as yet been no extensive
improvements in the way of roads.

The state has a Forest Reservation embracing the summit of Mt.
Mitchell, the highest peak east of the Rocky Mountains, but a private
company has constructed a highway to the top and taxes each auto party
of tourists a toll of $1.00 per head for the use of this road.




NORTH DAKOTA

Municipal Camp Sites


   Town or City    Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                   Free             Water    or Stove         Shower
   Abercrombie
   Almont
   Ashley          F         Y      Y        Y                Y
   Beach           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Belfield        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Bismark         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Bowman
   Bucyrus
   Buffalo Springs
   Carrington      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Cleveland       F         Y      Y        Y
   Crosby          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Dawson                                    Y         Y
   Dickinson—1     F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Dickinson—2     F         Y      Y                  Y
   Edgeley         F         Y      Y                  Y
   Fargo           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Gascoyne
   Gladstone
   Glen Ullin      F         Y      Y        Y
   Grafton
   Grand Forks     F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Hankinson       F         Y      Y
   Harvey          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Haynes
   Hebron          F         Y      Y        Y
   Hillsboro
   Jamestown       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Killdeer
   Kindred         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Larimore        F         Y      Y                  Y
   Lisbon
   McKenzie
   Mandan          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Marmarth
   Mayville        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Medina          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Medora
   Minot           F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Mott            F         Y      Y                  Y
   New Salem
   Oakes           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Pembina
   Ray             F         Y      Y        Y
   Rhame
   Steele
   Sterling
   Taylor          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Tioga           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Towner          F         Y      Y        Y
   Valley City     F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Wahpeton


The Sullys Hill National Park is located in North Dakota and is reached
from the Theodore Roosevelt International Highway from Devils Lake,
only a few miles distant.




OHIO

Municipal Camp Sites


  Town or City     Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                   Free             Water    or Stove         Shower
  Akron            F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Amherst          F                Y
  Archbold         F                Y                  Y
  Ashtabula        C                Y
  Bethesda         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Bryan            F         Y      Y        Y
  Butler           F                         Y
  Cambridge        F         Y      Y                  Y
  Cardington       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Cincinnati       F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Clyde            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Conneaut         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Columbus         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Dayton
  East Conneaut.   F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Green Springs.   C         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Jacksonville     F                         Y
  Lima
  Marion—2         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Minster          F                                   Y
  New Philadelphia F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Pioneer          F                                   Y
  Shelby           F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Springfield      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Toledo
  Troy             F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Wapakoneta       F                Y        Y
  West Unity       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
  Zanesville       F                Y        Y




OKLAHOMA

Municipal Camp Sites


   Town or City  Charge or   Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                 Free               Water    or Stove         Shower
   Ada           F           Y      Y        Y         Y
   Alva          F           Y      Y        Y         Y
   Anadarko      F           Y      Y        Y                Y
   Ardmore       F                  Y
   Atoka         F           Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Bartlesville  F           Y      Y        Y         Y
   Blackwell     F           Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Blanchard     F                  Y
   Cache         F           Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Carnegie      F           Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Chandler      F           Y      Y        Y
   Chickasha
   Clinton       F           Y      Y        Y         Y
   Comanche      F           Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Cushing       F                  Y
   Edmond        F                  Y        Y
   Dover
   Duncan
   El Reno       F                  Y        Y
   Enid          F           Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Fairview      F           Y      Y        Y         Y
   Ft. Gibson    F           Y      Y        Y         Y
   Geary         F           Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Granite       F           Y      Y        Y
   Guthrie       F           Y      Y                  Y
   Guymon
   Hammon        F           Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Hennessey     F           Y      Y        Y         Y
   Hinton        F                  Y
   Hobart        F                  Y        Y
   Hominy        F                  Y        Y
   McAlester     F           Y      Y        Y         Y
   Muldrow       F                  Y        Y
   Muskogee      25c.        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
                 Registrat’n
   Norman        F                  Y
   Oklahoma City F           Y      Y        Y
   Perry         F           Y      Y        Y         Y
   Ponca City    F           Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Pony Creek    F           Y      Y        Y         Y
   Pryor         F                  Y                  Y
   Roff          F                  Y        Y         Y
   Shawnee       F           Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Snyder        F                  Y        Y         Y
   Strong City   F                  Y                  Y
   Stroud        F           Y      Y        Y         Y
   Sulphur
   Terral        F           Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Tonkawa       F           Y      Y        Y         Y
   Tulsa         F           Y      Y        Y         Y
   Vinita        F           Y      Y        Y         Y
   Waurika       F
   Welch         F           Y      Y        Y


The only National Forest in Oklahoma is the Wichita, 61,480 acres. The
supervisor of this forest may be reached in Cache, and will give all
information possible regarding roads and camp sites in the Wichita
Forest.




OREGON

Municipal Camp Sites


  Town or City  Charge or Free Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath
                                      Water    or Stove         or
                                                                Shower
  Albany        F              Y      Y        Y         Y
  Arlington     F                     Y        Y
  Ashland       50c. day       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Astoria—3     F              Y
  Baker         F              Y      Y        Y         Y
  Bend          F              Y      Y
  Boswell       50c.           Y      Y        Y         Y
                Registrat’n
  Brownsville                  Y      Y        Y
  Burns                        Y      Y        Y         Y
  Clatskanie    F              Y      Y        Y         Y
  Corvallis     F              Y      Y        Y         Y
  Cottage Grove 50c.           Y      Y        Y         Y
                Registrat’n
  Crater Lake   F
  Dallas        F                     Y        Y
  Elgin         F              Y      Y        Y
  Enterprise    F              Y      Y        Y
  Eugene        50c.           Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Free Water    F              Y      Y        Y
  Grants Pass   F              Y      Y        Y
  Hillsboro     50c. after     Y      Y        Y         Y
                first day
  Hood River    F              Y      Y        Y         Y
  Huntington    F              Y      Y        Y
  Independence  F              Y      Y        Y
  Junction City F              Y      Y        Y         Y
  Klamath Falls F              Y      Y        Y
  La Grande     50c. day       Y      Y        Y
  Lake View     F                     Y        Y
  McMinnville   F              Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Marshfield    F              Y      Y        Y         Y
  Medford       50c. day       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Merlin        F              Y      Y        Y
  Myrtle Point
  Newberg       F              Y      Y        Y
  Newport       F              Y      Y        Y         Y
  North Bend    F              Y      Y        Y
  Ontario                      Y      Y        Y
  Pendleton     50c. day       Y      Y        Y         Y
  Portland      F              Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
  Prineville                   Y      Y        Y
  Roseburg      F              Y      Y        Y         Y
  Salem         50c.           Y      Y        Y         Y
  Seaside                      Y      Y        Y         Y
  St. Paul      F
  The Dalles    50c.           Y      Y        Y         Y
                Registrat’n
  Umatilla      F                     Y


The National Forests of Oregon number sixteen and form for motor
tourists one of the great attractions of the state. These are the

(1) Cascade National Forest (1,016,290 acres). Motor tourists will find
at Salt Creek Hot Springs camping facilities.

(2) Crater National Forest (798,588 acres). There are convenient
camping places along the motor road through this forest along the Rogue
River, at Natural Bridge, Union Creek, Silver Camp and Whiskey Creek.
Dead Indian Soda Springs in this region has free public camping
grounds.

(3) Deschutes National Forest (1,282,293 acres).

(4) Fremont National Forest (856,369 acres). Many desirable camping
places, accessible by automobile, may be reached from Silver Lake, such
as Williamson River, Klamath Marsh, Silver Creek and Buck Creek.

(5) Malheur National Forest (1,057,682 acres). The Metolius River,
which may be reached by excellent automobile roads, has a number of
public camping grounds along its course. Camping places are also found
along the entire length of Murderers Creek, which is accessible during
the summer through Bear Valley.

(6) Minam National Forest (430,694 acres). Balm Creek Reservoir in this
forest offers motor tourists good camping facilities.

(7) The Ochoco National Forest (716,604 acres). A new road through the
open park-like forest connects the Ochoco and Taylor Creek valleys.
Natural camp sites may be found along this route.

(8) The Oregon National Forest (1,031,926 acres). This forest has
numerous camping sites for auto campers, among which are Lost Lake,
Eagle Creek (one hundred thousand visit this camp ground each season),
Zig Zag River, and others.

(9) Santiam National Forest (607,097 acres).

(10) Siskiyou National Forest (998,044 acres).

(11) Siuslaw National Forest (543,383 acres).

(12) Umatilla National Forest (485,786 acres). There is a good summer
auto road to Lehman and Hideaway Springs via Pilot Rock to Ukiah,
Albee, and the John Day country. Lehman and Hideaway Springs are both
privately owned resorts in or near the Umatilla National Forest and are
popular camping places. The Forest itself does not offer exceptional
attractions to campers.

(13) Umpqua National Forest (1,011,022 acres).

(14) Wallowa National Forest (957,579 acres). Wenaha or Bingham
Springs, accessible by automobile, located on the Umatilla River a
short distance from the boundary of Wenaha National Forest, have warm
sulphur springs and a bathing and swimming pool, with a camp ground
equipped with camping conveniences.

(15) Wenaha National Forest (425,504 acres in Oregon).

(16) Whitman National Forest (882,496 acres).




PENNSYLVANIA

Municipal Camp Sites


   Town or City   Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                  Free             Water    or Stove         Shower
   Bangor         F                Y
   Bellefonte     F                Y        Y         Y
   Chambersburg   F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Elizabethville F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Erie           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Girard         F         Y      Y                  Y
   Knox           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   McKeesport     F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   New Castle     F         Y      Y        Y
   New Kensington F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Phœnixville    F                Y        Y
   Pittsburgh     F         Y      Y        Y
   Rockwood       F         Y      Y
   Swoyersville   F
   Watsontown     F         Y      Y        Y         Y



Public Camp Grounds in the Pennsylvania State Forests

The Department of Forestry has developed and equipped eight public camp
grounds in the State Forests for the use of automobile tourists. These
camp grounds are equipped with a space for tents, a fireplace, a supply
of pure water, two comfort stations, four garbage containers, four
tables and eight benches. No permit will be granted to any person for
any particular camp for more than ten days in one year. Occupancy,
however, is limited to two days unless a permit is obtained for a
longer period from a local State Forest officer.


  Name of Camp     Name of Forest  County      For Detailed Information
                                               Apply to

  Tea Springs      Bald Eagle      Clinton     District Forester,
                                               Mifflinburg, Pa.
  Caledonia        Michaux         Franklin    District Forester,
                                               Fayetteville, Pa.
  Promised Land    Delaware        Pike        District Forester,
                                               Stroudsburg, Pa.
  Childs Park      Delaware        Pike        District Forester,
                                               Stroudsburg, Pa.
  Ole Bull         Susquehannock   Potter      District Forester,
                                               Coudersport, Pa.
  Cherry Springs   Susquehannock   Potter      District Forester,
  Drive                                        Coudersport, Pa.
  Coleraine Forge  Logan           Huntington  District Forester,
                                               Petersburg, Pa.
  Laurel Summit    Forbes          Somerset    District Forester,
                                               Ligonier, Pa.




RHODE ISLAND

The Metropolitan Park Commission of the State of Rhode Island and
Providence Plantations has set apart certain open spaces for public
recreation and enjoyment. One of these, the Lincoln Woods Reservation
(458 acres), is one of the best natural parks in New England and
consists of rocky woodland, streams, hills and valleys, open meadows
and lakes. Shelters and fireplaces have been located in several
sections of the reservation and campers must use the latter if a fire
is needed. Permits for the use of camping locations may be obtained by
applying at the office of the Commission in the State House. Lincoln
Woods is located five miles from Providence.




SOUTH CAROLINA

Municipal Camp Sites


    Town or City Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                 Free             Water    or Stove         Shower
    Aiken        F                         Y
    Anderson     F         Y      Y        Y
    Camden       F         Y      Y                  Y
    Fairfax      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Greenwood    F         Y      Y                         Y


Thirteen thousand nine hundred and twenty-one acres of the Savannah
National Forest are located in South Carolina, and motorists will
doubtless find many attractive camp sites within its borders. The
supervisor of this forest (also called the Nantahala) may be addressed
for information at Franklin, N. C.




SOUTH DAKOTA

Municipal Camp Sites


   Town or City   Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                  Free             Water    or Stove         Shower
   Aberdeen       F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Alexandria
   Andover        F                Y                  Y
   Arlington      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Beresford      F
   Big Stone City
   Bowdle         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Bridgewater    F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Bristol
   Brookings      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Canton         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Chamberlain    F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Clark          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Cottonwood
   Craven
   Crystal Cave   F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Deadwood       F         Y      Y        Y
   Elk Point      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Emery
   Fairview
   Flandreau      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Garretson      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Glenham
   Gregory        F         Y      Y
   Groton         F         Y      Y
   Hot Springs    F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Hudson
   Huron          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Ipswich                  Y      Y        Y         Y
   Java
   Kadoka         F         Y      Y        Y
   Kemmon
   Kennebec
   Kimball        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   McLaughlin
   Madison
   Marion                   Y                         Y
   Marvin
   Milbank        F         Y      Y                  Y
   Mitchell       F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Mount Vernon
   Murdo          F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   New Underwood
   Oacoma
   Parker         F         Y      Y                  Y
   Parkston       F         Y      Y
   Piedmont
   Pierre         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Plankinton
   Presho         F                Y        Y
   Pukwana
   Quinn
   Rapid City               Y      Y        Y         Y
   Reliance
   Salem          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Sioux Falls    F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Sisseton
   Spearfish      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Stratford      F         Y      Y        Y
   Sturgis
   Summit         F         Y      Y                  Y
   Thunderhawk
   Twin Brooks
   Tyndall        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Vermillion     F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Vivian
   Wall
   Wasta
   Watauga
   Watertown      F         Y      Y                  Y
   Waubay
   Webster        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   White Lake
   Whitewood
   Woonsocket     F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Yankton        F         Y      Y        Y


South Dakota maintains in the Custer State Park one of the most
picturesque recreation grounds in the country. It comprises 61,440
acres in the Black Hills section of the state, 30,000 acres of which
are designated by the National Government as a game preserve. Among
other interesting game there is a herd of seventy-five buffalo. A
wonderful system of highways is being constructed which will open up
this park to motor tourists.

The Wind Cave National Park is accessible to motor tourists and is
being visited by more than thirty thousand tourists annually, most of
whom are campers.

There are three of the National Forests in South Dakota, viz.: the
Black Hills (483,403 acres); the Harney (548,854 acres); the Sioux
(75,524 acres). These are being rapidly opened up to camping motor
tourists by the construction of improved highways and camping sites.




TENNESSEE

Municipal Camp Sites


    Town or City  Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                  Free             Water    or Stove         Shower
    Camden        F         Y      Y
    Chattanooga—1           Y               Y
    Chattanooga—2           Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
    Columbia
    Gallatin      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Greenville    F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Jacksboro     F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Jellico       F                Y                  Y
    McEwen        F
    McKenzie      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Monterey      F                Y                  Y
    Pulaski
    Smithville    F         Y      Y
    Tullahoma     F         Y               Y


Among the lands acquired by the Government in 1918 were tracts in the
State of Tennessee which have been formed into the Cherokee National
Forest (83,875 acres) and the Unaka National Forest (11,854 acres).
Information as to camping sites and roads leading thereto may be had by
writing the supervisors of these forests, for the former at Athens,
Ga., and for the latter at Johnson City, Tenn.




TEXAS

Municipal Camp Sites


   Town or City    Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath
                   Free             Water    or Stove         or
                                                              Shower
   Alice           F         Y      Y        Y
   Alvarado        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Alvord          F         Y
   Aransas Pass    F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Austin          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Ballinger       F                Y        Y
   Bastrop         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Big Springs     F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Bonham          F                Y        Y
   Brady           F                Y        Y
   Brazoria        F                Y        Y
   Breckenridge    F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Brenham         F                Y        Y         Y
   Brownwood       F         Y      Y        Y
   Calvert         F         Y      Y                  Y
   Canadian        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Cisco           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Clarendon       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Clarksville     F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Cleburne        F                Y        Y
   Clifton
   Comanche        F         Y      Y
   Conroe          F                Y
   Copperas Cove   F         Y      Y
   Corpus Christi  F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Corsicana       F                Y
   Dalhart         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Dallas          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Dawson          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   De Kalb         F                Y        Y
   Del Rio         F                Y
   Denison         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Denton          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Eagle Pass      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   El Campo        F                Y
   Elkhart         F         Y
   El Paso         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Flatonia        F         Y      Y        Y
   Floydada        F         Y      Y        Y
   Fort Worth      F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Fredericksburg  F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Gainsville      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Galveston       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Harlingen       F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Haskell         F                Y        Y
   Honey Grove               Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Houston         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Junction        F         Y      Y        Y
   Karnes City     F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Kerrville       F         Y      Y        Y
   Lampasas        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Laporte         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Lewisville      F         Y      Y
   Liberty         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Llano           F         Y      Y        Y
   Longview        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Lubbock         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   McKinney        F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Marble Falls    F         Y      Y        Y
   Marshall        F         Y      Y
   Marlin          F         Y      Y        Y
   Mason           F         Y      Y        Y
   Meridian        F         Y      Y        Y
   Mineral Wells   F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Mt. Pleasant    F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Navasota        F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Pittsburg       F         Y      Y        Y
   Plainview       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Port Arthur     F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Port Lavaca     F
   Post, Garza Co. F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Roscoe          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   San Angelo      F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   San Antonio     F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Sanger
   San Marcos      F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   San Saba        F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Seymour         F         Y      Y        Y
   Shamrock        F         Y      Y
   Sherman         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Slaton          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Snyder          F         Y      Y                  Y
   Sonora          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Stephensville   F         Y      Y        Y
   Sulphur Springs F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Temple          F         Y      Y        Y
   Texarkana       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Texas City      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Tioga           F         Y      Y
   Trinity         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Tulia           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Valley Mills
   Van Alstyne     F         Y      Y        Y
   Vernon          F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Victoria        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Waco            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Walnut Springs
   Waxahachie      F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Whitesboro      F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Wichita Falls   F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Wills Point     F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y




UTAH

Municipal Camp Sites


   Town or City   Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                  Free             Water    or Stove         Shower
   Cisco          F                Y        Y
   Emery
   Fillmore       F         Y      Y                  Y
   Green River    F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Gunnison       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Heber          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Lehi           F         Y      Y
   Logan          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Manti          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Milford        F         Y      Y                  Y
   Moab           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Morgan         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Nephi          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Ogden          F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Paguitch       F         Y      Y        Y
   Price
   Provo City.    F         Y      Y        Y
   Richfield      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Salina
   Salt Lake City F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y


Zion National Park, in Southwestern Utah, is visited by thousands of
motor campers each summer, and has many attractive camp sites.

Utah is rich in National Forests, having no less than twelve, some of
which are accessible to motor tourists and offer desirable camps.

These National Forests, with their areas expressed in acres, are:
Ashley (973,871), Cache (264,194), Dixie (432,784), Fillmore (699,579),
Fishlake (656,740), La Sal (519,384), Manti (789,957), Minidoka
(72,123), Powell (689,927), Sevier (729,061), Uinta (988,602), and
Wasatch (604,594).




VERMONT

Municipal Camp Sites


    Town or City  Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                  Free             Water    or Stove         Shower
    Brattleboro   F
    Burlington    F
    East Hardwick
    Northfield    F                Y
    Rutland       25–50c.   Y      Y        Y
    St. Albans    F         Y      Y        Y
    Stowe         F


There are also many places along the main highways where individuals
have posted notices inviting tourists to camp there.

The State Forests are mentioned in another chapter, but they are
somewhat inaccessible, and provisions for motor campers as yet are
meager.




VIRGINIA

Municipal Camp Sites


   Town or City    Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                   Free             Water    or Stove         Shower
   Abingdon        Permit    Y      Y        Y         Y
   Appalachia      F                Y                  Y
   Clarksville     F                Y                  Y
   Emporia         F                                   Y
   Endless Caverns F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Richmond        F         Y      Y
   South Hill      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Virginia Beach  C         Y      Y        Y         Y


The Natural Bridge (71,710 acres) and the Shenandoah (44,920 acres)
National Forests are in Virginia and have many beautiful and
interesting spots to offer to the motor camper. Specific information
may be received as to camping sites by addressing the supervisor of the
former at Buena Vista, Va., and of the latter at Harrisonburg, Va.




WASHINGTON

Municipal Camp Sites


    Town or City   Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath
                   Free             Water    or Stove         or
                                                              Shower
    Almira
    Anacortes      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Bellingham—1   F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
    Bellingham—2   F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Burbank        F
    Cashmere
    Castle Rock    F                Y
    Centralia      F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
    Chehalis—1     F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
    Chehalis—2     F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
    Cheney—1       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Cheney—2       F                Y                         Y
    Cle Elum       F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
    Colville       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Coulee City    F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Davenport      F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
    Dayton         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
    Deer Park      F                Y
    Easton         F                Y        Y
    Edmonds        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Ellensburg     F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Garfield       F         Y      Y
    Goldendale—3   F         Y      Y        Y
    Grandview      F         Y      Y        Y
    Granite Falls  F         Y      Y        Y
    Hoquiam                  Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
    Issaquah       F         Y      Y        Y
    Kalama         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Kelso          F         Y      Y        Y
    Kirkland       F                Y        Y                Y
    Lake Keechelus
    Leavenworth    F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Marysville—2   F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Montesano      F                Y        Y
    Mount Rainier  F         Y      Y        Y
    National Park
    Mount Vernon   F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Newport
    North Beach
    Oakesdale      F                Y        Y
    Odessa         F         Y      Y        Y
    Okanogan
    Olympia        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Pasco          F                Y        Y
    Pomeroy        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Port Orchard   F                Y        Y
    Prosser                  Y      Y        Y         Y
    Raymond        F         Y      Y        Y
    Republic       F                Y
    Richland                 Y      Y        Y
    Ritzville                Y      Y        Y         Y
    Rosalia        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Seattle—2      F 7 days  Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
    Shelton        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Snoqualmie     F
    South Bend               Y      Y        Y         Y
    Spokane        50c. day  Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
    Sprague        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Sumas          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Tacoma         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
    Tenino         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Touchet        F                Y        Y
    Vancouver      50c. 7    Y      Y        Y         Y
                   days
    Walla Walla    F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
    Waterville
    Wenatchee
    White Salmon   F         Y      Y        Y         Y
    Wilbur
    Yakima         50c. day  Y      Y        Y         Y



State Camp Sites

Camp sites prepared by the State Forestry Department are generally upon
lands leased by the Department, such lands being situated upon public
highways and usually adjoining running streams of pure water,
fireplaces and free wood being provided. There are twenty-one of these
sites, mostly in counties in the western portion of the state.

There are sixteen State Parks, upon some of which camping sites have
been established and others will be provided. At present ten camp sites
have been opened to the public in the State Parks.



State Forest Camp Sites

The following is a list of the sites under lease by the Forestry
Department:

Part of Lot 2, Section 32, Township 37 North Range 1 West (San Juan
County).

Part of S.W. quarter of S.E. quarter of Section 32, Township 16 North
Range 2 West, 20.49 acres (Thurston County).

Four acres in S.E. corner of S.W. quarter of Section 32, Township 37
North Range 4 East (Whatcom County).

North 3 acres in Lot 5, Block 1, Silver Lake in Township 28 North Range
5 East on the Pacific Highway in Snohomish County.

One acre in Lot 3, Section 9, Township 36 North Range 2 West (San Juan
County).

Three acres in Lot 1, Section 21, Township 36 North Range 2 West (San
Juan County).

Three acres in Lot 5, Section 13, Township 35 North Range 3 West (San
Juan County).

Portion of Section 8, Township 36 North Range 2 West (San Juan County).

Three acres in Section 16, Township 36 North Range 1 West (San Juan
County).

Beach at Olga in San Juan County.

Five acres in N.E. quarter of S.W. quarter of Section 22, Township 33
North Range 6 East (Skagit County).

One and one-half acres in Lot 9, Section 10, Township 32 North Range 7
East (Snohomish County).

Five acres in Lot 6, Section 12, Township 30 North Range 6 East
(Snohomish County).

Fives acres in Section 5, Township 32 North Range 7 East (Snohomish
County).

Four acres in Lots 5 and 6, Section 25, Township 32 North Range 9 East
(Snohomish County).

Part of south half of N.E. quarter of S.W. quarter of Section 8,
Township 32 North Range 9 East (Snohomish County).

Five acres in Lot 11, Section 9, Township 32 North Range 8 East
(Snohomish County).

Three acres in S.E. quarter of N.W. quarter of Section 7, Township 32
North Range 9 East (Snohomish County).

Ten acres S.E. quarter of S.W. quarter of S.W. quarter of Section 8,
Township 30 North Range 5 West (Clallam County).

Portion of Section 9, Township 27 North Range 9 East (Snohomish
County).

Portion of Section 19, Township 24 North Range 12 West (Jefferson
County).



State Park Camp Sites

In the state parks the following camp sites have been developed:

In Chuckanut State Park, located on the Pacific Highway, about six
miles south of Bellingham, in Section 36, Township 37 North Range 2
East (Whatcom County), the park containing 20 acres, with salt water
frontage.

In Moran State Park, on Orcas Island, our largest park containing about
3,000 acres, camp sites have been prepared at Mountain Lake in Township
37 North Range 1 West (San Juan County).

In Deception Pass State Park, at Rosario Beach, on Fidalgo Island. This
park contains about 1,800 acres with several miles of salt water
frontage and is situated in Skagit and Island Counties in Township 34
North Ranges 1 and and 2 East.

Five acres on Vashon Island, King County, in Section 31, Township 23
North Range 3 East.

Four acres in S.E. quarter of S.E. quarter of Section 16, Township 25
North Range 6 East, on Redmond-Falls City Highway in King
County—partially improved.

Two acres on Black River Road nine miles southwest of Olympia in S.W.
quarter of S.W. quarter of Section 19, Township 17 North Range 2 West
(Thurston County).

Thirty-five acres, leased park on Navy Yard Highway, Hoods Canal, salt
water beach in Sections 19 and 20, Township 22 North Range 2 West
(Mason County), twenty miles west of Puget Sound Navy Yard at
Bremerton.

Five acres, leased site in Section 22, Township 21 North Range 4 West
(Mason County); on Olympic Highway at Purdy Creek.

Lewis and Clark State Park, containing 520 acres, situated on the
Pacific Highway in Lewis County, twelve miles south of Chehalis, in
Section 16, Township 12 North Range, 1 West.

Money Creek Park, maintained by the Natural Parks Association, in King
County, on the Stevens Pass Highway, at the junction of Money Creek and
the Skykomish River, fifty miles east of Everett.



National Forests

The State of Washington is rich in National Forests, having a total
number of ten. Almost all of them are now more or less accessible to
motorists. A list of these forests follows.

Chelan (677,429 acres). Good automobile roads give access to the lower
end of Lake Chelan, from the Sunset Highway and the Yellowstone Trail
by Blewett Pass and Wenatchee. There are many camping places along the
lake. Further information concerning camping sites may be obtained from
the Supervisor at Okanogan.

Columbia (784,498 acres). A road forty-seven miles long, passable for
automobiles, connects Castle Rock with Spirit Lake in this forest. The
Forest Service maintains a public camp ground on the south shore of the
lake where tourists and campers are always welcome. For other
information write the Supervisor of this forest at Portland, Oregon.

Colville (754,886 acres). Tourists may visit the remotest settlement in
the Colville National Forest by automobile and secure camping supplies
from towns on, or away from, the railroad. The Forest Supervisor can be
reached at Republic.

Olympic (1,534,689 acres). Olympic Hot Springs can be reached from
Elwha P. O. on the Olympic Highway. Splendid camping places can easily
be had near the springs along Boulder Creek. The address of the
Supervisor is Olympia.

Rainier (1,315,891 acres). McClellan Pass Highway, built by the Forest
Service and the State, is now completed as far as the Dalles of White
River. The National Park Highway from Tacoma to Mount Rainier follows
the Nisqually River in the Rainier National Forest for three miles.
Frequent camping sites may be found along these highways. The
Supervisor may be found at Tacoma.

Snoqualmie (698,043 acres). Along the principal routes of travel in
this forest the Forest Service has cleared up the most desirable
camping sites. The Supervisor is located at Seattle.

Washington (1,454,214 acres). This forest is rugged, and good
automobile roads are few. For camping sites information may be secured
from the Supervisor at Bellingham.

Wenaha (313,434 acres). One hundred and forty miles of road passable by
automobiles traverse this forest. Popular camping places accessible by
automobile are Tollgate and Godman Springs. For others inquire of the
Supervisor at Walla Walla.

Wenatchee (665,276 acres). The new road over Blewett Pass has a maximum
grade of five per cent and furnishes one of the most attractive and
beautiful drives in the Northwest. Lake Keechelus is skirted by the
Sunset Highway on its east side. Here are good hunting and fishing in
season and beautiful camping places. Leavenworth, Wash., is the
headquarters of the Supervisor.

The other forest, Okanogan (1,486,325 acres), is not accessible to
motorists.




WISCONSIN

Municipal Camp Sites


   Town or City     Charge or Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath
                    Free             Water    or Stove         or
                                                               Shower
   Abbotsford       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Amherst Junction
   Appleton         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Ashland          F                Y        Y
   Augusta                    Y      Y        Y         Y
   Baldwin          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Bangor           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Berlin           F         Y      Y        Y
   Bloomington      Permit           Y        Y
   Boscobel         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Burlington       F         Y      Y        Y
   Chippewa Falls   F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Clintonville     F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Cudahy
   Darien           F                Y        Y
   Delavan          F         Y      Y        Y
   De Pere          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Durand           F         Y      Y        Y
   Eagle River      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Eau Claire       F         Y      Y        Y
   Elroy            F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Evansville       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Fennimore        F         Y                         Y
   Fond du Lac      F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Fremont
   Green Bay        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Greenwood        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Hillsboro        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Hudson
   Iola             F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Jefferson        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Juneau           F         Y      Y                  Y
   Kilbourn         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Ladysmith        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   La Farge         F         Y      Y        Y
   Lake Mills       F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Lancaster        F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Madison          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Mauston          F         Y                         Y
   Medina
   Melrose          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Menomonee Falls
   Menomonie
   Merrill          F
   Middleton        F                Y
   Milwaukee—2      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Neenah           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Neillsville      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   New Lisbon       F         Y      Y
   Oshkosh          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Platteville      F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Plymouth         F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Port Washington  F                Y                  Y
   Racine           F         Y      Y        Y
   Reedsburg        F         Y      Y                  Y
   Richland Center  F         Y      Y                  Y
   Ripon            F         Y      Y                  Y
   Shawano          F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Sparta           F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Spring Green     F         Y      Y
   Spring Valley    F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   South Milwaukee  F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Stanley          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Stevens Point    F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Sturgeon Bay     F         Y      Y
   Viroqua          F         Y      Y                  Y
   Wabeno           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Washburn         F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
   Watertown        F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Waukesha         F         Y      Y
   Waupaca          F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Wausau           F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Wausaukee        F         Y      Y        Y
   Westby           F         Y      Y        Y
   Westfield        F         Y      Y        Y
   Weyanwega
   Winneconne       F         Y      Y        Y         Y
   Wisconsin Rapids F         Y      Y        Y         Y      Y



The State of Wisconsin maintains eight State Parks. At these parks the
state leases camp sites at 50 cents a week or $5.00 for the season.



List of State Parks

Brule Park (4,321 acres), Douglas County.

Cushing Memorial Park. Small.

Nelson Dewey Park (1,651 acres) is located in Grant County in the angle
formed by the confluence of the Wisconsin and Mississippi Rivers, and
includes the bluffs of both rivers.

Devils Lake Park (1,400 acres). Sauk County, near the city of Baraboo.

Interstate Park (730 acres), including the Dells of the St. Croix
River.

Pattison State Park (660 acres). A natural camping ground, including
Manitou Falls—highest in the state. Douglas County, near Superior.

Peninsula State Park (3,400 acres). Door County Peninsula, twenty-five
miles north of the city of Sturgeon, the largest park in the state, is
perhaps the one of foremost scenic and historical worth, natural beauty
and accessibility.

Perrot Park (910 acres), along the bluffs of the Mississippi,
twenty-five miles north of the city of La Crosse.




WYOMING

Municipal Camp Sites


Town or City         Charge  Toilet Drinking Fireplace Lights Bath or
                     or Free        Water    or Stove         Shower
Arvada
Basin                        Y      Y        Y         Y      Y

Carlisle
Casper               F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Cheyenne             F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Clearmont
Cody                 F       Y      Y        Y         Y
Cowley               F       Y      Y        Y         Y
Devils Tower
Gillette
Greybull                     Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Kemmerer             F       Y      Y
Laramie              F       Y      Y        Y         Y
Moorecroft
Parkman
Pine Bluff           F       Y      Y        Y         Y
Ranchester
Rock Springs         F       Y      Y        Y         Y
Sheridan
Shoshoni                     Y      Y        Y         Y
Sun Dance                           Y
Thermopolis          F       Y      Y        Y         Y      Y
Wheatland                    Y      Y        Y         Y
Worland                      Y      Y        Y         Y
Yellowstone National Park


The Yellowstone National Park, which lies largely within the State of
Wyoming, is probably the outstanding recreational feature of the state.

That it is being appreciated by the motor tourist camper is evident
from the fact that the visiting cars have come to number between
fifteen and twenty thousand a year—1923 record, 18,253 cars and 61,507
motorists.

The list of National Forests in Wyoming that follows, with areas in
acres and the addresses of the Supervisor of each, is for those who may
desire the information that these Supervisors will cheerfully give to
inquirers regarding camping sites in these forests, particularly those
accessible to the great transcontinental highways which cross Wyoming,
such as the Lincoln Highway and the National Park to Park Highway:

Ashley National Forest (5,987). Supervisor at Vernal, Utah.

Big Horn National Forest (1,119,725). Supervisor at Sheridan, Wyo.

Caribou National Forest (6,547). Supervisor at Montpelier, Idaho.

Hayden National Forest (322,175). Supervisor at Encampment, Wyo.

Medicine Bow National Forest (469,786). Supervisor at Laramie, Wyo.

Shoshone National Forest (1,576,043). Supervisor at Cody, Wyo.

Targhee National Forest (335,471). Supervisor at St. Anthony, Idaho.

Teton National Forest (1,922,947). Supervisor at Jackson, Wyo.

Washakie National Forest (852,653). Supervisor at Lander, Wyo.

Wyoming National Forest (899,980). Supervisor at Afton, Wyo.








CHAPTER XIV

STATE RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR MOTOR TOURISTS

    Motor Laws of the Different States as Affecting Motor Tourists from
    Other States—States Listed Alphabetically—Also Trailer License Laws
    of the Several States, Each State in Alphabetical Order—Suggested
    Regulations for Camping Parks—Tabulation of Information Concerning
    the Fishing and Game Laws of the Various States—States Given in
    Alphabetical Order.


The laws of the different states vary considerably in the matter of
regulating motor vehicles, so it will be well for the tourist to
familiarize himself in advance with the automobile and traffic
regulations of the states through which he means to travel.

Unless a protracted stay is contemplated he will not find it necessary
to pay any additional tax, but his home state tags should be properly
displayed.

Usually any traffic officer will be able to supply the tourist with a
copy of the local rules and regulations governing traffic in state or
city. Ultimately traffic regulations will be standardized, but as yet
there is considerable variation in the matter.

By the observance of common courtesy and common sense the tourist will,
as a rule, avoid any trouble with local authorities. However, this
should not be taken to mean that the visitor is not to acquaint himself
so far as possible with the local rules and regulations.

It is assumed that the tourist will usually wish to travel in the
United States, with the exception of those who may desire to take a
trip into the domain of our northern neighbor, Canada. Consequently
that will be the only foreign country mentioned.




Time Allowed Visiting Motorists on Home License

Canada. Motorists may tour thirty days without giving bond, provided
home state reciprocates.

Alabama, reciprocal allowance.

Arizona, six months.

Arkansas, reciprocal allowance.

California, three months—register, if longer than twenty-four hours.

Colorado, same as California.

Connecticut, thirty days.

Delaware, reciprocal allowance.

District of Columbia, reciprocal allowance, except for Maryland.

Florida, reciprocal allowance.

Georgia, thirty days.

Idaho, reciprocal allowance.

Indiana, sixty days.

Illinois, six months.

Iowa, reciprocal allowance.

Kansas, sixty days.

Kentucky, reciprocal allowance.

Louisiana, reciprocal allowance.

Maine, thirty days.

Maryland, ninety days, except for District of Columbia.

Massachusetts, reciprocal allowance.

Michigan, ninety days.

Minnesota, thirty days.

Mississippi, sixty days.

Missouri, sixty days.

Montana, thirty to ninety days.

Nebraska, thirty days.

Nevada, thirty days.

New Hampshire, twenty days.

New Jersey, fifteen days.

New Mexico, thirty days.

New York, reciprocal allowance.

North Carolina, sixty days.

North Dakota, thirty days.

Ohio, reciprocal allowance.

Oklahoma, sixty days.

Oregon, reciprocal allowance.

Pennsylvania, reciprocal allowance.

Rhode Island, ten days.

South Carolina, thirty days.

South Dakota, reciprocal allowance.

Tennessee, thirty days.

Texas, thirty days.

Utah, thirty days.

Vermont, three months.

Virginia, reciprocal allowance.

Washington, ninety days.

West Virginia, reciprocal allowance.

Wyoming, ninety days.

Wisconsin, reciprocal allowance.




Trailer Fees

As many tourists are now coming to use trailers, it will be important
to remember the fees charged on the same in the several states. Some
states have no special law affecting trailers. Where such is the case
it will be indicated.

Alabama.—No trailer law.

Arizona.—No trailer law.

Arkansas.—Pneumatic tires. One ton or less $10.00. One to two tons,
$15.00.

California.—Per trailer, $2.00.

Colorado.—One to two-ton capacity, $10.00.

Connecticut.—No trailer law.

Delaware.—Per 500 pounds gross weight, $2.00.

Florida.—Per 100 pounds, pneumatic tires, 75 cents.

Georgia.—No trailer law.

Idaho.—One ton and under, $15.00; 2,001–3,000 pounds, $20.00

Illinois.—No trailer law.

Indiana.—Less than a ton, $3.00; one to two tons, $6.00.

Iowa.—Under one ton, $10.00; one to two tons, $15.00—pneumatic tires.

Kansas.—No trailer law.

Kentucky.—No trailer law.

Louisiana.—No trailer law.

Maine.—Per 100 pounds gross weight—pneumatic tires—15 cents.

Maryland.—One ton—pneumatic tires—$10.00; each additional ton, $10.00.

Massachusetts.—Pneumatic tires, $10.00 per ton of capacity.

Michigan.—Per one hundred pounds of the trailer’s weight, 50 cents.

Minnesota.—Two per cent of value; minimum for one ton or less, $10.00;
each additional ton or fraction, $2.00.

Mississippi.—No trailer law.

Missouri.—No trailer law.

Montana.—No trailer law.

Nebraska.—No trailer law.

Nevada.—Thirty-five cents per weight of vehicle, and rated load
capacity.

New Hampshire.—Pneumatic tires, per 100 pounds gross weight, 60 cents.

New Jersey.—Solid tires, one half ton, $6.00; each additional half ton
up to two tons, $3.00.

New Mexico.—Rubber tires, 25 cents per 100 pounds rated capacity.

New York.—Two tons or less, $5.00.

North Carolina.—Per ton capacity, $15.00

North Dakota.—No trailer law.

Ohio.—Twenty cents per 100 pounds gross weight.

Oklahoma.—No trailer law.

Oregon.—Up to one and a half tons, $16.

Pennsylvania.—No fees for trailers weighing less than 500 pounds; less
than a ton, $10.00; 2,000–3,000 pounds, $20.00.

Rhode Island.—Pneumatic tires, 15 cents per 100 pounds.

South Carolina.—Five dollars plus $2.00 per 1,000 pounds carrying
capacity.

South Dakota.—Capacity two tons or less, $6.00.

Tennessee.—No trailer law.

Texas.—Fifteen cents per 100 pounds gross weight.

Utah.—One ton, $10.00; two tons, $15.00.

Vermont.—No trailer law.

Virginia.—One ton capacity, $15.00, and $3.00 for each additional 1,000
pounds.

Washington—Fifteen hundred pounds or less, $10.00; each additional 100
pounds 40 cents per hundred.

West Virginia.—Pneumatic tires, one ton or less, $5.00; each additional
ton, $7.50.

Wisconsin.—No trailer law.

Wyoming.—No fee for trailers weighing less than 500 pounds; above 500
pounds, 75 cents per hundred.

Where not specified, the rates quoted above are for pneumatic tires. In
general, it may be said that the rates for solid tires are double the
rates on pneumatic tires.

The Rules and Regulations of Motor Camping Parks will be found to vary
more or less with the locality. At many of these parks there are no
specific rules. Care-takers or police officers keep order, but often
that is all. However, there is coming to be a tendency to standardize
the management of these camping sites by the adoption of a few general
rules of procedure.

An example of the tendency to standardize the management of
motor-camping parks is seen in the recommendations of a committee
appointed at a recent convention of the Florida State Commercial
Secretaries’ Association. This committee, after correspondence with
commercial secretaries in towns and cities maintaining motor-camping
sites in various parts of the country, brought in a report recommending
that motor-camping parks in Florida be operated in conformity with the
following rules:


    “Registration.—Upon arrival, the party is to give the license
    number and make of car, the name of the applicant, his permanent
    address and the names of all members of his party. This information
    is to be given to the custodian of the camp, who will be appointed
    by either the local commercial organization, civil authorities or
    whoever is charged with the maintenance of the camp grounds. The
    applicant, providing his stay in the state is to be of some
    duration, should be advised of the requirements prescribed by the
    state automobile law relative to securing a state license. If any
    undesirables are found in the party the same, with their car number
    and the names of the persons in the party, with a statement of the
    cause of complaint, should immediately be transmitted to the
    custodian in charge, who in turn will convey this information to
    the proper local authorities, and should the complaint be serious
    enough the information should be sent to other commercial
    organizations or public authorities in other communities operating
    auto camps.”

    “Time Limit of Parties.—A maximum of two weeks for any one visit,
    with the privilege of renewing under local control.”


The great majority of auto camps, as may be seen from the tabulated
list of camps, make no charge. There is coming to be a feeling,
however, that responsible people will not object to paying a small
daily or weekly charge. The Northwestern Association of Auto Camp
Managers recommend a daily charge of fifty cents per car. On the other
hand, many of the most elaborate and expensively conducted camps are
absolutely free, as, for example, the quarter million dollar auto camp
maintained by the city of Denver. Those communities maintaining free
auto camps do so for the following reasons: They maintain that the
benefits derived by a community maintaining public automobile camps are
threefold.


    “First.—Automobile tourists stopping at these camps are individual
    mediums of publicity, the monetary value of which cannot be
    computed.

    “Second.—From an economic standpoint they are of benefit to the
    community in that they leave a certain amount of money in the
    community visited.

    “Third.—Visitors to these camps often become sufficiently impressed
    with the locality visited to locate there permanently, thereby
    adding other citizens, not only to the community, but to the state
    as well.”




State Regulations for Angling and Hunting

Alabama.—Angling: No fishing license required. Hunting: Resident,
$3.00; non-resident, $15.00. Deer (buck), Nov. 1–Jan. 1; squirrel,
Sept. 15–Feb. 1; quail, Nov. 1–March 1; wild turkey (gobblers), Dec.
1–April 1; dove, Oct. 16–Jan. 31; duck, geese, brant, plover, snipe,
coot, yellow-legs and mud hen, Nov. 1–Jan. 31; woodcock, Nov. 1–Jan.
31; rail, Sept. 1–Nov. 30. License issued by Probate Judge.

Arizona.—General hunting and fishing license. Resident, $1.25;
non-resident, $20.00. Small game hunting and fishing license.
Non-resident, $10.00. Trout, June 1–Sept. 1; deer (buck) and wild
turkey, Oct. 1–31; quail (except bob-white), Oct. 15–Dec. 15; mourning
doves, Sept. 1–Dec. 31; white wings, July 15–Dec. 31; duck, goose,
brant, snipe, coot, and gallinule, Oct. 15–Jan. 31; black-bellied and
golden plover, yellow-legs, Oct. 15–Dec. 15; rail, other than coot and
gallinule, Oct. 15–Nov. 30. License issued by game warden.

Arkansas.—Angling: Resident, $1.10; non-resident, $5.00. No closed
season. Hunting: Resident, $1.10; non-resident, $15.00. Deer and bear,
Nov. 10–Jan. 15; deer in Poinsett County, Nov. 10–Dec. 1; squirrel, May
15–Jan. 15; turkey (gobblers), Nov. 10–Jan. 15 and March 1–May 1;
turkey in Poinsett County, Nov. 10–Dec. 1; duck, goose, snipe, coot,
gallinule, Nov. 1–Jan. 31; woodcock, Nov. 1–Dec. 31; plovers,
yellow-legs, doves, Sept. 1–Dec. 15; rail, Sept. 1–Nov. 30. License
issued by Commissioner and Circuit Clerks.

California.—Angling: Resident, $1.00; non-resident, $3.00. Hunting:
Resident $1.00; non-resident, $10.00. Quail, Nov. 1–Jan. 16; grouse,
Sept. 15–Oct. 15; sage hens, Aug. 1–Sept. 15, except in Dist. 4½, where
closed all the year; doves, Aug. 1–Nov. 1; ducks, geese, jacksnipe and
mud hens, Oct. 1–Jan. 15; deer (Dists. 1, 1½, 4½), Aug. 1–Oct. 15;
(Dists. 2, 2½, 3), Aug. 1–Sept. 15; (Dist. 4), Sept. 16–Oct. 15.

Colorado.—Fishing and small-game hunting: Resident, $2.00;
non-resident, $5.00. Hunting, big game: Resident, $5.00; non-resident,
small game, $5.00; big game, $25.00. No person under 18 permitted to
hunt big game. Deer, Oct. 12–15; duck (except wood duck), goose, brant,
black-bellied and golden plover, Wilson snipe, or jacksnipe and greater
and lesser yellow-legs, Sept. 16–Dec. 31; sora and other rails (except
coot), Sept. 1–Nov. 30; prairie chickens, mountain and willow grouse,
Sept. 15–Oct. 1. Season for various fish varies according to altitude.
License issued by County Clerks, etc.

Connecticut.—Angling: Non-resident, $2.25. Trout, March 31–July 1;
bass, June 13–May 1; pickerel, April 13–Feb. 1. Hunting: Resident,
$1.25; non-resident, $10.25. Ducks, geese and brant, Sept. 13–Jan. 16;
quail, woodcock, partridge or ruffed grouse, Hungarian partridge and
male pheasants, squirrels, Oct. 7–Nov. 24; hares and rabbits, Oct.
7–Dec. 1; raccoon, Oct. 14–Feb. 1; mink, otter, muskrat, Oct. 31–March
15; skunk, Oct. 31–Feb. 1. License issued by Town Clerk.

Delaware.—Angling: Non-resident, $3.50. Bass, May 1–Feb. 1. Sunday
fishing unlawful. Non-residents may not take lobster. Hunting:
Non-resident, $10.50. Quail, partridge, woodcock, rabbit, Nov. 14–Jan.
1; squirrel, Aug. 31–Oct. 16; duck, Oct. 15–Feb. 1; black-bellied and
golden plover, yellow-legs, Aug. 16–Nov. 30; reed bird, Sept. 1–Oct.
30. License issued by Commission.

Florida.—No fishing license required. Hunting: Resident, $1.25-$3.50;
non-resident, $25. Deer, wild turkey, Nov. 20–Feb. 15; squirrel
(Escambia County, Oct. 15–March 1), (Holmes and Walton Counties, Oct.
20–March 1), Nov. 20–Feb. 15; ruffed grouse, imported pheasants
(English pheasant in Escambia County no open season), Nov. 20–Dec. 19;
duck, goose, brant, black-bellied and golden plover, Wilson snipe,
yellow-legs, coot, gallinule, dove, Nov. 20–Jan. 31; woodcock, Nov.
1–Dec. 31; rail (other than coot and gallinule), Nov. 20–30; reedbird,
Aug. 16–Nov. 15. License issued by County Judge.

Georgia.—No fishing license required. Season from July 1–Feb. 1.
Hunting: Resident $1.00–$3.00; non-resident, $15.00. Deer, Nov. 1–Dec.
31; rabbit, fox, squirrel, unprotected; cat, squirrel, opossum, Oct.
1–Feb. 28; quail, partridge, turkey (gobblers), Nov. 20–Feb. 28; duck,
goose, brant, coot, gallinule, Wilson snipe, Nov. 1–Jan. 31;
black-bellied and golden plover, yellow-legs, dove, Nov. 20–Jan. 31;
woodcock, Nov. 1–Dec. 31; rail (other than coot and gallinule), Sept.
1–Nov. 30; reed bird (ricebird), Aug. 16–Nov. 15. License issued by
Commission or County Warden.

Idaho.—Hunting and fishing: Resident, $2.00; non-resident, fishing,
$3.00, hunting and fishing, $25.00, bird hunting, $5.00. Trout all
year, except March, April and May in Franklin, Oneida and Cassia
Counties. Seasons vary so much with locality that hunter should apply
to Bureau of Fish and Game, at Boise, for regulations.

Illinois.—Angling: Non-resident, $1.25. Hunting, non-resident, $10.50.
Rabbit, Nov. 1–Jan. 31; squirrel, July 1–Dec. 1; quail (bob white),
Nov. 10–Dec. 10; prairie chicken, Oct. 20–31; duck, goose, brant,
Wilson snipe, coot, gallinule, black-bellied and golden plover,
yellow-legs, Sept. 16–Dec. 31; rail (other than coot and gallinule),
Sept. 1–Nov. 30. License issued by County Clerk.

Indiana.—Angling: Non-resident $1.00. Hunting: Resident, $1.00;
non-resident, $15.50, hunting and fishing. Rabbit, April 1–Jan. 10;
squirrel, Aug. 1–Dec. 1; quail, ruffed grouse, Nov. 10–Dec. 20; prairie
chicken, Oct. 15–Nov. 1; duck, goose, brant, Sept. 16–Dec. 31;
woodcock, Oct. 1–Nov. 30; black-bellied and golden plovers,
yellow-legs, Wilson snipe or jack snipe, coot, gallinule, Sept. 16–Dec.
20; rail, other than coot and gallinule, Sept. 1–Nov. 30. License
issued by Clerk of Circuit Court.

Iowa.—Angling: Non-resident, $2.00 (over 16 years). Hunting: Resident,
$1.00; non-resident, hunting and fishing, $10.00. Squirrel, Sept.
1–Jan. 1; ruffed grouse, quail, wild turkey, Nov. 1–Dec. 15; duck,
goose, brant, Wilson snipe or jacksnipe, coot, gallinule, black-bellied
and golden plover, yellow-legs, Sept. 16–Dec. 31; woodcock, Oct. 1–Nov.
30; rail (other than coot and gallinule), Sept. 1–Nov. 30. License
issued by County Auditor.

Kansas.—No fishing license required. Hunting: Resident, $1.00;
non-resident, $15.00. Fox, squirrel, Aug. 1–Jan. 1; quail, even years,
Dec. 1–10; prairie chicken, Sept. 20–30; dove, Sept. 1–Oct. 15; duck,
goose, brant, Wilson snipe or jacksnipe, coot, gallinule, black-bellied
and golden plover, yellow-legs, Sept. 16–Dec. 31; woodcock, Oct. 1–Nov.
30; rail, other than coot or gallinule, Sept. 1–Nov. 30. License issued
by County Clerk.

Kentucky.—No fishing license required. Hunting: Resident, $1.00;
non-resident, $7.50. Rabbit, Nov. 15–Dec. 31; squirrel, July 1–Dec. 15;
quail, ruffed grouse, Nov. 15–Jan. 1; dove, Sept. 1–Dec. 15; woodcock,
Nov. 15–30; duck, goose, brant, Wilson snipe or jacksnipe, coot,
gallinule, black-bellied and golden plovers, yellow-legs, Sept. 16–Dec.
31; rail (other than coot and gallinule), Sept. 1–Nov. 30. License
issued by County Clerk.

Louisiana.—No fishing license required. Hunting: Resident, $1.00;
non-resident, $15.00; deer and bear, $50.00. Bear, Oct. 15–Dec. 31;
deer (except in Beauregard, Allen, Rapides, La Salle, Winn, Jackson,
Lincoln, Union and parishes north and west of these), Nov. 1–Jan. 15;
squirrel, Oct. 1–March 1; hare, rabbit, July 1–Feb. 28; dove, Sept.
16–Dec. 31; quail, Nov. 10–March 1; wild turkey (gobblers, Nov.
15–April 1), Nov. 15–Feb. 15; gros-bec (night heron), July 1–Nov. 1;
duck, goose, brant, black-bellied and golden plover, Wilson snipe,
yellow-legs, rail, coot, gallinule, July 1–Nov. 1. License issued by
tax collector.

Maine.—Angling: Non-resident, $3.15. Hunting: Non-resident, $15.00.
Deer, Oct. 1–Nov. 30, except in Hancock and Washington Counties, Oct.
15–Dec. 14, and in Androscoggin, Cumberland, Kennebec, Knox, Lincoln,
Sagadahoc, Waldo and York Counties, Nov. 1–30; hare, rabbit, Oct.
1–March 31; gray squirrel, Oct. 1–31; ruffed grouse, partridge,
woodcock, Oct. 1–Nov. 30; duck, goose, brant, Wilson snipe, coot,
gallinule, Sept. 16–Dec. 31, except waterfowl in Back Bay, Portland;
black-bellied and golden plovers, yellow-legs, Aug. 16–Nov. 30, except
in Merrymeeting Bay and adjacent towns; rail, other than coot and
gallinule, Sept. 1–Nov. 30. Laws subject to change. License issued by
State Commissioner of Fisheries and Game, Augusta.

Maryland.—Angling: Non-resident, $5.00. Hunting: Non-resident, $10.25.
Rabbit, quail, ruffed grouse, wild turkey (except in Garret County),
Nov. 10–Jan. 1; squirrel, Sept. 1–Oct. 15 and Nov. 10–Jan. 1; woodcock,
Nov. 10–Dec. 31; dove, Sept. 1–Dec. 15; duck, goose, brant, Wilson
snipe, coot, gallinule, Nov. 1–Jan. 31; black-bellied and golden
plover, yellow-legs, Aug. 16–Nov. 30; rail (other than coot and
gallinule), Sept. 1–Nov. 1; reed bird, Sept. 1–Oct. 30. License issued
by Clerk of County Court.

Massachusetts.—Angling: Resident, $1.00; non-resident, $2.00. Bass,
June 20–Feb. 1; pickerel, May 1–March 1; trout, April 15–August 1;
smelt, June 1–March 15. Hunting: Resident, $2.00; non-resident, $10.
Deer from sunrise first Monday in December to sunset the following
Saturday, inclusive; hare or rabbit, Oct. 20–Feb. 28, except European
hares in Berkshire County, unprotected; gray squirrel, quail, ruffed
grouse, woodcock, Oct. 20–Nov. 20, except quail in Dukes, Essex,
Hampden, Middlesex and Nantucket Counties, protected until 1925; duck,
goose, brant, Wilson snipe, gallinule, quark (mudhen), Sept. 16–Dec.
31, except waterfowl in Barnstable, Bristol, Dukes and Nantucket
Counties, Oct. 1–Dec. 31; black-bellied and golden plovers,
yellow-legs, Aug. 16–Nov. 30; rail (other than coot and gallinule),
Sept. 1–Nov. 30. License issued by City or Town Clerk.

Michigan.—Angling: Non-resident, general, $4.00; except brook trout,
$2.00. (No fishing license required for those under 18.) Hunting:
Resident, deer, $2.50; small game, $1.00; non-resident, deer, $50.00;
small game, $10. Deer (male, horns not less than three inches long),
Nov. 10–30; rabbit, hare, Oct. 15–Dec. 31, except jack rabbit, Oct.
15–March 1; squirrel (fox), Oct. 15–31; ruffed grouse (partridge),
woodcock, Oct. 15–Nov. 20; duck, goose, brant, Wilson snipe, coot,
gallinule, Sept. 16–Dec. 31; black-bellied and golden plover,
yellow-legs, Sept. 16–Dec. 15; rail (other than coot and gallinule),
Sept. 1–Nov. 30. License issued by County Clerk, etc.

Minnesota.—Angling: Non-resident, $2.00 (not required under age 16).
Hunting: Resident, big game, $2.00; birds, $1; non-resident, animals,
$50.00; birds, $15.00. Deer, bull moose, Nov. 10–20; black bear,
rabbit, unprotected (except varying hare or snowshoe rabbit, Oct.
15–Mar. 1); squirrel, Oct. 15–March 1; quail, Oct. 15–Nov. 30; ruffed
grouse or partridge, Chinese or ring-necked pheasant (male only) in
even years, Oct. 15–Nov. 30; prairie chicken or pinnated grouse,
white-breasted or sharp-tailed grouse, in odd years, dove, Sept.
16–Oct. 1; woodcock, Oct. 1–Nov. 30; duck, goose, brant, coot,
gallinule, Wilson snipe, yellow-legs, Sept. 16–Dec. 31; rail (other
than coot or gallinule), Sept. 16–Nov. 30. License issued by County
Auditors, etc.

Mississippi.—No fishing license required. Hunting: Non-resident,
$20.00. Deer (male), bear, Nov. 15–March 1; rabbit, squirrel,
unprotected; quail or partridge, Nov. 1–March 1; wild turkey gobblers,
Jan. 1–May 1; dove, Sept. 16–Dec. 31; Wilson snipe (jacksnipe), coot,
poule d’eau, gallinule, black-bellied and golden plover, yellow-legs,
Nov. 1–Jan. 31; woodcock, Nov. 1–Dec. 31; rail (other than coot and
gallinule), Sept. 1–Nov. 30. License issued by Sheriff.

Missouri.—Angling: Resident, $1.00; non-resident, $3.00. Hunting:
Resident, $2.50; non-resident, $10.00. Deer (buck), wild turkey, Dec.
1–31; squirrel, June 1–Dec. 31; quail (bob white, partridge), Nov.
10–Dec. 31; duck, goose, brant, Wilson snipe, coot, gallinule,
black-bellied and golden plovers, yellow-legs, Sept. 16–Dec. 31;
woodcock, Nov. 10–30; rail (other than coot and gallinule), Sept.
15–Nov. 30. License issued by Commissioner.

Montana.—Angling: Non-resident, $3.50. Only fishing in state is for
Dolly Varden trout, Loch Leven trout, and whitefish, Dec. 1–May 28.
Hunting: Resident, $2.00; non-resident, general, $30; birds and fish,
$10.00. Deer (male with visible horns), Nov. 1–Dec. 1, except in
Carter, Custer, Dawson, Gallatin, Garfield, McCone, Phillips, Powder
River, Richland, Roosevelt, Rosebud, Stillwater, Teton, Valley,
Yellowstone and part of Fergus County until 1924; elk in Flathead,
Glacier, Madison, Park, Ponders, Sweet Grass, Teton and parts of
Gallatin, Lewis and Clark (except North Fork Dearborn River, Nov. 6–15,
Missoula, and Powell Counties, Oct. 15–Nov. 15); pheasant, partridge,
prairie chicken, fool hen, grouse, in Flathead, Lincoln, Missoula and
Saunders Counties only Oct. 1–15; duck, goose, brant, black-bellied and
golden plover, Wilson snipe, yellow-legs, coot, gallinule, Sept.
16–Dec. 31; rail (other than coot and gallinule), Sept. 1–Nov. 30.
License issued by Warden or Deputy.

Nebraska.—Angling: Non-resident, $2.10. Bass (rock, white, striped),
black bass, catfish, croppies, perch (white, yellow or ringed),
sunfish, pickerel, Jan. 1–Dec. 31; trout, pike or pike perch, April
1–Oct. 31; spear fishing for carp, suckers, gars and buffalo all the
year. Hunting: Resident, $1.10; non-resident, $10.10. Squirrel, Sept.
16–Dec. 31; prairie chicken, grouse, Oct. 1–Nov. 1; duck, goose, brant,
Wilson snipe, black-bellied and golden plover, yellow-legs, coot,
gallinule, Sept. 16–Dec. 31; rails (other than coot and gallinule),
Sept. 16–Nov. 30. License issued by Commissioner or agent.

Nevada.—Angling: Resident, $1.50; non-resident, $3.00. Hunting:
Resident, $1.50; non-resident, $10.00. Deer (male with horns), antelope
(with horns), Oct. 14–Nov. 12; prairie chicken, Oct. 1–Jan. 15; sage
hen, Aug. 1–Aug. 31; dove, Sept. 1–Dec. 15; duck, goose, brant, coot,
gallinule, Wilson snipe, black-bellied and golden plovers, Sept.
16–Dec. 31; rail, Sept. 1–Nov. 30. License issued by County Clerks or
Wardens.

New Hampshire.—Angling: Non-resident, $2.15. Hunting: Resident, $1.00;
non-resident, $15.00. Deer, Coos County, Oct. 15–Nov 30; Carroll
County, Nov. 15–Dec. 15; Grafton County, Nov. 1–Dec. 15; rest of state,
Dec. 1–31. Hare, rabbit, Oct. 1–Feb. 28; partridge, ruffed grouse,
woodcock, Oct. 1–Nov. 30; duck, goose, brant, Wilson snipe, coot,
gallinule, Sept. 16–Dec. 31; black-bellied and golden plover,
yellow-legs, Aug. 16–Nov. 30; rails (other than coot and gallinule),
Sept. 1–Nov. 30. License issued by Commissioner or agent.

New Jersey.—Angling: Non-resident, $3.25. Hunting: Resident, $1.65;
non-resident, $10.50. Deer (male, horns visible), Dec. 20 and 27, Jan.
3 and 10; raccoon, Oct. 1–Dec. 15; rabbit, squirrel, quail, ruffed
grouse, prairie chicken, English or ring-necked pheasant cocks, Nov.
10–Dec. 15 (except no open season for ring-necked pheasant in parts of
Burlington and Camden Counties); duck, goose, brant, Wilson snipe,
coot, gallinule, Oct. 16–Jan. 31; black-bellied and golden plovers,
yellow-legs, Aug. 16–Nov. 30; woodcock (extra license, $2.00, required,
Oct. 1–Nov. 9), Oct. 1–Nov. 30; reed bird, Sept. 1–Oct. 30; rail (marsh
hen), other than coot and gallinule, Sept. 1–Nov. 30. License issued by
City or Town Clerks, etc.

New Mexico.—Angling: Resident, $1.00; non-resident, $5.00. Hunting:
Resident, big game, $1.50; bird, $1.25; big game and bird, $2.25; big
game, bird and fish, $2.50. Non-resident, big game, $25.25; bird,
$10.25; big game and bird, $30.25; big game, bird and fish, $35.25.
Deer (horns at least six inches), squirrel, wild turkey, Nov. 20–30;
quail (except bob-white), Nov. 1–Dec. 31; turtle-dove and white-winged
dove, black-bellied and golden plover, yellow-legs, Sept. 1–Dec. 15;
duck, goose, brant, Wilson snipe, coot, gallinule, Oct. 1–Jan. 15; rail
(other than coot and gallinule), Sept. 1–Nov. 30. License issued by
County Clerks and deputies.

New York.—Angling: Non-resident, $2.50 (not required under 16 years or
in international boundary waters). Trout, March 31–Sept. 1; bass, June
15–Dec. 1. Hunting: Resident, $1.25; non-resident, $10.50. Deer (horns
not less than three inches), Oct. 15–Nov. 15, exceptions in towns of
Jackson, Salem and White Creek, Washington County, Nov. 7–19; Columbia,
Delaware, Greene, Orange, Rensselaer, Sullivan and Ulster Counties,
Nov. 1–15; varying hare, rabbit, Oct. 15–March 1; squirrel, Oct.
15–Nov. 15, except no open season in Niagara County; grouse, partridge,
Oct. 1–Nov. 15, except Orange, Sullivan and Westchester Counties, Nov.
15–30; pheasant (male), Oct. 19–26 and Nov. 4 and 11, except in Essex
and Washington Counties no open season until 1924; Wilson snipe
(jacksnipe), coot, gallinule, Sept. 16–Dec. 31, except south of main
line N. Y. Central Railroad, Buffalo to Albany, and Boston and Albany
Railroad Albany to Massachusetts boundary, Oct. 16–Dec. 31;
black-bellied and golden plover, yellow-legs, Aug. 16–Nov. 30;
woodcock, Oct. 1–Nov. 15; rail, other than gallinule, Sept. 1–Nov. 30.
License issued by City, County and Town Clerks. See also Long Island.

Long Island, N. Y.—Squirrel, quail, ruffed grouse, pheasant, Nov.
1–Dec. 31; varying hare, Oct. 15–Mar. 1; cotton tail rabbit, Nov.
1–Dec. 31; waterfowl, Wilson snipe, coot, mudhen, gallinule, Oct.
16–Jan. 31; black-bellied and golden plover, yellow-legs, Aug. 16–Nov.
30; woodcock, Oct. 1–Nov. 15; rail, Sept. 1–Nov. 30. License issued by
City, County and Town Clerks.

North Carolina.—Hunting: Duck, goose, brant, Wilson snipe, coot,
gallinule, Nov. 1–Jan. 31; black-bellied and golden plover,
yellow-legs, dove, Sept. 1–Dec. 15; woodcock, Nov. 1–Dec. 31; rail
(other than coot and gallinule), Sept. 1–Nov. 30; reed bird (ricebird),
Aug. 16–Nov. 15. For the numerous license regulations in the various
counties, address Secretary of the Audubon Society, Raleigh, N. C.

North Dakota.—No fishing license required. Season June 1–Oct. 15.
Hunting: Resident, $1.50; non-resident, $25.00. Deer (male with horns),
Nov. 21–30; prairie chicken, sharp-tailed grouse, black-bellied and
golden plover, yellow-legs, Wilson snipe, Sept. 16–Oct. 16; ruffed
grouse in Bottineau, Cavalier, Pembina and Roulette Counties, Oct.
1–10; duck, goose, brant, Sept. 16–Dec. 1; coot, gallinule, Sept.
16–Dec. 31; woodcock, Oct. 1–16; rail (other than coot and gallinule),
Sept. 1–Nov. 30. License issued by Commissioner, deputy or County
Auditor.

Ohio.—Angling: Non-resident, $2.00. Hunting: Resident, $1.25;
non-resident, general, $15.25. Hare, rabbit, Nov. 15–Jan. 1; squirrel,
Sept. 15–Oct. 20; ruffed grouse, cock pheasant, Hungarian partridge,
Nov. 15–25; duck, goose, brant, Wilson snipe, black-bellied and golden
plover, yellow-legs, coot, gallinule, Sept. 16–Dec. 31; woodcock, Oct.
1–Nov. 30; rail (other than coot and gallinule), Nov. 1–30. License
issued from County and Township Clerks.

Oklahoma.—No fishing license required. Season, May 1–Feb. 1. Hunting:
Resident, $1.25; non-resident, $15. Deer (male with horns), Nov.
15–Dec. 15; bear, unprotected, except in Blaine, Caddo, Comanche, Kiowa
and Major Counties; quail, Dec. 1–31; duck, goose, brant, Wilson snipe,
coot, gallinule, Oct. 16–Jan. 31; black-bellied and golden plover,
yellow-legs, dove, Sept. 1–Dec. 15; woodcock, Nov. 1–Dec. 31; rail
(other than coot and gallinule), Sept. 1–Nov. 30. License issued by
Warden, deputy or County Clerk.

Oregon.—Angling: Resident, $3.00; non-resident, $3.00 (not required of
female). Trout, April 15–Nov. 13; bass, June 15–April 15. Hunting:
Resident, $3.00; game and fish, $5.00; non-resident, $10.00, gun
license, $25.00 additional. West of Cascades, deer (male with horns),
Aug. 20–Oct. 31; silver-gray squirrel, Sept. 15–Oct. 15; quail, in
Coos, Curry, Jackson and Josephine Counties, Oct. 15–31; Chinese
pheasant, bob-white quail (except Chinese pheasants in Coos, Curry and
Josephine Counties), Oct. 15–31; grouse, native pheasant, Aug. 20–Sept.
20; duck, goose, brant, Wilson snipe, coot, black-bellied and golden
plover, yellow-legs, Oct. 1–Jan. 15; rail, Oct. 1–Nov. 30. East of
Cascades, deer (male with horns), Aug. 20–Oct. 31; quail (in Klamath
County), Oct. 15–31; grouse, native pheasant, Aug. 20–Sept. 20; prairie
chicken (Sherman, Union and Wasco Counties), Oct. 15–31; sage hen, July
15–31; Chinese pheasants (Baker, Grant, Hood River, Malheur, Umatilla,
Union, Wallowa and Wasco Counties), Oct. 15–31; duck, goose, Wilson
snipe, black-bellied and golden plover, yellow-legs, coot, Sept.
16–Dec. 31; rail (other than coot), Sept. 16–Nov. 30. License issued by
County Clerks and agents.

Pennsylvania.—Angling: Resident, $1.00; non-resident, $5.00. Brook
trout, April 15–Aug. 1; bass and pike, May 30–Jan. 1. Hunting:
Resident, $1.15; non-resident, $10. Deer (male with four-inch horns),
Dec. 1–15; bear, Nov. 1–Dec. 15; raccoon, Oct. 1–Jan. 31; hare, rabbit,
Nov. 1–Dec. 15; squirrel, quail, ruffed grouse, ring-necked pheasant,
Hungarian partridge, wild turkey, Nov. 1–30; duck, goose, brant, Sept.
16–Dec. 31; black-bellied and golden plover, yellow-legs, coot
(mudhen), gallinule, Wilson snipe, Sept. 16–Nov. 30; woodcock, Oct.
1–Nov. 30; rail, Sept. 1–Nov. 30; reed bird, Sept. 1–Oct. 30;
blackbird, Aug. 1–Nov. 30. License issued by County Treasurer or
Justice of the Peace.

Rhode Island.—Angling: Resident, 25 cents; non-resident, $1.15. Bass,
pickerel, June 19–Feb. 21; trout, April 1–July 16. Hunting: Resident,
$1.25; non-resident, $10.25. Squirrel, hare, rabbit, quail, ruffed
grouse, pheasant, Nov. 1–Dec. 31; duck, goose, brant, coot, gallinule,
Oct. 1–Jan. 15; black-bellied and golden plover, yellow-legs, Aug.
16–Nov. 30; Wilson snipe, Oct. 1–Nov. 30; woodcock, Nov. 1–30; rail,
Sept. 1–Nov. 30. License issued by City and Town Clerks.

South Carolina.—Angling: Non-resident, $3.25. Hunting: Resident, $3.10;
non-resident, $15.25. Deer (male), Sept. 1–Jan. 1; bear, rabbit,
squirrel, Oct. 1–March 15; quail, wild turkey, Nov. 30–March 1; duck,
goose, brant, coot, gallinule, Wilson snipe, Nov. 1–Jan. 31; dove,
black-bellied and golden plover, yellow-legs, Sept. 1–Dec. 15; rail,
Sept. 1–Nov. 30; woodcock, Nov. 1–Dec. 31; reed bird, Aug. 16–Nov. 15;
blackbird, Oct. 1–March 31. License issued by County Clerk or Game
Warden.

South Dakota.—Angling: Non-resident, $2.00. Trout, April 1–Oct. 1;
bass, May 30–March 1; other game fish, May 1–March 1. Hunting:
Resident, big game, $5.00; small game, $1.00; non-resident, big game,
$25.00; small game, $15.00. Deer (male), Nov. 1–30; partridge, grouse,
prairie chicken, black-bellied and golden plover, yellow-legs, Sept.
16–Oct. 15; duck, goose, brant, coot, gallinule, Wilson snipe, Sept.
16–Dec. 31; woodcock, Oct. 1–Nov. 30; rail, Sept. 16–Nov. 30. License
issued by Game Warden or County Treasurer.

Tennessee.—No fishing license required except in Blount, Monroe, Polk
and Sevier Counties, where it is $2.00. Also on Reelfoot Lake, same.
Season, June 15–May 1. Hunting: Resident, $2.00; non-resident, $10.00.
Waterfowl (differing in some counties), Nov. 1–Jan. 31; doves, Sept.
1–Dec. 15; quail, Nov. 15–Dec. 31; turkeys, Nov. 15–Jan. 1, and
gobblers, also April 1–25; squirrel, June 1–Dec. 31. License issued by
County Clerk.

Texas.—No fishing license required. Hunting: Resident, $2.00;
non-resident, $15. Deer (male), Nov. 1–Dec. 31; quail, Mexican
pheasant, Dec. 1–Jan. 31; wild turkey gobblers (except Brooks, Cameron,
Hidalgo, Jim Hogg, Kennedy, McMullen, Starr and Willacy Counties, Nov.
1, 1926), Nov. 1–Dec. 31; doves, Sept. 1–Dec. 15; duck, goose, brant,
Wilson snipe, coot, gallinule, Oct. 16–Jan. 31; black-bellied and
golden plover, yellow-legs, Oct. 16–Dec. 15; rail, Oct. 16–Nov. 30.
License issued by Commissioner, deputies and County Clerk.

Utah.—Hunting and fishing: Resident, $2.00; non-resident, $2.00;
females over 18, $1.00. Deer (male, with horns), Oct. 15–25; dove,
Sept. 1–30; duck, goose, coot, gallinule, Oct. 1–Dec. 31 (except
waterfowl in Kane, San Juan and Washington Counties, Oct. 1–Jan. 15;
duck in Fish Lake Game Preserve, Oct. 1–Nov. 30; rail, Sept. 1–Nov.
30). License issued by License Agents.

Vermont.—Angling: Resident, 75 cents; non-resident, $2.50. Trout in
streams, April 15–Aug. 15; in lakes and ponds, May 1–Sept. 15; bass,
July 1–Jan. 1; muskalonge, June 15–April 15; pike, May 1–March 1;
pickerel, May 1–March 15. Hunting: Resident, 75 cents; non-resident,
$10.50. Deer (horns not less than three inches), Nov. 6–18; hare,
rabbit, Sept. 15–Feb. 28; quail, Sept. 15–Nov. 30; ruffed grouse,
woodcock, Oct. 1–31; duck, goose, brant, coot, gallinule, Sept. 16–Dec.
31; black-bellied and golden plover, yellow-legs, Wilson or English
snipe, Sept. 16–Nov. 30. License issued by Town Clerk.

Virginia.—Angling: Non-resident, $2.50 (no fishing license required
east of Blue Ridge). Hunting: Resident, $3.00; non-resident, $10.00.
Deer, Oct. 1–Feb. 1, with numerous exceptions in various counties; elk,
Dec. 15–31, with exceptions; rabbit, Nov. 1–Feb. 1, with some
exceptions in certain counties; squirrel, Aug. 15–Feb. 1, exceptions in
certain counties; quail, pheasant, turkey, Nov. 1–Feb. 1, with a few
exceptions in certain counties; doves, Sept 1–Dec. 15, exceptions;
duck, goose, brant, Wilson snipe, Nov. 1–Jan. 31, with a few
exceptions; coot, mudhen, gallinule, Nov. 1–Jan. 1, with a few county
exceptions; black-bellied and golden plover, yellow-legs, Aug. 16–Nov.
30, with some exceptions; woodcock, Nov. 1–Dec. 31; rail, Sept. 1–Nov.
30, with exceptions; reed bird, Aug. 16–Nov. 15. License issued by
Clerk of County or Corporate Court.

Washington.—Angling: Resident, $1.50; non-resident, $2.50. Hunting:
Resident, $7.50; non-resident, $10. West of Cascades, deer, bear and
upland game birds, season fixed by county game commissions; duck,
goose, brant, coot, black-bellied and golden plover, Wilson snipe,
yellow-legs, Oct. 1–Jan. 15; rail, Oct. 1–Nov. 30. East of Cascades,
deer, bear, upland game birds as above; duck, goose, brant, coot,
Wilson snipe, black-bellied and golden plover, yellow-legs, Oct. 1–Dec.
31; rail, Oct. 1–Nov. 30. License issued by County Auditors.

West Virginia.—Hunting and fishing: Resident, $1.00; non-resident,
$15.00. Salmon, May 1–April 1; bass, June 1–April 1; trout, May 1–Aug.
1. Rabbit, Oct. 1–Dec. 31; squirrel, Sept. 1–Nov. 30; ruffed grouse,
turkey, Oct. 15–Nov. 30; quail, Nov. 1–30; duck, goose, brant, Oct.
15–Dec. 31; coot, gallinule, Sept. 16–Dec. 31; Wilson snipe
(jacksnipe), Oct. 15–Dec. 14; black-bellied and golden plover,
yellow-legs, Sept. 16–Dec. 31; woodcock, Oct. 15–Nov. 30; rail
(ortolan), Sept. 16–Nov. 30. License issued by County Clerk.

Wisconsin.—Angling: Non-resident, $3.00; all fish except trout, $2.00.
Fishing license not required in outlying waters or of person under 16.
Trout, May 1–Sept. 1; bass, June 15–March 1; other game fish, May
30–March 1. Hunting: Resident, $1.00; non-resident, $50.00; all game
except deer, $25.00. Squirrel, Oct. 15–Jan. 1; grouse and partridge,
Oct. 3–9; prairie chicken, Sept. 6–26; duck, Sept. 16–Dec. 20; rabbit,
Oct. 24–Jan. 16. License issued by Commission.

Wyoming.—Angling: Non-resident, $3.00. Hunting: Resident, birds, $1.50;
general, $2.50; non-resident, birds, $5.00; general, $50.00; bear,
$25.00. Deer (with horns), Sept. 15–Oct. 15; elk, Sept. 15–Nov. 15;
sheep, Sept. 15–Nov. 15; sage grouse, Aug. 1–15; duck, goose, coot,
gallinule, black-bellied and golden plover, Wilson snipe, yellow-legs,
Sept. 16–Dec. 16; rail, Sept. 1–Nov. 30.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MOTOR CAMPING ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


