The Project Gutenberg eBook of Porgy
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Porgy

Author: DuBose Heyward

Illustrator: Theodore Nadejen

Release date: June 8, 2021 [eBook #65566]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Mary Glenn Krause, Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PORGY ***

                                 PORGY

                            DU BOSE HEYWARD


                      _Books by the Same Author_

                 CAROLINA CHANSONS (WITH HERVEY ALLEN)
                         SKYLINES AND HORIZONS




                                 PORGY

                            DU BOSE HEYWARD

                            [Illustration]

                            _Decorated by_
                           THEODORE NADEJEN

                               NEW YORK
                        GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY


                           _Copyright, 1925,
                      By George H. Doran Company_

                                 PORGY
                                 --B--
                PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA


                                  FOR
                            DOROTHY HEYWARD




    _Porgy, Maria, and Bess,_
    _Robbins, and Peter, and Crown;_
    _Life was a three-stringed harp_
    _Brought from the woods to town._

    _Marvelous tunes you rang_
    _From passion, and death, and birth,_
    _You who had laughed and wept_
    _On the warm, brown lap of the earth._

    _Now in your untried hands_
    _An instrument, terrible, new,_
    _Is thrust by a master who frowns,_
    _Demanding strange songs of you._

    _God of the White and Black,_
    _Grant us great hearts on the way_
    _That we may understand_
    _Until you have learned to play._




I

[Illustration]




PORGY




PART I


Porgy lived in the Golden Age. Not the Golden Age of a remote and
legendary past; nor yet the chimerical era treasured by every man past
middle life, that never existed except in the heart of youth; but an age
when men, not yet old, were boys in an ancient, beautiful city that time
had forgotten before it destroyed.

In this city there persisted the Golden Age of many things, and not the
least among them was that of beggary. In those days the profession was
one with a tradition. A man begged, presumably, because he was hungry,
much as a man of more energetic temperament became a stevedore from the
same cause. His plea for help produced the simple reactions of a
generous impulse, a movement of the hand, and the gift of a coin,
instead of the elaborate and terrifying processes of organized
philanthropy. His antecedents and his mental age were his own affair,
and, in the majority of cases, he was as happily oblivious of one as of
the other.

Had it all been otherwise, had Porgy come a generation, or even a score
of years, later, there would have been a repetition of the old tragedy
of genius without opportunity. For, as the artist is born with the
vision of beauty, and the tradesman with an eye for barter, so was Porgy
equipped by a beneficent providence for a career of mendicancy. Instead
of the sturdy legs that would have predestined him for the life of a
stevedore on one of the great cotton wharves, he had, when he entered
the world, totally inadequate nether extremities, quick to catch the
eye, and touch the ready sympathy of the passer-by. Either by birth, or
through the application of a philosophy of life, he had acquired a
personality that could not be ignored, one which at the same time
interested and subtly disturbed. There was that about him which
differentiated him from the hordes of fellow practitioners who competed
with him for the notice of the tender-hearted. Where others bid eagerly
for attention, and burst into voluble thanks and blessings, Porgy sat
silent, rapt. There was something Eastern and mystic about the intense
introspection of his look. He never smiled, and he acknowledged gifts
only by a slow lifting of the eyes that had odd shadows in them. He was
black with the almost purple blackness of unadulterated Congo blood. His
hands were very large and muscular, and, even when flexed idly in his
lap, seemed shockingly formidable in contrast with his frail body.
Unless one were unusually preoccupied at the moment of dropping a coin
in his cup, he carried away in return a very definite, yet somewhat
disquieting, impression: a sense of infinite patience, and beneath it
the vibration of unrealized, but terrific, energy.

No one knew Porgy’s age. No one remembered when he first made his
appearance among the ranks of the local beggars. A woman who had married
twenty years before remembered him because he had been seated on the
church steps, and had given her a turn when she went in.

Once a child saw Porgy, and said suddenly, “What is he waiting for?”
That expressed him better than anything else. He was waiting, waiting
with the concentrating intensity of a burning-glass.

As consistent in the practice of his profession as any of the business
and professional men who were his most valued customers, Porgy was to
be found any morning, by the first arrival in the financial district,
against the wall of the old apothecary shop that stands at the corner of
King Charles Street and The Meeting House Road. Long custom, reinforced
by an eye for the beautiful, had endeared that spot to him. He would sit
there in the cool of the early hours and look across the narrow
thoroughfare into the green freshness of Jasper Square, where the
children flew their kites, and played hide-and-seek among the shrubs.
Then, when the morning advanced, and the sun poured its semi-tropical
heat between the twin rows of brick, to lie impounded there, like a
stagnant pool of flame, he would experience a pleasant atavistic calm,
and would doze lightly under the terrific heat, as only a full-blooded
negro can. Toward afternoon a slender blue shadow would commence to grow
about him that would broaden with great rapidity, cool the baking flags,
and turn the tide of customers home before his empty cup.

But Porgy best loved the late afternoons, when the street was quiet
again, and the sunlight, deep with color, shot level over the low roof
of the apothecary shop to paint the cream stucco on the opposite
dwelling a ruddy gold and turn the old rain-washed tiles on the roof to
burnished copper. Then the slender, white-clad lady who lived in the
house would throw open the deep French windows of the second story
drawing-room, and sitting at the piano, where Porgy could see her dimly,
she would play on through the dusk until old Peter drove by with his
wagon to carry him home.


§

Porgy had but one vice. With his day reduced to the dead level of the
commonplace, he was by night an inveterate gambler. Each evening his
collections were carefully divided into a minimum for room and food, and
the remainder for the evening’s game. Seen in the light of the smoking
kerosene lamp, with the circle of excited faces about him, he was no
longer the beggar in the dust. His stagnant blood leaped to sudden life.
He was the peer of the great, hulking fellows who swung cotton bales and
stank intolerably from labor in the fertilizer mills. He even knew that
he had won their grudging respect, for he had a way of coaxing and
wheedling the little ivory cubes that forced them to respond. The loud
“Oh, my Baby,” and explosive “Come seben,” of his fellow-gamesters
seldom brought silver when he experienced that light, keen feeling and
thought of the new, soft-spoken words to say. In those hours he lost his
look of living in the future. While the ivories flew, he existed in an
intense and burning present.

One Saturday night in late April, with the first premonitory breath of
summer in the air, Porgy sat in the gaming circle that had gathered
before his door in Catfish Row, and murmured softly to his gods of
chance. All day he had been conscious of a vague unrest. There had been
no breeze from the bay, and from his seat outside the apothecary shop
the sky showed opaque blue-grey and bore heavily upon the town. Towards
evening, a thunder-head had lifted over the western horizon and growled
ominously; but it had passed, leaving the air hot, vitiated, and moist.
The negroes had come in for the night feeling irritable, and, instead of
the usual Saturday night of song and talk, the rooms were for the most
part dark and silent, and the court deserted.

The game started late, and there were few players. Opposite Porgy,
sitting upon his haunches, and casting his dice in moody silence, was a
negro called Crown. He was a stevedore, had the body of a gladiator, and
a bad name. His cotton-hook, hanging from his belt by a thong, gleamed
in the lamp-light, and rang a clear note on the flags when he leant
forward to throw. Crown had been drinking with Robbins, who sat next to
him, and the air was rank with the effluvium of vile corn whisky.
Robbins was voluble, and as usual, when in liquor, talked incessantly of
his wife and children, of whom he was inordinately proud. He was a good
provider, and, except for his Saturday night drink and game, of steady
habits.

“Dat lady ob mine is a born white-folks nigger,” he boasted. “She fambly
belong tuh Gob’ner Rutledge. Ain’t yer see Miss Rutledge sheself come
tuh visit she when she sick? An’ dem chillen ob mine, dem is raise wid
_ways_.”

“Yo’ bes sabe yo’ talk for dem damn dice. Dice ain’t gots no patience
wid ’oman!” cut in a young negro of the group.

“Da’s de trut’,” called another. “Dey is all two after de same nigger
money. Dat mek um can’t git ’long.”

“Shet yo’ damn mout’ an’ t’row!” growled Crown.

Robbins, taken aback, rolled the dice hastily. Scarcely had they settled
before Crown scooped them fiercely into his great hand, and, swearing
foully at them, sent them tumbling out across the faintly illuminated
circle, to lose them on the first cast. Then Porgy took them up
tenderly, and held them for a moment cupped in his muscular,
slim-fingered hand.

“Oh, little stars, roll me some light!” he sang softly; made a pass, and
won. “Roll me a sun an’ moon!” he urged; and again the cubes did his
bidding.

“Porgy witch dem dice,” Crown snarled, as he drained his flask and sent
it shattering against the pavement.

Under the beetling walls of the tenement the game went swiftly forward.
In a remote room several voices were singing drowsily, as though
burdened by the oppression of the day. In another part of the building
some one was picking a guitar monotonously, chord after chord, until the
dark throbbed like an old wound. But the players were oblivious of all
except the splash of orange light that fell upon the flags, and the
living little cubes that flashed or dawdled upon it, according to the
mood of the hand that propelled them. Peter, the old wagoner, sat
quietly smoking in Porgy’s doorway, and looked on with the indulgent
smile of tolerant age. Once when Crown lost heavily, and turned snarling
upon Robbins with, “T’row dem damn dice fair, nigger,” he cautioned
mildly, “Frien’ an’ licker an’ dice ain’t meant tuh ’sociate. Yo’ mens
bes’ go slow.”

Then, in a flash, it happened.

Robbins rolled again, called the dice, and retrieved them before Crown’s
slow wits got the count, then swept the heap of coins into his pocket.

With a low snarl, straight from his crouching position, Crown hurled his
tremendous weight forward, shattering the lamp, and bowling Robbins over
against the wall. Then they were up and facing each other. The oil from
the broken lamp settled between two flags and blazed up ruddily. Crown
was crouched for a second spring, with lips drawn from gleaming teeth.
The light fell strong upon thrusting jaw, and threw the sloping brow
into shadow. One hand touched the ground lightly, balancing the massive
torso. The other arm held the cotton-hook forward, ready, like a
prehensile claw. In comparison Robbins was pitifully slender and
inadequate. There was a single desperate moment of indecision; then he
took his only chance. Like a thrown spear, he hurled his lithe body
forward under the terrifying hook, and clinched. Down, down, down the
centuries they slid. Clothes could not hold them. Miraculously the
tawny, ridged bodies tore through the thin coverings. Bronze ropes and
bars slid and wove over great shoulders. Bright, ruddy planes leaped out
on backs in the fire flare, then were gulped by sliding shadows. A
heady, bestial stench absorbed all other odors. A fringe of shadowy
watchers crept from cavernous doorways, sensed it, and commenced to wail
eerily. Backward and forward, in a space no larger than a small room,
the heaving, inseparable mass rocked and swayed. Breath labored like
steam. At times the fused single body would thrust out a rigid arm, or
the light would point out, for one hideous second, a tortured, mad face.
Again the mass would rise as though propelled a short distance from the
earth, topple, and crash down upon the pavement with a jarring impact.

Such terrific expenditure of human energy could not last. The end came
quickly, and with startling suddenness. Crown broke his adversary’s
weakening hold, and held him the length of one mighty arm. The other
swung the cotton-hook downward. Then he dropped his victim, and
swaggered drunkenly toward the street. Even to the most inexperienced
the result would have been obvious. Robbins was dead: horribly dead.

A scream rose to a crescendo of unendurable agony, and a woman broke
through the circle of spectators and cast herself upon the body. The
fire flickered to a faint, blue flame, unearthly, terrifying.

Porgy shivered violently, whimpered in the gloom; then drew himself
across his threshold and closed the door.


§

Catfish Row, in which Porgy lived, was not a row at all, but a great
brick structure that lifted its three stories about the three sides of a
court. The fourth side was partly closed by a high wall, surmounted by
jagged edges of broken glass set firmly in old lime plaster, and pierced
in its center by a wide entrance-way. Over the entrance there still
remained a massive grill of Italian wrought iron, and a battered capital
of marble surmounted each of the lofty gate-posts. The court itself was
paved with large flag-stones, which even beneath the accumulated grime
of a century, glimmered with faint and varying pastel shades in direct
sunlight. The south wall, which was always in shadow, was lichened from
pavement to rotting gutter; and opposite, the northern face, unbroken
except by rows of small-paned windows, showed every color through its
flaking stucco, and, in summer, a steady blaze of scarlet from rows of
geraniums that bloomed in old vegetable tins upon every window-sill.

Within the high-ceilinged rooms, with their battered colonial mantels
and broken decorations of Adam designs in plaster, governors had come
and gone, and ambassadors of kings had schemed and danced. Now before
the gaping entrance lay only a narrow, cobbled street, and beyond, a
tumbled wharf used by negro fishermen. Only the bay remained unchanged.
Beyond the litter of the wharf, it stretched to the horizon, taking its
mood from the changing skies; always different--invariably the same.

Directly within the entrance of the Row, and having upon the street a
single bleary window, wherein were displayed plates of fried fish, was
the “cook-shop” which catered to the residents of the tenement.

Porgy’s room was opposite the shop and enjoyed the great advantage of
having a front window that commanded the street and harbor, and an inner
door where he could sit and enter into the life of the court. To him,
the front window signified adventure, the door--home.


§

It was Porgy’s custom, when the day’s work was done and he had exchanged
a part of his collections for his evening meal of fish and bread, to
sit at his front window and watch the world pass by. The great cotton
wharves lay up the river, beyond the Row; and when the cotton season was
on, he loved to sit in the dusk and see the drays go by. They would
sweep into view with a loud thunder of wheels on the cobbles; and from
his low seat they loomed huge and mysterious in the gathering dark.
Sometimes there would be twenty of them in a row, with great
swiftly-stepping mules, crouched figures of drivers, and bales piled
toweringly above them. Always Porgy experienced a vague and not
unpleasant fear when the drays swung past. There was power, vast,
awe-inspiring; it could so easily crush him were he in its path. But
here, safe within his window, he could watch it with perfect safety. At
times when the train was unusually long, the sustained, rhythmic thunder
and the sweep of form after form past his window produced an odd
pleasurable detachment in his mind, and pictures of strange things and
places would brighten and fade. But the night following the killing, the
window was closed, and through the open door behind him beat the rhythm
of a dirge from Robbins’ room.

“What de matter, chillen?” came the strophe. And the antistrophe
swelled to the answer:

“Pain gots de body, an’ I can’t stan’ still.”

Porgy sat upon his floor counting the day’s collection: one dollar and
twenty cents. It had been a good day. Perhaps the sorrow that had
brooded over his spirit had quickened the sympathy of the passers-by.

“What de matter, Sister?”

“Jedus gots our brudder, an’ I can’t stan’ still.”

Ever since Porgy had come home the air had swung to the rhythm of the
chant. He divided his pile into equal portions, and commenced to pocket
one. The burden swayed out again.

“Pain gots de body, an’ I can’t stan’ still.”

He hesitated a moment, poured all the coins together again, selected a
twenty-five-cent piece which he put into his pocket, and, taking the
remainder in his hand, went out and drew himself across the short
distance to the room of mourning.

The body lay upon a bed in the corner of the room, sheeted to the eyes,
and upon its breast rested a large blue saucer. Standing in a circle
about the bed, or seated upon the floor, backs to the wall, were a score
of negroes, some singing, and others swaying, patting the floor with
their large feet. For not a single moment since the body had been laid
out had the rhythm slackened. With each hour it gathered weight until it
seemed to swing the massive structure.

Porgy had heard that Robbins had left no burial insurance, the customary
Saturday night festivities having consumed the slender margin between
daily wage and immediate need. Now, at sight of the saucer, he knew that
rumor had not erred. It had been an old custom among penniless negroes
to prepare the corpse thus, then to sing dirges until neighborhood
sympathy provided the wherewithal for proper interment. Recent years had
introduced the insurance agent and the “buryin’ lodge,” and the old
custom had fallen into disuse. It had even become a grievous reproach to
have a member of the family a “saucer-buried nigger.”

At the foot of the bed, bowed by the double weight of sorrow and
disgrace, the widow sat swaying to the rhythm like a beach palm in the
ebb and flow of a bleak sea wind.

The sight of her grief, the close room, the awful presence beneath the
sheet, and the unceasing pulse of sound that beat against his ears, all
contributed to stir a strange desire into being within Porgy. Suddenly
he threw his head back and wailed long and quaveringly. In rushed a
vast feeling of relief. He wailed again, emptied his handful of small
coins into the saucer, and sank to the floor at the head of the bed.
Presently he commenced to croon with the others, and a sense of
exaltation flooded his being, compelling him from the despair of the
dirge to a more triumphant measure.

“Oh, I gots a little brudder in de new grabe-yahd. What outshine de
sun,” he sang.

Without missing the beat, the chorus shifted: “An’ I’ll meet um in the
primus lan’.”

Then came a rude interruption. A short yellow negro bustled into the
room. His voice was low, oily, and penetrating. He was dressed entirely
in black, and had an air of great importance. The song fell away to
scarcely more than a throbbing silence. The man crossed the room to
where the widow sat huddled at the foot of the bed, and touched her on
the shoulder. She raised a face like a burned out ember.

“How de saucer stan’ now, my sister?” he whispered, at the same time
casting an appraising glance toward the subject of his inquiry.

“Dere ain’t but fifteen dollar,” she replied in a flat, despairing
voice.

“An’ he gots tuh git buried termorrer,” called an awed voice, “or de
boahd ob healt’ will take um, an’ give um tuh de students.”

The widow’s scream shrilled wildly. She rose to her knees and clutched
the man’s hand between both of hers. “Oh, fuh Gawd’s sake bury um in de
grabe-yahd. I goin’ tuh work Monday, and I swear tuh Gawd I goin’ tuh
pay yuh ebery cent.”

For a second even the rhythm ceased, leaving an aching suspense in the
air. Watchers waited tensely. Wide eyes, riveted on the man’s face,
pleaded silently. Presently his professional manner slipped from him.
“All right, Sister,” he said simply. “Wid de box, an’ one ca’age it will
cost me more dan twenty-five. But I’ll see yuh t’rough. Yuh can all be
ready at eight tumorruh. It’s a long trip tuh de cemetery.”

The woman relaxed silently across the foot of the bed, her head between
her out-flung arms. Then from the narrow confines of the room, the song
beat up and out triumphantly:

“Oh, I gots a little brudder in de new grabe-yahd. What outshine de
sun!”

The rhythm swelled, and voices in the court and upper rooms took it up,
until the deeply-rooted old walls seemed to rock and surge with the
sweep of it.


§

In the cool of the early morning, the procession took its departure for
the cemetery that lay beyond the city limits to the north. First went
the dilapidated hearse, with its rigid wooden plumes, and faded black
velvet draperies that nodded and swayed inside the plate glass panels.
Then followed the solitary carriage, in which could be seen massed black
accentuated by several pairs of white cotton gloves held to lowered
eyes. Behind the carriage came the mourners in a motley procession of
wagons and buggies that had been borrowed for the occasion.

Porgy drove with Peter, and four women, seated on straight chairs in the
wagon behind them, completed their company. From time to time a
long-drawn wail would rise from one of the conveyances, to be taken up
and passed back from wagon to wagon like a dismal echo.

Moving from the negro district into the wide thoroughfare of Meeting
House Road, with its high buildings and its white faces that massed and
scattered on the pavements, the cortége appeared almost grotesque, with
the odd fusion of comedy and tragedy so inextricably a part of negro
life in its deep moments.

The fat German who kept the shop on the corner of King Charles Street
and Summer Road, called his clerk from the depths of the building, and
their stomachs shook with laughter. But the little, dark Russian Jew in
the next shop, who dealt in abominably smelling clothing, gave them a
reproving look, and disappeared indoors.

The cemetery lay several miles beyond the city limits. The lot was bare
of trees, but among the graves many bright flowering weeds masked the
ugliness of the troubled earth. To the eastward a wide marsh stretched
away to a far, bright line of sea. Westward, ploughed fields swept out
to a distant forest of yellow pine. From the sea to the far tree tops,
the sky swung a dizzy arch of thin blue, high in the center of which
several buzzards hung motionless, watching.

In the vast emptiness of the morning the little procession crawled out
to the edge of the broken wooden fence that marked the enclosure, and
stopped.

By the time the last wagon had arrived, the cheap pine casket was
resting upon battens over the grave, and the preacher, robed in white,
was preparing to commence the service.

The mourners gathered close about the grave.

“Death, ain’t yuh gots no shame?” called a clear, high, soprano voice;
and immediately the mortal embodiment of infinite sorrow broke and
swayed about the grave in the funeral chant. Three times the line swung
its curve of song, shrill, keen, agonizing; then it fell away to a
heart-wrenching minor on the burden:

    “Take dis man an’ gone--gone.
     Death, ain’t yuh gots no shame?”

When the singing ceased, the burial service commenced, the preacher
extemporizing fluently. Taking his rhythm from the hymn, he poured his
words along its interminable reiteration until the cumulative effect
rocked the entire company.

The final moment of the ritual arrived. The lid was removed from the
casket, and the mourners were formed into line to pass and look upon the
face of the dead. A very old, bent negress went first. She stooped, then
suddenly, with a shriek of anguish, cast herself beside the coffin.

“Tell Peter tuh hold de do’ open fuh me. I’s comin’ soon!” she cried.

“Yes, Gawd, goin’ soon,” responded a voice in the crowd. Others pressed
about the grave, and the air was stabbed by scream on scream. Grief
spent itself freely, terrifyingly.

Slowly the clashing sounds merged into the regular measure of a
spiritual. Beautiful and poignant it rose, swelling out above the sounds
of falling earth as the grave was filled:

    “What yuh goin’ ter do when yuh
         come out de wilderness,
     Come out de wilderness,
     Come out de wilderness;
     What yuh goin’ ter do when yuh
         come out de wilderness
     Leanin’ on my Lord.

    “Leanin’ on my Lord,
     Leanin’ on my Lord,
     Leanin’ on my Lord
     Who died on Calvary.”

The music faded away in vague, uncertain minors. The mood of the crowd
changed almost tangibly. There was an air of restless apprehension.
Nervous glances were directed toward the entrance. Peter, always
sagacious, unless taken unawares, had conferred in advance with Porgy
about this moment. When he had helped him from the wagon, he had
stationed him just inside the fence, where he could be lifted quickly
into the road.

“De las’ man in de grabe-yahd goin’ tuh be de nex’ one tuh git buried,”
he had reminded his friend.

Now, as the final shovelful of earth was thrown upon the grave, he came
running to Porgy, and lifted him quickly into the road. Behind them
broke a sudden earth-shaking burst of sound, as of the stampeding of
many cattle, and past them the mourners swept, stumbling, fighting for
room; some assisting weaker friends, others fighting savagely to be free
of the enclosure. In the center of the crowd, plunging forward with
robes flying, was the preacher. In an incredibly short time the lot was
cleared. Then, from a screening bush near the grave, arose the old
negress who had been the first to wail out her grief. She had lain there
forgotten, overcome by the storm of her emotion. She tottered feebly
into the road.

“Nebber you min’, Sister,” the preacher assured her comfortingly. “Gawd
always lub de righteous.”

Dazed, and much pleased at the attention that she was receiving, while
still happily unmindful of its cause, the old woman smiled a vague
smile, and was hoisted into the wagon.

During the funeral the sun had disappeared behind clouds that had blown
in swiftly from the sea, and now a scurry of large drops swept over the
vehicles, and trailed away across the desolate graves.

“Dat’s all right now fer Robbins,” commented Porgy. “Gawd done sen’ he
rain already fuh wash he feet-steps offen dis eart’.”

“Oh, yes, Brudder!” contributed a woman’s voice; and, “Amen, my Jedus!”
added another.


§

In the early afternoon of the day of the funeral, Porgy sat in his
doorway communing with Peter. The old man was silent for awhile, his
grizzled head bowed, and an expression of brooding tenderness upon his
lined face.

“Robbins war a good man,” he reflected at length, “an’ dat nigger,
Crown, war a killer, an’ fuhebber gettin’ intuh trouble. Yet, dere lie
Robbins, wid he wife an’ fadderless chillen; an’ Crown done gone he
ways tuh do de same t’ing ober again somewheres else.”

“Gone fuh true. I reckon he done lose now on Kittiwar Islan’, in dem
palmettuh t’icket; an’ de rope ain’t nebber make fuh ketch um an’ hang
um.” Porgy stopped suddenly, and motioned with his head toward someone
who had just entered the court. The new arrival was a white man of
stocky build, wearing a wide-brimmed hat, and a goatee. He was swinging
a heavy cane, and he crossed the court directly and paused before the
two. For a moment he stood looking down at them with brows drawn
fiercely together. Then he drew back his coat, exhibiting a police
badge, and a heavy revolver in a breast holster.

“You killed Robbins,” he shot out suddenly at Peter. “And I’m going to
hang you for it. Come along now!” and he reached out and laid a firm
hand upon the old man’s shoulder.

Peter shook violently, and his eyes rolled in his head. He made an
ineffectual effort to speak, tried again, and finally said, “’Fore Gawd,
Boss, I ain’t nebber done it.”

Like a flash, the pistol was out of its holster, and pointing between
his eyes. “Who did it, then?” snapped the man.

“Crown, Boss. I done see him do um,” Peter cried in utter panic.

The man laughed shortly. “I thought so,” he said. Then he turned to
Porgy.

“You saw it too, eh?”

There was panic in Porgy’s face, and in his lap his hands had clinched
upon each other. But his eyes were fixed upon the paving. He drew a deep
breath, and waited.

A flare of anger swept the face above him. “Come. Out with it. I don’t
want to have to put the law on you.”

Porgy’s only answer was a slight tremor that shook the hands in his lap.
The detective’s face darkened, and sweat showed under his hat-brim.
Suddenly his temper bolted.

“Look at me, you damned nigger!” he shouted.

Slowly the sitting figure before him relaxed, almost it seemed, muscle
by muscle. At last the hands fell apart, and lay flexed and idle.
Finally Porgy raised eyes that had become hard and impenetrable as onyx.
They met the angry glare that beat down upon them without flinching.
After a long moment, he spoke slowly, and with great quietness.

“I ain’t know nuttin’ ’bout um. I been inside, asleep on my bed, wid de
do’ closed.”

“You’re a damn liar,” the man snapped.

He shrilled a whistle, and two policemen entered.

“He saw the killing,” the detective said, indicating Peter. “Take him
along, and lock him up as a material witness.”

“How about the cripple?” asked one of the officers.

“He could not have helped seeing it,” the man said sourly. “That’s his
room right there. But I can’t make him come through. But it don’t
matter. One’s enough to hang Crown, if we ever get him. Come, get the
old man in the wagon.”

The policeman lifted the shaking old negro to his feet. “Come along,
Uncle. It ain’t going to be as bad for you as Crown, anyway,” encouraged
one of them. Then the little party passed out of the entrance, leaving
Porgy alone.

From the street sounded the shrill gong of the patrol wagon, followed by
the beat of swiftly receding hoofs upon the cobbles.


§

Ten days had passed since the detective had taken Peter away. For a week
the wagon had waited under the tottering shed, and the dejected old
horse had subsisted upon a varied diet brought to him by the friends of
his absent master. Then a man had come and taken the outfit away. In
answer to the protests of the negroes, he had exhibited a contract,
dated three years previous, by which Peter was to pay two dollars a week
for an indefinite period, on an exorbitant purchase price. Failure to
pay any installment would cause the property to revert to the seller. It
all looked thoroughly legal. And so the dilapidated old rig rattled over
the cobbles and departed.

Then the man from the installment furniture house came. He was a
vile-mouthed, bearded Teuton, and swore so fiercely that no one dared to
protest when he loaded Peter’s furniture on his truck and drove away.

Now there remained in a corner of Porgy’s room, where he had taken them
into custody, only a battered leather trunk, a chromo of “The Great
Emancipator,” and a bundle of old clothes; mute reminders of their
kindly and gentle old owner.




II

[Illustration]




PART II


The languor of a Southern May was in the air. It was a season dear to
the heart of a negro. Work on the wharves was slowing down, and the men
were putting in only two or three days a week. There were always some of
them lying about the court, basking in the sun, laughing, and telling
stories while they waited for their women to come from the “white
folks’” kitchens, with their full dinner pails.

Near the entrance, the stevedores usually lounged, their great size
differentiating them from most of the other men. They had bright
bandanas about their thick necks, and under their blue cotton shirts
moved broad, flat backs that could heft a five hundred pound cotton
bale. Earning more money than the others, and possessing vast physical
strength in a world of brute force, they lorded it swaggeringly about
the court; taking the women that they wanted, and dressing them
gorgeously in the clashing crimsons and purples that they loved.

Grief over the loss of Robbins had stormed itself out at the funeral.
Peter’s ill fortune still occasioned general comment, but slight
concern to the individual. There was an air of gaiety about. The scarlet
of the geraniums was commencing to flicker in a run of windy flame on
each window sill; and from the bay came the smell of salt air blown
across young marsh-grass.

At the wharf, across the narrow street, the fishermen were discharging
strings of gleaming whiting and porgy. Vegetable sloops, blowing up from
the Sea Islands, with patched and tawny sails, broke the flat cobalt of
the inner harbor with the cross-wash of their creamy wakes.

Through the back door of the cook-shop Maria, the huge proprietress,
could be seen cutting shark-steaks from a four-foot hammerhead that one
of the fishermen had given her. All in all, it was a season for the good
things of life, to be had now for scarcely more than the asking.

Only Porgy sat lonely and disconsolate in his doorway and watched the
sunlight creep up the eastern wall until it faded to a faint red at the
top, then the blue dusk grew under the wharf, and swirled through the
street and court. He had not been able to get to his stand since Peter’s
departure; and the small store of coins, which he kept under a loose
brick in his hearth, was nearing exhaustion. Also, he missed his old
friend keenly and could not enter into the light-hearted life about him.

Presently two women entered. Porgy saw that they were Robbins’ widow,
and her sister, who now shared her room. He had been awaiting their
coming eagerly, as they had left in the early afternoon to carry
bed-clothing and food to the jail for Peter.

“How yuh fin’ um, Sister?” he hailed.

The younger woman paused, standing in the shadow, and the widow lowered
herself to a seat beside Porgy. She had put her grief aside, and gone
resolutely about her task of earning a living for the three children.

“I can’t puzzle dis t’ing out,” she said after a while. “De old man
ain’t done nuttin’, an’ dey done gots um lock up like a chicken t’ief.
Dey say dey gots tuh keep um till dat nigger Crown get ketch; an, Gawd
knows when dat debble ob a t’ing goin’ tuh happen.”

“It sho pay nigger tuh go blin’ in dis world,” contributed the young
woman. “Porgy ain’t gots much leg, but he sho got sense.”

After a moment of reflection, Porgy replied: “Sense do berry well; but
he can’t lift no weight.”

A big stevedore was crossing the court, his body moving easily with the
panther-like flow of enormous muscular power under absolute control.

The beggar’s eyes became wistful.

“Sense gots power tuh take a t’ing atter yuh gits dere,” he said. “But
he nebber puts bittle in a belly what can’t leabe he restin’ place. What
I goin’ do now sence Peter gone, an’ I can’t git on de street?”

“Pray, Brudder, pray,” said the widow devoutly. “Ain’t yuh see Gawd done
soffen de haht of dat yalluh buryin’ ondehtakuh attuh I done pray tuh
him fuh a whole day an’ night? Gawd gots leg fuh de cripple.”

“Bless de Lord!” ejaculated the young woman.

“An’ he gots comfort fuh de widder.”

“Oh, my Jedus!” crooned Porgy, beginning to sway.

“An’ food fuh de fadderless.”

“Yes, Lord!”

“An’ he goin’ raise dis poor nigger out de dus’.”

“Allelujah!”

“An’ set um in de seat ob de righteous.”

“Amen, my Sister!”

For a little while the three figures, showing now only as denser shadows
in a world of shade, swayed slowly from side to side. Then, without
saying a word, Porgy drew himself across his threshold, and closed the
door very softly.


§

It was not yet day when Porgy awakened suddenly. His eyes were wide, and
his face was working with unwonted emotion. In the faint light that
penetrated his bleared window from a street lamp, he made his way to the
hearth, and removed the brick from his secret depository. With feverish
haste he counted his little store, placing the coins in a row before
him. Then with the utmost care he recounted them, placing them in little
piles, one for the coppers, one for the nickels, and one for the dimes.
When he had fully satisfied himself as to the extent of his wealth, his
tension relaxed, and, tying the money in a rag which he tore from his
bed-clothing, he closed his hand firmly upon it, crawled back into bed,
and immediately fell asleep.


§

Two days later, Porgy drove his chariot out through the wide entrance
into a land of romance and adventure. He was seated with the utmost
gravity in an inverted packing-case that proclaimed with unconscious
irony the virtues of a well-known toilet soap. Beneath the box two solid
lop-sided wheels turned heavily. Before him, between a pair of
improvised shafts, a patriarchal goat tugged with the dogged persistence
of age which has been placed upon its mettle, and flaunted an
intolerable stench in the face of the complaisant and virtuous soap box.

As oblivious of the mirth-provoking quality of his appearance, as he was
of a smell to which custom had inured him, Porgy turned his equipage
daringly into a new thoroughfare, and drove through a street where high,
bright buildings stood between wide gardens, and where many ladies
passed and re-passed on the sidewalks, or in glittering carriages.

But the magic that had come to pass, even in the triumph of that first
morning, stirred vague doubts and misgivings within him. He noticed that
while he occasioned slight comment in the negro quarter, no sooner had
he entered the white zone, than people commenced to pass him with
averted faces, and expressions that struggled between pity and laughter.
When he finally reached his old stand before the apothecary shop, these
misgivings crystallized into a definite fear.

Several of his clients happened to be passing the shop together. One of
them was clerk to an apothecary further down the street. He seized his
nose with one hand, while he pointed at Porgy with the other. Then all
seized their noses, shaking with laughter, and waited to see what would
happen.

Porgy looked his outfit over carefully. Certainly it was working with
the utmost satisfaction. Somewhat mystified, he tied the ancient animal
to a post and, with great gravity, swung himself out of his wagon,
across the pavement, and to his old stand.

The boys who had laughed stood nearby, and were joined by others, until
soon there was quite a group.

Presently here issued from the shop the loud voice of the proprietor:
“Oh, Mary, come quick, and bring the broom. Something has died again.”
Then followed the sound of boxes being overturned, while dust from a
prodigious sweeping bellied in clouds from the door. Then the
apothecary, very red in the face, came out for air, and found the goat.
The burst of laughter that greeted him increased his irritation.
Brandishing the broom, and in no uncertain language, he drove Porgy from
his door.

But the bystanders had so enjoyed the joke at the apothecary’s expense,
and were feeling in such high good humor, that when Porgy had an
opportunity to appraise his collections, he found that they amounted to
more than he frequently got from a whole day of patient waiting.


§

It is impossible to conceive of a more radical change than that brought
about in Porgy’s life by his new emancipation. From his old
circumstances which had conspired to anchor him always to one spot, he
was now in the grip of new forces that as inevitably resulted in
constant change of scene. Soon he became quite a metropolitan, and might
have been seen in any part of the city, either sitting in his wagon at
the curb, or, if the residents of the locality seemed lenient in their
attitude toward goats, disembarking, and trying his luck in the strip of
shade along the wall.

In those days, everyone tolerated Porgy--for a while. He had become “a
character.” The other beggars gnashed their teeth, but were powerless.

On certain days he would turn to the south when he left the court, and
soon would emerge into a land of such beauty that he never lost the
illusion that it was unreal. No one seemed to work in that country,
except the happy, well-clothed negroes who frequently came to back gates
when he passed, and gave him tender morsels from the white folks’
kitchens. The great, gleaming houses looked out at him with kindly eyes
that peered between solid walls of climbing roses. Ladies on the deep
piazzas would frequently send a servant running out to give him a coin
and speed him on his way.

Before the houses and the rose-trellises stretched a broad drive, and
beyond its dazzling belt of crushed shell the harbor lay between its
tawny islands, like a sapphire upon a sailor’s weathered hand. Sometimes
Porgy would steal an hour from the daily rounds, pause there, and watch
a great, blunt-nosed steamer heave slowly out of the unknown, to come to
rest with a sigh of spent steam, and a dusty thundering of released
anchor chains.

“Gawd sho gots a long arm,” he would murmur; or, “Porgy, yo’ sho is a
little somethin’ aftuh all.”

Then there would be other days when he would repair to the narrow retail
street, with its unbelievable windows, and drawing near to the curb,
between the tall carriages of the shoppers would fall heir to the
pennies which they got with their change, and which were of no value to
such as they.

Always kind hands dropped coins in his cup, and sped him on. They were
great days for Porgy. And great were the nights when he would tell of
his adventures to the envious circle that gathered in the dusk of the
court.

But Porgy was by nature a dreamer, and there were times even in those
days, when his mind returned with wistful longing to the old
uninterrupted hours when he used to sit, lost in meditation, under the
unmarked drift of time. Some day, he would tell himself, there would
come one with a compassion so great that he would give both Porgy and
the goat place by his doorstep. Then life would be perfect indeed.


§

June, and the cotton season was over. The last tramp steamer had faded
into the horizon. Great sheds that linked land and sea lay empty and
dark, and through their cavernous depths echoed the thud and suck of
waves against the bulkheads. The last of the stevedores had departed,
some to the plantations, others to the phosphate mines, and still others
to the river barges.

The long, hot days, so conducive to indolence, brought a new phase of
life to Catfish Row. The loud talk and noisy comings and goings
diminished. Men came in earlier in the evenings, and spent more time
with their women.

Porgy sat alone in his doorway. In a room overhead a man and his wife
were engaged in a friendly quarrel that ended in laughter. From an open
window nearby came the sound of drowsy child voices. In the crowded dark
about him, Life, with cruel preoccupation, was engrossed with its
eternal business.

A large, matronly woman who lived near him, passed, carrying a pail of
water. She stopped, set down her burden, and dropped a hand on Porgy’s
shoulder.

“What de matter wid dis man, he ain’t gots nuttin’ tuh say?” she asked
him kindly.

Porgy’s face contracted with emotion. He caught her hand and hurled it
from him. “Lemme be,” he rasped, in a tight, husky voice. “Yuh done gots
yuh own man. Ain’t yuh?”

“Oh, Lawd!” she laughed, as she turned away. “Yuh ain’t t’ink I wantin’
_yuh_, is yuh? Do listen tuh de man.”


§

Through the early night a woman had lain in the dust against the outer
wall of Maria’s cook-shop. She was extremely drunk and unpleasant to
look upon. Exactly when she had dropped, or been dropped there, no one
knew. Porgy had not seen her when he had driven in at sunset. But he had
heard some talk of her among those who had entered later. One of the men
had come in laughing.

“I seen Crown’s Bess outside,” he said. “Must be she come aroun’ tuh
look fur um.”

“She sho goin’ tuh hab one long res’, ef she goin’ wait dere fur um. Dat
nigger gone f’om hyuh fas’ and far!” another had averred.

It was ten o’clock: and Maria was closing her shop. The great negress
was in the act of fastening the window, when the tall, gaunt form of the
woman lurched through the door into the faint illumination of the
smoking lamp. The visitor measured the distance to the nearest bench
with wandering and vacant eyes, plunged for it, and collapsed, with head
and arms thrown across a table.

Maria was exasperated, but equal to the emergency. Catching the woman
around the middle, she swung her easily to the door, dropped her into
outer darkness, and returned to the window.

A crash caused her to turn suddenly. There was the woman again, sprawled
across the table as before.

“I swear tuh Gawd!” exclaimed the provoked negress. “Ef yuh ain’t de
persistentes’ nigger I ebber seen.” She went over, lifted the woman’s
head, and looked into eyes in the far depths of which a human soul was
flickering feebly.

“Somethin’ tuh eat,” the woman whispered. “Lemme hab somethin’ tuh eat,
an’ I’ll go.”

Growling like an approaching equinoctial gale, Maria brought bread and
fish; and emptying the dregs of the coffeepot into a cup, placed it
before her.

“Now, eat an’ trabble, Sister,” she advised laconically.

The woman raised her head. An ugly scar marked her left cheek, and the
acid of utter degradation had etched hard lines about her mouth; but
eyes into which human consciousness was returning looked fearlessly into
the determined face of the big negress. For a moment she ate wolfishly;
then asked suddenly:

“Who lib in dat room ’cross de way?”

“Porgy,” she was informed, “but such as yuh ain’t gots no use fuh he.
He a cripple, an’ a beggar.”

“He de man wid goat?”

“Yes, he gots goat.”

The woman’s eyes narrowed to dark, unfathomable slits.

“I hyuh say he gits good money fum de w’ite folks,” she said slowly.

In silence the meal was finished. Then the woman steadied herself a
moment with hands against a table, and, without a word to Maria, walked
quickly, with an almost haughty carriage, from the room.

She crossed the narrow drive with a decisive tread, opened the door of
Porgy’s room, entered, and closed the door behind her.


§

It was late afternoon. Serena Robbins entered the court, paused at
Porgy’s door, and gave a sharp rap on the weathered panel. The door was
opened by a woman. The visitor looked through her, and spoke directly to
Porgy, who sat within.

“I gots good news,” she announced. “I done tuh see my w’ite folks ’bout
Peter; an’ dey say dey gots a frien’ who is a lawyer, an’ he kin git um
out. I tell um tuh sen’ um tuh see you ’bout um, ’cause yuh gots so
much sense when yuh talks tuh w’ite folks.”

Having delivered her message, Serena turned a broad back upon the woman
who stood silently in the doorway, and with the bearing of an arbiter of
social destinies, strode to her corner of the court.

Across the drive, Maria, vast and moist, hung over her stove in a far
corner of her cook-shop. Several negroes sat at the little tables,
eating their early suppers, laughing and chaffing.

“Yuh sho got good-lookin’ white gals in dis town,” drawled a slender
young octoroon. He was attired in sky-blue, peg-top trousers, yellow
spats, and in the center of a scarlet bow-tie gleamed an immense paste
horseshoe.

“Do listen tuh Sportin’ Life!” said a black, loutish buck admiringly.
“Ef he ain’t lookin’ at de rollin’ bones, he always gots he eye on de
women.”

Maria’s heavy tread shook the room as she crossed and stood, with arms
akimbo, scowling down at her iridescent guest. The man looked up,
lowered his eyes quickly, and shifted uneasily in his chair.

“Nigger!” she finally shot at him, and the impact almost jarred him from
his chair. “I jus’ tryin’ ter figger out wedder I bettuh kill yuh
decent now, wid yuh frien’s about yuh; or leabe you fuh de w’ite
gentlemens tuh hang attuh a while.”

“Come now, old lady, don’t talk like dese old-fashioned lamp-oil niggers
what have had no adwantage. Why, up in New York, where I been waitin’ in
a hotel--”

But he got no further.

“Noo Yo’k,” she shouted. “Don’t yuh try any Noo Yo’kin’ aroun’ dis town.
Ef I had my way, I’d go down tuh dat Noo Yo’k boat, an’ take ebbery
Gawd’s nigger what come up de gang plank wid er Joseph coat on he back
an’ a glass headlight on he buzzom and drap um tuh de catfish befo’ he
foot hit decent groun’! Yas; my belly fair ache wid dis Noo Yo’k talk.
De fus t’ing dat dem nigger fuhgit is dat dem is nigger. Den dem comes
tuh dese decent country mens, and fills um full ob talk wut put money in
de funeral ondehtakuh pocket.” Breathless, she closed her arraignment by
bringing a fist the size of a ham down upon the table with such force
that her victim leapt from his chair and extended an ingratiating hand
toward her.

“Dat’ all right, Auntie. Le’s you an’ me be frien’.”

“Frien’ wid yuh?” and her tone dripped scorn. “One ob dese days I might
lie down wid er rattlesnake, and when dat time come, yuh kin come right
along an’ git intuh de bed. But till den, keep yuh shiny carcase in Noo
Yo’k till de debbil ready tuh take chaage ob um!”

Suddenly the anger left her eyes, and her face became grave. She leaned
over, and spoke very quietly into his face.

“Fuh Gawd’s sake, don’t talk dat kind ob talk tuh dese hyuh boys. Dis
county ain’t nebber yit see a black man git lynch. Dese nigger knows
folks, an’ dey knows nigger. Fer Gawd’ sake keep yuh mout’ off w’ite
lady. Yuh gots plenty ob yuh own color fuh talk ’bout. Stick tuh dem,
an’ yuh ain’t git inter no trouble.”

During Maria’s attack upon her guest, the court had been full of the
many-colored sounds that accompanied its evening life. Now, gradually
the noise shrunk, seeming to withdraw into itself. All knew what it
meant. A white man had entered. The protective curtain of silence which
the negro draws about his life when the Caucasian intrudes hung almost
tangibly in the air. No one appeared to notice the visitor. Each was
busily preoccupied with his task. Yet the newcomer made no move that was
not noted by fifty pairs of inscrutable eyes.

The man wore a soft hat drawn well down over his face. He was slender
and tall, and walked with his body carried slightly forward, like one
who is used to meeting and overcoming difficulties.

A young woman passed him. He reached out and touched her on the arm. She
stopped, and turned immediately toward him, her eyes lowered, her manner
submissive, but utterly negative.

“I am looking for a man by the name of Porgy,” he said in a clear
pleasant voice. “Can you direct me to his room?”

“Porgy?” she repeated slowly, as though trying to remember. Then she
called aloud: “Anybody hyuh know a man by de name ob Porgy?”

Several of the silent bystanders looked up. “Porgy?” they repeated, one
after another, with shakes of the head.

The white man laughed reassuringly, as though quite used to the
proceeding. “Come,” he urged, “I am his friend, Mr. Alan Archdale; I
know that he lives here, and I want to help him.”

From behind her tubs, Serena advanced, knocking the ashes from her clay
pipe as she came. When she was quite close, she stopped, and peered up
into the face above her. Then she turned upon the girl.

“Go ’long an’ call Porgy,” she commanded. “Can’t yuh tell _folks_ when
yuh see um?”

A light broke over the young woman’s face.

“Oh, yuh means _Porgy_?” she cried, as though she had just heard the
name for the first time; “I ain’t understan’ wut name yuh say, Boss,”
and echoes arose from different parts of the court. “Oh, yes, de
gentleman mean _Porgy_. How come we ain’t understan’.” Then the tension
in the air broke, and life resumed its interrupted flow.

The young woman stepped to Porgy’s door, and called. Presently the door
opened, and a woman helped the beggar out to his seat upon the sill,
then seated herself behind him in the deep gloom of the room.

Archdale crossed the short distance, and seated himself on the sill
beside the negro.

“Tell me about your friend who got locked up on account of the Robbins
murder,” he asked, without preamble.

In the dim light, Porgy leaned forward and looked long into the keen,
kindly face of his questioner.

Archdale gave a surprised exclamation: “Why, you’re the old man who used
to beg in front of the apothecary shop on King Charles Street!” he said.
Then, after a moment of scrutiny: “But you are not old, after all, are
you?” and he studied the face intently. There was a touch of grey in the
wool above the ears, and strong character lines flared downward from the
nose to corners of a mouth that was, at once, full-lipped and sensuous,
yet set in a resolute line most unusual in a negro. With the first
indications of age upon it, the face seemed still alive with a youth
that had been neither spent nor wasted.

“But, tell me about your friend,” said the visitor, breaking a silence
that was commencing to become tense.

Porgy’s face still wore its mask. “How come yuh tuh care, Boss?” he
queried.

“Why, I am the Rutledge’s lawyer; and I look after their colored folks
for them. I think they must have owned half the slaves in the county. A
woman here, Serena Robbins, is the daughter of their old coachman, or
something; and she asked them to help her friend out.”

“Peter ain’t gots no money, yuh know, Boss. An’ I jes begs from do’ to
do’.” There was still a shade of suspicion in Porgy’s voice.

Archdale laughed reassuringly. “It will not take any money. At least,
not much; and I am sure that Mrs. Rutledge will take care of that. So
you can go right ahead and tell me all about it.”

Fully satisfied at last, Porgy told the tale of the killing and the
subsequent arrest of Peter.

When he had finished the recital, Archdale sat silent for a while. “The
dirty hounds!” he said under his breath. Finally he turned wearily to
Porgy, and explained slowly:

“Of course we can go to law about this; but it will take no end of time.
There is an easier way. He must have someone, who is acceptable to the
magistrate, to go his bond. Do you know a man by the name of Huysenberg,
who keeps a corner-shop down by the West-end wharf?”

Porgy, listening intently, nodded.

Archdale handed him a bill. “Take this ten dollars to him, and tell him
that you want him to go Peter’s bond. He hasn’t any money of his own,
and his shop is in his wife’s name; but he has an arrangement with the
magistrate that makes him entirely satisfactory.”

He handed Porgy a card with an address pencilled under a printed name.
“You will find me here,” he said. “If Peter is not out in two days after
you hand over the ten, let me know.” Then, with a brisk, but friendly
“Good night,” he left the court.


§

There was great rejoicing in Catfish Row. Peter had returned. The ten
dollar bill which Archdale had given Porgy had worked the miracle.
Except for the fact that the old negro’s shoulders drooped, and his grip
on actualities seemed weakened by his confinement, there was no evidence
to show that he had been absent. He had gone to the horse-dealer, and
had found his ancient beast still awaiting a purchaser. Another contract
had been signed which had started him off again on the eternal weekly
payment. The German had driven back with the furniture, which Peter had
docilely purchased for the second time. Again “The Great Emancipator”
had been hung in his accustomed place above the mantel. Now, each
morning, the old wagon rattled out over the cobbles, with the usual
number of small, ecstatic, black bodies pendant from its dilapidated
superstructure.

“De buckra sho pots nigger figgered out tuh a cent!” said Peter
philosophically, and even with a note of admiration in his voice. “Dem
knows how much money wagon make in er week; an’ de horse man, de
furniture man, an’ de lan’lo’d mek dey ’rangement’ accordin’. But I done
lib long ’nough now tuh beat ’em all, ’cause money ain’t no use tuh a
man attuh he done pass he prime, nohow.”

When the old man had settled firmly back into his nook, and had an
opportunity to look about him, he noticed a change in Porgy.

“I tell yuh dat nigger happy,” he said to Serena, one evening while they
were smoking their pipes together on her washing bench.

“Go ’long wid yuh!” she retorted. “Dat ’oman ain’t de kin’ tuh mek man
happy. It tek a killer like Crown tuh hol’ she down.”

“Dat may be so,” agreed the old man sagely. “But Porgy don’ know dat
yit. An’ ’side, ef a man is de kin’ wut needs er ’oman, he goin’ be
happy regahdless. Him dress she up in he own eye till she look lak de
Queen of Sheba tuh um. Porgy t’ink right now dat he gots a she-gawd in
he room.”

“He sho’ gots de kin’ wut goin’ gib um hell,” Serena commented
cynically. “Dat ’oman ain’t fit tuh ’sociate wid. Much as I like Porgy,
I wouldn’t swap t’ree wo’d wid she.”

“Dat’s all so, Sister,” conceded Peter. “But yuh keep yo’ eye on Porgy.
He usen tuh hate all dese chillen. Ain’t he? Now watch um. Ebery day
w’en he come home he gots candy-ball fuh de crowd. An’ wut mo’,
yistuhday I hyuh he an’ she singin’ tuhgedduh in dey room.”

Serena motioned to him to be quiet. Porgy’s woman crossed the court to
draw a bucket of water from the common tap near Serena’s corner. She was
neatly dressed, and passed them as though they did not exist. Filling
her pail, she swung it easily to her head, and, steadying it lightly
with one hand, returned close to them with an air of cool scorn that
produced entirely different effects upon her two observers. Serena
watched her departure in silence.

“Dat de t’ing!” said Peter, a note of admiration in his voice. “She sho
ain’t axin’ no visit offen none of she neighbor.” And he emitted an
indiscreet chuckle, which was too much for his friend.

“Yuh po’, ole, wall-eyed, sof’-headed gran’daddy! Ain’t yuh ’shame’ tuh
set dey befo’ me, an’ talk sweet-mout’ ’bout dat murderin’ Crown’s Bess?
Ef I wuz yo’ age, an’ er man, I’d sabe my sof’ wo’d fer de Gawd-farin’
ladies.”

“Ef yuh wuz my age, an’ a man--” commenced Peter. He hesitated, and
looked long at her with his dim, kindly eyes; then he shook his head.
“No; it ain’t no use. Yuh wouldn’t onderstan’. Dat somet’ing shemale
sense ain’t goin’ tuh help yuh none wid.” And, still shaking his head,
he knocked out his pipe, and departed in the direction of the stable,
where he was presently greeted by a soft, comprehending whinny.

Bess entered Porgy’s room and swung her pail of water to its place
beside the new wood stove that had superseded the old, open hearth, and
busied herself with preparations for supper.

Porgy was seated in a low chair near the door. He was smoking
contentedly, and the odd tension that had characterized him, even in his
moments of silent thought, had given place to a laxed attitude of body
and an expression of well-being.

An infinitesimal negro passed with a whistle and a double shuffle.

“Look hyuh, sonny!” called Porgy.

The boy paused, hesitated, and advanced slowly. Porgy held out a large
round ball, striped red and white. “How ’bout er sweet?” he said a
little self-consciously. The boy took the candy, and shuffled uneasily
from foot to foot.

“Dat’s right,” said Porgy, with a burst of sudden, warm laughter, that
somehow startled the child. “Now yuh come again an’ see Porgy an’
Bess.”




III

[Illustration]




PART III


Porgy drove slowly down King Charles Street, and appraised the prospects
for hitching and settling awhile in the narrow strip of shade against
the walls of the buildings. The day was sweltering, and both cripple and
goat were drooping beneath the steady pressure of the sun.

A man passed, walking briskly. Porgy at once recognized the long, easy
stride, and the soft felt hat drawn rather low over the eyes. He reached
out and gave a slight twist to the tail of his somnambulant animal,
which resulted in a shambling trot that brought the vehicle abreast of
the pedestrian. But at that moment the gentleman stopped, produced a
key, and opening the door of an office, passed in without looking
around.

Porgy eyed the office and its environs with evident satisfaction. The
building stood very near the old apothecary shop; and between it and its
neighbor to the east was an entrance way several feet in width, which
breathed forth an inviting coolness from its deep shade. No one was
passing at the moment. Porgy turned the head of his beast toward the
entrance, gave a sudden twist to the tail, and drove audaciously across
the pavement, and into the retreat. Then he hitched his wagon a few feet
from the street, and seated himself, cup in hand, at the pavement’s
inner edge.

“Yuh bes’ git along out of Mr. Alan’ do’way wid dat goat befo’ he fin’
yuh. Ain’t yuh onduhstan’ gentlemen ain’t likes tuh smell goat?”

Porgy looked up and met the threatening gaze of Simon Frasier.

Frasier was a practising attorney-at-law. He was well past fifty years
of age, and his greying wool looked very white in comparison with his
uncompromisingly black skin. He had voted the democratic ticket in the
dark period of reconstruction, when such action on his part took no
little courage, and accordingly enjoyed the almost unlimited toleration
of the aristocracy. Without possessing the official sanction of the
State for the practice of his profession, he was, by common consent
among the lawyers, permitted to represent his own people in the police
and magistrates’ courts and to turn his hand to other small legal
matters into which it was thought inadvisable to enquire too deeply.

Porgy regarded his accuser stonily.

“Ob course gentlemen ain’t likes tuh smell goat,” he replied.

The door opened, and Archdale looked out. From where Porgy sat he could
have touched him with his hand; yet the cripple’s gaze never wavered
from the face of the negro, and his expression remained unchanged.
Forestalling an interruption, he hastened on, in a voice that had become
mildly incredulous, as he continued, “But it can’t be dat attuh knowing
buckra long as yuh been know um, yuh ain’t onduhstan’ um any better dan
tuh t’ink dey would dribe away po’ cripple in de heat.”

Archdale made a movement that actually crossed Porgy’s line of vision;
but the beggar’s face gave no sign of recognition. His voice rose to a
pitch of indignation:

“Yuh might be a lawyuh, an’ all dat; but I ain’t goin’ tuh hab yuh stan’
dey an’ tell me dat Mistuh Archdale gots dem po’ w’ite-trash ways. Ob
course he don’t likes de smell ob goat; but he gots er haht in he breas’
fuh de po’ cripple nigger.”

A wry smile tugged at the corner of Archdale’s mouth.

“All right, Porgy,” he said, “I got it all; but, gentleman or no
gentleman, I can’t have a goat on my doorstep. I would not have one
client left in a week.”

At the sound of Archdale’s voice, Porgy looked around. His entire body
seemed to express amazement.

“Why, hyuh’s de Boss now!” he cried. Then he turned triumphantly to the
negro, and added, “Wut I done tells yuh ’bout de real quality; ain’t yuh
done see he say I kin stay?”

Archdale became desperate. “I did not say you could,” he cried, with the
manner of one who puts his foot in the crack of a closing door. “You can
wait there today, as I will be in court all morning; but tomorrow you
must find somewhere else.”

“By tuhmorruh I goin’ hab dis goat wash till yuh can’t tell um from one
of dem rosebush in de pahk!” Porgy assured him with an ingenuous smile.
“Yuh is goin’ to be mighty lubbin’ of dis goat attuh a while, Boss.”

“No; goats don’t wash, Porgy. Away you go after today.” But the power of
absolute conviction was not in Archdale’s voice. His foot was still in
the crack; but he knew that the door was closing.

“All right, Frasier; I’ll see you now about your divorce business,” he
said to the other negro, and showed him into the office.

Presently through an open window behind Porgy came the sound of
Archdale’s voice:

“All right, Frasier. Out with it. The gentleman who has come down to
improve moral conditions among the negroes thinks you are a menace. He
is going to have you indicted for granting divorces illegally.”

In a voice very different from the one in which he had arraigned Porgy,
Frasier began:

“I fin’ so much nigger onsattify wid dere marriage, an’ I hyuh tell ob a
t’ing dey calls divorce.”

“Yes?” encouraged his questioner.

“So fuh a long time now I been separate dem wid a divorce wut I mek up
fuh de pu’pose. An’ he go fine, Boss. I done mek too much nigger happy.”

“Have you one of the papers with you?”

Silence; and then Archdale’s voice again.

“‘I, Simon Frasier, hereby divorce Rachel Smalls and Columbus Devo for
the charge of one dollar; signed, Simon Frasier.’ Well, that is simple
enough. Where did you get this seal?”

“I done buy um from de junk-shop Jew, Boss.”

“Don’t you know there is no such thing as divorce in this State?”

“I hyuh tell dere ain’t no such t’ing fuh de w’ite folks; but de nigger
need um so bad, I ain’t see no reason why I can’t mek up one wut sati’fy
de nigger? He seem tuh work berry well, too, till dat sof’ mout’
gentleman come ’roun’ an’ onsettle all my client.”

A groan floated through the window to Porgy’s ears, causing him to
indulge in a slow, malicious smile. Then in a pained voice the negro
lawyer proceeded: “He been keepin’ me alibe, Boss. An’ wut mo’, he keep
de nigger straight. Dis gentleman say dat dey gots tuh lib tuhgedduh
anyhow till dey done dead. Dat’s de law, he say. But nigger ain’t mek
dataway. I done get um all properly moralize, and dis same gentleman
tell um dat my paper ain’t no mo’ dan a license tuh ’dulterate. So now
dey just leabe each odduh anyhow, and I ain’t gets no dollar. An’ now he
say he goin’ jail me, wut mo’!”

There was a moment of silence, then Porgy heard Archdale’s voice calling
a number; then: “Hello! Is that the Solicitor’s office? Mr. Dennis,
please.”

“Oh--this is Archdale, Dennis. Yes, another negro. This time it is
Frasier, you know, the divorce decree case. Yes, I have him here in my
office. Look here; you have a terrifically heavy docket this term.
There is no use taking the State’s money and your valuable time on this
case.”

There followed a pause; then Archdale said hastily, “Oh, no; I am not
trying anything; but he is perfectly innocent of any deliberate
wrongdoing. Yes, of course; it would be serious if he were responsible;
but you know no one takes old Frasier seriously. A no-bill from the
grand jury would save no end of time and trouble.

“Yes; I will guarantee that he will stop.”

Porgy listened intently; and after a moment he heard Archdale say,
“Thank you,” and turn his chair toward his client. Then he heard him
address the negro.

“We are not going to lock you up this time, Simon. But you will have to
stop divorcing your people. I have given my word. If you do it again,
snap! to jail we both go. Do you understand?”

A relieved gasp greeted the announcement, followed by “Gawd bless yuh,
Boss!” and a moment later Frasier stood blinking in the white glare of
the street.

Porgy looked up, and in an exact imitation of Frasier’s professional
manner, said testily, “Mobe on, please; mobe on. I gots a berry perlite
goat hyuh wut objec’ tuh de smell ob de jail-bird.”

A chuckle sounded from Archdale’s office.

Immediately the light of victory, carefully veiled, but bright, shone in
Porgy’s eyes. He reached behind him and tweaked the goat by the ear. The
dejected animal mistook the signal, and started forward.

“No, no, bubber,” whispered Porgy. “Ain’t yuh hear de Boss laugh? When
nigger mek de buckra laugh, den he know he done won. Dis wey we goin’
spen’ we libe. You watch.”


§

The change in Porgy, which Peter had been the first to notice, was now
apparent to all who knew him. The defensive barrier of reserve that he
had built about his life was down. The long hours when he used to sit
fixed and tense, with the look of introspection upon his face, were
gone. Even the most skeptical of the women were beginning to admit that
Bess was making him a good mate. Not that they mingled freely with the
other residents of the court. On the contrary, they seemed strangely
sufficient unto themselves in the midst of the intensely gregarious life
that was going on about them. Porgy’s earnings were adequate to their
modest needs, and Bess was always up and out with the first of the
women, and among them all there was none who could bargain more shrewdly
with the fishermen and hucksters who sold their wares on the wharf.

Like Porgy, Bess had undergone a subtle change that became more evident
from day to day. Her gaunt figure had rounded out, bringing back a look
of youthful comeliness, and her face was losing its hunted expression.
The air of pride that had always shown in her bearing, which had
amounted almost to disdain, that had so infuriated the virtuous during
her evil days, was heightened, and, in her bettered condition forced a
resentful respect from her feminine traducers.

One morning while she was doing her marketing on the wharf, one of the
river men who had known her in the past, hailed her too familiarly. He
was at that moment stepping from the top round of a ladder on to the
wharf.

“How ’bout ternight?” he asked with a leer.

She was holding a string of whiting in her left hand, and was hanging
upon the final penny of a bargain with the fishman. She half turned, and
delivered a resounding slap with her right hand. The man staggered
backward, hung for a moment, then vanished. There was a tremendous
splash from the shallow water.

“Twenty cent fuh dis string, an’ not one cent mo’,” Bess continued
coolly to the fishman.

He accepted the price. Bess gave him eighteen cents, and a hard look. He
counted the money, glanced at the hand that now hung innocently against
her apron, then laughed.

“Just as yuh say, Sister. I ain’t quarrelin’ none wid _yuh dis_
mornin’.”

Bess gave him one of the faint, cryptic smiles that always made men
friends and women enemies for her, and departed for Catfish Row, as if
nothing had happened to break the dull routine of the morning’s chores.


§

Saturday night, and the court had flung off its workaday clothes and
mood. In the corner by Serena’s washbench a small intimate circle had
gathered about a smoking kerosene lamp. Several women sat on the bench
with drowsy little negroes in their laps. A man near the light leaned
over a guitar, with a vague wistfulness in his face, and plucked
successive chords with a swift, running vibrance of sound. Then a deep
baritone hummed for a second and raised an air:

    “Ain’t it hahd tuh be a nigger;
     Ain’t it hahd tuh be a nigger;
     Ain’t it hahd tuh be a nigger;
     ’Cause yuh can’t git yo’ rights w’en yuh do.

    “I was sleepin’ on a pile ob lumber,
     Jus’ as happy as uh man kin be,
     W’en a w’ite man come wake me from my slumber,
     An’ he say, ‘Yuh gots tuh work now, ’cause yuh free!’”

       Then they were all in on the chorus:

         “Ain’t it hahd tuh be a nigger,”

and the gloom hummed with the low, close harmonies.

In another corner the crap circle had gathered. Porgy’s delight in the
game had not waned with his increasing interests, and he sat fondling
the small white cubes, and whispering to them in his old confidential
manner.

“Little w’ite babies,” he crooned, “come sing fuh dis nigger.”

He cast--and won.

Gathering the little heap of pennies and nickels, he passed them behind
him to Bess, who squatted in the shadows. She took the money in silence,
counted it, dropped it into her apron pocket, and continued to watch the
game intently, smiling her cryptic smile when Porgy won, but saying
scarcely anything at all.

The negro known as Sportin’ Life had come in just as the game was
commencing, and had sat in. That he was not altogether above suspicion
was evidenced by the fact that the little circle of men refused to allow
him to use his own dice, and told him so frankly. He scowled at them,
dropped the dice back into his pocket, and started to leave. Then he
seemed to think better of it, and joined the circle.

As the game proceeded it became evident that Porgy’s luck was with him;
he was the most consistent winner, and Sportin’ Life was bearing most of
the burden. But the mulatto was too good a gambler to evince any
discomfiture. He talked steadily, laughed much, and missed no
opportunity to drop a sly word of suspicion when Porgy drew in a pot.
There was nothing that could be taken up and resented, but Porgy was
mystified, and Bess’ face was dark with anger more than once. He had a
way of leaning over just as Porgy cast, and placing his face almost on
the flags so that he could see under the dice when they struck. Then he
would look up, laugh meaningly into Porgy’s face, and sometimes clap his
hands as though the cripple had managed something very cleverly.

When the game finally broke up it was clear that he had poisoned the
minds of the company, and the good nights lacked their usual warmth.

Bess reached into her apron pocket, and drew out the evening’s winnings.
The coins made quite a little weight in her hand. A late fragment of
moon swung over the wall and poured its diminished light into her open
palm. She commenced to count the money, Porgy left her, and drew himself
into his room. She proceeded to count, absorbed in her task.


§

“Porgy lucky,” said a low voice beside her. “Mus’ be yer gots two dollar
dere fer um.” Sportin’ Life lifted his elegant trousers, so that the
knees would not bag, and squatted on the flags at her side. He removed
his stiff straw hat, with its bright band, and spun it between his
hands. The moonlight was full upon his face, with its sinister, sensuous
smile.

She looked at him squarely a moment, then said in a cold, level voice:

“I can’t ’member ebber meetin’ a nigger dat I like less dan I does you.”

“Thank yer kindly,” he replied, not in the least degree daunted. “But
jus’ de same, I wants ter be frien’ wid yer. Me and you ain’t usen ter
dese small-town slow ways. We ain’t been above seein’ night-life what is
night-life, an’ I jus’ wants ter talk to you now and den; dat’s all.”

“I gots no time fuh talk,” she told him. “An’ wut mo’, I t’rough wid de
kin’ ob nights you is t’inking ’bout.”

“No mo’ red-eye; none ’tall?” he queried. “Nebber gits t’irsty, eh?”

“Yes, Gawd knows, I does git t’irsty now and den,” she said impulsively;
then added sharply, “But I done t’rough now, I tells yer; I done
t’rough.”

She arose to go. “Yo’ kin’ mek me sick,” she told him; “an’ I ain’t
wants tuh hab no mo’ talk wid yuh.”

He got spryly to his feet, and stood beside her. “Oh, come on, le’s let
bygone be bygone, an’ be frien’.” Then his voice became low and
ingratiating: “Come; gimme yer han’, Sister,” he said.

Acquiescent, but mystified, she held out her open palm.

He poured a little pile of white powder into it. There it lay in the
moonlight, very clean and white on her dark skin. “Happy dus’!” she
said, and her voice was like a gasp. “Take dat t’ing away, nigger. I
t’rough wid um, I tells yuh.” But she did not turn her hand over and let
it fall upon the ground.

“Jus’ a little touch fer ole time sake,” he whispered. “’Tain’t ’nough
ter hurt er fly. An’ it ain’t goin’ ter cos’ yer one cent.”

She stood a moment longer, and her hand trembled, spilling a few grains
between her fingers. Then suddenly she clapped her palm over her mouth.
When she took it away it was quite empty.

Sportin’ Life heaved a sigh of relief, turned and leant against the
wall--and waited.

In the corner by Serena’s bench the party was breaking up. Only a few
women were left, and instead of the blur of general talk, remarks leapt
clear. They were discussing the crap game that had just closed.

“Dey is somet’ing berry queer ’bout de way de money always go tuh de
same place,” a voice was saying.

The moonlight ebbed from the corner where Bess and Sportin’ Life stood.
Five minutes had passed since she had made her sudden decisive gesture.
She stood oddly rigid, with her hands clenched at her sides.

Abruptly she spun around. “Yuh gots mo’ ob dat?” Her voice was low and
taut.

“Sho’ I has!” came the answer, with a confident laugh. “But it don’t
come cheap. Gimme dat money yer got dere.”

Silently she held out her hand, and poured the coins into his palm.

He gave her a small folded paper.

“I got more ob dat when yer needs it,” he said, as he turned away.

But she did not hear him. She snatched the paper, opened it, and threw
the contents into her mouth.

The court was sinking to sleep. One by one the lighted windows went
blank. The women at the washbench got to their feet. One yawned noisily,
and another knocked her clay pipe out on the flags in a shower of
sparks. Then a voice came clearly--the one that had complained before
about the crap game.

“I ain’t sayin’ ef it conjer, er jus’ plain loaded dice. All I gots tuh
say is dat dam nigger, Porgy, steal my Sam’ wages off him now t’ree
week runnin’.”

Out of the shadows and across the moonlit square a figure flashed,
gesturing wildly.

The women leapt back. The one who had done the talking screamed once,
the shrill note echoing around the walls. The advancing figure closed
convulsive hands upon her shoulders and snatched her body forward. Wide,
red-lit eyes glared into her face. A voice half sobbed, half screamed,
“Yuh say dat ’bout Porgy? Yuh say Porgy is t’ief?”

The victim was young and strong. She tore the hands from her shoulders
and raised her arms before her face. One of the other women reached out
to seize the intruder, but was met with a glare so insanely malignant
that she retreated screaming.

Above them windows were leaping to light. Dark bodies strained from
sills. Feet sounded, running down clapping dilapidated stairways. A
shrill, long, terrifying shriek cut across the growing noise, and the
women clinched and fell. Bystanders rushed to intervene, and became
involved. Always in the centre of the storm a maddened woman whirled
like a dervish and called horribly upon her God, striking and clawing
wildly.

The babel became terrific. The entire population of the court
contributed to the general confusion. In the rooms above, children
wailed out a nameless terror.

Suddenly over the tumult sounded the gong of the patrol wagon, and
through the gateway half-a-dozen policemen advanced with pistols out,
and clubs ready.

The uproar stopped suddenly at its peak. Shadows dropped back and were
gulped by deeper shadow. Feet made no sound in retreating. Solid bodies
became fluid, sliding. Yawning doorways drew them in. Miraculously the
court was converted into a vacant, walled square, in which stood six
erect figures, looking a little theatrical and foolish with their
revolvers and clubs, and a woman who shook menacing hands at nothing at
all and swore huskily at phantoms.

“No trouble finding the cause of the disturbance,” said an authoritative
voice. “Get her, men. Better use bracelets. Can’t tell about dope
cases.”

The squad closed quickly. For a moment a grotesque shadow tumbled and
shifted in the centre of the court; then a voice said, “Steady now.” The
mass broke into individual figures, and, under the ebbing moonlight,
moved toward the entrance with a manacled woman in their midst.

Porgy had opened his door at the first outcry and sat on the sill trying
to get the import of the disturbance. Now, as the group passed close to
him, he looked up. The woman had ceased her outcry, and was looking
about with vague, unseeing eyes. As they walked past his doorway, so
close that he could have touched the nearest officer with his hand, she
looked down, and her gaze focussed upon the sitting figure. Her body
stiffened, and her head lifted with the old, incongruous gesture of
disdain.

“Bess!” called Porgy once very loudly; and again, in a voice that
sagged, “Bess!”

One of the policemen paused and looked down upon the speaker. But the
woman turned deliberately away, and he hastened to rejoin the party.
Then the wagon clanged down the darkened street.


§

Under the gas light that supplemented a far, dusty window in the
Recorder’s Court, stood Bess. She swayed, and her face twitched
occasionally; but her glance was level, and her head erect.

Behind a high desk sat a man well past middle age. His florid complexion
caused his long grey mustache to appear very white. His eyes were far
apart and suggested a kindness that was born of indolence, rather than
of wide compassion. His hands were slender and beautifully made, and he
sat with elbows on desk, and finger-tips touching. When he spoke it was
in a drawl that suggested weariness.

“What is the charge, Officer?” he asked.

“Bein’ under the influence of dope, an’ creatin’ a disturbance in
Catfish Row, yer Honor,” replied the policeman who stood by the
prisoner.

“Anybody hurt?”

“Not as we was able to see, yer Honor.”

The judge turned to the prisoner.

“Have you ever been here before?”

“No, suh,” came the reply in a low, clear tone.

“The officer of the day thinks she has, yer Honor,” put in the
policeman, “but he can’t swear to it. She looks like a hundred others,
he says, scar and all; an’ they change names so fast you get nothing
from the records.”

The judge regarded the prisoner with amiability. The thermometer on the
wall beside him registered ninety. It was asking too much of good-nature
to require it to subvert itself in such heat.

“I suppose we will have to give you the benefit of the doubt,” he said.
Then he turned to the officer.

“After all, it’s the man who sold her the poison we want. I was kept
here three hours yesterday by dope cases. I want it put a stop to.”

He contracted his brows in a weak attempt at sternness, and directed a
steady gaze at Bess.

“Who sold you that dope?”

She met his eyes squarely.

“I don’t t’ink I know um again,” she said in a low, even tone. “I buy
from um in de dark, las’ night, an’ he gone off right away.”

“It’s no use, Your Honor,” put in the policeman. “They won’t give each
other away.”

The judge fixed the culprit with a long scrutiny. Then he asked:

“Have you any money to pay a fine?”

“No, suh. Yuh’ll jus’ hab tuh gib’ me my time.”

A man entered the room.

“I beg your pardon, Your Honor,” he said, “but there is a cripple
outside in a goat-cart who says he is prepared to pay the woman’s fine.”

“Eh; what’s that?” exclaimed the judge. “Is it that black scoundrel,
Porgy, the beggar?”

“That’s him, Yer Honor,” replied the man, with a grin.

“Why, the highwayman takes a dime from me every time I venture on King
Charles Street. And here he has the audacity to come and offer to pay a
fine.”

“Don’t tek he money, Boss.”

The prisoner said the words steadily, then caught her lower lip with her
strong, white teeth.

“Address the Court as ‘Your Honor,’ not ‘Boss,’” ordered the judge.

“Yo’ Honuh,” amended the culprit.

For a long moment the Recorder sat, his brow contracted. Then he drew a
large, cool, linen handkerchief from his pocket and mopped his face.

“Go out and take ten dollars from the beggar,” he told the policeman.
“It’s a small fine for the offence.” Then turning to the woman, he said:

“I am going to lock you up for ten days; but any time you give the name
of that dope peddler to the jailor you can leave. Do you understand?”

Bess had nothing to say in reply, and after a moment the policeman took
her by the arm.

“This way to the wagon,” he directed, and led her from the court room.

The street was a blaze of early morning sun, and the woman covered her
eyes with her hand. The wagon stood, step to curb, and the officer
hurried her across the narrow pavement and into the conveyance.

The bell clanged, and the heavy horse flung its weight against the
collar.

Something impelled Bess to remove her hand and to look down.

Below the high side of the patrol, looking rather like a harbor tug
beside an ocean liner, stood the goat-cart. For a moment she looked into
Porgy’s face. It told her nothing, except that he seemed suddenly to
have grown older, and that the real Porgy, who had looked out at her
from the eyes for a little while, had gone back into his secret places
and closed the door.

The wagon lunged forward.

Then Porgy spoke.

“How long?” he called.

The incessant clamor of the gong commenced, and the hoofs beat their
noisy tattoo upon the stones.

Bess raised both hands with fingers extended.

The wagon rounded a corner and disappeared.


§

The jail in which Bess was incarcerated was no better, and no worse,
than many others of its period, and the score of negro women with whom
she found herself could not be said to suffer acutely under their
imprisonment. When life reaches a certain level of misery, it envelops
itself in a protective anesthesia which deadens the senses to extremes;
and having no tasks to perform, the prisoners awaited the expiration of
their brief sentences with sodden patience, or hastened the passage of
time with song.

By day they were at liberty to exercise in the jail yard, a square of
about half an acre surrounded by a high brick wall, containing not so
much as a single blade of grass. Like a great basin, the yard caught and
held the heat which poured from the August sun until it seemed to
overflow the rim, and quiver, as though the immense vessel had been
jarred from without. But the soaring walls gave always a narrow strip of
shade to which the prisoners clung, moving around the sides as the day
advanced, with the accuracy of the hand of a sundial.

Before nightfall the prisoners were herded into the steaming interior of
the building, and Bess and the other women were locked in a steel cage,
which resembled a large dog-pound and stood in the centre of a high,
square room, with a passageway around it. A peculiarly offensive
moisture clung to the ceiling, and streamed in little rivulets down the
walls. An almost unbreatheable stench clogged the atmosphere.

The jailers were not vindictive. They were not even unkind. Some of them
evidenced a mild affection for their charges, and would pause to
exchange greetings with them on their rounds. But it would have meant
effort to better the living conditions, and effort on the part of a
white warden in August was not to be considered. They locked them up,
gave them a sufficiency of hominy and white pork to sustain life,
allowed them to see their visitors, talk, and sing to their heart’s
content. If they were suffering from tuberculosis, or one of a hundred
nameless and communicable diseases, when they entered, it was none of
the County’s affair. And if they left showing that ash-pallor so
unmistakable in a negro, it was as lamentable as it was unavoidable. But
when all was said and done, what must one expect if one added to the
handicap of a dark skin the indiscretion of swallowing cocaine and
indulging in a crap game?

Bess received but one visitor during her imprisonment. When the callers
were admitted, on the day following her arrival, Maria loomed in the
centre of the small, timid group. She went directly to Bess where she
sat by the wall, with her eyes closed against the glare. The big negress
wore an expression of solicitude, and her voice was low and surprisingly
gentle as she said:

“Porgy ask me tuh bring yer dis blanket fuh lie on, an’ dese fish an’
bread. How yuh is feelin’ now?” Then she bent over and placed a bundle
in the prisoner’s lap.

Bess opened her eyes in surprise.

“I ain’t been expectin’ no fabors off none ob you folks,” she replied.
“How come yuh tuh care ef I lib er die, attuh dat row I mek?”

Maria lowered herself to a seat beside her.

“I lubs dat nigger, Porgy, lak he been my chile,” she told her. “An’ wut
mo’, I t’ink I know what done happen tuh yuh.”

“Wut yuh know?”

“I been in my do’ dat night; an’ I seen dat skunk, Sportin’ Life, sell
yuh dat stuff. Ef I had er known den wut it wuz, I’d a been hyuh long
side ob yuh now fuh murder.”

After a moment, she asked: “Wut mek yuh don’t tell de jailluh who done
um, an’ come on home?”

Bess remained silent for a moment; then she raised her head and looked
into the eyes of the older woman.

“I’s a ’oman grown. Ef I tek dope, dat muh own business. Ef I ebber gits
muh han’ on dat nigger, I goin’ fix um so he own mammy ain’t know um!
But I ain’t goin’ gib um ’way tuh de w’ite folks.”

The hard lines about her mouth softened, and, in scarcely more than a
whisper, she added:

“I gots tuh be decent ’bout somet’ing, ’less I couldn’t go back an’ look
in Porgy face.”

Maria got heavily to her feet. The other visitors were leaving, and she
longed to be free of the high, brick walls. She dropped a hand on Bess’s
shoulder.

“Yuh do right, Sister. But ef dat yalluh nigger come tuh Catfish Row
agin--leabe him fuh me--dat’s all!” Then the big negress joined the
departing group, and passed out through the small steel doorway that
pierced the massive gate.

Bess sat for a long while without moving. The sun lifted over the high
wall, and drove its white-hot tide into her lap, and upon her folded
hands.

“Wut mek yuh ain’t mobe intuh de shade?” a neighbor asked curiously.

Bess looked up and smiled.

“I jes’ settin’ hyuh t’inkin’ ’bout muh frien’,” she said. “Yuh done
hear um call me ‘Sister,’ ain’t yuh? Berry well den. Dat mean me and she
is frien’.”


§

Bess lay upon the bed in Porgy’s room and stared at the ceiling with
hard, bright eyes. From time to time she would pluck at the sheet that
covered her and utter hurried, indistinct sentences that bore not the
slightest relation to existing circumstances. A week had passed since
her release, and its seven interminable days had been spent in this
fashion.

Porgy was out upon the day’s rounds. Occasionally the door to the
sick-room would open, and an awed, black face peer in. The mystery of
delirium frightened and perplexed the negroes, and limited the
manifestations of kindness and sympathy that they usually bestowed upon
unfortunate friends. Even Maria was not proof against this dread, and
the irrelevant observations that greeted her when she went in with the
daily lunch sent her hurrying wide-eyed from the room.

Porgy returned early in the evening. His face was deeply marked, but the
lines were those of anxiety, and his characteristic firmness of mouth
and jaw was gone. He closed the door on the curious glances of his
neighbors, and lifted himself to a seat upon the bed.

“How Bess now?” he asked softly.

She shifted her gaze from the ceiling to his face.

“Eighteen miles tuh Kittiwar!” she muttered. “Rattlesnake’, palmettuh
bush, an’ such.”

Her eyes were suddenly fearful, and she closed her hand tightly upon
his.

Porgy cast a hurried glance over his shoulder. Then, reassured, stroked
her brow, and comforted her in his deep, gentle voice.

“Yuh hyuh wid Porgy now; an’ nuttin’ can’t hurt yuh. Soon de cool wedder
comin’ an’ chill off dese febers. Ain’t yuh ’member how dat cool win’
come tuh town wid de smell ob pine tree: an’ how de star is all polish
up lak w’ite folks’ silber? Den ebbery body git well. Ain’t yuh know?
Yuh jus’ keep still, an’ watch wut Porgy say.”

She was silent after that, and closed her eyes. Presently, to his
relief, he saw that she was sleeping. This was the moment for which he
had been waiting. He went out, closing the door very gently, and joined
a group of sympathisers in the court.

“Wut we goin’ do now?” he asked. “A week gone, an’ she ain’t none
better.”

Peter knocked out his clay pipe on a flagstone, with three staccato
little raps, thus gaining the attention of the circle.

“Ef yuh wants tuh listen tuh me,” he remarked weightily, “I adwise yer
tuh sen’ she tuh de w’ite folk’ hospital.”

His words were received with a surprise amounting to incredulity.

“Fuh Gawd sake, Daddy Peter!” an awed voice said at last. “Ain’t yuh
knows dey lets nigger die dey, so dey kin gib um tuh de student?”

But the old negro stood his ground.

“De student ain’t gits um ’til he done dead. Ain’t dat so? Den he can’t
hurt um none. Ain’t dat so, too? An’ I gots dis tuh say. One ob my w’ite
folks is er nuss tuh de hospital; and dat lady is er pure angel wid de
sick nigger. Ef I sick tuhmorruh I goin’ tuh she; an’ wut she say is
good wid me. I wants dis carcase tek care ob w’ile he is alibe. W’en he
done dead, I ain’t keer.”

“Yuh ain’t keer whedder yuh is cut up an’ scatter, ’stead of bein’ bury
in Gawd own grabe-yahd?” someone asked the iconoclast.

Under this direct attack, the old man weakened.

“Well, mebbe I ain’t sayin’ I jus’ as lief,” he compromised. “But I
t’ink Gawd onduhstan’ de succumstance, an’ mek allowance.”

Serena Robbins broke the silence which followed.

“How come yuh ain’t ax me fuh pray ober um?” she enquired in a slightly
offended voice. “Mus’ be yuh is done fergit how Gawd done answer we las’
prayeh, and sen’ dat goat tuh sabe yu’ life, when starbation done stan’
dey an’ look yuh in de eye.”

Porgy brightened at that, and turned eagerly from the dark horror of
Peter’s suggestion.

“Dat so, my Sister,” he commenced; but her eyes were already closed, and
her body was swaying from side to side, as she sat cross-legged on the
flags. Presently she began to intone:

“Oh, Jedus, who done trouble de wateh in de sea ob Gallerie--”

“Amen!” came the chorus, led by Porgy.

“An’ likewise who done cas’ de Debbil out ob de afflicted, time an’ time
agin--”

“Oh, Jedus!”

“Wut mek yuh ain’t lay yo’ han’ on dis sister’ head?”

“Oh, my fadder!”

“An’ sen’ de Debbil out ob she, down er steep place intuh de sea, lak
yuh use’ tuh do, time an’ time agin?’

“Time an’ time agin!”

“Ain’t dis po’ cripple done lif’ up out de dus’ by we prayeh?”

“Da’s de trut’, Jedus.”

“Eben so, lif’ up he woman, an’ mek she well, time an’ time agin!”

“Time an’ time ag’in! Allelujah!”

After the prayer the group scattered, each going silently away in the
late dusk, until there remained only Porgy, who sat with bowed head, and
Maria, massive and inscrutable, beside him.

When the last retreating footstep died away, the great negress bent her
turbaned head over until it almost touched Porgy’s face.

“Listen tuh me,” she whispered. “Yuh wants dat ’oman cure up; ain’t
yuh?”

“Yuh knows I does.” And, already suffering from the reaction from
religious enthusiasm, his voice was flat and hopeless.

“Berry well den. De ribber boat leabe fum de wharf at sebben o’clock,
tuhmorruh mo’nin’. Yuh knows dat deck-han’ by de name Mingo?”

Porgy nodded assent, his eyes intent upon her face.

“Well; git on de wharf early, an’ gib um two dollar. Tell um w’en de
boat done git tuh Ediwander Islan’ at eight tuhmorruh night, tuh go
right tuh Lody cabin, an’ tell she tuh mek a conjer tuh cas’ de debbil
out Bess.”

“Yuh tink dat cure she?” asked Porgy, with a glimmer of new hope in his
eyes.

“I ain’t tink. I knows,” came in tones of absolute conviction. “Now,
min’; an’ do wut I say.”

The big negress shuffled away to her room, leaving Porgy alone in the
gloom.

The bent, solitary figure raised its eyes to the square of sky, with its
bewildering profusion of stars, that fitted like a lid over the high rim
of the court. There were no sounds except a weary land breeze that
fingered the lichens on the south wall, and a whisper from the bay, as
the tide lifted its row of shells and pebbles a notch further up the
littered beach.

Now that all human companionship had been withdrawn, the watcher felt
strangely alone, and smaller than the farthest star or most diminutive
shell. Like a caged squirrel, his tired mind spun the rounds of his
three alternatives: First, the white man’s science, gaunt, clean, and
mysterious, with the complete and awful magistracy which it assumed over
the luckless bodies that fell into its possession. He knew that it
returned some healed in body. He knew that others had passed into its
portals, and had been obliterated utterly. Then his second alternative:
the white man’s God, vague and abstract as the wind that moved among the
lichens, with his Jesus, who could stir him suddenly to his most
beautiful songs and make his heart expand until, for a moment, it
embraced all mankind with compassionate love, but who passed, as the
wind passes, leaving him cold and disillusioned. One of these he must
choose, or else turn his face back to the old blurred trail that
receded, down, down, down to the beginning of things: to the symbols one
might hold, tangible and terrifying; to the presciences that shuddered
like dawn at the back of the brain and told one what to do without the
process of thought.

As though bent beneath a great physical weight, Porgy sat without
moving, until the pattern on his glittering ceiling had changed and
shifted. Then he lifted his face slowly, drew his sleeve across his
moist forehead, and entered his room.


§

Just before sunrise Porgy left his room and hitched up his goat. In the
upper air over Catfish Row a single buzzard hung poised. Slowly it
careened to a current of air, and its belly and under-wings lit to a
ruddy glory from the sun, which was still below the horizon. Porgy saw
it and winced. But as he went about his task there was no indecision in
his face. He harnessed the goat with steady hands, drove out of the
court and to the pier-head.

He experienced no difficulty in finding his man. Mingo accepted the
mission and the handful of pennies and nickels; and Porgy, having closed
the bargain, returned at once to the court.

Maria was opening her shop as he entered, and paused with a shutter in
her hands. She could scarcely believe her eyes. The beggar’s face was
bright, and he was humming a tune.

“Wut de news?” she asked. “Bess done git well?”

“Not jus’ yit,” he replied. “But I done had me a dream las’ night; an’
de dream say tuh sen’ tuh de conjer ’oman; an’ Bess goin’ break she
feber tuhnight.”

“Da’s right, my Brudder,” Maria responded heartily. “Dat ’oman good as
well now. You watch!”

All day, sitting by Archdale’s office, Porgy hummed his tune, and
counted off the hours of the steamboat’s voyage. Now she would be
passing Kittiwar, and, in only a few hours more, she would be coming to
rest for the night at Ediwander.

The counting off continued after he went to bed, and he was strangely
undisturbed by Bess’s mutterings. Now the boat had arrived, he finally
told himself. Maria had said that the cabin was near the landing. Surely
it would not take the woman long to brew the spell. His excitement
increased to a mood of exaltation. He lay with his hand upon Bess’s
forehead, waiting.

Far away St. Christopher struck the hour. The mellow bells threw the
quarter hours out like a handful of small gold coins to ring down upon
the drowsy streets. Then, very deliberately, they dropped ten round,
heavy notes into the silence.

This should be the moment. Porgy pressed his hand harder, and sweat
broke out upon his brow. For a moment it seemed to him that life hung
suspended.

“Porgy,” said a weak, flat voice beside him. “Porgy, dat you dey, ain’t
it? Why you ain’t talk tuh me?”

The cripple’s answer was a sudden high laugh that broke to a sob.

“T’ank Gawd!” he said; and again, “T’ank Gawd!”


§

On the evening following the day upon which Bess had taken her turn for
the better, Maria was alone in her shop. The supper hour was over, and
her patrons had departed. She was busy at her stove, and did not turn
immediately when someone entered. When she finally looked over her
shoulder, her customer had buried his face in his hands, and she failed
to recognize him. Of one fact there could be little doubt: the man was
drunk, for the close, little room was already heavy with the exhalations
of vile corn whiskey.

She crossed the room, and touched the man on the shoulder. He lowered
his hands and attempted to focus his eyes on her face.

“Oh, it’s you, Mingo?” she said, and even then she did not grasp the
significance of his presence in the city at that time.

“Gimme some supper,” he growled; and, with an uncertain movement, drew
some change from his pocket and spilled it in a small pile on the table.

Maria looked at the money. There was about half a dollar in all, but
there were only two nickels, and the remainder was in pennies. It looked
suspiciously like the currency in which Porgy paid his debts. Then, as
she stood looking down at the little heap of copper, the full import of
the man’s presence dawned upon her.

“Wut yuh doin’ here now?” she demanded of him in a tense whisper; “when
de ribber boat ain’t due back fuh annoder day?”

The question stirred her customer’s consciousness to a faint gleam of
life; but it did not vitalize it sufficiently for adroit prevarication.

“I miss de boat dis trip,” he managed to articulate. “I take er drink
wid er frien’, and when I git tuh de wharf, de boat done gone.”

Two powerful hands gripped his shoulders and flung him back against the
wall. He opened his eyes wide and looked into a face of such cold
ferocity that his loose lips emitted a sudden “Oh, Jedus!” and he became
immediately sober, and very much afraid.

Then Maria poured into his ears words that had the heat and dead weight
of molten lead.

“Now I goin’ lock yuh up in dat closet till de ribber boat is back at de
wharf,” she concluded. “Den I goin’ let yuh loose. But I all de time
goin’ be where I kin git my hand on yuh again. Ef yuh ebber tells Porgy,
or any libbin’ soul, dat yuh ain’t deliber dat message tuh Lody, I
goin’ tuh hab nigger blood on my soul w’en I stan’ at de jedgement. Now
yuh gots dat straight in yuh head?”

Mingo nodded assent. He was beyond the power to speak.

The big negress jerked him suddenly to his feet, propelled him across
the room and into the stygian recesses of the closet. Then she slammed
the door, turned the immense iron key in the lock, and dropped it in her
pocket.

“Well, dat’s dat!” she remarked, as she wiped a moist, mystified face
upon a corner of her apron. “Mus’ hab been Jedus done um atter all.”
Then, as though to dismiss the matter, she added: “No, I be damn ef he
did. He ain’t gots it in um.”




IV

[Illustration]




PART IV


It was the day set for the grand parade and picnic of “The Sons and
Daughters of Repent Ye Saith the Lord,” and, with the first light of
morning, Catfish Row had burst into a fever of preparation. Across the
narrow street, the wharf, from which the party was to leave, bustled and
seethed with life. A wagon rattled out to the pier-head and discharged
an entire load of watermelons. Under the vigilant eyes of a committee a
dozen volunteers lifted the precious freight from the vehicle, and piled
it ready for the steamer.

From behind the next pier, with a frenzied threshing of its immense
stern paddle, came the excursion boat. Tall open exhaust funnels flanked
the walking-beam, and coughed great salmon-colored plumes of steam into
the faint young sunlight. A fierce torrent of wood-smoke gushed from the
funnel and went tumbling away across the harbor. Painters were hurled,
missed, coiled, and hurled again. Then, amid a babblement of advice and
encouragement, the craft was finally moored in readiness for the Lodge.

The first horizontal rays of the sun were painting the wall a warm
claret, when Porgy opened his door, to find Peter already dressed for
the parade, and perched upon the back of his gaily blanketed horse. He
wore a sky-blue coat, white pants which were thrust into high black
leggings, and a visored cap, from beneath which he scowled fiercely down
upon the turmoil around the feet of his mount. Across his breast, from
right shoulder to left hip, was a broad scarlet sash, upon which was
emblazoned, “Repent Ye Saith the Lord!” and from his left breast
fluttered a white ribbon bearing the word “MARSHAL.” From time to time,
he would issue orders in hoarse, menacing gutturals, which no one
heeded; and twice, in the space of half an hour, he rode out to the
pier-head, counted the watermelons, and returned to report the number to
an important official who had arrived in a carriage to supervise the
arrangements.

Momently the confusion increased, until at eight o’clock it culminated
in a general exodus toward the rendezvous for the parade.

The drowsy old city had scarcely commenced its day when, down through
King Charles Street, the procession took its way. Superbly
unselfconscious of the effect that it produced, it crashed through the
slow, restrained rhythm of the city’s life like a wild, barbaric chord.
All of the stately mansions along the way were servantless that day, and
the aristocratic matrons broke the ultimate canon of the social code and
peered through front windows at the procession as it swept flamboyantly
across the town.

First came an infinitesimal negro boy, scarlet-coated, and aglitter with
brass buttons. Upon his head was balanced an enormous shako; and while
he marched with left hand on hip and shoulders back, his right hand
twirled a heavy gold-headed baton. Then the band, two score boys attired
in several variations of the band master’s costume, strode by. Bare,
splay feet padded upon the cobbles; heads were thrown back, with lips to
instruments that glittered in the sunshine, launching daring and
independent excursions into the realm of sound. Yet these improvisations
returned always to the eternal boom, boom, boom of an underlying rhythm,
and met with others in the sudden weaving and ravelling of amazing
chords. An ecstasy of wild young bodies beat living into the blasts that
shook the windows of the solemn houses. Broad, dusty, blue-black feet
shuffled and danced on the many-colored cobbles and the grass between
them. The sun lifted suddenly over the housetops and flashed like a
torrent of warm, white wine between the staid buildings, to break on
flashing teeth and laughing eyes.

After the band came the men members of the lodge, stepping it out to the
urge of the marshals who rode beside them, reinforcing the marching
rhythm with a series of staccato grunts, shot with crisp, military
precision from under their visored caps. Breast cross-slashed with the
emblems of their lodge, they passed.

Then came the carriages, and suddenly the narrow street hummed and
bloomed like a tropic garden. Six to a carriage sat the sisters. The
effect produced by the colors was strangely like that wrought in the
music; scarlet, purple, orange, flamingo, emerald; wild, clashing,
unbelievable discords; yet, in their steady flow before the eye,
possessing a strange, dominant rhythm that reconciled them to each other
and made them unalterably right. The senses reached blindly out for a
reason. There was none. They intoxicated, they maddened, and finally
they passed, seeming to pull every ray of color from the dun buildings,
leaving the sunlight sane, flat, dead.

For its one brief moment out of the year the pageant had lasted. Out of
its fetters of civilization this people had risen, suddenly, amazingly.
Exotic as the Congo, and still able to abandon themselves utterly to the
wild joy of fantastic play, they had taken the reticent, old Anglo-Saxon
town and stamped their mood swiftly and indelibly into its heart. Then
they passed, leaving behind them a wistful envy among those who had
watched them go,--those whom the ages had rendered old and wise.


§

When the exodus from the Row was completed, Bess helped Porgy out to the
boat and established him in an angle of the main-deck cabin, where he
could see and enjoy the excursion to the full. Below them on the wharf,
Maria, who had the direction of the refreshment committee in hand, moved
about among the baskets and boxes, looking rather like a water-front
conflagration, in a voluminous costume of scarlet and orange. Bess left
Porgy and descended the ladder.

“I gots a ready hand wid bundle,” she announced diffidently.

The immense negress paused, and looked her up and down.

“Well, well, it looks like yer tryin’ ter be decent,” she commented.

Instantly the woman chilled, “Yuh kin go tuh Hell!” she said
deliberately. “I ain’t axin’ fuh no sermon. I want a job. Does yuh want
a han’ wid dem package, or not?”

For a moment their eyes met. Then they laughed suddenly, loudly
together, with complete understanding.

“All right, den,” the older woman said. “Ef yuh is dat independent, yuh
kin tek dem basket on board.”

After that they worked together, until the procession arrived, without
the interchange of further remarks.


§

Down the quiet bay, like a great, frenzied beetle, the stern-wheeler
kicked its way. On the main deck the band played without cessation. In a
ring before it, a number of negroes danced, for the most part shuffling
singly. The sun hurled the full power of an August noon upon the
oil-smooth water, and the polished surface cast it upward with added
force under the awnings. The decks sagged with color, and repeated
explosions of laughter rode the heat waves back to the drowsing, lovely
old city long after the boat had turned the first bend in the narrow
river and passed from view on its way to the negro picnic grounds on
Kittiwar Island.

Thrashing its way between far-sweeping marshes and wooded sea islands,
the boat would burst suddenly into lagoon after lagoon, that lay strewn
along the coast, that blazed in the noon like great fire-opals held in
silver mesh.

Finally a shout went up. Kittiwar lay before them, thrusting a slender
wharf from its thickly wooded extremity into the slack tide.

The debarkation over, Maria took possession of a clearing that stood in
a dense forest of palmettoes and fronted on the beach, and marshalled
her committee to prepare the lunch. From the adjacent beach came the
steady, cool thunder of the sea and the unremitting hum of sand, as
tireless winds scooped it from the dunes and sent it in low, flat-blown
layers across the hard floor of the beach.

The picnickers heard it, and answered with a shout. Soon the streaming
whiteness of the inner surf was dotted with small, glistening black
bodies; the larger figures, with skirts hoisted high, were wading in the
shallows.

Porgy sat with a large myrtle bush in one hand, with which he brushed
flies from several sleeping infants. The sun lay heavy and comforting
upon him. One of the children stirred and whimpered. He hummed a low,
bumbling song to it. There was a new contentment in his face. After a
while he commenced to nod.


§

“I go an’ git some palmettuh leaf fuh tablecloth,” Bess told Maria; and,
without waiting for an answer, she took a knife from a basket, and
entered the dense tangle of palm and vine that walled the clearing.

Almost immediately she was in another world. The sounds behind her
became faint, and died. A rattler moved its thick body sluggishly out of
her way. A flock of wood ibis sprang suddenly up, broke through the
thick roof of palm leaves, and streamed away over the treetops toward
the marsh with their legs at the trail.

She cut a wide fan-shaped leaf from the nearest palmetto. Behind her
some one breathed--a deep interminable breath.

The woman’s body stiffened slowly. Her eyes half closed and were
suddenly dark and knowing. Some deep ebb or flow of blood touched her
face, causing it to darken heavily, leaving the scar livid. Without
turning, she said slowly:

“Crown!”

“Yas, yuh know berry well, dis Crown.”

The deep sound shook her. She turned like one dazed, and looked him up
and down.

His body was naked to the waist, and the blue cotton pants that he had
worn on the night of the killing had frayed away to his knees. He bent
slightly forward. The great muscles of his torso flickered and ran like
the flank of a horse. His small wicked eyes burned, and he moistened his
heavy lips.

Earth had cared for him well. The marshes had provided eggs of wild
fowl, and many young birds. The creek had given him fish, crabs and
oysters in abundance, and the forest had fed him with its many berries,
and succulent palmetto cabbage.

“I seen yuh land,” he said, “an’ I been waitin’ fuh yuh. I mos’ dead ob
lonesome on dis damn island, wid not one Gawd’s person to swap a word
wid. Yuh gots any happy-dus’ wid yuh?”

“No,” she said; then with an effort, “Crown, I gots somethin’ tuh tell
yuh. I done gib up dope; and beside dat, I sort ob change my way.”

His jaw shot forward, and the huge shoulder muscles bulged and set. His
two great hands went around her throat and closed like the slow fusing
of steel on steel. She stopped speaking. He drew her to him until his
face touched hers. Under his hands her arteries pounded, sending fierce
spurts of flame through her limbs, beating redly behind her eyeballs.
His hands slackened. Her face changed, her lips opened, but she said
nothing. Crown broke into low, shaken laughter, and threw her from him.

“Now come wid me,” he ordered.

Into the depths of the jungle they plunged; the woman walking in front
with a trance-like fixity of gaze. They followed one of the narrow
hard-packed trails that had been beaten by the wild hogs and goats that
roamed the island.

On each side of them, the forest stood like a wall, its tough low trees
and thick-bodied palmettoes laced and bound together with wire-strong
vines. Overhead the foliage met, making the trail a tunnel as
inescapable as though it had been built of masonry.

The man walked with a swinging, effortless stride, but his breath
sounded in long, audible inhalations, as though he labored physically.

When they had journeyed for half an hour they crossed a small cypress
swamp. The cypress-knees jutted grotesquely from the yellow water, and
trailing Spanish moss extended drab stalactites that brushed their faces
as they threaded the low, muddy trail.

Finally Bess emerged into a small clearing, in the centre of which stood
a low hut with sides of plaited twigs and roof of palmetto leaves laid
on top of each other in regular rows like shingles.

Crown was close behind her. At the low door of the hut she paused and
turned toward him. He laughed suddenly and hotly at what he saw in her
face.

“I know yuh ain’t change,” he said. “Wid yuh an’ me it always goin’ tuh
be de same. See?”

He snatched her body toward him with such force that her breath was
forced from her in a sharp gasp. Then she inhaled deeply, threw back her
head, and sent a wild laugh out against the walls of the clearing.

Crown swung her about and threw her face forward into the hut.


§

The sun was so low that its level rays shot through the tunnels of the
forest and bronzed its ceiling of woven leaves when Bess returned to
the clearing. She paused for a moment. Behind her, screened by the
underbrush, stood Crown.

“Now ’member wut I tells yuh,” he said. “Yuh kin stay wid de cripple
’til de cotton come. Den I comin’. Davy will hide we on de ribber boat
fur as Sawannah. Den soon de cotton will be comin’ in fas’, an’ libbin
will be easy. Yuh gits dat?”

For a moment she looked into the narrow, menacing eyes, then nodded.

“Go ’long den, an’ tote fair, les yuh wants tuh meet yo’ Gawd.”

She stepped into the open. Already most of the party were on the boat.
She crossed the narrow beach to the wharf.

Maria stood by the gangplank and looked at her with suspicious eyes.
“Wuh yuh been all day?” she demanded.

“I git los’ in de woods, an’ I can’t git my bearin’s ’til sundown. But
dat ain’t nobody’ business ’cep’ me an’ Porgy, ef yuh wants tuh know.”

She found Porgy on the lower deck near the stern, and seated herself by
him in silence. He was looking into the sunset, and gave no evidence of
having noticed her arrival.

Through the illimitable, mysterious night, the steamer took its way.
Presently it swung out of one of the narrow channels and wallowed like
an antediluvian monster into the stillness of a wide lagoon. Out of the
darkness, low, broad waves moved in upon it, trailing stars along their
swarthy backs to shatter into silver dust against the uncouth bows.

To Porgy and Bess, still sitting silent in the stern, came only the
echoes of drowsy conversations, sounds of sleeping, and the rhythmic
splash and drip of the single great wheel behind them. The boat forged
out into the centre of the lagoon, and the shore line melted out behind
it. Where it had shown a moment before, could now be seen only the
steady climb of constellations out of the water’s rim, and the soft,
humid lamps of low, near stars. The night pressed in about the two quiet
figures.

Porgy had said no word since their departure. His body had assumed its
old, tense attitude. His face wore again its listening look. Now, he
said slowly:

“Yuh nebber lie tuh me, Bess.”

“No,” came an even, colorless voice, “I nebber lie tuh yuh. Yuh gots tuh
gib me dat.”

Another interval, then:

“War it Crown?”

A sharp, indrawn breath beside him, and a whisper:

“How yuh know?”

“Gawd gib cripple many t’ings he ain’t gib strong men.” Then again,
patiently, “War it Crown?”

“Yes, it war.”

“Wut he say?”

“He comin’ fuh me when de cotton come tuh town.”

“Yuh goin’?”

“I tell um--yes.”

After a while the woman reached out a hand and closed it lightly about
the man’s arm. Under the sleeve she felt the muscles go rigid. What
power! She tried to circle it with her hand. It was almost as big as
Crown’s. It was strange that she had not noticed that before. She opened
her mouth to speak, but no sound came. Presently she sighed, and
withdrew her hand.

Through the immense emptiness of sea and sky the boat forged slowly
toward the distant city’s lights.


§

“I gots er feelin’ yistuhday,” announced Maria to Serena Robbins, as she
took a batch of wet clothing from the latter’s tub, gave it one twist
with her enormous hands, and set it aside to go upon the line.

“Wut yuh gots er feelin’ ’bout?”

“I gots er feelin’ w’en Porgy ’oman come out de wood on de picnic, she
done been wid Crown.”

At the mention of the murderer’s name Serena stepped back, and her usual
expression of sanctimonious complacency slowly changed. Her lower lip
shot forward, and her face darkened.

“Yuh t’ink dat nigger on Kittiwar?” she asked.

“I allus figgered he bin dey in dem deep palmetters,” Maria replied.
“But w’en I look in Bess’s eye las’ night, I sho ob two ting: one, dat
he is dey, an’ two, dat she been wid um.”

“Yuh b’lieb she still ran wid dat nigger?”

“Dem sort ob mens ain’t need tuh worry ’bout habin’ ’omen,” Maria told
her. “Dey kin lay de lash on um, an’ kick um in de street; den dey kin
whistle w’en dey ready, an’ dere dey is ag’in lickin’ dey han’.”

“She goin’ stay wid Porgy, ef she know wut good fuh she.”

“She know all right, an’ she lub Porgy. But ef dat nigger come attuh
she, dey ain’t goin’ tuh be noboddy roun’ hyuh but Porgy an’ de goat.”

A sudden dark flame blazed in Serena’s face, sweeping the acquired
complacency before it, and changing it utterly. She leant forward, and
spoke heavily:

“Dat nigger bes’ t’ank he Gawd dat I gots My Jedus now fuh hol’ back my
han’!”

“Yuh ain’t means dat yuh is goin’ tuh gib um up tuh de w’ite folks ef he
come back to town, ’stead ob settle wid um yu’self?’ Maria asked
incredulously.

“I ain’t know wut fuh do,” the other replied, the hatred in her face
giving way to a look of perplexity. “Ef dat nigger come tuh town he sho
tuh git kill’ sooner er later. Den de w’ite folks goin’ lock me up. Dey
gots it on de writin’s now dat I been Robbins’ wife; an’ dey goin’
figger I like as not kill um. I knows two people git lock up dat way,
an’ dey ain’t do one Gawd t’ing.”

“Nigger sho’ gots fuh keep he eye open in dis worl’,” the big negress
observed. “But we can’t turn no nigger ober tuh de police.”

A man paused before the entrance of the court, and looked in. To the two
women he was only a silhouette standing under the arch against a
dazzling expanse of bay; but the foppish outlines of the indolent,
slender figure were unmistakable.

A smile of pleased anticipation grew about Maria’s wide mouth. She
dried her hands upon her apron.

“Jus’ like I been tellin’ yuh!” she remarked to Serena. “T’ank Gawd,
Jedus ain’t gots me yit wuh he gots you; an’ I still mens enough tuh
straighten out a crooked nigger. See dat yalluh snake wrigglin’ in de
do’way? He de one wut sell Bess dat happy-dus’.”

Drying her hands and bared forearms with ominous thoroughness, she
crossed to her shop. The room was empty when she entered. She went at
once to the stove which stood in its corner, with its legs set upon four
bricks. She bent forward, placed a shoulder against one of its corners,
gave a heave, and drew out a brick. Then she straightened up, spat first
on one hand, then on the other, and, carrying the brick in her immense
right, lightly, and with a certain awful fondness, stepped out of her
door.

Sportin’ Life was now within the entrance, and presented an unsuspecting
profile to the cook-shop.

With frightful deliberation, Maria swung her long arm back; then, like
the stroke of a rattler, it shot forward. The brick caught the mulatto
full on the side of the head. He crumpled among his gaudy habiliments
like a stricken bird.

After a space of time the victim blinked feebly, then opened his eyes
upon Maria’s face. She was mopping his head with a wet rag, and his
first glance discovered an expression of gentleness on her heavy
features. Reassured, he opened his eyes wide. But the gentleness was
gone. He felt himself gripped by the shoulders, and suddenly snatched
upward to be placed upon unsteady legs. Then he was propelled rapidly
toward the gate.

At the pavement’s edge Maria swung her victim around until his wandering
and reluctant gaze met hers.

“De las’ time yuh wuz aroun’ hyuh, I ain’t hab nuttin’ on yuh but my
eyes. Now I knows yuh--yuh damn, dirty, dope-peddler, wreckin’ de homes
ob dese happy niggers!”

Her arms shot forward and back like locomotive pistons. The man’s head
snapped to an acute angle, and righted itself with difficulty.

“Now, w’en I done flingin’ yuh out dis gate,” she proceeded, “it’s de
las’ time yuh is goin’ tuh leabe it erlibe. Eberybody say I is er berry
t’orough nigger, an’ ef yuh ebber comes roun’ hyuh agin, drunk or sobuh,
I ain’t goin’ to be t’rough wid yuh carcase ontil I t’row yuh bones out
tuh de buzza’d one by one.”

Abruptly she reversed the luckless man and placed a foot in the small of
his back. Then with a heave that seemed to bring into play every muscle
of her huge bulk, she catapulted him once and for all out of Catfish Row
and the lives of its inhabitants.




V

[Illustration]




PART V


“Fish runnin’ well outside de bar, dese days,” remarked Jake one evening
to several of his seagoing companions.

A large, bronze-colored negro paused in his task of rigging a line, and
cast an eye to sea through the driveway.

“An’ we mens bes’ make de mores ob it,” he observed. “Dem Septumbuh
storm due soon, an’ fish ain’t likes eas’ win’ an’ muddy watuh.”

Jake laughed reassuringly.

“Go ’long wid yuh. Ain’t yuh done know we hab one stiff gale las’
summer, an’ he nebber come two yeah han’ runnin’.”

His wife came toward him with a baby in her arms, and, giving him the
child to hold, took up the mess of fish which he was cleaning in a
leisurely fashion.

“Ef yuh ain’t mans enough tuh clean fish no fastuh dan dat, yuh bes’
min’ de baby, an’ gib um tuh a ’oman fuh clean!” she said scornfully, as
she bore away the pan.

The group laughed at that, Jake’s somewhat shamefaced merriment rising
above the others. He rocked the contented little negro in his strong
arms, and followed the retreating figure of the mother with admiring
eyes.

“All right, mens,” he said, returning to the matter in hand. “I’m all
fuh ridin’ luck fer as he will tote me. Turn out at fo’ tuhmorruh
mornin’, and we’ll push de ‘Seagull’ clean tuh de blackfish banks befo’
we wets de anchor. I gots er feelin’ in my bones dat we goin’ be gunnels
undeh wid de pure fish when we comes in tuhmorruh night.”

The news of Jake’s prediction spread through the negro quarter. Other
crews got their boats hastily in commission and were ready to join the
“Mosquito Fleet” when it put to sea.

On the following morning, when the sun rose out of the Atlantic, the
thirty or forty small vessels were mere specks teetering upon the
water’s rim against the red disc that forged swiftly up beyond them.

Afternoon found the wharf crowded with women and children, who laughed
and joked each other as to the respective merits of their men and the
luck of the boats in which they went to sea.

Clara, Jake’s wife, sought the head of the dock long before sundown, and
sat upon the bulkhead with her baby asleep in her lap. Occasionally she
would exchange a greeting with an acquaintance; but for the most part
she gazed toward the harbor mouth and said no word to any one.

“She always like dat,” a neighbor informed a little group. “A conjer
’oman once tell she Jake goin’ git drownded; an’ she ain’t hab no
happiness since, ’cept when he feet is hittin’ de dirt.”

Presently a murmur arose among the watchers. Out at the harbor mouth,
against the thin greenish-blue of the horizon, appeared the “Mosquito
Fleet.” Driven by a steady breeze, the boats swept toward the city with
astonishing rapidity.

Warm sunlight flooded out of the west, touched the old city with
transient glory, then cascaded over the tossing surface of the bay to
paint the taut, cupped sails salmon pink, as the fleet drove forward
directly into the eye of the sun.

Almost before the crowd realized it, the boats were jibing and coming
about at their feet, each jockeying for a favorable berth.

Under the skillful and daring hand of Jake, the “Seagull” took a chance,
missed a stern by a hairbreadth, jibed suddenly with a snap and boom,
and ran in, directly under the old rock steps of the wharf.

A cheer went up from the crowd. Never had there been such a catch. The
boat seemed floored with silver which rose almost to the thwarts,
forcing the crew to sit on gunnels, or aft with the steersman.

Indeed the catch was so heavy that as boat after boat docked, it became
evident that the market was glutted, and the fishermen vied with each
other in giving away their surplus cargo, so that they would not have to
throw it overboard.


§

By the following morning the weather had become unsettled. The wind was
still coming out of the west; but a low, solid wall of cloud had
replaced the promising sunset of the evening before, and from time to
time the wind would wrench off a section of the black mass, and volley
it with great speed across the sky, to accumulate in unstable pyramids
against the sunrise.

But the success of the day before had so fired the enthusiasm of the
fishermen that they were not easily to be deterred from following their
luck, and the first grey premonition of the day found the wharf seething
with preparation.

Clara, with the baby in her arms, accompanied Jake to the pier-head. She
knew the futility of remonstrance; but her eyes were fearful when the
heavy, black clouds swept overhead. Once, when a wave slapped a pile,
and threw a handful of spray in her face, she moaned and looked up at
the big negro by her side. But Jake was full of the business in hand,
and besides, he was growing a little impatient at his wife’s incessant
plea that he sell his share of the “Seagull” and settle on land. Now he
turned from her, and shouted:

“All right, mens!”

He bestowed a short, powerful embrace upon his wife, with his eyes
looking over her shoulder into the Atlantic’s veiled face, turned from
her with a quick, nervous movement, and dropped from the wharf into his
boat.

Standing in the bow, he moistened his finger in his mouth, and held it
up to the wind.

“You mens bes’ git all de fish yuh’ kin tuhday,” he admonished. “Win’ be
in de eas’ by tuhmorruh. It gots dat wet tas’ ter um now.”

One by one the boats shoved off, and lay in the stream while they
adjusted their spritsails and rigged their full jibs abeam, like
spinnakers, for the free run to sea. The vessels were similar in design,
the larger ones attaining a length of thirty-five feet. They were very
narrow, and low in the waist, with high, keen bows, and pointed sterns.
The hulls were round-bottomed, and had beautiful running lines, the
fishermen, who were also the designers and builders, taking great pride
in the speed and style of their respective craft. The boats were all
open from stem to stern and were equipped with thole-pins for rowing, an
expedient to which the men resorted only in dire emergency.

Custom had reduced adventure to commonplace; yet it was inconceivable
that men could put out, in the face of unsettled weather, for a point
beyond sight of land, and exhibit no uneasiness or fear. Yet bursts of
loud, loose laughter, and snatches of song, blew back to the wharf long
after the boats were in mid-stream.

The wind continued to come in sudden flaws, and, once the little craft
had gotten clear of the wharves, the fleet made swift but erratic
progress. There were moments when they would seem to mark time upon the
choppy waters of the bay; then suddenly a flaw would bear down on them,
whipping the water as it came, and, filling the sails, would fairly lift
the slender bows as it drove them forward.

By the time that the leisurely old city was sitting down to its
breakfast, the fleet had disappeared into the horizon, and the sun had
climbed over its obstructions to flood the harbor with reassuring light.

The mercurial spirits of the negroes rose with the genial warmth.
Forebodings were forgotten. Even Clara sang a lighter air as she rocked
the baby upon her lap.

But the sun had just lifted over the eastern wall, and the heat of noon
was beginning to vibrate in the court, when suddenly the air of security
was shattered. From the center of town sounded the deep, ominous clang
of a bell.

At its first stroke life in Catfish Row was paralyzed. Women stopped
their tasks, and, not realizing what they did, clasped each others’
hands tightly, and stood motionless, with strained, listening faces.

Twenty times the great hammer fell, sending the deep, full notes out
across the city that was holding its breath and counting them as they
came.

“Twenty!” said Clara, when it had ceased to shake the air.

She ran to the entrance and looked to the north. Almost at the end of
vision, between two buildings, could be seen the flagstaff that
surmounted the custom-house. It was bare when she looked--just a thin,
bare line against the intense blue, but even as she stood there, a
flicker of color soared up its length; then fixed and flattened, showing
a red square with a black center.

“My Gawd!” she called over her shoulder. “It’s de trut’. Dat’s de
hurricane signal on top de custom-house.”

Bess came from her room, and stood close to the terrified woman.

“Dat can’t be so,” she said comfortingly. “Ain’t yuh ’member de las’
hurricane, how it tek two day tuh blow up. Now de sun out bright, an’ de
cloud all gone.”

But Clara gave no sign of having heard her.

“Come on in!” urged Bess. “Ef yuh don’t start tuh git yuh dinner, yuh
won’t hab nuttin’ ready fuh de mens w’en dey gits in.”

After a moment the idea penetrated, and the half-dazed woman turned
toward Bess, her eyes pleading.

“You come wid me, an’ talk a lot. I ain’t likes tuh be all alone now.”

“Sho’ I will,” replied the other comfortingly. “I min’ de baby fuh yuh,
an’ yuh kin be gittin’ de dinner.”

Clara’s face quivered; but she turned from the sight of the far red flag
and opened her door for Bess to pass in.

After the two women had remained together for half an hour, Bess left
the room for a moment to fetch some sewing. The sun was gone, and the
sky presented a smooth, leaden surface. She closed the door quickly so
that Clara might not see the abrupt change, and went out of the entrance
for a look to sea.

Like the sky, the bay had undergone a complete metamorphosis. The water
was black, and strangely lifeless. Thin, intensely white crests rode the
low, pointed waves; and between the opposing planes of sky and sea a
thin westerly wind roamed about like a trapped thing and whined in a
complaining treble key. A singularly clear half-light pervaded the
world, and in it she could see the harbor mouth distinctly, as it lay
ten miles away between the north and south jetties that stretched on the
horizon like arms with the finger-tips nearly touching.

Her eyes sought the narrow opening. Guiltless of the smallest speck, it
let upon utter void.

“It’d take ’em t’ree hour tuh mek harbor from de banks wid good win’,”
said a woman who was also watching. “But dere ain’t no powuh in dis
breeze, an’ it a head one at dat.”

“Dey kin row it in dat time,” encouraged Bess. “‘An’ de storm ain’t hyuh
yit.”

But the woman hugged her forebodings, and stood there shivering in the
close, warm air.


§

Except for the faint moan of the wind, the town and harbor lay in a
silence that was like held breath.

Many negroes came to the wharf, passed out to the pier-head, and sat
quietly watching the entrance to the bay.

At one o’clock the tension snapped. As though it had been awaiting St.
Christopher’s chimes to announce “Zero Hour,” the wind swung into the
east, and its voice dropped an octave, and changed its quality. Instead
of the complaining whine, a grave, sustained note came in from the
Atlantic, with an undertone of alarming variations, that sounded oddly
out of place as it traversed the inert waters of the bay.

The tide was at the last of the ebb, and racing out of the many rivers
and creeks toward the sea. All morning the west wind had driven it
smoothly before it. But now, the stiffening eastern gale threw its
weight against the water, and the conflict immediately filled the bay
with large waves that leapt up to angry points, then dropped back
sullenly upon themselves.

“Choppy water,” observed a very old negro who squinted through
half-closed eyes. “Dem boat nebbuh mek headway in dat sea.”

But he was not encouraged to continue by the silent, anxious group.

Slowly the threatening undertone of the wind grew louder. Then, as
though a curtain had been lowered across the harbor mouth, everything
beyond was blotted by a milky screen.

“Oh, my Jedus!” a voice shrilled. “Here he come, now! Le’s we go!”

Many of the watchers broke for the cover of buildings across the street.
Some of those whose men were in the fleet crowded into the small
wharf-house. Several voices started to pray at once, and were
immediately drowned in the rising clamor of the wind.

With the mathematical precision that it had exhibited in starting, the
gale now moved its obliterating curtain through the jetties, and thrust
it forward in a straight line across the outer bay.

There was something utterly terrifying about the studied manner in which
the hurricane proceeded about its business. It clicked off its moves
like an automaton. It was Destiny working nakedly for the eyes of men
to see. The watchers knew that for at least twenty-four hours it would
stay, moving its tides and winds here and there with that invincible
precision, crushing the life from those whom its preconceived plan had
seemed to mark for death.

With that instant emotional release that is the great solace of the
negro, the tightly packed wharf-house burst into a babblement of weeping
and prayer.

The curtain advanced to the inner bay and narrowed the world to the
city, with its buildings cowering white and fearful, and the remaining
semi-circle of the harbor.

And now from the opaque surface of the screen came a persistent roar
that was neither of wind or water, but the articulate cry of the storm
itself. The curtain shot forward again and became a wall, grey and
impenetrable, that sunk its foundations into the tortured sea and bore
the leaden sky upon its soaring top.

The noise became deafening. The narrow strip of water that was left
before the wharves seemed to shrink away. The buildings huddled closer
and waited.

Then it crossed the strip, and smote the city.

From the roofs came the sound as though ton after ton of ore had been
dumped from some great eminence. There was a dead weight to the shocks
that could not conceivably be delivered by so unsubstantial a substance
as air, yet which was the wind itself, lifting abruptly to enormous
heights, then hurling its full force downward.

These shocks followed the demoniac plan, occurring at exact intervals,
and were succeeded by prying fingers, as fluid as ether, as hard as
steel, that felt for cracks in roofs and windows.

One could no longer say with certainty, “This which I breathe is air,
and this upon which I stand is earth.” The storm had possessed itself of
the city and made it its own. Tangibles and intangibles alike were
whirled in a mad, inextricable nebula.

The waves that moved upon the bay could be dimly discerned for a little
distance. They were turgid, yellow, and naked; for the moment they
lifted a crest, the wind snatched it and dispersed it, with the rain,
into the warm semi-fluid atmosphere with which it delivered its attack
upon the panic-stricken city.

Notch by notch the velocity increased. The concussions upon the roofs
became louder, and the prying fingers commenced to gain a purchase,
worrying small holes into large ones. Here and there the wind would get
beneath the tin, roll it up suddenly, whirl it from a building like a
sheet of paper, and send it thundering and crashing down a deserted
street.

Again it would gain entrance to a room through a broken window, and,
exerting its explosive force to the full, would blow all of the other
windows outward, and commence work upon the walls from within.

It was impossible to walk upon the street. At the first shock of the
storm, the little group of negroes who had sought shelter in the
wharf-house fled to the Row. Even then, the force of the attack had been
so great that only by bending double and clinging together were they
able to resist the onslaughts and traverse the narrow street.

Porgy and Bess sat in their room. The slats had been taken from the bed
and nailed across the window, and the mattress, bundled into a corner,
had been pre-empted by the goat. Bess sat wrapped in her own thoughts,
apparently unmoved by the demoniac din without. Porgy’s look was one of
wonder, not unmixed with fear, as he peered into the outer world between
two of the slats. The goat, blessed with an utter lack of imagination,
revelled in the comfort and intimacy of his new environment, expressing
his contentment in suffocating waves, after the manner of his kind. A
kerosene lamp without a chimney, smoking straight up into the unnatural
stillness of the room, cast a faint, yellow light about it, but only
accentuated the heavy gloom of the corners.

From where Porgy sat, he could catch glimpses of what lay beyond the
window. There would come occasional moments when the floor of the storm
would be lifted by a burrowing wind, and he would see the high, naked
breakers racing under the sullen pall of spume and rain.

Once he saw a derelict go by. The vessel was a small river sloop, with
its rigging blown clean out. A man was clinging to the tiller. One wave,
larger than its fellows, submerged the little boat, and when it wallowed
to the surface again, the man was gone, and the tiller was kicking
wildly.

“Oh, my Jedus, hab a little pity!” the watcher moaned under his breath.

Later, a roof went by.

Porgy heard it coming, even above the sound of the attack upon the Row,
and it filled him with awe and dread. He turned and looked at Bess, and
was reassured to see that she met his gaze fearlessly. Down the street
the roar advanced, growing nearer and louder momentarily. Surely it
would be the final instrument of destruction. He held his breath, and
waited. Then it thundered past his narrow sphere of vision. Rolled
loosely, it loomed to the second story windows, and flapped and tore at
the buildings as it swept over the cobbles.

When a voice could be heard again, Porgy turned to his companion.

“You an’ me, Bess,” he said with conviction “We _sho’_ is a little
somet’ing attuh all.”

After that, they sat long without exchanging a word. Then Porgy looked
out of the window and noticed that the quality of the atmosphere was
becoming denser. The spume lifted for a moment, and he could scarcely
see the tormented bay.

“I t’ink it mus’ be mos’ night,” he observed. “Dey ain’t much light now
on de outside ob dis storm.”

He looked again before the curtain descended, and what he saw caused his
heart to miss a beat.

He knew that the tide should be again at the ebb, for the flood had
commenced just after the storm broke. But as he looked, the water, which
was already higher than a normal flood, lifted over the far edge of the
street, and three tremendous waves broke in rapid succession, sending
the deep layers of water across the narrow way to splash against the
wall of the building.

This reversal of nature’s law struck terror into the dark places of
Porgy’s soul. He beckoned to Bess, his fascinated eyes upon the
advancing waves.

She bent down and peered into the gloom.

“Oh, yes,” she remarked in a flat tone. “It been dis way in de las’
great storm. De win’ hol’ de watuh in de jetty mout’ so he can’t go out.
Den he pile up annoder tide on him.”

Suddenly an enormous breaker loomed over the backs of its shattered and
retreating fellows. The two watchers could not see its crest, for it
towered into, and was absorbed by, the low-hanging atmosphere. Yellow,
smooth, and with a perpendicular, slightly concave front, it flashed
across the street, and smote the solid wall of the Row. They heard it
roar like a mill-race through the drive, and flatten, hissing in the
court. Then they turned, and saw their own door give slightly to the
pressure, and a dark flood spurt beneath it, and debouch upon the floor.

Bess took immediate command of the situation. She threw an arm about
Porgy, and hurried him to the door. She withdrew the bolt, and the
flimsy panels shot inward. The court was almost totally dark. One after
another now the waves were hurtling through the drive and impounding in
the walled square.

The night was full of moving figures, and cries of fear; while, out of
the upper dark, the wind struck savagely downward.

With a powerful swing, Bess got Porgy to a stairway that providentially
opened near their room, and, leaving him to make his way up alone, she
rushed back, and was soon at his heels with an armful of belongings.

They sought refuge in what had been the great ball-room of the mansion,
a square, high-ceilinged room on the second story, which was occupied by
a large and prosperous family. There were many refugees there before
them. In the faint light cast by several lanterns, the indestructible
beauty of the apartment was evident, while the defacing effects of a
century were absorbed in shadow. The noble open fireplace, the tall,
slender mantel, with its Grecian frieze and intricate scrollwork, the
high panelled walls were all there. And then, huddled in little groups
on the floor, or seated against the walls, with eyes wide in the
lantern-shine, the black, fear-stricken faces.

Like the ultimate disintegration of a civilization--there it was; and
upon it, as though to make quick work of the last, tragic chapter, the
scourging wrath of the Gods--white, and black.


§

The night that settled down upon Catfish Row was one of nameless horror
to the inhabitants, most of whom were huddled on the second floor in
order to avoid the sea from beneath, and deafening assaults upon the
roof above their heads.

With the obliteration of vision, sound assumed an exaggerated
significance, and the voice of the gale, which had seemed by day only a
great roar, broke up in the dark into its various parts. Human voices
seemed to cry in it; and there were moments when it sniffed and moaned
at the windows.

Once, during a silence in the room, a whinny was distinctly heard.

“Dat my ole horse!” wailed Peter. “He done dead in he stall now, an’ dat
he woice goin’ by. Oh, my Gawd!”

They all wailed out at that; and Porgy, remembering his goat, whimpered
and turned his face to the wall.

Then someone started to sing:

    “I gots uh home in de rock, don’t yuh see?”

With a feeling of infinite relief, Porgy turned to his Jesus. It was not
a charm that he sought now for the assuaging of some physical ill, but a
benign power, vaster perhaps even than the hurricane. He lifted his rich
baritone above the others:

    “Oh, between de eart’ an’ sky,
     I kin see my Sabior die.
     I gots uh home in de rock,
     Don’t yuh see!”

Then they were all in it, heart and soul. Those who had fallen into a
fitful sleep, awoke, rubbed their eyes, and sang.

Hour after hour dragged heavily past. Outside, the storm worked its will
upon the defenceless city. But in the great ball-room of Catfish Row,
forty souls sat wrapped in an invulnerable garment. They swayed and
patted, and poured their griefs and fears into a rhythm that never
missed a beat, which swept the hours behind it into oblivion, and that
finally sang up the faint grey light that penetrated the storm, and told
them that it was again day.


§

At about an hour after daybreak the first lull came. Like the other
moves of the hurricane, it arrived without warning. One moment the
tumult was at its height. The next, there was utter suspension.
Abruptly, like an indrawn breath, the wind sucked back upon itself,
leaving an aching vacuum in its place. Then from the inundated
water-front arose the sound of the receding flood.

The ebb-tide was again overdue, and with the second tide piled upon it,
the whole immeasurable weight of the wind was required to maintain its
height. Now, with the pressure removed, it turned and raced beneath the
low-lying mist toward the sea, carrying its pitiful loot upon its back.

To the huddled figures in the great room of the Row came the welcome
sound, as the court emptied itself into the street. The negroes crowded
to the windows, and peered between the barricades at the world without.

The water receded with incredible speed. Submerged wreckage lifted above
the surface. The street became the bed of a cataract that foamed and
boiled on its rush to the sea. Presently the wharf emerged, and at its
end even a substantial remnant of the house could be descried. How it
had survived that long was one of the inexplicable mysteries of the
storm.

Suddenly Peter, who was at one of the windows, gave a cry, and the other
negroes crowded about him to peer out.

The sea was still running high, and as a large wave lifted above the
level of the others, it thrust into view the hull of a half-submerged
boat. Before the watchers could see, the wave dropped its burden into a
trough, but the old man showed them where to look, and presently a big
roller caught it up, and swung it, bow on, for all to see. There was a
flash of scarlet gunnel, and, beneath it, a bright blue bird with open
wings.

“De ‘Seagull’!” cried a dozen voices together. “My Gawd! dat Jake’
boat!”

All night Clara had sat in a corner of the room with the baby in her
arms, saying no word to anyone. She was so still that she seemed to be
asleep, with her head upon her breast. But once, when Bess had gone and
looked into her face, she had seen her eyes, wide and bright with pain.

Now the unfortunate woman heard the voices, and sprang to the window
just in time to see the craft swoop into a hollow at the head of the
pier.

She did not scream out. For a moment she did not even speak. Then she
spun around on Bess with the dawn of a wild hope in her dark face.

“Tek care ob dis baby ’til I gits back,” she said, as she thrust the
child almost savagely into Bess’s arms. Then she rushed from the room.

The watchers at the window saw her cross the street, splashing wildly
through the kneedeep water. Then she ran the length of the wharf, and
disappeared behind the sheltering wall of the house.

It was so sudden, and tired wits move slowly. Several minutes had passed
before it occurred to anyone to go with her. Finally Peter turned from
the window.

“Dat ’oman ain’t ought tuh be out dey by sheself,” he said. “Who goin’
out dey wid me, now?”

One of the men volunteered, and they started for the door.

A sound like the detonation of a cannon shook the building to its
foundations. The gale had returned, smashing straight downward from some
incredible height to which it had lifted during the lull.

The men turned and looked at one another.

Shock followed shock in rapid succession. Those who stood by the windows
felt them give inward, and instinctively threw their weight against the
frames. The explosions merged into a steady roar of sound that
surpassed anything that had yet occurred. The room became so dark that
they could no longer see one another. The barricaded windows were
vaguely discernible in bars of muddy grey and black. Deeply rooted walls
swung from the blows, and then settled slowly back on the recoil.

A confused sound of praying filled the room. And above it shrilled the
terror of the women.

For an appreciable space of time the spasm lasted. Then, slowly, as
though by the gradual withdrawing of a lever, the vehemence of the
attack abated. The muddy grey bars at the windows became lighter, and
some of the more courageous of the negroes peered out.

The wharf could be seen dimly extending under the low floor of spume and
mist. The breakers were higher than at any previous time, but instead of
smashing in upon the shore, they raced straight up the river and
paralleled the city. As each one swung by it went clean over the wharf,
obliterating it for the duration of its passage.

Suddenly from the direction of the lower harbor a tremendous mass
appeared, showing first only a vast distorted stain against the grey
fabric of the mist. Then a gigantic wave took it, and drove it into
fuller view.

“Great Gawd A’mighty!” some one whispered. “It’s dat big lumbuh schooner
bruck loose in de harbor.”

The wave hunched its mighty shoulders under the vessel and swung it
up--up, for an interminable moment. The soaring bowsprit lifted until it
was lost in mist. Tons of water gushed from the steep incline of the
deck, and poured over the smooth, black wall of the side, as it reared
half out of the sea. Then the wave swept aft, and the bow descended in a
swift, deadly plunge.

A crashing of timbers followed that could be heard clearly above the
roaring of the storm. The hull had fallen directly across the middle of
the wharf. There was one cataclysmic moment when the whole view seemed
to disintegrate. The huge timbers of the wharf up-ended, and were washed
out like straws. The schooner rolled half over, and her three masts
crashed down with their rigging. The shock burst the lashings of the
vessel’s deck load, and as the hull heeled, an avalanche of heavy
timbers took the water. The ruin was utter.

Heavy and obliterating, the mist closed down again.

Bess turned from the window holding the sleeping infant in her arms,
raised her eyes and looked full at Porgy.

With an expression of awe in his face, the cripple reached out a timid
hand and touched the baby’s cheek.


§

The windows of the great ball-room were open to the sky, and beyond
them, a busy breeze was blowing across its washed and polished expanse,
gathering cloud-remnants into little heaps, and sweeping them in
tumbling haste out over the threshold of the sea.

Most of the refugees had returned to their rooms, where sounds of busy
salvaging could be heard. Porgy’s voice arose jubilantly announcing that
the goat had been discovered, marooned upon the cook-stove; and that
Peter’s old horse had belied his whinny, and was none the worse for a
thorough wetting.

Serena Robbins paused before Bess, who was gathering her things
preparatory to leaving the room, placed her hands upon her hips, and
looked down upon her.

“Now, wut we all goin’ do wid dis po’ mudderless chile?” she said,
addressing the room at large.

The other occupants of the room gathered behind Serena, but there was
something about Bess’s look that held them quiet. They stood there
waiting and saying nothing.

Slowly Bess straightened up, her face lowered and pressed against that
of the sleeping child. Then she raised her eyes and met the gaze of the
complacent older woman.

What Serena saw there was not so much the old defiance that she had
expected, as it was an inflexible determination, and, behind it, a
new-born element in the woman that rendered the scarred visage
incandescent. She stepped back, and lowered her eyes.

Bess strained the child to her breast with an elemental intensity of
possession, and spoke in a low, deep voice that vested her words with
sombre meaning.

“Is Clara come back a’ready, since she dead, an’ say somet’ing ’bout
‘_we_’ tuh yuh ’bout dis chile?”

She put the question to the group, her eyes taking in the circle of
faces as she spoke.

There was no response; and at the suggestion of a possible return of the
dead, the circle drew together instinctively.

“Berry well den,” said Bess solemnly. “Ontell she do, I goin’ stan’ on
she las’ libbin’ word an’ keep dis chile fuh she ’til she do come back.”

Serena was hopelessly beaten, and she knew it.

“Oh, berry well,” she capitulated. “All I been goin’ tuh do wuz jus’ tuh
puhwide um wid er propuh Christian raisin’. But ef she done gib um tuh
yuh, dere ain’t nuttin mo’ I kin do, I guess.”




VI

[Illustration]




PART VI


October blew down from the north, bracing, and frosty-clear. It sent a
breeze racing like mad over the bay and bouncing into the court to toss
the clotheslines like lanyards of signal flags. The torpid city and
wide, slumbrous marshes were stung to sudden life and laughed up at the
far, crisp blue of the sky.

Out in the harbor mouth, a faint wisp of smoke grew and blackened, and
presently beneath it the rusty hull of a tramp lifted from the Atlantic,
and thrust its blunt nose into the waters of the bay.

Summer had gone. Soon the cotton would be coming through.

It was nine o’clock, and still Porgy lingered in the court. His blood
leapt swiftly in his veins, and he experienced that sweet upsurge of
life that the North knows with the bursting of spring, but that comes
most keenly to the sultry lands with the strong breath of autumn. Yet,
when he looked up at the sky, a vague prescience of disaster darkened
his spirit. He sat beside Bess in the doorway, with his eyes upon the
child in her lap. After a while he took the baby into his arms, and then
the foreboding suddenly became pain.

He looked up and met the gaze of the woman. It was there in her eyes
also, plain for him to see.

Out in the silence of the street a sound commenced to grow. Only a
faint, far murmur at first, it gathered weight until it became a steady
rumble, with a staccato clip, clip, clip running through it.

There were a few women and children about, and they ran to the entrance
to see. But Porgy and Bess sat and looked fixedly at the bay, where it
lay beyond the gate.

Then the drays came, and the bay was blotted out by the procession.

The great mules, fat and strong from their summer in pasture, moved
swiftly with a sharp click of shoes, and the drivers cracked their whips
and laughed down at the crowd. The low platforms of the vehicles seemed
almost to brush the ground; and, upon them, clear to the top of the
entrance arch, the bales towered, with the fibre showing in dazzling
white patches where the bagging was torn. Twenty or more in the train
they passed.

Scarcely had the rumble receded in the distance, than a burst of heavy
laughter sounded in the street, and two tall figures strode through the
entrance and into the group of women and children. There was a bright
flash from bandanas, and one of the men swung a child to his shoulder.
Loud greetings followed, and another burst of laughter, heavy,
deep-chested and glad.

From an upper window a woman’s voice called, “Come on, Sister; le’s we
go down. De stevedore is comin’ back.”

Porgy turned toward Bess, and moistened his lips with his tongue. Then
he spoke in a low husky voice:

“Us ain’t talk much sence de picnic, Bess, you an’ me. But I gots tuh
talk now. I gots tuh know how you an’ me stan’.”

Bess regarded him dumbly. For a moment the look which Serena had seen
when she had tried to take the baby brushed her face, then it passed,
leaving it hopeless.

Porgy leaned forward. “Yuh is wantin’ tuh go wid Crown w’en he come?”

Then she answered: “W’en I tek dat dope, I know den dat I ain’t yo’
kin’. An’ w’en Crown put he han’ on me dat day, I run tuh he like water.
Some day dope comin’ agin. An’ some day Crown goin’ put he han’ on my
t’roat. It goin’ be like dyin’ den. But I gots tuh talk de trut’ tuh
yuh. W’en dem time come, I goin’ tuh go.”

“Ef dey warn’t no Crown?” Porgy whispered. Then before she could answer,
he hurried on: “Ef dey wuz only jes’ de baby an’ Porgy, wut den?”

The odd incandescence flared in her face, touching it with something
eternal and beautiful beyond the power of human flesh to convey. She
took the child from Porgy with a hungry, enfolding gesture. Then her
composure broke.

“Oh, fuh Gawd sake, Porgy, don’t let dat man come an’ handle me! Ef yuh
is willin’ tuh keep me, den lemme stay. Ef he jus’ don’t put dem hot
han’ on me, I kin be good, I kin ’member, I kin be happy.”

She broke off abruptly, and hid her face against that of the child.

Porgy patted her arm. “Yuh ain’t needs tuh be ’fraid,” he assured her.
“Ain’t yuh gots yo’ man? Ain’t yuh gots Porgy? Wut kin’ of a nigger yuh
t’inks yuh gots anyway, fuh let annuduh nigger carry he ’oman? No, suh!
yuh gots yo’ man now; yuh gots Porgy.”


§

From behind a sea island the full October moon lifted its chill disc and
strewed the bay with cold, white fire. The lights were out in Catfish
Row, except for a shaft of firelight that fell across the dark from
Serena’s room, and a faint flicker in the cook-shop, where Maria was
getting her fire laid in readiness for the early breakfast.

A cry sounded in the court, which was quickly muffled; then followed
low, insolent laughter.

Maria was at her door instantly. Across the court, a man could be seen
for one moment, seated on Serena’s wash-bench; then behind him the door
closed with a bang, shutting off the shaft of firelight.

Maria crossed the court, and when she had reached the man’s side he
looked up. The moonlight fell upon his face. It was Crown.

“What yuh doin’ hyuh?” she asked him.

“Jus’ droppin’ in on a few ole frien’.”

“Come tuh de shop,” she commanded. “I gots tuh hab talk wid yuh.”

He arose obediently, and followed her.

Maria turned up the lamp and faced about as Crown entered the room. He
had to bend his head to pass under the lintel, and his shoulders brushed
the sides of the opening.

The big negress stood for a long moment looking at him. Her gaze took in
the straight legs with their springing thighs straining the fabric of
the cotton pants, the slender waist, and the almost unbelievable
outward flare of the chest to the high, straight span of the shoulders.

A look of deep sadness grew in her somber face.

“Wid uh body like dat!” she said at last, “why yuh is goin’ aroun’
huntin’ fuh deat’?”

Crown laughed uneasily, stepped into the room, and sat at a table. He
placed his elbows upon it, hunched his shoulders forward with a writhing
of muscle beneath the shirt, then dropped his chin in his hands, and
regarded the woman.

“I know dese hyuh niggers,” he replied. “Dey is a decent lot. Dey
wouldn’t gib no nigger away tuh de w’ite folks.”

“Dat de Gawd’ trut’. Only dey is odder way ob settlin’ up er debt.”

“Serena?” he asked, with a sidelong look, and a laugh. “Dat sister gots
de fear ob Gawd in she heart. I ain’t ’fraid none ob she.”

After a moment of silence he asked abruptly:

“Bess still libbin’ wid de cripple?”

“Yes; an’ she a happy, decent ’oman. Yuh bes’ leabe she alone.”

“Fer Gawd’ sake! Wut yuh tink I come tuh dis damn town fuh? I ain’t jus’
huntin’ fuh deat’! I atter my ’oman.”

Maria placed her hands on the table opposite the man and bent over to
look into his face.

“’Oman is all berry much de same,” she said in a low, persuasive voice.
“Dey comes an’ dey goes. One sattify a man quick as annuduh. Dey is lots
ob bettuh lookin’ gal dan Bess. She fix fuh life now wid dat boy. I ax
yuh go an’ lef she. Gib she uh chance.”

“It tek long time tuh learn one ’oman,” he said slowly. “Me an’ Bess
done fight dat all out dese fibe year gone.”

“Yuh ain’t goin’ leabe she den?” There was an unusual note of pleading
in the heavy voice.

“Not till Hell freeze.”

After a moment he arose and turned to her.

“I gots tuh go out now. I ain’t sho’ wedder I goin’ away tuhnight or
wait fuh tuhmorruh night. I goin’ look aroun’ an’ see how de lan’ lay;
but I’ll be seein’ yuh agin befo’ I goes.”

Maria regarded him for a long moment; the look of sadness in her face
deepened to a heavy melancholy; but she said nothing.

Crown started for the street with his long, swaggering stride. The big
woman watched him until he turned to the north at the entrance and
passed from view. Then she locked the door and, with a deep sigh,
walked to her own room.


§

Porgy opened his eyes suddenly. The window, which had been luminous when
he went to sleep, was now darkened. He watched it intently. Slowly he
realized that parts of the little square still showed the moonlit waters
of the bay, and that only the centre was blocked out by an intervening
mass. Then the mass moved, and Porgy saw that it was the torso and
shoulders of a man. The window was three feet in width, yet the
shoulders seemed to brush both sides of it as the form bent forward. The
sash was down, and presently there came a sound as though hands were
testing it to see whether it could be forced up.

Porgy was lying on his back. He reached his left hand over the covers
and let the fingers touch ever so lightly the sleeping faces of first
the baby, then the woman. His right hand slid beneath his pillow, and
his strong, slender fingers closed about the handle of a knife.

At the window the slight, testing noise continued.


§

It was certainly after midnight when Maria looked from her doorway; for
the moon was tottering on the western wall, and while she stood looking,
slowly it dropped over and vanished.

The vague forebodings that she had felt when she talked to Crown earlier
in the evening had kept sleep from her; with each passing hour her fears
increased, and with them a sense of imminence that finally forced her to
get up, slip on a wrapper, and prepare to make the rounds of the court.

But on opening her door, she was at once reassured. The square stood
before her like a vast cistern brimmed with misty dark and roofed with a
lid of sky. A cur grovelled forward on its belly from a near-by nook,
and licked one of her bare feet with its moist, warm tongue.

Above her, in the huge honeycomb of the building, someone was snoring in
a slow, steady rhythm.

The big negress drew a deep sigh of relief and turned back toward her
room.

A sound of cracking wood snapped the silence. Then, like a flurry of
small bells, came a shiver of broken glass on the stones.

Maria spun around, and tried to locate the sound; but no noise followed.
Silence flowed back over the court and settled palpably into its
recesses. The faint, not unpleasant rhythm of the snoring came
insistently forward.

Suddenly Maria turned, her face quick with apprehension. She drew her
wrapper closely about her, and crossed to Porgy’s door. With only half
of the distance traversed, she heard a sound from the room. It was more
of a muffled thump than anything else, and with it, something very like
a gasp.

When her hand closed over the knob all was silent again, except that she
could hear a long, slightly shuddering breath.

Then came a sound that caused her flesh to prickle with primal terror.
It was so unexpected, there in the chill, silent night. It was Porgy’s
laugh, but different. Out of the stillness it swelled suddenly, deep,
aboriginal, lustful. Then it stopped short.

Maria heard the baby cry out; then Bess’s voice, sleepy and mystified.
“Fuh Gawd’ sake, Porgy, what yuh laughin’ ’bout?”

“Dat all right, honey,” came the answer. “Don’t yuh be worryin’. Yuh
gots Porgy now, an’ he look atter he ’oman. Ain’t I done tells yuh: Yuh
gots er _man_ now.”

Maria turned the knob, entered the room, and closed the door quickly
behind her.

Night trailed westward across the city. In the east, out beyond the
ocean’s rim, essential light trembled upward and seemed to absorb rather
than quench the morning stars. Out of the sliding planes of mist that
hung like spent breath above the city, shapes began to emerge and assume
their proper values.

Far in the upper air over Catfish Row a speck appeared. It took a long,
descending spiral, and became two, then three. Around a wide circle the
specks swung, as though hung by wires from a lofty pivot. The light
brightened perceptibly. The specks dropped to a lower level, increased
in size, and miraculously became a dozen. Then some of them dropped in
from the circumference of the circle, cutting lines across like the
spokes of a wheel, and from time to time flapping indolent wings. Dark
and menacing when they flew to the westward, they would turn easily
toward the east, and the sun, still below the horizon, would gild their
bodies with ruddy gold, as they sailed, breast on, toward it.

Down, down they dropped, reaching low, and yet lower levels, until at
last they seemed to brush the water-front buildings with their sombre
wings. Then gradually they narrowed to a small circle that patrolled
the air directly over a shape that lay awash in the rising tide, across
the street from Catfish Row.

Suddenly from the swinging circle a single bird planed down and lit with
an awkward, hopping step directly before the object. For a moment he
regarded it with bleak, predatory eyes; then flew back to his fellows. A
moment later the whole flock swooped down, and the shape was hidden by
flapping wings and black awkward bodies that hopped about and fought
inward to the centre of the group.

A negro who had been sleeping under an overturned bateau awoke and
rubbed his eyes; then he sprang up and, seizing an oar, beat the birds
away with savage blows.

He bent over the object for a moment, then turned and raced for the
street with eyes showing white.

“Fuh Gawd’ sake, folks,” he cried, “come hyuh quick! Hyuh Crown, an’ he
done dead.”


§

A group of three white men stood over the body. One was the
plain-clothes man with the goatee and stick who had investigated the
Robbins’ murder. Behind him stood a uniformed policeman. The third, a
stout, leisurely individual, was stooping over the body, in the act of
making an examination.

“What do you make of it, Coroner?” asked the plain-clothes man.

“Knife between fifth and sixth ribs; must have gone straight through the
heart.”

“Well, he had it comin’ to him,” the detective observed. “They tell me
he is the nigger, Crown, who killed Robbins last April. That gives us
the widow to work on fer a starter, by the way; and Hennessy tells me
that he used to run with that dope case we had up last August. She’s
livin’ in the Row, too. Let’s go over and have a look.”

The Coroner cast an apprehensive glance at the forbidding structure
across the way.

“Can’t be so sure,” he cautioned. “Corpse might have been washed up.
Tide’s on the flood.”

“Well, I’m goin’ to have a look at those two women, anyway,” the
plain-clothes man announced. “That place is alive with crooks. I’d like
to get something on it that would justify closing it up as a public
nuisance, and throwing the whole lot of ’em out in the street. One
murder and a happy-dust riot already this summer; and here we are
again.”

Then turning to the policeman, he gave his orders.

“Get the wagon and take the body in. Then you had better come right
back. We might have some arrests. The Coroner and I’ll investigate while
you’re gone.”

He turned away toward the Row, assuming that he would be followed.

“All right, Cap; what do you say?” he called.

The Coroner shook his ponderous figure down into his clothes, turned
with evident reluctance, and joined him.

“All right,” he agreed. “But all I need is a couple of witnesses to
identify the body at the inquest.”

Across the street a small negro boy detached himself from the base of
one of the gateposts and darted through the entrance.

A moment later the white men strode into an absolutely empty square.
Their heels made a sharp sound on the flags, and the walls threw a clear
echo down upon them.

A cur that had been left napping in the sun woke with a start, looked
about in a bewildered fashion, gave a frightened yelp, and bolted
through a doorway.

It was all clearly not to the taste of the Coroner, and he cast an
uneasy glance about him.

“Where do we go?” he asked.

“That’s the widow’s room over there, if she hasn’t moved. We’ll give it
a look first,” said the detective.

The door was off the latch, and, without knocking, he kicked it open and
walked in.

The room was small, but immaculately clean. Beneath a patched white
quilt could be seen the form of a woman. Two other women were sitting in
utter silence beside the bed.

The form under the covers moaned.

“Drop that,” the detective commanded. “And answer some questions.”

The moaning stopped.

“Where were you yesterday and last night?”

The reply came slowly, as though speaking were great pain.

“I been sick in dis bed now t’ree day an’ night.”

“We been settin’ wid she, nursin’ she, all dat time,” one of the women
said.

And the other supplemented, “Dat de Gawd’ trut’.”

“You would swear to that?” asked the Coroner.

Three voices answered in chorus:

“Yes, Boss, we swear tuh dat.”

“There you are,” said the Coroner to the plain-clothes man, “an
air-tight alibi.”

The detective regarded him for a moment with supreme contempt. Then he
stepped forward and jerked the sheet from Serena’s face, which lay upon
the pillow as immobile as a model done in brown clay.

“You know damn well that you were out yesterday!” he snapped. “I have a
good mind to get the wagon and carry you in.”

Silence followed.

“What do you say to that?” he demanded.

But Serena had nothing to say, and neither had her handmaidens.

Then he turned a menacing frown upon them, as they sat motionless with
lowered eyes.

“Well!”

They jumped slightly, and their eyes showed white around the iris.
Suddenly they began to speak, almost in unison.

“We swear tuh Gawd, we done been hyuh wid she t’ree day.”

“Oh, Hell!” said the exasperated detective. “What’s the use? You might
as well argue with a parrot-cage.”

“That woman is just as ill at this moment as you are,” he said to his
unenthusiastic associate when they were again in the sunlight. “Her
little burlesque show proves that, if nothing else. But there is her
case all prepared. I don’t believe she killed Crown; she doesn’t look
like that kind. She is either just playing safe, or she has something
entirely different on her chest. But there’s her story; and you’ll never
break in without witnesses of your own; and you’ll never get ’em.”

The Coroner was not a highly sensitized individual; but as he moved
across the empty court, he found it difficult to control his nerves
under the scrutiny which he felt leveled upon him from behind a hundred
shuttered windows. Twice he caught himself looking covertly over his
shoulders; and, as he went, he bore hopefully away toward the entrance.

But the detective was intent upon his task, and presently called him
back.

“This is the cripple’s room,” he said. “He ain’t much of a witness. I
tried to break him in the Robbins case; but he wouldn’t talk. I want to
have a look at the woman, though.”

He kicked the door open suddenly. Porgy and Bess were seated by the
stove, eating breakfast from tin pans. On the bed in the corner the baby
lay.

Porgy paused, with his spoon halfway to his mouth, and looked up. Bess
kept her eyes on the pan, and continued to eat.

The Coroner stopped in the doorway, and made a businesslike show of
writing in a notebook.

“What’s your name?” he asked Porgy.

The cripple studied him for a long moment, taking in the ample
proportions of the figure and the heavy, but not unsympathetic, face.
Then he smiled one of his fleeting, ingenuous smiles.

“Jus’ Porgy,” he said. “Yuh knows me, Boss. Yuh is done gib me plenty ob
penny on King Charles Street.”

“Of course, you’re the goat-man. I didn’t know you without your wagon,”
he said amiably. Then, becoming businesslike, he asked:

“This nigger, Crown. You knew him by sight. Didn’t you?”

Porgy debated with himself for a moment, looked again into the Coroner’s
face, was reassured by what he saw there, and replied:

“Yes, Boss: I ’member um w’en he usen tuh come hyuh, long ago.”

“You could identify him, I suppose?”

Porgy looked blank.

“You’d know him if you saw him again?”

“Yes, Boss; I know um.”

The Coroner made a note in his book, closed it with an air of finality,
and put it in his pocket.

During the brief interview, the detective had been making an examination
of the room. The floor had been recently scrubbed, and was still damp in
the corners. He gave the clean, pine boards a close scrutiny, then
paused before the window. The bottom of the lower sash had been broken,
and several of the small, square panes were missing.

“So this is where you killed Crown, eh?” he announced.

The words fell into the silence and were absorbed by it, causing them to
seem theatrical and unconvincing. Neither Porgy nor Bess spoke. Their
faces were blank and noncommittal.

After a full moment, the woman said:

“I ain’t onduhstan’, Boss. Nobody hyuh ain’t kill Crown. My husban’ he
fall t’rough dat winduh yisterday when he leg gib ’way. He er cripple.”

“Any one see him do it?” enquired the Coroner from the door.

“Oh, yes, Boss,” replied Bess, turning to him. “T’ree or four ob de mens
was in de street; dey will tell yuh all ’bout um.”

“Yes, of course; more witnesses,” sneered the detective. Then turning to
the Coroner, he asked with a trace of sarcasm in his tone:

“That satisfies you fully, I suppose?”

The Coroner’s nerves were becoming edgy.

“For God’s sake,” he retorted, “do you expect me to believe that a
cripple could kill a two-hundred pound buck, then tote him a hundred
yards? Well, I’ve got what I need now anyway. As far as I’m concerned,
I’m through.”

They were passing the door of Maria’s shop when the detective caught
sight of something within that held his gaze.

“You can do as you please,” he told his unwilling companion. “But I’m
going to have a look in here. I have never been able to get anything on
this woman; but she is a bad influence in the neighborhood. I’d trust
her just as far as I could throw her.”

The Coroner heaved a sigh of resignation, and they stepped back, and
entered the shop.

Upon the flooring, directly before the door, and not far from it, was a
pool of blood. Standing over the pool was a table, and upon it lay the
carcass of a shark. Maria sat on a bench behind the table. As the men
entered she swung an immense cleaver downward. A cross-section of the
shark detached itself and fell away on a pile of similar slices. A thin
stream of blood dribbled from the table, augmenting the pool upon the
floor.

Maria did not raise her eyes from her task. Again the cleaver swung up,
and whistled downward.

From the street sounded the clatter of the returning patrol.

“I’ll wait for you in the wagon,” said the Coroner hastily, and stepped
back into the sunlight.

But he was not long alone. The uninterrupted swing of the dripping
cleaver was depressing, and the enthusiasm of his associate waned.

The bell clanged. Hoofs struck sparks from the cobbles, and the strong
but uncertain arm of the law was withdrawn, to attend to other and more
congenial business.


§

The sound from the retreating wagon dwindled and ceased.

For a moment Catfish Row held its breath; then its windows and doors
flew open, and poured its life out into the incomparable autumn weather.
The crisis had passed. There had been no arrests.

Serena stepped forth, her arms filled with the morning’s wash.

“‘Ain’t it hahd tuh be er nigger!’” someone sang in a loud, clear voice.
And everybody laughed.

Down the street, like an approaching freight train, came the drays,
jarring the building and rattling the windows, as the heavy tires rang
against the cobbles.

Bess and Porgy came out with the others, and seated themselves against
the wall in the gracious sunlight. Of the life, yet apart from it,
sufficient unto each other, they did not join in the loud talk and
badinage that was going on about them. Like people who had come on a
long, dark journey, they were content to sit, and breathe deeply of the
sun. The baby was sleeping in Bess’s arms, and from time to time she
would sing a stave to it in a soft, husky voice.

Into the court strode a group of stevedores. Their strong white teeth
flashed in the sunshine, and their big, panther-like bodies moved easily
among the women and children that crowded about them.

“Wey all de gals?” called one in a loud, resonant voice. “Mus’ be dey
ain’t know dat dis is pay-day.”

Two women who were sitting near Porgy and Bess rose and went forward,
with their arms twined about each other’s waists. In a few minutes they
were out of the crowd again, each looking up with admiring eyes into
the face of one of the men.

“Mens an’ ’omans ain’t de same,” said Porgy. “One mont’ ago dem gals
been libbin’ wid dey own mens. Den de storm tek um. Now dey is fuhgit um
a’ready, an’ gibbin’ dey lub tuh de nex’.”

“No; dey is diff’rent fuh true,” replied Bess. “An’ yuh won’t nebber
onduhstan’. All two dem gal gots baby fuh keep alibe.” She heaved a deep
sigh; and then added, “Dey is jus’ ’oman, an’ nigger at dat. Dey is
doin’ de bes’ dey kin--dat all.”

She was looking down at the baby while she spoke, and when she raised
her eyes and looked at Porgy, he saw that they were full of tears.

“But you, Bess; you is diff’rent f’om dat?” he said, with a gently
interrogating note in his voice.

“Dat ’cause Gawd ain’t mek but one Porgy!” she told him. “Any ’oman gots
tuh be decent wid you. But I gots fuh tell yuh de trut’, widout Porgy I
is jus’ like de res’.”

A shadow drifted across their laps, and they lifted their faces to the
sky.

A solitary buzzard had left the circle that had hung high in the air all
morning, and was swinging back and forth over the Row, almost brushing
the parapet of the roof as it passed. While Porgy and Bess looked, it
suddenly raised the points of its wings, reached tentative legs
downward, spread its feet wide, and lit on the edge of the roof directly
over their room.

“My Gawd!” exclaimed Maria, who was standing near. “Crown done sen’ he
buzzud back fuh bring trouble. Knock um off, Porgy. Fer Gawd’ sake,
knock um off befo’ he settle!”

The cripple reached out and picked up a brick-bat. The happiness had
left his face, and his eyes were filled with fear. With a swing of his
long, powerful arm, he sent the missile on its errand.

It struck the parapet directly beneath the bird.

With a spasmodic flap of wings, the black body lifted itself a few feet
from the building, then settled suddenly back. For a moment it hopped
awkwardly about, as though the roof were red hot beneath its feet, then
folded its wings, drew its nude head in upon its breast, and surveyed
the court with its aloof, malevolent eyes.

“T’row agin,” Maria called, handing Porgy another brick-bat. But he
seemed not to hear. His face quivered, and he hid it in his hands.

“Sonny,” the big negress called to a small boy who was standing near,
looking at the bird with his mouth open. “Git out on de roof wid uh
stick, an’ run dat bird away.”

But Porgy plucked at her skirt, and she looked down.

“Let um be,” he said in a hopeless voice. “It too late now. Ain’t yuh
see he done settle, an’ he pick my room fuh light ober? It ain’t no use
now. Yuh knows dat. It ain’t no use.”


§

The next morning Porgy sat in his accustomed place by Archdale’s door.
Autumn had touched the oaks in the park across the way, and they brushed
the hard, bright sky with a slow circling motion, and tossed handfuls of
yellow leaves down upon the pedestrians who stepped briskly along.

King Charles Street was full of hurrying men on their way to the cotton
offices and the big wholesale warehouses that fronted on the wharves.
Like the artery of a hale old man who has lain long asleep, but who
wakens suddenly and springs into a race, the broad thoroughfare seemed
to pound and sing with life.

The town was in a generous mood. Again and again the bottom of Porgy’s
cup gave forth its sharp, grateful click as a coin struck it and
settled. But the cripple had not even his slow glance of thanks for his
benefactors on that flashing autumn morning. Always he kept veiled,
apprehensive eyes directed either up or down the street, or lifted
frightened glances to the sky, as though fearing what he might see
there.

At noon a white man stopped before him. But he did not drop a coin and
pass on.

After a moment, Porgy brought his gaze back, and looked up.

The white man reached forward, and handed him a paper.

“Dat fuh me?” asked Porgy, in a voice that shook.

“You needn’t mind takin’ it,” the man assured him with a laugh. “It’s
just a summons as witness to the Coroner’s inquest. You knew that
nigger, Crown, didn’t you?”

He evidently took Porgy’s silence for assent, for he went on.

“Well, all you got to do is to view the body in the presence of the
Coroner, tell him who it is, and he’ll take down all you say.”

Porgy essayed speech, failed, tried again, and finally whispered:

“I gots tuh go an’ look on Crown’ face wid all dem w’ite folks lookin’
at me. Dat it?”

His voice was so piteous that the constable reassured him:

“Oh, cheer up; it’s not so bad. I reckon you’ve seen a dead nigger
before this. It will all be over in a few minutes.”

“Dey ain’t goin’ be no nigger in dat room ’cept me?” Porgy asked.

“Just you and Crown, if you still call him one.”

After a moment Porgy asked:

“I couldn’t jus’ bring a ’oman wid me? I couldn’t eben carry my--my
’oman?”

“No,” said the white man_ positively. “Now I’ve got to be gettin’ along,
I reckon. Just come over to the Court House in half an hour, and I’ll
meet you and take you in. Only be sure to come. If you don’t show up
it’s jail for you, you know.”

For a moment after the man had gone, Porgy sat immovable, with his eyes
on the pavement. Then a sudden change swept over him. He cast one glance
up and down the hard, clean street, walled by its uncompromising,
many-eyed buildings. Then in a panic he clambered into his cart, gave a
cruel twist to the tail of his astonished goat, and commenced a
spasmodic, shambling race up Meeting House Road in the direction in
which he knew that, miles away, the forests lay.


§

To many, the scene which ensued on the upper Meeting House Road stands
out as an exquisitely humorous episode, to be told and retold with
touching up of high lights and artistic embellishments. To these, in the
eyes of whom the negro is wholly humorous, per se, there was not the
omission of a single conventional and readily recognizable stage
property.

For, after all, what could have been funnier than an entirely serious
race between a negro in a dilapidated goat-cart, and the municipality’s
shining new patrol wagon, fully officered and clanging its bell for the
crowds to hear as it came.

The finish took place in the vicinity of the railway yards and
factories, and the street was filled with workmen who smoked against the
walls, or ate their lunch, sitting at the pavement’s edge--grand-stand
seats, as they were quite accurately described in the telling.

The street cars ran seldom that far out; and Porgy had the thoroughfare
almost entirely to himself. His face wore a demented look, and was
working pitifully. In his panic, he wrung the tail of his unfortunate
beast without mercy. The lunchers along the pavement saw him coming, and
called to friends further along; so that as he came, he was greeted with
shouts of laughter and witty sallies from the crowd.

Then the wagon appeared, a mere speck in the distance, but sending the
sound of its bell before it as an advertisement of its presence. It grew
rapidly until it reached the cheering crowds. Then it seemed that even
the sedate officers of the law were not above a sly humor of their own,
for the vehicle slackened its pace perceptibly and prolonged the final
moment of capture.

The big buildings had been left behind, and there lay before Porgy only
the scattered, cheap bungalows of the labor quarters; and beyond, as
elusive and desirable as the white man’s heaven, glimmered the far line
of the woods, misty and beautiful in the pink autumn haze.

The patrol forged ahead and came to a clanging stop. The officers leapt
out and, amid shouts of laughter from the crowd, lifted wagon, goat and
man into the vehicle. The driver jerked the horse back into its
breechings, swung the wagon with a dramatic snap that was not wasted
upon his gallery, and sent it clanging and rocking back in the
direction from which it had come.

Porgy fell forward, with his arms thrown out upon the back of the goat,
and buried his face between them in the shaggy, evil-smelling hair.

The workmen upon the sidewalks cheered and shouted with mirth. Surely it
had been a great day. They would not soon have another laugh to match
it.


§

When the wagon reached the down-town district, the inquest was over. It
had been a simple matter to secure another witness for the
identification of the body. The jury had made short work of their task,
and had found that Crown had come to his death as the result of a chest
wound at the hands of person or persons unknown.

Porgy was taken at once to the station house, where the charge of
“Contempt of Court” was formally entered against him on the blotter, and
he was locked up to await trial early the following morning.

Under the wheezing gas jet, the Recorder looked Porgy over with his
weary glance, brought the tips of his slender fingers together; gave him
“five days,” in his tired drawl, and raised his eyes to the next negro
on the morning’s list.

They hoisted the outfit, goat and all, into the patrol for the trip to
the jail, thus again brightening a day for a group of light-hearted
Nordics upon the pavement.

A large, red-faced policeman took his seat at the rear of the wagon.

“You sure beat all!” he confided to Porgy, with a puzzled frown.
“Runnin’ away like the devil was after you, from bein’ a witness; an’
now goin’ to jail with a face like Sunday mornin’.”


§

In the fresh beauty of an early October morning, Porgy returned home.
There were few of his friends about, as work was now plentiful, and most
of those who could earn a day’s wage were up and out. He drove through
the entrance, pulled his goat up short, and looked about him.

Serena was seated on her bench with a baby in her arms.

Porgy gave her a long look, and a question commenced to dawn in his
eyes. The child turned in her arms, and his suspicions were confirmed.
It was his baby--his and Bess’s.

Then Serena looked up and saw him. She arose in great confusion, clasped
the infant to her ample bosom, and, without a word of greeting, stepped
through her doorway. Then, as though struck by an afterthought, she
turned, thrust her head back through the opening, and called loudly:

“Oh, Maria! hyuh Porgy come home.”

Then she disappeared and the door slammed shut.

Mystified and filled with alarm, Porgy turned his vehicle toward the
cook-shop and arrived at the door just as Maria stepped over the
threshold.

She seated herself on the sill and brought her face level with his. Then
she looked into his eyes.

What Porgy saw there caused him to call out sharply:

“Where’s Bess? Tell me, quick, where’s Bess?”

The big negress did not answer, and after a moment her ponderous face
commenced to shake.

Porgy beat the side of his wagon with his fist.

“Where, where--” he began, in a voice that was suddenly shrill.

But Maria placed a steadying hand over his frantic one and held it
still.

“Dem dutty dogs got she one day w’en I gone out,” she said in a low,
shaken voice. “She been missin’ yuh an’ berry low in she min’ ’cause she
can’t fin’ out how long yuh is lock up fuh. Dat damn houn’ she knock off
de wharf las’ summer fin’ she like dat an’ git she tuh tek er swalluh ob
licker. Den half a dozen of de mens gang she, an’ mek she drunk.”

“But wuh she now?” Porgy cried. “I ain’t keer ef she wuz drunk. I want
she now.”

Maria tried to speak, but her voice refused to do her bidding. She
covered her face with her hands, and her throat worked convulsively.

Porgy clutched her wrist. “Tell me,” he commanded. “Tell me, now.”

“De mens all carry she away on de ribber boat,” she sobbed. “Dey leabe
word fuh me dat dey goin’ tek she all de way tuh Sawannah, an’ keep she
dey. Den Serena, she tek de chile, an’ say she is goin’ gib um er
Christian raisin’.”

Deep sobs stopped Maria’s voice. For a while she sat there, her face
buried in her hands. But Porgy had nothing to say. When she finally
raised her head and looked at him, she was surprised at what she saw.

The keen autumn sun flooded boldly through the entrance and bathed the
drooping form of the goat, the ridiculous wagon, and the bent figure of
the man in hard, satirical radiance. In its revealing light, Maria saw
that Porgy was an old man. The early tension that had characterized him,
the mellow mood that he had known for one eventful summer, both had
gone; and in their place she saw a face sagged wearily, and the eyes of
age lit only by a faint reminiscent glow from suns and moons that had
looked into them, and had already dropped down the west.

She looked until she could bear the sight no longer; then she stumbled
into her shop and closed the door, leaving Porgy and the goat alone in
an irony of morning sunlight.


THE END



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PORGY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


