The Project Gutenberg eBook of Ground Tumbling
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Ground Tumbling

Author: Henry Walter Worth

Release date: October 14, 2017 [eBook #55750]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Richard Tonsing, Chris Curnow and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GROUND TUMBLING ***

[Illustration]

                         A. G. SPALDING & BROS.
             MAINTAIN THEIR OWN HOUSES FOR DISTRIBUTING THE
                                SPALDING
                            COMPLETE LINE OF
                             ATHLETIC GOODS
                        IN THE FOLLOWING CITIES


                       NEW YORK
                         Downtown-
                           124–128 Nassau St.
                         Uptown-
                           29–33 West 42d St.
                       NEWARK, N. J.
                           845 Broad Street
                       BOSTON, MASS.
                           141 Federal Street

                       CHICAGO
                           147–149 Wabash Ave.
                       ST. LOUIS, MO.
                           415 North Seventh St.
                       KANSAS CITY, MO.
                           1120 Grand Ave.
                       DENVER, COL.
                           1616 Arapahoe St.

                       SAN FRANCISCO
                           156–158 Geary St.
                       SEATTLE, WASH.
                           711 Second Ave.
                       LOS ANGELES, CAL.
                           435 South Spring St.

                       BUFFALO, N. Y.
                           611 Main Street
                       SYRACUSE, N. Y.
                           University Block
                       PITTSBURG, PA.
                           439 Wood Street

                       CINCINNATI, O.
                           119 East Fifth St.
                       CLEVELAND, O.
                           741 Euclid Ave.
                       COLUMBUS, O.
                           191 South High St.

                       MILWAUKEE, WIS.
                           379 East Water St.
                       MINNEAPOLIS, MINN.
                           44 Seventh St., South
                       ST. PAUL, MINN.
                           386 Minnesota St.

                       PHILADELPHIA, PA.
                           1210 Chestnut Street
                       BALTIMORE, MD.
                           208 East Baltimore St.
                       WASHINGTON, D. C.
                           709 14th St., N.W.

                       DETROIT, MICH.
                           254 Woodward Ave.
                       LOUISVILLE, KY.
                           328 West Jefferson St.
                       INDIANAPOLIS, IND.
                           211 Massachusetts Ave.

                       ATLANTA, GA.
                           74 N. Broad Street
                       NEW ORLEANS, LA.
                           140 Carondelet St.
                       DALLAS, TEX.
                           355 Commerce St.

                       LONDON, ENG.
                         Three Stores
                           317–318,
                           High Holborn, W. C.

                           78, Cheapside
                         West End Branch
                           29, Haymarket, S.W.

                       BIRMINGHAM, ENG.
                           57, New Street
                       MANCHESTER, ENG.
                           4, Oxford St. and
                           1, Lower Moseley St.
                       EDINBURGH, SCOT.
                           3 South Charlotte St.
                             (Cor. Princes St.)

                       MONTREAL, P. Q.
                           443 St. James St.
                       TORONTO, ONT.
                           189 Yonge St.

                       SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA
                           228 Clarence St.

                    Communications directed to A. G.
                 SPALDING & BROS., at any of the above
                     addresses, will receive prompt
                               attention.

                        THE SPALDING TRADE MARK
                          IS REGISTERED IN THE
                          UNITED STATES PATENT
                           OFFICE, ALSO IN 27
                           FOREIGN COUNTRIES.
                         INFRINGERS ARE WARNED.


            THE SPALDING TRADE-MARK IS THE FOUNDATION OF THE
                           SPALDING BUSINESS




                      Spalding’s Athletic Library


[Illustration: A. G. SPALDING]

Anticipating the present tendency of the American people toward a
healthful method of living and enjoyment, Spalding’s Athletic Library
was established in 1892 for the purpose of encouraging athletics in
every form, not only by publishing the official rules and records
pertaining to the various pastimes, but also by instructing, until
to-day Spalding’s Athletic Library is unique in its own particular field
and has been conceded the greatest educational series on athletic and
physical training subjects that has ever been compiled.

The publication of a distinct series of books devoted to athletic sports
and pastimes and designed to occupy the premier place in America in its
class was an early idea of Mr. A. G. Spalding, who was one of the first
in America to publish a handbook devoted to athletic sports, Spalding’s
Official Base Ball Guide being the initial number, which was followed at
intervals with other handbooks on the sports prominent in the ’70s.

Spalding’s Athletic Library has had the advice and counsel of Mr. A. G.
Spalding in all of its undertakings, and particularly in all books
devoted to the national game. This applies especially to Spalding’s
Official Base Ball Guide and Spalding’s Official Base Ball Record, both
of which receive the personal attention of Mr. A. G. Spalding, owing to
his early connection with the game as the leading pitcher of the
champion Boston and Chicago teams of 1872–76. His interest does not
stop, however, with matters pertaining to base ball; there is not a
sport that Mr. Spalding does not make it his business to become familiar
with, and that the Library will always maintain its premier place, with
Mr. Spalding’s able counsel at hand, goes without saying.

The entire series since the issue of the first number has been under the
direct personal supervision of Mr. James E. Sullivan, President of the
American Sports Publishing Company, and the total series of consecutive
numbers reach an aggregate of considerably over three hundred, included
in which are many “annuals,” that really constitute the history of their
particular sport in America year by year, back copies of which are even
now eagerly sought for, constituting as they do the really first
authentic records of events and official rules that have ever been
consecutively compiled.

When Spalding’s Athletic Library was founded, seventeen years ago, track
and field athletics were practically unknown outside the larger colleges
and a few athletic clubs in the leading cities, which gave occasional
meets, when an entry list of 250 competitors was a subject of comment;
golf was known only by a comparatively few persons; lawn tennis had some
vogue and base ball was practically the only established field sport,
and that in a professional way; basket ball had just been invented;
athletics for the schoolboy—and schoolgirl—were almost unknown, and an
advocate of class contests in athletics in the schools could not get a
hearing. To-day we find the greatest body of athletes in the world is
the Public Schools Athletic League of Greater New York, which has had an
entry list at its annual games of over two thousand, and in whose
“elementary series” in base ball last year 106 schools competed for the
trophy emblematic of the championship.

While Spalding’s Athletic Library cannot claim that the rapid growth of
athletics in this country is due to it solely, the fact cannot be denied
that the books have had a great deal to do with its encouragement, by
printing the official rules and instructions for playing the various
games at a nominal price, within the reach of everyone, with the sole
object that its series might be complete and the one place where a
person could look with absolute certainty for the particular book in
which he might be interested.

In selecting the editors and writers for the various books, the leading
authority in his particular line has been obtained, with the result that
no collection of books on athletic subjects can compare with Spalding’s
Athletic Library for the prominence of the various authors and their
ability to present their subjects in a thorough and practical manner.

A short sketch of a few of those who have edited some of the leading
numbers of Spalding’s Athletic Library is given herewith:

[Illustration]


                           JAMES E. SULLIVAN

President American Sports Publishing Company; entered the publishing
house of Frank Leslie in 1878, and has been connected continuously with
the publishing business since then and also as athletic editor of
various New York papers; was a competing athlete; one of the organizers
of the Amateur Athletic Union of the United States; has been actively on
its board of governors since its organization until the present time,
and President for two successive terms; has attended every championship
meeting in America since 1879 and has officiated in some capacity in
connection with American amateur championship track and field games for
nearly twenty-five years; assistant American director Olympic Games,
Paris, 1900; director Pan-American Exposition athletic department, 1901;
chief department physical culture Louisiana Purchase Exposition, St.
Louis, 1904; secretary American Committee Olympic Games, at Athens,
1906; honorary director of Athletics at Jamestown Exposition, 1907;
secretary American Committee Olympic Games, at London, 1908; member of
the Pastime A. C., New York; honorary member Missouri A. C., St. Louis;
honorary member Olympic A. C., San Francisco; ex-president Pastime A.
C., New Jersey A. C., Knickerbocker A. C.; president Metropolitan
Association of the A. A. U. for fifteen years; president Outdoor
Recreation League; with Dr. Luther H. Gulick organized the Public
Schools Athletic League of New York, and is now chairman of its games
committee and member executive committee; was a pioneer in playground
work and one of the organizers of the Outdoor Recreation League of New
York; appointed by President Roosevelt as special commissioner to the
Olympic Games at Athens, 1906, and decorated by King George I. of the
Hellenes (Greece) for his services in connection with the Olympic Games;
appointed special commissioner by President Roosevelt to the Olympic
Games at London, 1908; appointed by Mayor McClellan, 1908, as member of
the Board of Education of Greater New York.

[Illustration]


                              WALTER CAMP

For quarter of a century Mr. Walter Camp of Yale has occupied a leading
position in college athletics. It is immaterial what organization is
suggested for college athletics, or for the betterment of conditions,
insofar as college athletics is concerned, Mr. Camp has always played an
important part in its conferences, and the great interest in and high
plane of college sport to-day, are undoubtedly due more to Mr. Camp than
to any other individual. Mr. Camp has probably written more on college
athletics than any other writer and the leading papers and magazines of
America are always anxious to secure his expert opinion on foot ball,
track and field athletics, base ball and rowing. Mr. Camp has grown up
with Yale athletics and is a part of Yale’s remarkable athletic system.
While he has been designated as the “Father of Foot Ball,” it is a
well-known fact that during his college career Mr. Camp was regarded as
one of the best players that ever represented Yale on the base ball
field, so when we hear of Walter Camp as a foot ball expert we must also
remember his remarkable knowledge of the game of base ball, of which he
is a great admirer. Mr. Camp has edited Spalding’s Official Foot Ball
Guide since it was first published, and also the Spalding Athletic
Library book on How to Play Foot Ball. There is certainly no man in
American college life better qualified to write for Spalding’s Athletic
Library than Mr. Camp.

[Illustration]


                        DR. LUTHER HALSEY GULICK

The leading exponent of physical training in America; one who has worked
hard to impress the value of physical training in the schools; when
physical training was combined with education at the St. Louis
Exposition in 1904 Dr. Gulick played an important part in that congress;
he received several awards for his good work and had many honors
conferred upon him; he is the author of a great many books on the
subject; it was Dr. Gulick, who, acting on the suggestion of James E.
Sullivan, organized the Public Schools Athletic League of Greater New
York, and was its first Secretary; Dr. Gulick was also for several years
Director of Physical Training in the public schools of Greater New York,
resigning the position to assume the Presidency of the Playground
Association of America. Dr. Gulick is an authority on all subjects
pertaining to physical training and the study of the child.

[Illustration]


                             JOHN B. FOSTER

Successor to the late Henry Chadwick (“Father of Base Ball”) as editor
of Spalding’s Official Base Ball Guide; sporting editor of the New York
Evening Telegram; has been in the newspaper business for many years and
is recognized throughout America as a leading writer on the national
game; a staunch supporter of organized base ball, his pen has always
been used for the betterment of the game.

[Illustration]


                              TIM MURNANE

Base Ball editor of the Boston Globe and President of the New England
League of Base Ball Clubs; one of the best known base ball men of the
country; known from coast to coast; is a keen follower of the game and
prominent in all its councils; nearly half a century ago was one of
America’s foremost players; knows the game thoroughly and writes from
the point of view both of player and an official.

[Illustration]


                         HARRY PHILIP BURCHELL

Sporting editor of the New York Times; graduate of the University of
Pennsylvania; editor of Spalding’s Official Lawn Tennis Annual; is an
authority on the game; follows the movements of the players minutely and
understands not only tennis but all other subjects that can be classed
as athletics; no one is better qualified to edit this book than Mr.
Burchell.

[Illustration]


                           GEORGE T. HEPBRON

Former Young Men’s Christian Association director; for many years an
official of the Athletic League of Young Men’s Christian Associations of
North America; was connected with Dr. Luther H. Gulick in Young Men’s
Christian Association work for over twelve years; became identified with
basket ball when it was in its infancy and has followed it since, being
recognized as the leading exponent of the official rules; succeeded Dr.
Gulick as editor of the Official Basket Ball Guide and also editor of
the Spalding Athletic Library book on How to Play Basket Ball.

[Illustration]


                            JAMES S. MITCHEL

Former champion weight thrower; holder of numerous records, and is the
winner of more championships than any other individual in the history of
sport; Mr. Mitchel is a close student of athletics and well qualified to
write upon any topic connected with athletic sport; has been for years
on the staff of the New York Sun.

[Illustration]


                           MICHAEL C. MURPHY

The world’s most famous athletic trainer; the champion athletes that he
has developed for track and field sports, foot ball and base ball
fields, would run into thousands; he became famous when at Yale
University and has been particularly successful in developing what might
be termed championship teams; his rare good judgment has placed him in
an enviable position in the athletic world; now with the University of
Pennsylvania; during his career has trained only at two colleges and one
athletic club, Yale and the University of Pennsylvania, and Detroit
Athletic Club; his most recent triumph was that of training the famous
American team of athletes that swept the field at the Olympic Games of
1908 at London.

[Illustration]


                          DR. C. WARD CRAMPTON

Succeeded Dr. Gulick as director of physical training in the schools of
Greater New York: as secretary of the Public Schools Athletic League is
at the head of the most remarkable organization of its kind in the
world; is a practical athlete and gymnast himself, and has been for
years connected with the physical training system in the schools of
Greater New York, having had charge of the High School of Commerce.

[Illustration]


                          DR. GEORGE J. FISHER

Has been connected with Y. M. C. A. work for many years as physical
director at Cincinnati and Brooklyn, where he made such a high
reputation as organizer that he was chosen to succeed Dr. Luther H.
Gulick as Secretary of the Athletic League of Y. M. C. A.’s of North
America, when the latter resigned to take charge of the physical
training in the Public Schools of Greater New York.

[Illustration]


                            DR. GEORGE ORTON

On athletics, college athletics, particularly track and field, foot
ball, soccer foot ball, and training of the youth, it would be hard to
find one better qualified than Dr. Orton; has had the necessary athletic
experience and the ability to impart that experience intelligently to
the youth of the land; for years was the American, British and Canadian
champion runner.

[Illustration]


                          FREDERICK R. TOOMBS

A well-known authority on skating, rowing, boxing, racquets, and other
athletic sports; was sporting editor of American Press Association, New
York; dramatic editor; is a lawyer and has served several terms as a
member of Assembly of the Legislature of the State of New York; has
written several novels and historical works.

[Illustration]


                              R. L. WELCH

A resident of Chicago; the popularity of indoor base ball is chiefly due
to his efforts; a player himself of no mean ability; a first-class
organizer; he has followed the game of indoor base ball from its
inception.

[Illustration]


                         DR. HENRY S. ANDERSON

Has been connected with Yale University for years and is a recognized
authority on gymnastics; is admitted to be one of the leading
authorities in America on gymnastic subjects; is the author of many
books on physical training.

[Illustration]


                           CHARLES M. DANIELS

Just the man to write an authoritative book on swimming; the fastest
swimmer the world has ever known; member New York Athletic Club swimming
team and an Olympic champion at Athens in 1906 and London, 1908. In his
book on Swimming, Champion Daniels describes just the methods one must
use to become an expert swimmer.

[Illustration]


                             GUSTAVE BOJUS

Mr. Bojus is most thoroughly qualified to write intelligently on all
subjects pertaining to gymnastics and athletics; in his day one of
America’s most famous amateur athletes; has competed successfully in
gymnastics and many other sports for the New York Turn Verein; for
twenty years he has been prominent in teaching gymnastics and athletics;
was responsible for the famous gymnastic championship teams of Columbia
University; now with the Jersey City high schools.

[Illustration]


                            CHARLES JACOBUS

Admitted to be the “Father of Roque;” one of America’s most expert
players, winning the Olympic Championship at St. Louis in 1904; an
ardent supporter of the game and follows it minutely, and much of the
success of roque is due to his untiring efforts; certainly there is no
one better qualified to write on this subject than Mr. Jacobus.

[Illustration]


                            DR. E. B. WARMAN

Well known as a physical training expert; was probably one of the first
to enter the field and is the author of many books on the subject;
lectures extensively each year all over the country.

[Illustration]


                              W. J. CROMIE

Now with the University of Pennsylvania; was formerly a Y. M. C. A.
physical director; a keen student of all gymnastic matters; the author
of many books on subjects pertaining to physical training.

[Illustration]


                              G. M. MARTIN

By profession a physical director of the Young Men’s Christian
Association; a close student of all things gymnastic, and games for the
classes in the gymnasium or clubs.

[Illustration]


                              PROF. SENAC

A leader in the fencing world; has maintained a fencing school in New
York for years and developed a great many champions; understands the
science of fencing thoroughly and the benefits to be derived therefrom.




                       SPALDING ATHLETIC LIBRARY
 Giving the Titles of all Spalding Athletic Library Books now in print,
                      grouped for ready reference


                       SPALDING OFFICIAL ANNUALS

         No.  1  Spalding’s Official Base Ball Guide
         No.  1A Spalding’s Official Base Ball Record
         No.  2  Spalding’s Official Foot Ball Guide
         No.  2A Spalding’s Official Soccer Foot Ball Guide
         No.  3  Spalding’s Official Cricket Guide
         No.  4  Spalding’s Official Lawn Tennis Annual
         No.  5  Spalding’s Official Golf Guide
         No.  6  Spalding’s Official Ice Hockey Guide
         No.  7  Spalding’s Official Basket Ball Guide
         No.  7A Spalding’s Official Women’s Basket Ball Guide
         No.  8  Spalding’s Official Lacrosse Guide
         No.  9  Spalding’s Official Indoor Base Ball Guide
         No. 10  Spalding’s Official Roller Polo Guide
         No. 12  Spalding’s Official Athletic Almanac
         No. 12A Spalding’s Official Athletic Rules


 Group I.                                                      Base Ball

 No.   1     _Spalding’s Official Base Ball Guide_
 No.   1A    Official Base Ball Record.
 No. 202     How to Play Base Ball.
 No. 223     How to Bat.
 No. 232     How to Run Bases.
 No. 230     How to Pitch.
 No. 229     How to Catch.
 No. 225     How to Play First Base.
 No. 226     How to Play Second Base.
 No. 227     How to Play Third Base.
 No. 228     How to Play Shortstop.
 No. 224     How to Play the Outfield.
 No. 231     { How to Organize a Base Ball League.
             { How to Organize a Base Ball Club.
             { How to Manage a Base Ball Club.
             { How to Train a Base Ball Team.
             { How to Captain a Base Ball Team.
             { How to Umpire a Game.
             { Technical Base Ball Terms.
 No. 219     Ready Reckoner of Base Ball Percentages.

                          BASE BALL AUXILIARIES

 No. 336     Minor League Base Ball Guide.
 No. 338     Official Book National League of Prof. Base Ball Clubs.
 No. 340     Official Handbook National Playground Ball Assn.


 Group II.                                                     Foot Ball

 No.   2     _Spalding’s Official Foot Ball Guide._
 No. 334     Code of the Foot Ball Rules.
 No. 324     How to Play Foot Ball.
 No.   2A    _Spalding’s Official Soccer Foot Ball Guide._
 No. 286     How to Play Soccer.
 No. 335     English Rugby.

                           FOOT BALL AUXILIARY

 No. 332     Spalding’s Official Canadian Foot Ball Guide.


 Group III.                                                      Cricket

 No.   3     _Spalding’s Official Cricket Guide._
 No. 277     Cricket; and How to Play It.


 Group IV.                                                   Lawn Tennis

 No.   4     _Spalding’s Official Lawn Tennis Annual._
 No. 157     How to Play Lawn Tennis.
 No. 279     Strokes and Science of Lawn Tennis.


 Group V.                                                           Golf

 No.   5     _Spalding’s Official Golf Guide._
 No. 276     How to Play Golf.


 Group VI.                                                        Hockey

 No.   6     _Spalding’s Official Ice Hockey Guide._
 No. 304     How to Play Ice Hockey.
 No. 154     Field Hockey.
 No. 188     {Lawn Hockey.
             {Parlor Hockey.
             {Garden Hockey.
 No. 180     Ring Hockey.

                            HOCKEY AUXILIARY

 No. 256     Official Handbook Ontario Hockey Association.


 Group VII.                                                  Basket Ball

 No.   7     _Spalding’s Official Basket Ball Guide._
 No.   7A    _Spalding’s Official Women’s Basket Ball Guide._
 No. 193     How to Play Basket Ball.

                          BASKET BALL AUXILIARY

 No. 323     Official Collegiate Basket Ball Handbook.



 Group VIII.                                                    Lacrosse

 No.   8     _Spalding’s Official Lacrosse Guide._
 No. 201     How to Play Lacrosse.


 Group IX.                                              Indoor Base Ball

 No.   9     _Spalding’s Official Indoor Base Ball Guide._


 Group X.                                                           Polo

 No.  10     _Spalding’s Official Roller Polo Guide._
 No. 129     Water Polo.
 No. 199     Equestrian Polo.


 Group XI.                                           Miscellaneous Games

 No. 248     Archery.
 No. 138     Croquet.
 No. 271     Roque.
 No. 194     {Racquets.
             {Squash-Racquets.
             {Court Tennis.
 No.  13     Hand Ball.
 No. 167     Quoits.
 No. 170     Push Ball.
 No.  14     Curling.
 No. 207     Lawn Bowls.
 No. 188     Lawn Games.
 No. 189     Children’s Games.
 No. 341     How to Bowl.


 Group XII.                                                    Athletics

 No.  12     _Spalding’s Official Athletic Almanac._
 No.  12A    _Spalding’s Official Athletic Rules._
 No.  27     College Athletics.
 No. 182     All-Around Athletics.
 No. 156     Athletes’ Guide.
 No.  87     Athletic Primer.
 No. 273     Olympic Games at Athens, 1906.
 No. 252     How to Sprint.
 No. 255     How to Run 100 Yards.
 No. 174     Distance and Cross Country Running.
 No. 259     How to Become a Weight Thrower.
 No.  55     Official Sporting Rules.
 No. 246     Athletic Training for Schoolboys.
 No. 317     Marathon Running.
 No. 331     Schoolyard Athletics.

                          ATHLETIC AUXILIARIES

 No. 339     Intercollegiate Official Handbook.
 No. 302     Y. M. C. A. Official Handbook.
 No. 313     Public Schools Athletic League Official Handbook.
 No. 314     Public Schools Athletic League Official Handbook—Girls’
               Branch.
 No. 308     Official Handbook New York Interscholastic Athletic
               Association.


 Group XIII.                                    Athletic Accomplishments

 No. 177     How to Swim.
 No. 296     Speed Swimming.
 No. 128     How to Row.
 No. 209     How to Become a Skater.
 No. 178     How to Train for Bicycling.
 No.  23     Canoeing.
 No. 282     Roller Skating Guide.


 Group XIV.                                                 Manly Sports

 No.  18     Fencing. (By Breck.)
 No. 162     Boxing.
 No. 165     Fencing. (By Senac.)
 No. 140     Wrestling.
 No. 236     How to Wrestle.
 No. 102     Ground Tumbling.
 No. 233     Jiu Jitsu.
 No. 166     How to Swing Indian Clubs.
 No. 200     Dumb Bell Exercises.
 No. 143     Indian Clubs and Dumb Bells.
 No. 262     Medicine Ball Exercises.
 No.  29     Pulley Weight Exercises.
 No. 191     How to Punch the Bag.
 No. 289     Tumbling for Amateurs.
 No. 326     Professional Wrestling.


 Group XV.                                                    Gymnastics

 No. 104     Grading of Gymnastic Exercises.
 No. 214     Graded Calisthenics and Dumb Bell Drills.
 No. 254     Barnjum Bar Bell Drill.
 No. 158     Indoor and Outdoor Gymnastic Games.
 No. 124     How to Become a Gymnast.
 No. 287     Fancy Dumb Bell and Marching Drills.
 No. 327     Pyramid Building Without Apparatus.
 No. 328     Exercises on the Parallel Bars.
 No. 329     Pyramid Building with Wands, Chairs and Ladders.

                           GYMNASTIC AUXILIARY

 No. 333     Official Handbook I. C. A. A. Gymnasts of America.


 Group XVI.                                             Physical Culture

 No. 161     Ten Minutes’ Exercise for Busy Men.
 No. 208     Physical Education and Hygiene.
 No. 149     Scientific Physical Training and Care of the Body.
 No. 142     Physical Training Simplified.
 No. 185     Hints on Health.
 No. 213     285 Health Answers.
 No. 238     Muscle Building.
 No. 234     School Tactics and Maze Running.
 No. 261     Tensing Exercises.
 No. 285     Health by Muscular Gymnastics.
 No. 288     Indigestion Treated by Gymnastics.
 No. 290     Get Well; Keep Well.
 No. 325     Twenty-Minute Exercises.
 No. 330     Physical Training for the School and Class Room.


    ANY OF THE ABOVE BOOKS MAILED POSTPAID UPON RECEIPT OF 10 CENTS




 Group I.                                                      Base Ball


[Illustration]

  No. 1—Spalding’s Official Base Ball Guide.

The leading Base Ball annual of the country, and the official authority
of the game. Contains the official playing rules, with an explanatory
index of the rules compiled by Mr. A. G. Spalding; pictures of all the
teams in the National, American and minor leagues; reviews of the
season; college Base Ball, and a great deal of interesting information.
Price 10 cents.

  No. 1A—Spalding’s Official Base Ball Record.

Something new in Base Ball. Contains records of all kinds from the
beginning of the National League and official averages of all
professional organizations for past season. Illustrated with pictures of
leading teams and players. Price 10 cents.

  No. 202—How to Play Base Ball.

Edited by Tim Murnane. New and revised edition. Illustrated with
pictures showing how all the various curves and drops are thrown and
portraits of leading players. Price 10 cents.

  No. 223—How to Bat.

There is no better way of becoming a proficient batter than by reading
this book and practising the directions. Numerous illustrations. Price
10 cents.

  No. 232—How to Run the Bases.

This book gives clear and concise directions for excelling as a base
runner; tells when to run and when not to do so; how and when to slide;
team work on the bases; in fact, every point of the game is thoroughly
explained. Illustrated. Price 10 cents.

  No. 230—How to Pitch.

A new, up-to-date book. Its contents are the practical teaching of men
who have reached the top as pitchers, and who know how to impart a
knowledge of their art. All the big leagues’ pitchers are shown. Price
10 cents.

  No. 229—How to Catch.

Every boy who has hopes of being a clever catcher should read how
well-known players cover their position. Pictures of all the noted
catchers in the big leagues. Price 10 cents.

  No. 225—How to Play First Base.

Illustrated with pictures of all the prominent first basemen. Price 10
cents.

  No. 226—How to Play Second Base.

The ideas of the best second basemen have been incorporated in this book
for the especial benefit of boys who want to know the fine points of
play at this point of the diamond. Price 10 cents.

  No. 227—How to Play Third Base.

Third base is, in some respects, the most important of the infield. All
the points explained. Price 10 cents.

  No. 228—How to Play Shortstop.

Shortstop is one of the hardest positions on the infield to fill, and
quick thought and quick action are necessary for a player who expects to
make good as a shortstop. Illus. Price 10 cents.

  No. 224—How to Play the Outfield.

An invaluable guide for the outfielder. Price 10 cents.

  No. 231—How to Coach; How to Captain a Team; How to Manage a Team;
    How to Umpire; How to Organize a League; Technical Terms of Base
    Ball.

A useful guide. Price 10 cents.

  No. 219—Ready Reckoner of Base Ball Percentages.

To supply a demand for a book which would show the percentage of clubs
without recourse to the arduous work of figuring, the publishers had
these tables compiled by an expert. Price 10 cents.


                         BASE BALL AUXILIARIES.

  No. 336—Minor League Base Ball Guide.

The minors’ own guide. Edited by President T. H. Murnane, of the New
England League. Price 10 cents.

  No. 338—Official Handbook of the National League of Professional
    Base Ball Clubs.

Contains the Constitution, By-Laws, Official Rules, Averages, and
schedule of the National League for the current year, together with list
of club officers and reports of the annual meetings of the League. Price
10 cents.

  No. 340—Official Handbook National Playground Ball Association.

This game is specially adapted for playgrounds, parks, etc., and is
spreading rapidly. The book contains a description of the game, rules
and list of officers. Price 10 cents.




 Group II.                                                     Foot Ball


[Illustration]

  No. 2—Spalding’s Official Foot Ball Guide.

Edited by Walter Camp. Contains the new rules, with diagram of field;
All-America teams as selected by the leading authorities; reviews of the
game from various sections of the country; scores; pictures. Price 10
cents.

  No. 334—Code of the Foot Ball Rules.

This book is meant for the use of officials, to help them to refresh
their memories before a game and to afford them a quick means of
ascertaining a point during a game. It also gives a ready means of
finding a rule in the Official Rule Book, and is of great help to a
player in studying the Rules. Compiled by C. W. Short, Harvard, 1908.
Price 10 cents.

  No. 324—How to Play Foot Ball.

Edited by Walter Camp, of Yale. Everything that a beginner wants to know
and many points that an expert will be glad to learn. Snapshots of
leading teams and players in action, with comments by Walter Camp. Price
10 cents.

[Illustration]

  No. 2A—Spalding’s Official Association Soccer Foot Ball Guide.

A complete and up-to-date guide to the “Soccer” game in the United
States, containing instructions for playing the game, official rules,
and interesting news from all parts of the country. Illustrated. Price
10 cents.

  No. 286—How to Play Soccer.

How each position should be played, written by the best player in
England in his respective position, and illustrated with full-page
photographs of players in action. Price 10 cents.


                         FOOT BALL AUXILIARIES.

  No. 332—Spalding’s Official Canadian Foot Ball Guide.

The official book of the game in Canada. Price 10 cents.

  No. 335—Spalding’s Official Rugby Foot Ball Guide.

Contains the official rules under which the game is played in England
and by the California schools and colleges. Also instructions for
playing the various positions on a team. Illustrated with action
pictures of leading teams and players. Price 10 cents.




 Group III.                                                      Cricket


[Illustration]

  No. 3—Spalding’s Official Cricket Guide.

The most complete year book of the game that has ever been published in
America. Reports of special matches, official rules and pictures of all
the leading teams. Price 10 cents.

  No. 277—Cricket; and How to Play it.

By Prince Ranjitsinhji. The game described concisely and illustrated
with full-page pictures posed especially for this book. Price 10 cents.




 Group IV.                                                   Lawn Tennis


[Illustration]

  No. 4—Spalding’s Official Lawn Tennis Annual.

Contents include reports of all important tournaments; official ranking
from 1885 to date; laws of lawn tennis; instructions for handicapping;
decisions on doubtful points; management of tournaments; directory of
clubs; laying out and keeping a court. Illustrated. Price 10 cents.

  No. 157—How to Play Lawn Tennis.

A complete description of lawn tennis; a lesson for beginners and
directions telling how to make the most important strokes. Illustrated.
Price 10 cents.

  No. 279—Strokes and Science of Lawn Tennis.

By P. A. Vaile, a leading authority on the game in Great Britain. Every
stroke in the game is accurately illustrated and analyzed by the author.
Price 10 cents.




 Group V.                                                           Golf


[Illustration]

  No. 5—Spalding’s Official Golf Guide.

Contains records of all important tournaments, articles on the game in
various sections of the country, pictures of prominent players, official
playing rules and general items of interest. Price 10 cents.

  No. 276—How to Play Golf.

By James Braid and Harry Vardon, the world’s two greatest players tell
how they play the game, with numerous full-page pictures of them taken
on the links. Price 10 cents.




 Group VI.                                                        Hockey


[Illustration]

  No. 6—Spalding’s Official Ice Hockey Guide.

The official year book of the game. Contains the official rules,
pictures of leading teams and players, records, review of the season,
reports from different sections of the United States and Canada. Price
10 cents.

  No. 304—How to Play Ice Hockey.

Contains a description of the duties of each player. Illustrated. Price
10 cents.

  No. 154—Field Hockey.

Prominent in the sports at Vassar, Smith, Wellesley, Bryn Mawr and other
leading colleges. Price 10 cents.

  No. 188—Lawn Hockey, Parlor Hockey, Garden Hockey.

Containing the rules for each game. Illustrated. Price 10 cents.

  No. 180—Ring Hockey.

A new game for the gymnasium. Exciting as basket ball. Price 10 cents.


                           HOCKEY AUXILIARY.

  No. 256—Official Handbook of the Ontario Hockey Association.

Contains the official rules of the Association, constitution, rules of
competition, list of officers, and pictures of leading players. Price 10
cents.




 Group VII.                                                  Basket Ball


[Illustration]

  No. 7—Spalding’s Official Basket Ball Guide.

Edited by George T. Hepbron. Contains the revised official rules,
decisions on disputed points, records of prominent teams, reports on the
game from various parts of the country. Illustrated. Price 10 cents.

  No. 7A—Spalding’s Official Women’s Basket Ball Guide.

Edited by Miss Senda Berenson, of Smith College. Contains the official
playing rules and special articles on the game by prominent authorities.
Illustrated. Price 10 cents.

  No. 193—How to Play Basket Ball.

By G. T. Hepbron, editor of the Official Basket Ball Guide. Illustrated
with scenes of action. Price 10 cents.


                         BASKET BALL AUXILIARY.

  No. 323—Collegiate Basket Ball Handbook.

The official publication of the Collegiate Basket Ball Association.
Contains the official rules, records, All-America selections, reviews,
and pictures. Edited by H. A. Fisher, of Columbia. Price 10 cents.




 Group VIII.                                                    Lacrosse


  No. 8—Spalding’s Official Lacrosse Guide.

Contains the constitution, by-laws, playing rules, list of officers and
records of the U. S. Inter-Collegiate Lacrosse League. Price 10 cents.

  No. 201—How to Play Lacrosse.

Every position is thoroughly explained in a most simple and concise
manner, rendering it the best manual of the game ever published.
Illustrated with numerous snapshots of important plays. Price 10 cents.




 Group IX.                                              Indoor Base Ball


[Illustration]

  No. 9—Spalding’s Official Indoor Base Ball Guide.

America’s national game is now vying with other indoor games as a winter
pastime. This book contains the playing rules, pictures of leading
teams, and interesting articles on the game by leading authorities on
the subject. Price 10 cents.




 Group X.                                                           Polo


[Illustration]

  No. 10—Spalding’s Official Roller Polo Guide.

Edited by J. C. Morse. A full description of the game; official rules;
records; pictures of prominent players. Price 10 cents.

  No. 129—Water Polo.

The contents of this book treat of every detail, the individual work of
the players, the practice of the team, how to throw the ball, with
illustrations and many valuable hints. Price 10 cents.

  No. 199—Equestrian Polo.

Compiled by H. L. Fitzpatrick of the New York Sun. Illustrated with
portraits of leading players, and contains most useful information for
polo players. Price 10 cents.




 Group XI.                                           Miscellaneous Games


  No. 271—Spalding’s Official Roque Guide.

The official publication of the National Roque Association of America.
Contains a description of the courts and their construction, diagrams,
illustrations, rules and valuable information. Price 10 cents.

  No. 138—Spalding’s Official Croquet Guide.

Contains directions for playing, diagrams of important strokes,
description of grounds, instructions for the beginner, terms used in the
game, and the official playing rules. Price 10 cents.

  No. 341—How to Bowl.

The contents include: diagrams of effective deliveries; hints to
beginners; how to score; official rules; spares, how they are made;
rules for cocked hat, quintet, cocked hat and feather, battle game, etc.
Price 10 cents.

  No. 248—Archery.

A new and up-to-date book on this fascinating pastime. The several
varieties of archery; instructions for shooting; how to select
implements; how to score; and a great deal of interesting information.
Illustrated. Price 10 cents.

  No. 194—Racquets, Squash-Racquets and Court Tennis.

How to play each game is thoroughly explained, and all the difficult
strokes shown by special photographs taken especially for this book.
Contains the official rules for each game. Price 10 cents.

  No. 167—Quoits.

Contains a description of the plays used by experts and the official
rules. Illustrated. Price 10 cents.

  No. 170—Push Ball.

This book contains the official rules and a sketch of the game;
illustrated. Price 10 cents.

  No. 13—How to Play Hand Ball.

By the world’s champion, Michael Egan. Every play is thoroughly
explained by text and diagram. Illustrated. Price 10 cents.

  No. 14—Curling.

A short history of this famous Scottish pastime, with instructions for
play, rules of the game, definitions of terms and diagrams of different
shots. Price 10 cents.

  No. 207—Bowling on the Green; or, Lawn Bowls.

How to construct a green; how to play the game, and the official rules
of the Scottish Bowling Association. Illustrated. Price 10 cents.

  No. 189—Children’s Games.

These games are intended for use at recesses, and all but the team games
have been adapted to large classes. Suitable for children from three to
eight years, and include a great variety. Price 10 cents.

  No. 188—Lawn Games.

Lawn Hockey, Garden Hockey, Hand Tennis, Tether Tennis; also Volley
Ball, Parlor Hockey, Badminton, Basket Goal. Price 10 cents.




 Group XII.                                                    Athletics


[Illustration]

  No. 12—Spalding’s Official Athletic Almanac.

Compiled by J. E. Sullivan, President of the Amateur Athletic Union. The
only annual publication now issued that contains a complete list of
amateur best-on-records; intercollegiate, swimming, interscholastic,
English, Irish, Scotch, Swedish, Continental, South African,
Australasian; numerous photos of individual athletes and leading
athletic teams. Price 10 cents.

  No. 12A—Spalding’s Official Athletic Rules.

The A. A. U. is the governing body of athletes in the United States of
America, and all games must be held under its rules, which are
exclusively published in this handbook, and a copy should be in the
hands of every athlete and every club officer in America. Price 10
cents.

  No. 27—College Athletics.

M. C. Murphy, the well-known athletic trainer, now with Pennsylvania,
the author of this book, has written it especially for the schoolboy and
college man, but it is invaluable for the athlete who wishes to excel in
any branch of athletic sport; profusely illustrated. Price 10 cents.

  No. 182—All-Around Athletics.

Gives in full the method of scoring the All-Around Championship; how to
train for the All-Around Championship. Illustrated. Price 10 cents.

  No. 156—Athlete’s Guide.

Full instructions for the beginner, telling how to sprint, hurdle, jump
and throw weights, general hints on training; valuable advice to
beginners and important A. A. U. rules and their explanations, while the
pictures comprise many scenes of champions in action. Price 10 cents.

  No. 273—The Olympic Games at Athens.

A complete account of the Olympic Games of 1906, at Athens, the greatest
International Athletic Contest ever held. Compiled by J. E. Sullivan,
Special United States Commissioner to the Olympic Games. Price 10 cents.

  No. 87—Athletic Primer.

Edited by J. E. Sullivan, Ex-President of the Amateur Athletic Union.
Tells how to organize an athletic club, how to conduct an athletic
meeting, and gives rules for the government of athletic meetings;
contents also include directions for laying out athletic grounds, and a
very instructive article on training. Price 10 cents.

  No. 252—How to Sprint.

Every athlete who aspires to be a sprinter can study this book to
advantage. Price 10 cents.

  No. 255—How to Run 100 Yards.

By J. W. Morton, the noted British champion. Many of Mr. Morton’s
methods of training are novel to American athletes, but his success is
the best tribute to their worth. Illustrated. Price 10 cents.

  No. 174—Distance and Cross-Country Running.

By George Orton, the famous University of Pennsylvania runner. The
quarter, half, mile, the longer distances, and cross-country running and
steeplechasing, with instructions for training; pictures of leading
athletes in action, with comments by the editors. Price 10 cents.

  No. 259—Weight Throwing.

Probably no other man in the world has had the varied and long
experience of James S. Mitchel, the author, in the weight throwing
department of athletics. The book gives valuable information not only
for the novice, but for the expert as well. Price 10 cents.

  No. 246—Athletic Training for Schoolboys.

By Geo. W. Orton. Each event in the intercollegiate programme is treated
of separately. Price 10 cents.

  No. 55—Official Sporting Rules.

Contains rules not found in other publications for the government of
many sports; rules for wrestling, shuffleboard, snowshoeing,
professional racing, pigeon shooting, dog racing, pistol and revolver
shooting, British water polo rules, Rugby foot ball rules. Price 10
cents.

  No. 331—Schoolyard Athletics.

By J. E. Sullivan, Ex-President Amateur Athletic Union and member of
Board of Education of Greater New York. An invaluable handbook for the
teacher and the pupil. Gives a systematic plan for conducting school
athletic contests and instructs how to prepare for the various events.
Illustrated. Price 10 cents.

  No. 317—Marathon Running.

A new and up-to-date book on this popular pastime. Contains pictures of
the leading Marathon runners, methods of training, and best times made
in various Marathon events. Price 10 cents.


                         ATHLETIC AUXILIARIES.

  No. 339—Official Intercollegiate A. A. A. A. Handbook.

Contains constitution, by-laws, and laws of athletics; records from 1876
to date. Price 10 cents.

  No. 308—Official Handbook New York Interscholastic Athletic
    Association.

Contains the Association’s records, constitution and by-laws and other
information. Price 10 cents.

  No. 302—Official Y. M. C. A. Handbook.

Contains the official rules governing all sports under the jurisdiction
of the Y. M. C. A., official Y. M. C. A. scoring tables, pentathlon
rules, pictures of leading Y. M. C. A. athletes. Price 10 cents.

  No. 313—Official Handbook of the Public Schools Athletic League.

Edited by Dr. C. Ward Crampton, director of physical education in the
Public Schools of Greater New York. Illustrated. Price 10 cents.

  No. 314—Official Handbook Girls’ Branch of the Public Schools
    Athletic League.

The official publication. Contains: constitution and by-laws, list of
officers, donors, founders, life and annual members, reports and
illustrations. Price 10 cents.




 Group XIII.                                    Athletic Accomplishments


  No. 177—How to Swim.

Will interest the expert as well as the novice; the illustrations were
made from photographs especially posed, showing the swimmer in clear
water; a valuable feature is the series of “land drill” exercises for
the beginner. Price 10 cents.

  No. 296—Speed Swimming.

By Champion C. M. Daniels of the New York Athletic Club team, holder of
numerous American records, and the best swimmer in America qualified to
write on the subject. Any boy should be able to increase his speed in
the water after reading Champion Daniels’ instructions on the subject.
Price 10 cents.

  No. 128—How to Row.

By E. J. Giannini, of the New York Athletic Club, one of America’s most
famous amateur oarsmen and champions. Shows how to hold the oars, the
finish of the stroke and other valuable information. Price 10 cents.

  No. 23—Canoeing.

Paddling, sailing, cruising and racing canoes and their uses; with hints
on rig and management; the choice of a canoe; sailing canoes, racing
regulations; canoeing and camping. Fully illustrated. Price 10 cents.

  No. 209—How to Become a Skater.

Contains advice for beginners; how to become a figure skater, showing
how to do all the different tricks of the best figure skaters. Pictures
of prominent skaters and numerous diagrams. Price 10 cents.

  No. 282—Official Roller Skating Guide.

Directions for becoming a fancy and trick roller skater, and rules for
roller skating. Pictures of prominent trick skaters in action. Price 10
cents.

  No. 178—How to Train for Bicycling.

Gives methods of the best riders when training for long or short
distance races; hints on training. Revised and up-to-date in every
particular. Price 10 cents.




 Group XIV.                                                 Manly Sports


  No. 140—Wrestling.

Catch-as-catch-can style. Seventy illustrations of the different holds,
photographed especially and so described that anybody can with little
effort learn every one. Price 10 cents.

  No. 18—Fencing.

By Dr. Edward Breck, of Boston, editor of The Swordsman, a prominent
amateur fencer. A book that has stood the test of time, and is
universally acknowledged to be a standard work. Illustrated. Price 10
cents.

  No. 162—Boxing Guide.

Contains over 70 pages of illustrations showing all the latest blows,
posed especially for this book under the supervision of a well-known
instructor of boxing, who makes a specialty of teaching and knows how to
impart his knowledge. Price 10 cents.

  No. 165—The Art of Fencing

By Regis and Louis Senac, of New York, famous instructors and leading
authorities on the subject. Gives in detail how every move should be
made. Price 10 cents.

  No. 236—How to Wrestle.

The most complete and up-to-date book on wrestling ever published.
Edited by F. R. Toombs, and devoted principally to special poses and
illustrations by George Hackenschmidt, the “Russian Lion.” Price 10
cents.

  No. 102—Ground Tumbling.

Any boy, by reading this book and following the instructions, can become
proficient. Price 10 cents.

  No. 289—Tumbling for Amateurs.

Specially compiled for amateurs by Dr. James T. Gwathmey. Every variety
of the pastime explained by text and pictures, over 100 different
positions being shown. Price 10 cents.

  No. 191—How to Punch the Bag.

The best treatise on bag punching that has ever been printed. Every
variety of blow used in training is shown and explained, with a chapter
on fancy bag punching by a well-known theatrical bag puncher. Price 10
cents.

  No. 200—Dumb-Bells.

The best work on dumb-bells that has ever been offered. By Prof. G.
Bojus, of New York. Contains 200 photographs. Should be in the hands of
every teacher and pupil of physical culture, and is invaluable for home
exercise. Price 10 cents.

  No. 143—Indian Clubs and Dumb-Bells.

By America’s amateur champion club swinger, J. H. Dougherty. It is
clearly illustrated, by which any novice can become an expert. Price 10
cents.

  No. 262—Medicine Ball Exercises.

A series of plain and practical exercises with the medicine ball,
suitable for boys and girls, business and professional men, in and out
of gymnasium. Price 10 cents.

  No. 29—Pulley Weight Exercises.

By Dr. Henry S. Anderson, instructor in heavy gymnastics, Yale
gymnasium. In conjunction with a chest machine anyone with this book can
become perfectly developed. Price 10 cents.

  No. 233—Jiu Jitsu.

Each move thoroughly explained and illustrated with numerous full-page
pictures of Messrs. A. Minami and K. Koyama, two of the most famous
exponents of the art of Jiu Jitsu, who posed especially for this book.
Price 10 cents.

  No. 166—How to Swing Indian Clubs.

By Prof. E. B. Warman. By following the directions carefully anyone can
become an expert. Price 10 cents.

  No. 326—Professional Wrestling.

A book devoted to the catch-as-catch-can style; illustrated with
half-tone pictures showing the different holds used by Frank Gotch,
champion catch-as-catch-can wrestler of the world. Posed by Dr. Roller
and Charles Postl. By Ed. W. Smith, Sporting Editor of the Chicago
American. Price 10 cents.




 Group XV.                                                    Gymnastics


  No. 104—The Grading of Gymnastic Exercises.

By G. M. Martin. A book that should be in the hands of every physical
director of the Y. M. C. A., school, club, college, etc. Price 10 cents.

  No. 214—Graded Calisthenics and Dumb-Bell Drills.

For years it has been the custom in most gymnasiums of memorizing a set
drill, which was never varied. Consequently the beginner was given the
same kind and amount as the older member. With a view to giving
uniformity the present treatise is attempted. Price 10 cents.

  No. 254—Barnjum Bar Bell Drill.

Edited by Dr. R. Tait McKenzie, Director Physical Training, University
of Pennsylvania. Profusely illustrated. Price 10 cents.

  No. 158—Indoor and Outdoor Gymnastic Games.

A book that will prove valuable to indoor and outdoor gymnasiums,
schools, outings and gatherings where there are a number to be amused.
Price 10 cents.

  No. 124—How to Become a Gymnast.

By Robert Stoll, of the New York A. C., the American champion on the
flying rings from 1885 to 1892. Any boy can easily become proficient
with a little practice. Price 10 cents.

  No. 287—Fancy Dumb Bell and Marching Drills.

All concede that games and recreative exercises during the adolescent
period are preferable to set drills and monotonous movements. These
drills, while designed primarily for boys, can be used successfully with
girls and men and women. Profusely illustrated. Price 10 cents.

  No. 327—Pyramid Building Without Apparatus.

By W. J. Cromie, Instructor of Gymnastics, University of Pennsylvania.
With illustrations showing many different combinations. This book should
be in the hands of all gymnasium instructors. Price 10 Cents.

  No. 328—Exercises on the Parallel Bars.

By W. J. Cromie. Every gymnast should procure a copy of this book.
Illustrated with cuts showing many novel exercises. Price 10 cents.

  No. 329—Pyramid Building with Chairs, Wands and Ladders.

By W. J. Cromie. Illustrated with half-tone photographs showing many
interesting combinations. Price 10 cents.


                          GYMNASTIC AUXILIARY.

  No. 333—Official Handbook Inter-Collegiate Association Amateur
    Gymnasts of America.

Edited by P. R. Carpenter, Physical Director Amherst College. Contains
pictures of leading teams and individual champions, official rules
governing contests, records. Price 10 cents.




 Group XVI.                                             Physical Culture


  No. 161—Ten Minutes’ Exercise for Busy Men.

By Dr. Luther Halsey Gulick, Director of Physical Training in the New
York Public Schools. A concise and complete course of physical
education. Price 10 cents.

  No. 208—Physical Education and Hygiene.

This is the fifth of the Physical Training series, by Prof. E. B. Warman
(see Nos. 142, 149, 166, 185, 213, 261, 290). Price 10 cents.

  No. 149—The Care of the Body.

A book that all who value health should read and follow its
instructions. By Prof. E. B. Warman, the well-known lecturer and
authority on physical culture. Price 10 cents.

  No. 142—Physical Training Simplified.

By Prof. E. B. Warman. A complete, thorough and practical book where the
whole man is considered—brain and body. Price 10 cents.

  No. 261—Tensing Exercises.

By Prof. E. B. Warman. The “Tensing” or “Resisting” system of muscular
exercises is the most thorough, the most complete, the most
satisfactory, and the most fascinating of systems. Price 10 cents.

  No. 185—Health Hints.

By Prof. E. B. Warman. Health influenced by insulation; health
influenced by underwear; health influenced by color; exercise. Price 10
cents.

  No. 213—285 Health Answers.

By Prof. E. B. Warman. Contents: ventilating a bedroom; ventilating a
house; how to obtain pure air; bathing; salt water baths at home; a
substitute for ice water; to cure insomnia, etc., etc. Price 10 cents.

  No. 238—Muscle Building.

By Dr. L. H. Gulick. A complete treatise on the correct method of
acquiring strength. Illustrated. Price 10 cents.

  No. 234—School Tactics and Maze Running.

A series of drills for the use of schools. Edited by Dr. Luther Halsey
Gulick. Price 10 cents.

  No. 325—Twenty-Minute Exercises.

By Prof. E. B. Warman, with chapters on “How to Avoid Growing Old,” and
“Fasting: Its Objects and Benefits.” Price 10 cents.

  No. 285—Health by Muscular Gymnastics.

With hints on right living. By W. J. Cromie. If one will practice the
exercises and observe the hints therein contained, he will be amply
repaid for so doing. Price 10 cents.

  No. 288—Indigestion Treated by Gymnastics.

By W. J. Cromie. If the hints therein contained are observed and the
exercises faithfully performed great relief will be experienced. Price
10 cents.

  No. 290—Get Well; Keep Well.

By Prof. E. B. Warman, author of a number of books in the Spalding
Athletic Library on physical training. Price 10 cents.

  No. 330—Physical Training for the School and Class Room.

Edited by G. R. Borden, Physical Director of the Y. M. C. A., Easton,
Pa. A book that is for practical work in the school room. Illustrated.
Price 10 cents.

[Illustration:

  A. G. SPALDING

  FROM PHOTOGRAPH TAKEN IN SAN FRANCISCO IN NOVEMBER, 1879
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                      SPALDING’S ATHLETIC LIBRARY
                          GROUP XIV., NO. 102




                            Ground Tumbling


                                   BY
                           HENRY WALTER WORTH
  Formerly Physical Director of Armour Institute of Technology Chicago

[Illustration]


                            PUBLISHED BY THE
                   AMERICAN SPORTS PUBLISHING COMPANY
                       21 WARREN STREET, NEW YORK




                            COPYRIGHT, 1910
                                   BY
                   AMERICAN SPORTS PUBLISHING COMPANY
                                NEW YORK




                              INTRODUCTION

                                   ❧


Oh, do you remember, how, when a small boy in the country, in the months
of April, May, June, July, August and September (it mattered little what
time of the year it was, just so the ice was out of the water), you used
to run to the river at a “twelve-second gait,” make two simple twists of
the wrist, thereby removing a waist and pair of trousers, and plunge
into the water with speed equalled only by the rapidity with which you
say your prayers on a cold night? Of course you do. Great fun, was it
not? I used to think there was nothing like it. I could not get into the
water quick enough. That was before I learned to turn the “back” and the
“flip,” however.

After I learned to turn the back and forward somersault, when I was
about eleven years old, I would linger on the bank, or soft sandy beach,
“tumbling,” until I saw the other boys coming out to dress, then I would
dive in, swim a few strokes, just to say I had been in swimming, come
out and dress with the rest.

Like the proverbial “Wandering Willie,” the water lost much of its charm
for me after I found what royal fun the turning and twisting on the bank
afforded. I have wondered many times if the Almighty, when He created
beaches like Manhattan, Rockaway and Nantasket, making them slope gently
down to the water, and put the soft, but not too soft, yielding sand
there, if He did not think how admirable they would be to “tumble” on.

Any one who has experienced the pleasure of a few “backs,” “flips,”
“snap-ups,” etc., on the soft sand, immediately after donning the light
bathing suit, will agree with me that it is “great fun.” And he who has
never been taught, never practiced any acrobatic work, I hope will begin
“easy” at first; a few simple feats and practice carefully every
opportunity he has.

I am sure whoever takes an interest, tries, and advances as far as the
“round-off,” “flip” and “back,” will feel fully repaid for all the time
passed in learning. He will find so many opportunities of performing,
and it will be a means of great pleasure to himself, if not to his
friends.

Many of the acts can be performed in the parlor or in a very small
space. However, they should never be _practiced_ in the parlor.

Now a few words upon the benefits, physical and mental, derived from
practicing tumbling.

An expert tumbler has an everlasting faculty of always landing on his
feet. If thrown from a horse, street car or carriage, like a cat that is
dropped from a window, and the man who strikes a match on the sole of
his boot, he always lights on his feet. There is a sort of wriggle or
twist that a man who has practiced tumbling long can make in the air
that will invariably bring him down feet first.

The mental benefit is derived from the pleasure found in practicing, as
all recreation is a mental benefit. I feel that all I could preach, say
or sing about the benefit of any certain exercise would be feeble
indeed. Boys and young men—and they are the ones who will probably be
most interested in this book—are not appealed to by advice on “what they
ought to do.” They will never practice any of the feats described in
this book for the good it will do them. They know that plenty of sleep
is good for them, and they know that tobacco is bad for them; but it
makes no difference.

This book is intended more for the boy who wishes to learn but does not
know just where and how to begin. What we all need in this world is
encouragement. I should like to encourage every boy who wishes to learn.
Don’t be discouraged because it takes you so long to learn the
handspring; when that is once learned, the other acts will be easier.

Do you remember the comparative lines used by a baking powder company in
advertising their baking powder? There was the long line reaching nearly
across the page, representing this firm’s powder, “Absolutely Pure.”
Then there was the next line, not as long, representing some other
firm’s powder—not as long a line, and not so pure a powder. Then there
were other lines along down the list, shorter and shorter, until the
last, which was only about an eighth of an inch long. Now, I think these
lines might serve as an excellent illustration of the length of time it
will require one to learn the different feats. Let the long line
represent the length of time it takes to acquire the first trick; the
practice for the first trick will help you with the second, the second
with the third, and so on, so that when you have practiced and learned
many feats the time required to learn each will grow shorter and
shorter, although the acts grow harder.

This rule will apply to all athletic and gymnastic work as well as to
tumbling.

To boys who are apt to get discouraged I love to tell of a boy I knew in
Chicago. He was far below the average in natural ability when I first
knew him—awkward and clumsy—but he became interested in gymnastic work
and kept “everlastingly at it.” He fairly lived in the gymnasium. As a
result of this faithful labor, in less than three months’ time he
participated in a gymnastic exhibition, turning a forward somersault
through a blazing hoop.

Practice, don’t be discouraged! You will probably never become as great
an acrobat as one of the Nelson Brothers, but you will certainly find
great pleasure and accomplish some good results by Ground Tumbling.

                                                             THE AUTHOR.




                               DIRECTIONS

                                   ❧


_1. The Switch._

This is an act which is easily performed and affords much amusement for
spectators. Stand in an erect position with hands hanging at sides,
spring up a foot-and-a-half from the ground and give a quick jerk or
switch with the body and come down facing in the opposite direction. Do
not jump around. The turn is made by a twist of the body, not with the
feet or legs.

[Illustration: No. 2. THE SITDOWN.]


_2. The Sit Down._

Stand with the feet about one foot apart, bend over, keeping the legs
perfectly straight, until the finger tips nearly touch the toes, then
fall back to a sitting position on the floor. Do not bend the knees. If
performed correctly this can be done on a very hard floor without
hurting the performer in the least. (See illustration.)


_3. The Back Roll._

Performed the same as No. 2, only instead of stopping at the sitting
position the performer rolls back on the shoulders and head, and with
the use of the hands comes to a standing position on feet.

[Illustration: No. 4. THE FISH FLOP.]


_4. The Fish Flop._

Lie on stomach, feet close together with the toes touching the floor.
Place hands on sides, near ribs, flop over onto back with help of hands
and feet, keeping the body perfectly rigid. (See illustration.)


_5. The Front Roll._

Stand with heels close together, toes turned out. Bend over, place hands
on floor about one foot apart and about a foot-and-a-half in front of
feet, bend head in toward body and touch the back of head on floor
between hands and, with a push from the feet, roll over on back and up
onto feet again. “Curl up” in doing this act. Bring feet well under
body.


_6. The Cart Wheel._

Stand erect, throw left hand hard down on the floor, about two feet from
the left foot, follow with the right hand, two feet from the left hand,
then the right foot down about two feet from the right hand, and so on.
The feet and hands should be placed as nearly on a straight line as
possible. Arms and legs moving like the spokes in a wheel, hence the
name.


_7. The Round-off._

This may be done with either running or standing start. Strike hands on
ground in front of feet, letting the left strike a little before the
right, as in the cart-wheel. Place them about ten inches apart, at the
same time swing the body over and around, so as to land in a sitting
position directly opposite the one in starting.


_8. The Handspring._

Possibly the most common acrobatic feat. May be done from running or
standing start; strike hands hard on the ground, turn head under and in,
throw feet over head and as they begin to come down give a hard spring
or push up with the hands, curling feet down and back under body and
coming to standing position, facing the same way as when starting.


_9. The One-hand Handspring._

Same as No. 8, except that but one hand is used. The weight of the body
should be brought well over the hand used.

[Illustration: No. 10. THE HEADSPRING.]


_10. The Headspring._

Instructions same as for No. 8, only the spring is made from the head
instead of the hands. (See illustration.)

[Illustration: No. 11. THE SNAP UP.]


_11. The Snap Up._

Lie on back, carry feet up and back over head so that the toes nearly
touch the ground, bearing the weight on the back of head, neck and
shoulders. The hands should be placed on the ground near shoulders and
neck. Give a quick hard whip with the feet and legs over toward first
position and a hard snap or push up with the neck, shoulders and hands.
With a little practice it can be done without the aid of the hands. It
is a pretty act and a good “finish” to every act ending with a fall on
the back. (See illustration.)


_12. The Elephant Walk._

A comical contortion act. Place hands on floor in front of feet as near
to toes as possible. Do not bend the knees. Walk.


_13. The Long Dive or Lion’s Leap._

This is a long dive made on the mats or some soft place, much as one
dives into the water. Take a short run, strike both feet at the same
time on a spot about five feet from the mat, make a dive toward the
centre of the mat striking first the hands, then the head (which should
be well turned down and under), allowing the force of the dive to be
about equally divided between the hands, neck, head and shoulders. Curl
up well as in No. 5.


_14. The Hop Over Hand and Foot._

Grasp left foot with right hand, with thumb of right hand under great
toe joint; fingers of right hand over top of toes with backs of fingers
up. Jump over hand and foot with right foot. The point to be observed in
performing this trick is to keep the right hand and left foot perfectly
still while jumping with the right. If moved, they are apt to trip the
foot when jumping. This is excellent practice in developing quickness in
handling the feet, which is an important factor in tumbling.


_15. The Hop Back._

Jump back to original position from finish of No. 14. Try the same trick
with both feet over and back.


_16. The Jump Over Stick in Hands._

Practice this with a cane or rattan that can be bent down while jumping
over. Grasp stick with ordinary grasp, hands placed as far apart as the
width of shoulders. Jump over stick between hands, keeping stick in
hands. Jump back.


_17. The Jump Over Hat._

Same as No. 16, except jump is made over hat held in hands.


_18. The Jump Over Razor-Blade._

This should never be practiced until the performer can successfully jump
over short lead pencil held in hands. It is a “stage trick” that takes
well and usually makes a hit. It should be done with a razor-blade so
dull that if struck with the feet it would do no harm. Hold the blade of
the razor in the hands so loosely that if tripped upon by toes it would
easily slip from hands without injury.

[Illustration: No. 19. THE JUMP OVER HANDS.]


_19. The Jump Over Hands._

This is one of the prettiest and most difficult acts that is performed.
Entwine the fingers together and jump through the arms and over the
hands. It may take months of practice to get this feat, but, when once
learned, the legs will be so supple and quick that nearly all other
acrobatic feats will come easier in consequence. (See illustration.)


_20. The Twist Handspring._

Performed the same as No. 8, only, after touching the hands, the body
gives a quick turn or twist to the right or left so as to finish the act
facing in position used in starting.


_21. The Twist Snap-Up._

Same as No. 11, only the body gives a quick turn or twist to the right
or left after the shoulders leave the ground so that the finish is made
opposite the position taken in starting.


_22. The Cradle._

First do the snap-up, No. 11, and immediately after landing fall back
onto the shoulders, neck, head and hands as in the snap-up, then snap
back to feet and continue to rock back and forth.


_23. The Kicking Jackass._

Stand with heels close together, jump onto hands, with the feet carried
well back and the back arched. Then spring (not fall) back to the feet
from the hands and continue the movement. Be sure that the feet leave
and strike the ground together, also the hands. Do not “crow-hop,” that
is, don’t strike first one foot and then the other, a sort of
“ker-flap,” “pit-pat” sound.

[Illustration: No. 24. THE CURL.]


_24. The Curl._

Stand erect, fall slowly forward on the hands, keeping the body
perfectly straight. Break the force of the fall by letting the arms bend
slightly, but straighten them immediately. Curl up, bringing the knees
well up toward the chin and carry the feet through between the hands,
not letting them touch the floor; extend legs in front of arms, curl up
again, carry feet back through hands and straighten into the
“handstand.” This is a difficult feat, but it may be practiced with
perfect safety. It is excellent practice for developing the muscles of
the stomach and abdomen. (See illustration.)

[Illustration: No. 25. RUNNING FORWARD SOMERSAULT.]


_25. Running Forward Somersault._

Take a quick run of about twenty yards, strike both feet together on the
mat or floor. Jump well into the air, duck the head down and in, and try
to describe a half circle through the air, with the feet landing in a
position, the same direction as when starting. It is well to practice
this over a very soft place, having a board or some hard object to turn
from and land into hay, shavings, soft sand, sawdust or tan-bark. When
one has a soft place on which to practice he should go at it boldly; he
will then be less apt to jar himself. A quick hard run is the important
thing, and a leap of about five feet should be made before striking the
take-off. (See illustration.)


_26. The Back Somersault._

This is done from a standing position. Get two men to hold you up
while trying. The “lungers” that are generally used in the
gymnasium—“coward-strap” they are called—may be used with perfect
safety. However, I think the best kind of strap is a long strong
towel.

Stand firmly with the heels about four inches apart, spring up as high
as possible, throw the head back and down and try to describe a half
circle with the feet landing in a position facing the same way as when
starting. This should be performed with a “cut,” that is when the feet
get well over the head catch the legs back of the knees and pull them
down under the body. The way of using the hands in performing the back
somersault will gradually come to the performer with practice.


_27. The Flip._

Sometimes called “Back Handspring.” Should be practiced over a
moderately soft place. Stand with the back to the mat. Sink down so that
knees come within a foot of the floor in front of feet. Throw the hands
and head back. Strike hands on floor, about six inches apart, in a
position such as is held while walking on hands. Do not let the head
touch the ground. Then throw the feet up over the head and hands,
describing a half circle, finishing facing the same way as when
starting. Use the stomach and abdomen muscles when performing this act.
Do not let the feet leave the ground until the hands are firmly placed.


_28. The Twister._

This is No. 26, the back somersault, with a half turn to the right or
left, so that the finish is made facing in an opposite position from the
position in starting. It is well in practising this act to try and turn
just a little at first, then an inch further, and so on until the
complete half turn is made.


_29. The Twist Flip._

Same as No. 27, the “flip,” only a half turn is made from the hands so
as to finish facing in an opposite direction from that taken when
starting.


_30. The Spotter._

This is the back somersault turned in such a way as to finish with the
feet in the same spot they were when starting. It is best acquired by
trying to make each finish nearer and nearer to the starting position.


_31. The Gainer._

Same as No. 30, except that the finish is made with the feet striking in
front of the starting position.


_32. The Tuck-up._

This is a high back somersault performed without the “cut.” It is
usually done as a finish to a succession of “flips.”


_33. The Standing Forward._

This is the forward somersault performed without a run. To do this one
must jump high into the air, turning as he would in the running forward
and “cut” by catching the legs in front, just above the ankles, and
drawing them under the ankles. It is a difficult act.


_34. The Half Forward._

The first part of this act is performed as in No. 25, only, instead of
having the feet describe a circle over the head, they stop in the air
above head, and the landing is made on the hands. It is, in fact, a sort
of jump or dive on the hands and stand there.

[Illustration: No. 35. THE HALF BACK.]


_35. The Half Back._

Like No. 26, only the finish is made onto the hands and the body
balanced there. Instead of turning all the way around, jump back onto
the hands and stand there. (See illustration.)

This concludes the article on “single acts.” In the next chapter I will
describe how the acts can be suitably combined. A clever performer can
make combinations other than these. In fact, there are an endless
variety of combinations that can be made with the acts here described.
Space will not allow of a longer or more thorough description.


                              COMBINATIONS

 _36._ A succession of No. 5.

 _37._ A combination of Nos. 2 and 3.

 _38._ A succession of No. 6.

 _39._ A combination of Nos. 2, 3, 4 and 11.

 _40._ A combination of Nos. 11 and 8.

 _41._ A combination of Nos. 10 and 8.

 _42._ A succession of No. 8.

 _43._ A succession of No. 11.

 _44._ A succession of No. 10.

 _45._ A combination of Nos. 7, 2 and 3.

 _46._ A combination of Nos. 7, 2, 3, 4 and 11.

 _47._ A combination of Nos. 7, 2, 3, 4, 11 and 23.

 _48._ A succession of No. 21.

 _49._ A combination of Nos. 8 and 33.

 _50._ No. 13 through hoop.

 _51._ A combination of Nos. 7 and 26.

 _52._ A combination of Nos. 7 and 27.

 _53._ A combination of Nos. 23 and 26.

 _54._ A combination of Nos. 24 and 33.

 _55._ A combination of Nos. 7, 27 and 26.

 _56._ A combination of Nos. 7, 27, 26 and 33.

 _57._ A combination of No. 7 and a succession of Nos. 27 and 32.

 _58._ A succession of Nos. 8 and 34, then a succession of No. 27.

 _59._ A combination of No. 7, a succession of Nos. 27 and 28, then a
         succession of Nos. 27 and 32.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration: ACCEPT NO SUBSTITUTE THE SPALDING TRADE-MARK GUARANTEES
QUALITY]


                             Home Apparatus

“It is not so important to have big muscles as it is to have good
digestion; it is not so important to have powerful muscles as it is, to
have a strong, regular heart; it is not so important to have great skill
with one’s muscles as to have good lungs and kidneys.”—_Extract from
Spalding Athletic Library No. 161—“Ten Minutes’ Exercise for Busy Men.”_

The value of a few minutes’ exercise daily with scientific and properly
designed apparatus, is rapidly becoming apparent to the vast number of
business men who find it simply impossible to take regular outdoor
exercise.


                    Spalding Gold Medal Indian Clubs

      Model, material and finish as perfect as the most complete and
                    up-to-date factory can make them.

              _Natural Color, Lathe Polished, High Finish,_

 Spalding Gold Medal Indian Clubs are made of selected first grade clear
 maple, in two popular models and are perfect in balance. Each club bears
   fac-simile of the Spalding Gold Medal. Each pair is wrapped in paper
                                   bag.

[Illustration: Model E]

[Illustration: Model B]


                                MODEL E

                      _Weights specified are for
                              each club._

                      ½ lb. Model E. Pair, =$ .60=
                      ¾ lb. Model E. Pair,   =.60=
                      1 lb. Model E. Pair,   =.70=
                     1½ lb. Model E. Pair,   =.80=
                      2 lb. Model E. Pair,  =1.00=
                      3 lb. Model E. Pair,  =1.20=


                                MODEL B

                      _Weights specified are for
                              each club._

                      ½ lb. Model B. Pair, =$ .50=
                      ¾ lb. Model B. Pair,   =.50=
                      1 lb. Model B. Pair,   =.55=
                     1½ lb. Model B. Pair,   =.60=
                      2 lb. Model B. Pair,   =.70=
                      3 lb. Model B. Pair,  =1.00=


                    Spalding Trade-Mark Indian Clubs

                            Stained Finish.

The following clubs bear our Trade-Mark, are made of good material, and
are far superior in shape and finish to the best clubs of other makes.
Furnished in two popular models. Each pair wrapped in paper bag.

[Illustration: Model ES]

[Illustration: Model BS]


                                MODEL ES

                       _Weights specified are for
                              each club._

                      ½ lb. Model ES. Pair, =$ .35=
                      ¾ lb. Model ES. Pair,   =.35=
                      1 lb. Model ES. Pair,   =.40=
                     1½ lb. Model ES. Pair,   =.50=
                      2 lb. Model ES. Pair,   =.60=
                      3 lb. Model ES. Pair,   =.70=


                                MODEL BS

                       _Weights specified are for
                              each club._

                      ½ lb. Model BS. Pair, =$ .30=
                      ¾ lb. Model BS. Pair,   =.30=
                      1 lb. Model BS. Pair,   =.35=
                     1½ lb. Model BS. Pair,   =.45=
                      2 lb. Model BS. Pair,   =.55=
                      3 lb. Model BS. Pair,   =.65=

[Illustration: No. A]

[Illustration: No. AA]


                       Spalding Exhibition Clubs

Handsomely finished in ebonite and made for exhibition and stage
purposes. The clubs are hollow, with a large body, and although
extremely light, represent a club weighing three pounds or more.

 No. =A.= Ebonite finish.                                        =$3.50=
 No. =AA.= With German Silver Bands.                       Pair, =$5.00=

[Illustration: No. 1]


               Spalding Indian Club and Dumb Bell Hangers

Made of iron and nicely japanned.

 No. =1.= For Indian Clubs or Dumb Bells.               Per pair, =16c.=

 No. =1M.= For Indian Clubs or Dumb Bells, mounted on
   oak strips.                                          Per pair, =25c.=

[Illustration]




                  Spalding Gold Medal Wood Dumb Bells


  There is Skill Used in Turning Spalding Dumb Bells. They Feel Right
                          Because They Are So

               Natural Color, Lathe Polished, High Finish

[Illustration: Model A]

Spalding Gold Medal Dumb Bells are made of selected first grade clear
maple, and are perfect in balance. Each bell bears fac-simile of the
Spalding Gold Medal. Each pair is wrapped in paper bag. Weights
specified are for each bell.

                ½ lb.       ¾ lb.       1 lb.      1½ lb.       2 lb.
 Pair,         =40c.=      =45c.=      =50c.=      =55c.=      =65c.=


                  Spalding Trade-Mark Wood Dumb Bells

                             Stained Finish

[Illustration: Model AW]

Spalding Trade-Mark quality. Made of good material and superior in shape
and finish to the best wood dumb bells of other makes. Each pair wrapped
in paper bag. Weights specified are for each bell.

                ½ lb.       ¾ lb.       1 lb.      1½ lb.       2 lb.
 Pair,         =30c.=      =30c.=      =35c.=      =45c.=      =55c.=


                        Spalding Iron Dumb Bells

[Illustration]

Made on approved models, nicely balanced and finished in black enamel.

 Sizes 2 to 40 pounds,                                             =6c.=

 Over 40 pounds,                                                   =8c.=

 Bar Bells, any weight, wrought iron handles, any
   length made specially.                                  Pound, =10c.=


                   Spalding Nickel-Plated Dumb Bells

[Illustration: Nickel-plated and polished.]

 =1N.= 1 lb.                                                     =$ .25=
 =2N.= 2 lb.                                                       =.50=
 =3N.= 3 lb.                                                       =.65=
 =4N.= 4 lb.                                                       =.75=
 =5N.= 5 lb.                                                      =1.00=


                   Spalding Nickel-Plated Dumb Bells

                           With Rubber Bands

[Illustration: Nickel-plated and polished.]

 =1B.= 1 lb.                                                     =$ .65=
 =2B.= 2 lb.                                                       =.75=
 =3B.= 3 lb.                                                      =1.00=
 =4B.= 4 lb.                                                      =1.15=
 =5B.= 5 lb.                                                      =1.25=


     =Savage Bar Bell=—Especially designed by DR. WATSON L. SAVAGE.

[Illustration]

 =Model S.= Has large pear-shaped ends with a
   flexible hickory shaft ½-inch in diameter,
   producing a vibratory exercise, similar to that
   obtained with the French wand.                     Per dozen, =$6.00=


                         Spalding Ash Bar Bells

[Illustration]

 No. =2.= Selected material, highly polished, 5 feet
   long.                                              Per dozen, =$5.00=


                          Spalding School Wand

[Illustration]

 No. =3.= 3½ feet long. Made of straight grain maple. Per dozen, =$1.30=


                       Spalding Calisthenic Wand

[Illustration]

 No. =4.= 4½ feet long. 1-inch diameter.              Per dozen, =$1.60=


                             Home Apparatus

“If a man gets plenty of food, and his digestive apparatus works it up
into good rich blood; if the heart is strong and regular so that this
good blood goes to all parts of the body with vigor and regularity, and
if the respiratory and excretory apparatus is in such good order that
this blood is kept pure, the fundamental conditions of health are
laid.”—“_Extracts from Spalding Athletic Library No. 161._”—“_Ten
Minutes’ Exercise for Busy Men._”

Rational exercise with simple but correct apparatus will enable almost
any man to arrive at approximately a correct state of health.

[Illustration]


                    SPALDING IMPROVED MEDICINE BALLS

             An excellent form of exercise for business men

[Illustration]

Weigh from four to eleven pounds. The covering is of selected tan
leather, sewn in the same manner as our foot balls. Quality throughout
has been much improved and the balls as now made are extremely durable.
The exercise consists of throwing ball to one another, and the catching
of it develops the chest, exercises the back, arms, legs; in fact,
improves the whole system.

 No. =11.=  4-pound Ball.                                  Each, =$5.00=
 No. =12.=  6-pound Ball.                                  Each,  =6.00=
 No. =13.=  9-pound Ball.                                  Each,  =7.00=
 No. =14.= 11-pound Ball.                                  Each, =10.00=


                             Home Apparatus

“One of the aims of physical training is to make exercise interesting
and enjoyable. To be beneficial in the highest sense it must be
recreative. Particularly is this true of physical exercise for
business men. As a class, in their daily work, they are kept on a
constant mental strain. Besides, they are, to a large degree,
physically inactive. Life becomes too intense, too serious, too
sordid. Exercise therefore, for business men, must be largely
recreative, relaxing and restful.”—_Extract from Spalding Athletic
Library, No. 262—“Exercises with the Medicine Ball.”_

[Illustration]


                          SPALDING HAND BALLS

Hand ball, played indoors, will keep base ball players and other
athletes in good condition during hard weather when outdoor athletics
are out of the question.

The leather-covered hand balls we make are wound by hand, and are the
same as those used by the best ball players in this country.

[Illustration]

 No. =1.= Match, regulation size and weight, leather
   cover.                                                  Each, =$1.25=

 No. =2.= Expert, leather cover.                                   =.85=

 No. =6.= Rubber, best quality, almost solid.                      =.40=

 No. =4.= Amateur, leather cover.                                  =.25=

 No. =5.= Rubber hand ball.                                        =.25=

 The Irish Regulation Balls have been improved in quality and will give
                        excellent satisfaction.

 RED ACE, IRISH REGULATION red rubber ball.                   Each, 50c.
 BLACK ACE, IRISH REGULATION black rubber ball.               Each, 50c.

 For other balls suitable for Hand Ball Game, see page devoted to Lawn
                             Tennis Balls.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]


                  Spalding Hand Ball Gloves and Mitts

 No. =A.= Gloves. Best quality glove leather with
   stitched front and special wrist pad.                   Pair, =$4.00=

 No. =B.= Mitts. Lightly padded.                                  =3.00=

 No. =C.= Gloves. Full fingered.                                  =1.50=

 No. =D.= Fingerless Gloves.                                       =.75=

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




                            Sandow’s Patent

                              Spring Grip

                               Dumb Bells


[Illustration: EUGEN SANDOW, Patentee.]

                         A. G. SPALDING & BROS.

                  SOLE AMERICAN AND CANADIAN LICENSEES

An entire system of Physical Culture is embraced within the exercises
possible with these wonderful dumb bells.

The bells are made in two halves connected by steel springs, the effort
necessary in gripping compelling the pupil to continually devote his
whole mind to each movement. This concentration of will power on each
muscle involved is what is responsible for the great results obtained
through properly exercising with them.

[Illustration: No. 6. MEN’S]

[Illustration: No. 4. LADIES’]

[Illustration: No. 2. BOYS’]


                 Sandow’s Patent Spring Grip Dumb Bells

 No. =6. MEN’S=. Nickel-plated; fitted with seven
   steel springs.                                      Per pair, =$3.00=

 No. =4. LADIES’=. Nickel-plated; fitted with five
   steel springs.                                      Per pair, =$2.50=

 No. =2. BOYS’=. Nickel-plated; fitted with four
   steel springs.                                      Per pair, =$2.00=

 =We include with each pair of Sandow Dumb Bells a chart of exercises by
 Sandow and full instructions for using. Also a piece of selvyt cloth for
                  keeping dumb bells in good condition.=




                        Spalding Home Apparatus

Exercise acts on the health of an individual in the same way as the
draught does on the fire in a furnace. Pile on the coal and shut off the
draught and you kill the fire. Continue to eat heavy meals and take no
exercise and your health will be affected, not because of the food you
have eaten so much as on account of the lack of exercise. A little
exercise is all that is necessary to keep you in good condition. Some
rational, pleasant and interesting exercise, persisted in with
regularity and, preferably, with Spalding Home Apparatus, will help you
to retain your health.

[Illustration]


                      Spalding Chest Weight No. 2

An ideal machine for home use. Well made and easy running. Rods are
⅜-inch coppered spring steel. Bearings are hardened steel cone points
running in soft, gray iron, noiseless and durable. Weight carriage
packed with felt, good for long wear, but easily removed and replaced
when necessary without the use of glue or wedges of any kind. Weight
carriage strikes on rubber bumpers. Weights are 5-pound iron dumb-bells,
one to each carriage, and may be removed and used as dumb bells. Wall
and floor boards are hard wood, nicely finished and stained. All
castings heavily japanned. Every part of machine guaranteed free of
defect.

 No. =2.=                                                  Each. =$5.00=

[Illustration]


                      Spalding Chest Weight No. 12

We have just added this very well-made machine to our line. Cast iron
parts are all nicely _japanned_. The wheels are iron, turned true on
centers, and have hardened steel cone point bearings. The guide rods are
spring steel, copper-plated. The weight carriage has removable felt
bushings, noiseless and durable. Each handle is equipped with 10 lbs. of
weights.

 No. =12.=                                                Each, =$10.00=

[Illustration: Showing important details of Construction of No. 12
Machine.]

[Illustration]




 =THE SPALDING TRADE-MARK IS PLACED UPON EVERY GENUINE SPALDING ARTICLE.
                          ACCEPT NO SUBSTITUTE.=

[Illustration]


                   The Laflin Friction Rowing Machine

Do not use oil on friction cylinder. If its action is not perfectly
smooth a little clear soap rubbed on its surface will properly correct
its action. The means used to produce the resistance is a simple
friction clutch, which takes instant hold at the commencement of the
stroke and retains the pressure till its completion, when it instantly
releases it precisely as in a boat. Quickly taken apart without
loosening any bolts or screws. Each machine is adjustable to any amount
of friction or resistance.

 No. =119.=                                           Complete, =$16.00=

[Illustration]


                             Home Apparatus

The apparatus listed in this catalogue is designed particularly for
private use; i. e., in homes and private gymnasiums. It retains the same
superior marks of quality which distinguish the regular line of
gymnasium apparatus manufactured by A. G. Spalding & Bros., but its
distinctive design permits it to be sold at a price more in keeping with
its use than heretofore obtainable, without any sacrifice of practical
value or durability.

[Illustration]


                         Kerns’ Rowing Machine

                    Operated just like rowing a boat

     =Suitable alike for the Athlete or the ordinary Man or Woman=

The ideal boat for home use and training purposes. Used by the leading
athletic clubs, colleges and prominent oarsmen of the world, and
pronounced the most perfect rowing machine ever produced. Fitted with
the Kerns’ Patent Roller Seat and Shoes, the shoes having a three-inch
adjustment, to suit either a tall or a short person. By turning a
thumb-nut the belt can be tightened to any desired degree, and more or
less friction thrown into the running parts, imitating the resistance
which exists when forcing a row-boat through the water. The weaker sex
can use the machine by simply loosening the thumb-nut which reduces the
resistance; and on the other hand, by reversing the operation the
resistance can be so increased that the strongest athlete can have any
amount of resistance. The oars are pivoted in such a way that the
operator can handle and turn them the same as he would during the return
and feathering motion with a boat oar.

 No. 600. Kerns’ Patent Single Scull Rowing Machine.      Each, =$30.00=




               Spalding New and Improved Worsted Jerseys


 Following sizes carried in stock regularly in all qualities: 28 to 44
                              inch chest.

                   Other sizes at an advanced price.

[Illustration:


  =Jerseys are being used more
  and more by base ball players,
  especially for early
  Spring and late Fall games.
  The Spalding line includes a
  complete assortment of
  styles and qualities.=
]

_We allow two inches for stretch in all our Jerseys, and sizes are
marked accordingly. It is suggested, however, that for very heavy men a
size about two inches larger than coat measurement be ordered to insure
a comfortable fit._


                              STOCK COLORS

=PLAIN COLORS=—The following stock colors are supplied in our worsted
jerseys (NOT Nos. 6 or 6X) at regular prices. Other colors to order only
in any quality (EXCEPT Nos. 6 and 6X). 25c. each extra.

                             Gray
                             Orange
                             Black
                             White
                             Maroon
                             Scarlet
                             Cardinal
                             Navy Blue
                             Royal Blue
                             Columbia Blue
                             Peacock Blue
                             Dark Green
                             Olive Green
                             Irish Green
                             Pink
                             Purple
                             Yellow
                             Seal Brown
                             Old Gold
                             Drab

 No. =1P.= Full regular made; that is, fashioned or
   knit to exact shape on the machine and then put
   together by hand, altogether different from
   cutting them out of a piece of material and sewing
   them up on a machine as are the majority of
   garments known as Jerseys. Special quality
   worsted. Solid stock colors.                            Each, =$4.50=

 No. =10P.= Worsted, fashioned. Solid stock colors,        Each, =$3.00=

 No. =12P.= Worsted; solid stock colors.                   Each, =$2.75=

 No. =12XB.= Boys’ Jersey. Worsted. Furnished in
   sizes 26 to 36 inches chest measurement only.
   Solid stock colors only. No special orders.             Each, =$2.00=


                             SPECIAL NOTICE

 _We will furnish any of the above solid color Jerseys (except Nos. 6 and
   6X), with one color body and another color (not striped) collar and
             cuffs in stock colors only at no extra charge._

[Illustration: Nos. 1P, 10P and 12P]

[Illustration]


                        Spalding Cotton Jerseys

 No. =6.= Cotton, good quality, fashioned, roll
   collar, full-length sleeves. Colors: Black, Navy
   Blue, Gray and Maroon only.                             Each, =$1.00=

 No. =6X.= Cotton, same as No. 6, but with striped
   sleeves in following combinations only: Navy with
   White or Red stripe; Black with Orange or Red
   stripe; Maroon with White stripe.                       Each, =$1.25=

                  =Woven Letters, Numerals or Designs=

  _We weave into our best grade Jerseys, No. 1P, Letters, Numerals and
                       Designs in special colors
     as desired. Prices quoted on application. Designs submitted._


               =PRICES SUBJECT TO ADVANCE WITHOUT NOTICE=




                         Spalding Coat Jerseys


  =Following sizes carried in stock regularly in all qualities: 28 to 44
              inch chest. Other sizes at an advanced price.=


    _We allow two inches for stretch in all our Jerseys, and sizes are
 marked accordingly. It is suggested, however, that for very heavy men a
 size about two inches larger than coat measurement be ordered to insure
                           a comfortable fit._


                              STOCK COLORS

                             Gray
                             Orange
                             Black
                             White
                             Maroon
                             Scarlet
                             Cardinal
                             Navy
                             Royal Blue
                             Columbia Blue
                             Peacock Blue
                             Dark Green
                             Olive Green
                             Irish Green
                             Pink
                             Purple
                             Yellow
                             Seal Brown
                             Old Gold
                             Drab

 PLAIN COLORS—The above stock colors are supplied in our worsted jerseys
 (NOT Nos. 6 or 6X) at regular prices. Other colors to order only in any
              quality (EXCEPT Nos. 6 or 6X) 25c. each extra.

 STRIPES AND TRIMMINGS—Supplied as specialised in any of the above stock
   colors (not more than two colors in any garment) at regular prices.
   Other colors to order only in any quality (EXCEPT Nos. 6 or 6X) 25c.
                               each extra.

[Illustration: Nos. 10C and 12C]

[Illustration: No. 10CP]

The Spalding Coat Jerseys are made of the same worsted yarn from which
we manufacture our better grade Jerseys, Nos. 10P and 12P, and no pains
have been spared to turn them out in a well-made and attractive manner.
Plain solid stock colors (not striped) or one solid stock color body and
sleeves with different stock color solid trimming (not striped) on
cuffs, collar and front edging. Pearl buttons.

 No. =10=C. Same grade as our No. 10P.                     Each. =$3.50=
 No. =12=C. Same grade as our No. 12P.                     Each. =$3.00=
 No. =10=CP. Pockets, otherwise same as No. 10C.           Each, =$4.25=

[Illustration: Nos. 10PW and 12PW]

[Illustration: No. 12PV]


                  Spalding Striped and V-Neck Jerseys

                   _Note list of stock colors above_

 No. =10=PW. Good quality worsted, same grade as No.
   10P. Solid stock color body and sleeves, with
   6-inch stock color stripe around body.                  Each, =$3.50=

 No. =12=PW. Worsted; solid stock color body and
   sleeves with 6-inch stock color stripe around
   body.                                                   Each, =$3.00=

 No. =10=PX. Good quality worsted, fashioned; solid
   stock color body, with stock color striped
   sleeves, usually alternating two inches of same
   color as body, with narrow stripes of any other
   stock color.                                            Each, =$3.50=

 No. =12=PV Worsted, solid stock colors, with V-neck
   instead of full collar as on regular jerseys.           Each, =$3.00=

 No. =12=PX. Worsted, solid stock color body, with
   stock color striped sleeves, usually alternating
   two inches of same color as body, with narrow
   stripes of any other stock color.                       Each, =$3.00=

[Illustration: Nos. 10PX and 12PX]




                     SPALDING _Automobile_ SWEATER


[Illustration]

[Illustration: Collar Turned Up]

[Illustration: Collar Turned Down]

 No. =WJ.= Most satisfactory and comfortable style
   for automobilists; also useful for training
   purposes, reducing weight, tramping during cold
   weather, golfing, shooting, tobogganing,
   snowshoeing; in fact, for every purpose where a
   garment is required to give protection from cold
   or inclement weather. High collar that may be
   turned down, changing it into neatest form of
   button front sweater. Highest quality special
   heavy weight worsted. Sizes, 28 to 44 inches. In
   stock colors.                                           Each, =$8.50=

=PLAIN COLORS=—All Spalding Sweaters are supplied in any of the colors
designated, at regular prices. Other colors to order only in any
quality, 50c. each garment extra.

=SPECIAL NOTICE=—We will furnish any of the solid color sweaters with
one color body and another color (not striped) collar and cuffs in stock
colors only at no extra charge.

N. B.—We designate three shades which are sometimes called RED: These
are Scarlet, Cardinal and Maroon. Where RED is specified on order
Scarlet will be supplied.


                              STOCK COLORS

                             Gray
                             Orange
                             Black
                             White
                             Maroon
                             Scarlet
                             Cardinal
                             Navy
                             Royal Blue
                             Columbia Blue
                             Peacock Blue
                             Dark Green
                             Olive Green
                             Irish Green
                             Pink
                             Purple
                             Yellow
                             Seal Brown
                             Old Gold
                             Drab


                  Spalding “Highest Quality” Sweaters

[Illustration]

_We allow four inches for stretch in all our sweaters, and sizes are
marked accordingly. It is suggested, however, that for very heavy men a
size about two inches larger than coat measurement be ordered to insure
a comfortable fit._

WORSTED SWEATERS. Made of special quality wool, and exceedingly soft and
pleasant to wear. They are full fashioned to body and arms and put
together by hand, not simply stitched up on a machine as are the
majority of garments sold as regular made goods.

         _All made with 9-inch collars; sizes 28 to 44 inches._

 No. =AA.= The proper style for use after heavy
   exercise, inducing copious perspiration, for
   reducing weight or getting into condition for
   athletic contests. Particularly suitable also for
   Foot Ball and Skating. Heaviest sweater made. In
   stock colors.                                           Each. =$9.00=

 No. =A.= “Intercollegiate.” In stock colors. Special
   weight.                                                        =7.00=

 No. =B.= Heavy weight. In stock colors.                          =6.00=

[Illustration: =Front View=]

[Illustration: =Back View=]


         Spalding Combined Knitted Muffler and Chest Protector

 No. =M.= Special weight; highest quality worsted in
   solid stock colors to match our sweaters.               Each, =$1.25=

                       =PRICES SUBJECT TO CHANGE
                            WITHOUT NOTICE=


                            =Shaker Sweater=

[Illustration:

  In Stock Colors

  Sizes 30 to 44 in.
]

 Fills a demand for as heavy a weight as our “Highest Quality” grade, but
                            at a lower price.

 No. =3.= Standard weight, slightly lighter than No.
   B.                                                      Each, =$4.00=


                      Spalding Vest Collar Sweater

[Illustration]

 No. =BG.= Best quality worsted, good weight; with
   extreme open or low neck. In stock colors.               Ea., =$6.00=




                        SPALDING JACKET SWEATERS


 =STOCK COLORS= PLAIN COLORS—All Spalding Sweaters are supplied in any of
 the following stock colors at regular prices. Other colors to order only
                     in any quality 50c. each extra.

                             GRAY
                             ORANGE
                             BLACK
                             WHITE
                             MAROON
                             SCARLET
                             CARDINAL
                             NAVY BLUE
                             ROYAL BLUE
                             COLUMBIA BLUE
                             PEACOCK BLUE
                             DARK GREEN
                             OLIVE GREEN
                             IRISH GREEN
                             PINK
                             PURPLE
                             YELLOW
                             SEAL BROWN
                             OLD GOLD
                             DRAB

SPECIAL NOTICE—We will furnish any of the solid color sweaters mentioned
below with one color body and another color (not striped) collar and
cuffs in stock colors only at no extra charge. This does not apply to
the No. 3JB Boys’ Sweater.

_Sizes 28 to 44 inch chest measurement. We allow four inches for stretch
in all our sweaters, and sizes are marked accordingly. It is suggested,
however, that for very heavy men a size about two inches larger than
coat measurement be ordered to insure a comfortable fit._

[Illustration: No. VGP]

[Illustration:

  No. VG. Showing special trimmed edging and cuffs supplied, if desired,
    on jacket sweaters at no extra charge.
]

                              BUTTON FRONT

 No. =VG.= Best quality worsted, heavy weight, pearl
   buttons. Made in regular stock colors, also in
   Dark Brown Mixture.                                     Each, =$7.00=

 No. =DJ.= Fine worsted, standard weight, pearl
   buttons, fine knit edging. Made in regular stock
   colors, also in Sage Gray.                              Each, =$6.00=

 No. =3J.= Standard weight wool, Shaker knit, pearl
   buttons. In stock colors.                               Each, =$5.00=

                              WITH POCKETS

 No. =VGP.= Best quality worsted, heavy weight, pearl
   buttons. In stock colors. With pocket on either
   side and a particularly convenient and popular
   style for golf players.                                 Each, =$7.50=

[Illustration: No. CDW]

[Illustration: No. 3JB]


                  Spalding Special Base Ball Sweaters

 No. =CDW.= Good quality worsted, ribbed knit. In
   stock colors. Special trimmed edging and cuffs in
   stock colors supplied at no extra charge.               Each, =$5.50=


                          Boys’ Jacket Sweater

 No. =3JB.= This is an all wool jacket sweater, with
   pearl buttons; furnished only in sizes from 30 to
   36 inches chest measurement. In stock colors.           Each, =$3.50=

[Illustration]


                       Spalding Ladies’ Sweaters

Knit in the Spalding athletic stitch of best quality long fibre worsted;
full fashioned to shape of body on special machine and finished by hand.
Cuffs, pocket and edging of special stitch. Good quality pearl buttons.
Patch pockets. Attractive in appearance and, being properly made, they
fit well and give satisfactory wear. Furnished in regular stock colors.

 No. =LDJ.= Ladies’ Sweater, regular button front.         Each, =$8.00=

 No. =LWJ.= With special reversible collar, as on our
   Men’s No. WJ Automobile Sweater.                       Each, =$10.00=




            The Spalding Official Intercollegiate Foot Ball


[Illustration]

This is the ONLY OFFICIAL COLLEGE FOOT BALL, and is used in every
important match played in this country. =Guaranteed absolutely if seal
of box is unbroken.= We pack with leather case and guaranteed pure Para
rubber bladder (no composition), an inflater, lacing needle and rawhide
lace.


                        No. J5. Complete, $5.00

WE GUARANTEE every Spalding Foot Ball to be perfect in material and
workmanship and correct in shape and size when inspected at our factory.
If any defect is discovered during the first game in which it is used,
or during the first day’s practice use, and if returned at once, we will
replace same under this guarantee. We do not guarantee against ordinary
wear nor against defect in shape or size that is not discovered
immediately after the first day’s use.

Owing to the superb quality of every Spalding Foot Ball, our customers
have grown to expect a season’s use of one ball, and at times make
unreasonable claims under our guarantee which we will not allow.

[Illustration: A. G. Spalding & Bros.]




                Spalding All-Steel Playground Apparatus


 Acknowledged as the Standard. Specified and purchased by practically all
          Municipal Park and Playground Commissions in America.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: Correspondence Invited.]

[Illustration: Special Plans and Estimates on Request.]


                SPALDING PLAYGROUND APPARATUS IS USED IN

                        Alameda, Cal.
                        Allegheny, Pa.
                        Ashburnham, Mass.
                        Baltimore, Md.
                        Bayonne, N. J.
                        Bloomfield, N. J.
                        Boston, Mass.
                        Brooklyn, N. Y.
                        Bryn Mawr, Pa.
                        Buffalo, N. Y.
                        Catskill, N. Y.
                        Chicago, Ill.
                        Cincinnati, O.
                        Cleveland, O.
                        Dallas, Texas
                        Dayton, O.
                        Denver, Col.
                        Dongan Hills, N. Y.
                        East Orange, N. J.
                        Forest Park, Md.
                        Ft. Plain, N. Y.
                        Ft. Wayne, Ind.
                        Galesburg, Ill.
                        Geneva, N. Y.
                        Greeley, Col.
                        Hamilton, Ontario, Can.
                        Havana, Cuba
                        Hoboken, N. J.
                        Jersey City, N. J.
                        Kansas City, Mo.
                        Kentfield, Cal.
                        Lancaster, Pa.
                        Leavenworth, Kan.
                        Lexington, Ind.
                        Lockhart, Ala.
                        Los Angeles, Cal.
                        Louisville, Ky.
                        Lowell, Mass.
                        Lynn, Mass.
                        Madison, N. J.
                        Melrose, Mass.
                        Meridian, Miss.
                        Milwaukee, Wis.
                        Morristown, N. J.
                        Nashville, Tenn.
                        Naugatuck, Ct.
                        Newark, N. J.
                        New Brunswick, N. J.
                        New Haven, Ct.
                        New London, Ct.
                        New Paltz, N. Y.
                        New York, N. Y.
                        Oakland, Cal.
                        Omaha, Neb.
                        Orange, N. J.
                        Oswego, N. Y.
                        Pasadena, Cal.
                        Passaic, N. J.
                        Philadelphia, Pa.
                        Pittsburgh, Pa.
                        Pocatello, Idaho
                        Polk, Pa.
                        Portland, Me.
                        Portland, Ore.
                        Porto Barrios, S. Am.
                        Pueblo, Col.
                        Reading, Pa.
                        Rochester, N. Y.
                        Rye, N. Y.
                        Sag Harbor, N. Y.
                        San Jose, Cal.
                        Seattle, Wash.
                        Springfield, Mass.
                        Somerville, Mass.
                        St. Louis, Mo.
                        Summit, N. J.
                        Utica, N. Y.
                        Walla Walla, Wash.
                        Washington, D. C.
                        Watertown, Mass.
                        Watervleit, N. Y.
                        Westfield, Mass.
                        Wilkes-Barre, Pa.
                        Winnipeg, Man., Can.
                        Winthrop, Mass.
                        Worcester, Mass.
                        Ypsilanti, Mich.

                      A. G. SPALDING & BROS., Inc.
              Gymnasium and Playground Contract Department
                            CHICOPEE, MASS.




                  Spalding “Official National League”

                          REG. U.S. PAT. OFF.

                                  Ball


[Illustration]

            Official Ball of the Game for over Thirty Years

Adopted by the National League in 1878, and the only ball used in
Championship games since that time. Each ball wrapped in tinfoil, packed
in a separate box, and sealed in accordance with the latest League
regulations. Warranted to last a full game when used under ordinary
conditions.

 No. 1. Each, $1.25                                    Per Dozen, $15.00

[Illustration]




                          Durand-Steel Lockers


[Illustration:

  Some of the 6,000 Durand-Steel Lockers Installed in the
  Public Gymnasiums of Chicago. 12′ × 15′ × 42′, Double Tier.
]

[Illustration: Six Lockers In Double Tier]

[Illustration: Three Lockers In Single Tier]

=Wooden lockers are objectionable=, because they attract vermin, absorb
odors, can be easily broken into, and are dangerous on account of fire.

=Lockers made from wire mesh or expanded metal afford little security=,
as they can be easily entered with wire cutters. Clothes placed in them
become covered with dust, and the lockers themselves present a poor
appearance, resembling animal cages.

=Durand-Steel Lockers= are made of finest grade furniture steel and are
finished with gloss black, furnace-baked japan (400°), comparable to
that used on hospital ware, which will never flake off nor require
refinishing, as do paints and enamels.

=Durand-Steel Lockers= are usually built with doors perforated full
length in panel design with sides and backs solid. This prevents clothes
in one locker from coming in contact with wet garments in adjoining
lockers, while plenty of ventilation is secured by having the door
perforated its entire length, but, if the purchaser prefers, we
perforate the backs also.

=The cost of Durand-Steel Lockers is no more than that of first-class
wooden lockers=, and they last as long as the building, are sanitary,
secure, and, in addition, are fire-proof.

       THE FOLLOWING STANDARD SIZES ARE THOSE MOST COMMONLY USED:

                              DOUBLE TIER
                           12 × 12 × 36 Inch
                           15 × 15 × 36 Inch
                           12 × 12 × 42 Inch
                           15 × 15 × 42 Inch

                              SINGLE TIER
                           12 × 12 × 60 Inch
                           15 × 15 × 60 Inch
                           12 × 12 × 72 Inch
                           15 × 15 × 72 Inch

                      SPECIAL SIZES MADE TO ORDER.

We are handling lockers as a special contract business, and shipment
will in every case be made direct from the factory in Chicago. If you
will let us know the number of lockers, size and arrangement, we shall
be glad to take up, through correspondence, the matter of prices.

 PROMPT ATTENTION GIVEN  A. G. SPALDING & BROS.   FOR COMPLETE LIST OF
  TO ANY COMMUNICATIONS    STORES IN ALL LARGE   STORES SEE INSIDE FRONT
     ADDRESSED TO US             CITIES            COVER OF THIS BOOK

 Prices in effect January 5, 1910. Subject to change without notice. For
             Canadian prices see special Canadian catalogue.




The following selection of items from their latest Catalogue will give
an idea of the great variety of ATHLETIC GOODS manufactured by A. G.
SPALDING & BROS. SEND FOR A FREE COPY.


 =A=rchery


 =B=ags—
   Bat
   Cricket
   Striking
   Uniform
 Balls—
   Base
   Basket
   Cricket
   Field Hockey
   Foot, College
   Foot, Rugby
   Foot, Soccer
   Golf
   Hand
   Indoor
   Medicine
   Playground
   Squash
   Tennis
   Volley
   Water Polo
 Bandages, Elastic
 Bathing Suits
 Bats—
   Base Ball
   Cricket
 Belts


 =C=aps—
   Base Ball
   University
   Water Polo
 Chest Weights
 Circle, Seven-Foot
 Coats, Base Ball
 Collars, Swimming
 Corks, Running
 Covers, Racket
 Cricket Goods
 Croquet Goods


 =D=iscus, Olympic
 Dumb Bells


 =E=mblems
 Equestrian Polo
 Exerciser, Home


 =F=elt Letters
 Fencing Sticks
 Field Hockey
 Flags—
   College
   Foul, Base Ball
   Marking, Golf
 Foils, Fencing
 Foot Balls—
   Association
   College
   Rugby


 =G=lasses, Base Ball—
   Sun
   Automobile
 Gloves—
   Base Ball
   Boxing
   Cricket
   Fencing
   Foot Ball
   Golf
   Handball
   Hockey, Ice
 Glove Softener
 Goals—
   Basket Ball
   Foot Ball
   Hockey, Ice
 Golf Clubs
 Golf Counters
 Golfette
 Gymnasium, Home
 Gymnasium Board


 =H=ammers, Athletic
 Hats, University
 Head Harness
 Health Pull
 Hockey Sticks, Ice
 Hole Cutter, Golf
 Hole Rim, Golf
 Horse, Vaulting
 Hurdles, Safety
 Hurley Goods


 =I=ndian Clubs


 =J=ackets—
   Fencing
   Foot Ball
 Javelins
 Jerseys


 =K=nee Protectors


 =L=acrosse
 Lanes for Sprints
 Lawn Bowls
 Leg Guards—
   Base Ball
   Cricket
   Foot Ball


 =M=arkers, Tennis
 Masks—
   Base Ball
   Fencing
   Nose
 Masseur, Abdominal
 Mattresses
 Megaphones
 Mitts—
   Base Ball
   Handball
   Striking Bag
 Moccasins


 =N=ets—
   Cricket
   Golf Driving
   Tennis
   Volley Ball
 Numbers, Competitors’


 =P=ads—
   Chamois, Fencing
   Foot Ball
   Sliding, Base Ball
 Pants—
   Base Ball
   Basket Ball
   Foot Ball, College
   Foot Ball, Rugby
   Hockey, Ice
   Running
 Pennants, College
 Plates—
   Base Ball Shoe
   Home
   Marking, Tennis
   Pitchers’ Box
   Pitchers’ Toe
   Teeing, Golf
 Platforms, Striking Bag
 Poles—
   Vaulting
 Polo, Roller, Goods
 Posts—
   Backstop, Tennis
   Lawn Tennis
 Protectors—
   Abdomen
   Base Ball Body
   Eye Glass
 Push Ball


 =Q=uoits


 =R=ackets, Tennis
 Rings—
   Exercising
   Swinging
 Rowing Machines
 Roque


 =S=acks, for Sack Racing
 Score Board, Golf
 Score Books
 Score Tablets, Base Ball
 Shirts—
   Athletic
   Base Ball
 Shoes—
   Base Ball
   Basket Ball
   Bowling
   Clog
   Cross Country
   Cricket
   Fencing
   Foot Ball, Association
   Foot Ball, College
   Foot Ball, Rugby
   Foot Ball, Soccer
   Golf
   Gymnasium
   Jumping
   Running
   Skating
   Squash
   Tennis
 Shot—
   Athletic
   Indoor
   Massage
 Skates—
   Ice
   Roller
 Skis
 Sleeve, Pitchers
 Snow Shoes
 Squash Goods
 Straps—
   Base Ball
   For Three-Legged Race
   Skate
 Stockings
 Striking Bags
 Suits—
   Basket Ball
   Gymnasium
   Gymnasium, Ladies’
   Running
   Soccer
   Swimming
   Union Foot Ball
 Supporters
   Ankle
   Wrist
 Suspensories
 Sweaters


 =T=ether Tennis
 Tights—
   Full
   Wrestling
   Knee
 Toboggans
 Trapeze
 Trunks—
   Bathing
   Velvet
   Worsted


 =U=mpire Indicator Uniforms


 =W=ands, Calisthenic
 Watches, Stop
 Water Wings
 Weights, 56-lb.
 Whitely Exercisers
 Wrestling Equipment




                            Standard Policy


A Standard Quality must be inseparably linked to a Standard Policy.

Without a definite and Standard Mercantile Policy, it is impossible for
a manufacturer to long maintain a Standard Quality.

To market his goods through the jobber, a manufacturer must provide a
profit for the jobber as well as the retail dealer. To meet these
conditions of Dual Profits, the manufacturer is obliged to set a
proportionately high list price on his goods to the consumer.

To enable the glib salesman, when booking his orders, to figure out
attractive profits to both the jobber and retailer, these high list
prices are absolutely essential; but their real purpose will have been
served when the manufacturer has secured his order from the jobber, and
the jobber has secured his order from the retailer.

However, these deceptive high list prices are not fair to the consumer,
who does not, and, in reality, is not ever expected to pay these fancy
list prices.

When the season opens for the sale of such goods, with their misleading
but alluring high list prices, the retailer begins to realize his
responsibilities, and grapples with the situation as best he can, by
offering “special discounts,” which vary with local trade conditions.

Under this system of merchandising, the profits to both the manufacturer
and the jobber are assured; but as there is no stability maintained in
the prices to the consumer, the keen competition amongst the local
dealers invariably leads to a demoralized cutting of prices by which the
profits of the retailer are practically eliminated.

This demoralization always reacts on the manufacturer. The jobber
insists on lower, and still lower, prices. The manufacturer, in his
turn, meets this demand for the lowering of prices by the only way open
to him, viz.: the cheapening and degrading of the quality of his
product.

The foregoing conditions became so intolerable that, ten years ago, in
1899, A. G. Spalding & Bros. determined to rectify this demoralization
in the Athletic Goods Trade, and inaugurated what has since become known
as “The Spalding Policy.”

The “Spalding Policy” eliminates the jobber entirely, so far as Spalding
Goods are concerned, and the retail dealer secures his supply of
Spalding Athletic Goods direct from the manufacturer under a restricted
retail price arrangement by which the retail dealer is assured a fair,
legitimate and certain profit on all Spalding Athletic Goods, and the
consumer is assured a Standard Quality and is protected from imposition.

The “Spalding Policy” is decidedly for the interest and protection of
the users of Athletic Goods, and acts in two ways:

FIRST—The user is assured of genuine Official Standard Athletic Goods,
and the same fixed prices to everybody.

SECOND—As manufacturers, we can proceed with confidence in purchasing at
the proper time, the very best raw materials required in the manufacture
of our various goods, well ahead of their respective seasons, and this
enables us to provide the necessary quantity and absolutely maintain the
Spalding Standard of Quality.

All retail dealers handling Spalding Athletic Goods are required to
supply consumers at our regular printed catalogue prices—neither more
nor less—the same prices that similar goods are sold for in our New
York, Chicago and other stores.

All Spalding dealers, as well as users of Spalding Athletic Goods, are
treated exactly alike, and no special rebates or discriminations are
allowed to anyone.

Positively, nobody; not even officers, managers, salesmen or other
employes of A. G. Spalding & Bros., or any of their relatives or
personal friends, can buy Spalding Athletic Goods at a discount from the
regular catalogue prices.

This, briefly, is the “Spalding Policy,” which has already been in
successful operation for the past ten years, and will be indefinitely
continued.

In other words, “The Spalding Policy” is a “square deal” for everybody.

                                                A. G. SPALDING & BROS.

                                              By _A. G. Spalding._

                                                              PRESIDENT.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Changed “etc., is” to “etc., and is” in the description for pamphlet
      no. 340.
 2. Changed “culls in stock” to “cuffs in stock”.
 3. Silently corrected typographical errors.
 4. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.
 5. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 6. Enclosed bold font in =equals=.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GROUND TUMBLING ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


