The Project Gutenberg eBook of Kitchen Tested Recipes from Canned Foods
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Kitchen Tested Recipes from Canned Foods

Creator: American Can Company. Home Economics Department

Release date: May 25, 2020 [eBook #62230]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Lisa Corcoran and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KITCHEN TESTED RECIPES FROM CANNED FOODS ***

                                KITCHEN
                            _Tested Recipes_
                           FROM CANNED FOODS


    [Illustration: A Guide to Common Can Sizes]

                       A Guide to Common Can Sizes

 No. ¼ FLAT CAN     4¾ oz.                Used for various meat
                    approximately ½ cup   spreads, such as ham, tongue
                                          and liver.
 No. ½ FLAT CAN     7¾ oz.-8½ oz.         Used principally for salmon.
                    approximately 1 cup
 No. 1 TALL CAN     12 to 16 oz.          Used for salmon, fruit
                    approximately 2 cups  cocktail and fruits for salad.
 No. 2 CAN          1 lb. 2 oz. to 1 lb.  Used primarily for
                    8 oz.                 vegetables, fruits and juices.
                    approximately 2½ cups
 No. 2½ CAN         1 lb. 10 oz. to 2     Used mainly for fruits.
                    lbs. 3 oz.            Spinach, tomatoes,
                    approximately 3½ cups sauerkraut, beets and pumpkin
                                          are also packed in it.
 No. 3 CYLINDER CAN 1 qt. 14 fluid oz.    Used primarily for fruit and
                    approximately 5¾ cups vegetable juices and contains
                                          46 or 47 ounces.
 No. 10 CAN         6 lbs. to 8 lbs.      Used for vegetables and
                    approximately 13 cups fruits. Commonly called
                                          institutional or restaurant
                                          size and is not ordinarily
                                          available in retail stores.


_KITCHEN TESTED RECIPES FROM CANNED FOODS_

_Preparing attractive, nutritious meals for the family is an aim in
every home._

To those who know the economy, convenience, and nutritive value of
commercially canned foods, this booklet of recently created and
developed recipes from the Canco Testing Kitchen will be a source for
new appetizing dishes. To the many who are establishing new homes and
planning and preparing meals for the first time, this booklet will
provide the needed recipes for the daily menus, whether they be simple
or elaborate.

The use of commercially canned foods saves many hours in the preparation
of fruits, vegetable, fish and meats, and also assures no waste.




                          _TABLE OF CONTENTS_


                                _SOUPS_
      Purée Mongole                                                    3
      Corn and Tomato Chowder                                          3
      Fish Tomato Stew                                                 3


                                 _FISH_
      Jellied Salmon Mold                                              5
      Baked Salmon with Dressing                                       5
      Lobster Bisque                                                   5
      Creole Fish Pie                                                  6
      Southern Shrimp                                                  6
      Tuna and Apple Salad                                             6
      Deviled Sardines                                                 7


                              _VEGETABLES_
      Savory Vegetables                                                9
      Broiled Corn                                                     9
      Carrot and Rice Croquettes                                       9
      Creole Hamburger and Bean Pie                                   10
      Asparagus Croquettes                                            10
      Cheese Sauce                                                    10
      Bean Stew                                                       11
      Sweet Potato Scones                                             12
      Baked Spinach and Corn                                          12
      Spinach                                                         12
      Pork Chops Creole                                               13
      Julienne Beets with Horseradish Sauce                           13
      Asparagus Luncheon Rolls                                        13


                                _FRUITS_
      Fruit Dessert Rolls                                             15
      Spiced Fruits                                                   15
      Golden Fruit Punch                                              15
      Cranberry and Raisin Pie                                        16
      Fruit Custard                                                   16
      Soft Custard                                                    16
      Pumpkin Whip                                                    17

    [Illustration: Soups]


_PURÉE MONGOLE_

  1 No. 1 can Condensed Tomato Soup
  1 No. 1 can Condensed Green Pea Soup
  2⅔ cups Milk
  1 cup ½-inch Bread Cubes
  2 tablespoons Margarine or Butter

Mix soups together in saucepan; add milk, stirring until well blended.
Heat thoroughly. Sauté bread cubes in fat until delicately browned;
serve as garnish. Thinly sliced celery may also be used as garnish.
                                                       _4 to 6 Servings_


_CORN AND TOMATO CHOWDER_

  2 slices Bacon or Salt Pork
  1 medium-sized Onion, sliced
  2 tablespoons Green Pepper
  1 No. 2½ can Tomatoes
  1 No. 2 can Cream Style Corn
  1 teaspoon Salt
  ¼ teaspoon Thyme
  Dash of Pepper

Cut bacon into ½-inch slices. Sauté bacon, onions and green pepper in
large saucepan. Add tomatoes; mix well. Add corn; season with salt,
thyme and pepper. Cover; simmer for 20 minutes.
                                                       _6 to 8 Servings_


_FISH TOMATO STEW_

  3 medium-sized Potatoes (1½ cups cubed)
  4 tablespoons Fat
  ⅓ cup chopped Onions
  2 tablespoons Green Pepper
  1 No. 2 can Tomato Juice
  1 cup Water
  1 teaspoon Salt
  ⅛ teaspoon Pepper
  Dash of Thyme
  1 7-oz. can Fish Flakes

Pare and cube potatoes; sauté with onions in fat until lightly browned.
Add green pepper, tomato juice, water, salt, pepper and thyme. Cook
until potatoes are tender. Add fish flakes. Simmer for 5 minutes.
                                                            _4 Servings_

    [Illustration: Jellied salmon mold]


_JELLIED SALMON MOLD_

  2 tablespoons plain Gelatin
  ½ cup Cold Water
  ½ teaspoon Salt
  Dash of Pepper
  ¼ teaspoon Worcestershire Sauce
  1 Bay Leaf
  1 No. 2 can Tomato Juice
  2 tablespoons Lemon Juice
  1 7-oz. can Salmon
  1 tablespoon chopped Onion
  ½ cup chopped Celery
  2 hard cooked Eggs

Soften gelatin in cold water. Add salt, pepper, Worcestershire sauce and
bay leaf to tomato juice; heat to boiling point. Remove bay leaf; add
lemon juice. Pour hot seasoned tomato juice over gelatin. Stir until
dissolved. Chill gelatin mixture until slightly thickened. Flake salmon,
mix with onion, celery and chopped eggs. Fold mixture into thickened
gelatin. Rinse 8-inch ring mold or individual molds in cold water; pour
in gelatin mixture. Chill until firm. Unmold on platter; garnish with
crisp lettuce and watercress.
                                                       _6 to 8 Servings_

  Note: _1 No. 2 can Tomato Juice Cocktail may be substituted for Tomato
  Juice and seasonings._


_BAKED SALMON WITH DRESSING_

  1 1-lb. can Salmon
  2 cups soft Bread Crumbs
  ¼ teaspoon Pepper
  ½ teaspoon Poultry or Fish Seasoning
  2 teaspoons minced Onion
  2 teaspoons chopped Parsley
  2 teaspoons chopped Pickles
  3 tablespoons Butter or Margarine, melted
  ¼ cup Milk

Drain salmon, reserving 2 tablespoons liquor; break into large pieces.
Place in bottom of medium-sized shallow casserole; add salmon liquor.
Mix together remaining ingredients; spread over salmon. Bake in a
moderately hot oven at 400°F for about 20 minutes. Garnish with parsley.
                                                       _4 to 5 Servings_


_LOBSTER BISQUE_

  1 6-oz. can Lobster (1 cup)
  3 tablespoons Butter
  1 quart Milk, with cream
  1½ teaspoons Salt
  Dash of Pepper
  Paprika

Drain lobster; cut in small pieces. Melt butter in top of double boiler;
add lobster; cook 3 minutes. Add milk, salt, and pepper. Heat almost to
boiling. Cover; place over hot water; let stand 30 minutes before
serving to develop best flavor. Sprinkle with paprika.
                                                          _Makes 5 cups_


_CREOLE FISH PIE_

  ⅓ cup sliced Onions
  ¼ cup Green Pepper strips
  1 tablespoon Butter or Margarine
  1 tablespoon Flour
  ¼ teaspoon Salt
  ½ No. 2½ can (1⅔ cups) Tomatoes
  1 7-oz. can Tuna Fish

Sauté onions and green pepper in butter or margarine for about 10
minutes, until soft. Stir in flour and salt, add tomatoes; cook for 10
minutes, stirring constantly. Drain fish; break into large pieces, and
place in bottom of greased shallow casserole. Cover with tomato mixture.
Sprinkle with corn flake crumbs or buttered bread crumbs; garnish top
with several of the cooked onion rings and pepper strips. Bake in a
moderate oven 350°F for 15 to 20 minutes until browned.
                                                       _3 to 4 Servings_


_SOUTHERN SHRIMP_

  1 No. 1 can Shrimp
  3 tablespoons uncooked Rice
  ½ teaspoon Salt
  ⅛ teaspoon Poultry Seasoning
  ⅛ teaspoon Celery Salt
  Dash of Pepper
  1 No. 1 can Mushroom Broth
  ½ cup Milk

Clean shrimp (if wet pack, omit salt from recipe). Cook rice in boiling,
salted water until tender; drain and rinse in cold water. Add rice,
salt, poultry seasoning, celery salt and pepper to mushroom broth and
milk in saucepan; heat to boiling. Add shrimp; heat thoroughly. Serve in
pastry shells, or over toast. Garnish with parsley.
                                                       _5 to 6 Servings_

  Note: _If thicker sauce is desired add 2 teaspoons flour mixed with
  small amount of milk and stir into mixture._


_TUNA AND APPLE SALAD_

  1 7-oz. can Tuna Fish
  2 medium-sized Red Apples
  ½ cup chopped Celery
  2½ tablespoons Salad Dressing
  2 tablespoons Lemon Juice
  ¼ teaspoon Salt
  Dash of Pepper

Flake tuna fish in a mixing bowl. Core and cut apples in ½-inch cubes to
make 1 cup; add to fish; add celery, salad dressing thinned with lemon
juice, salt and pepper. Mix lightly with a fork. Serve on crisp lettuce.
                                                            _4 Servings_

    [Illustration: Deviled Sardines]


_DEVILED SARDINES_

  1 3¼ oz. can Sardines in Oil
  2½ tablespoons melted Butter or Margarine
  3 tablespoons Flour
  2 teaspoons Prepared Mustard
  1 teaspoon grated Onion
  1 teaspoon Salt
  1 Clove
  1 Bay Leaf
  Dash of Pepper
  1½ cups Milk
  ½ cup chopped Celery
  2 hard-cooked Eggs, chopped
  ⅓ cup coarse Bread Crumbs

Drain sardines; cut in ¾-inch pieces. Make white sauce of 1½ tablespoons
butter or margarine, flour, seasonings and milk; remove clove and bay
leaf. Add celery and fold in eggs and sardines. Spread in a shallow
baking dish. Cover with crumbs buttered with remaining butter or
margarine. Bake in moderate oven 375°F for 15 minutes until top is
browned.
                                                            _4 Servings_

    [Illustration: Savory vegetables]


_SAVORY VEGETABLES_

  1 No. 2 can Vegetable (Peas or Green Beans or Spinach or Asparagus,
          etc.)
  ½ teaspoon Salt
  Butter or Margarine
  Seasonings

Drain liquid into a saucepan; boil quickly to reduce amount to about ½
to ⅓ cup. Add the vegetable; heat thoroughly. Add salt, butter or
margarine and seasonings to suit taste. Garnish and serve.
                                                       _4 to 5 Servings_

  Note: _Instead of reducing liquid by boiling, it may be saved for
  soups, sauces, gravies or vegetable cocktails. Do NOT throw it away as
  it contains valuable nutrients._


_BROILED CORN_

  1 No. 2 can Whole Kernel Corn
  ½ teaspoon Salt
  Dash of Pepper
  ½ cup Chili Sauce
  1 slice Bacon

Drain corn; place in bottom of greased shallow baking dish; add ¼ cup
corn liquor, salt and pepper. Spread chili sauce over top. Cut bacon
into ¼-inch pieces and garnish. Place in a moderate broiler 375°F for 15
to 20 minutes until bacon is crisp.
                                                            _6 Servings_


_CARROT AND RICE CROQUETTES_

  1 No. 2 can diced Carrots
  ⅔ cup uncooked or 2 cups cooked Rice
  1 tablespoon Butter or Margarine
  2 tablespoons Flour
  ¼ teaspoon Curry Powder
  1 teaspoon Salt
  Dash of White Pepper
  1 teaspoon chopped Onion
  ⅔ cup Milk
  1 Egg
  ⅔ to 1 cup fine Bread Crumbs

Drain carrots, reserving liquor for soup. Cook rice in boiling salted
water until tender; drain and rinse with cold water. Mash carrots and
mix with rice. Melt butter or margarine in a saucepan; add flour, curry
powder, salt, pepper and onion; blend thoroughly; slowly add milk.
Continue cooking, stirring constantly until thick. Mix sauce thoroughly
into carrot mixture. Chill for at least 20 minutes. Shape mixture for
croquettes, using 1 heaping tablespoon for each. Beat egg slightly; add
two tablespoons water. Dip croquettes into bread crumbs, then into egg
and again into crumbs. Chill until ready to fry. Fry in small amount of
hot fat in skillet until nicely browned. Serve with white parsley sauce.
                                              _10 Croquettes—5 Servings_


_CREOLE HAMBURGER AND BEAN PIE_

  1 tablespoon Fat
  4 tablespoons minced Onions
  1 tablespoon chopped Green Pepper
  ½ lb. ground Beef
  ½ (6-oz.) can or 6 tablespoons Tomato Paste
  ½ No. 2½ can or 1¾ cups Tomatoes
  ½ No. 2 can or 1¼ cups String Beans
  ½ teaspoon Salt
  ¼ teaspoon Garlic Powder or a Garlic Clove
  Dash of Thyme
  Dash of Celery Seed
  Dash of Pepper
  ½ Recipe for Drop Biscuits

Melt fat in saucepan; sauté onions, pepper and meat. Add tomato paste,
tomatoes and ¼ cup bean liquor. Add salt, garlic powder or garlic clove,
thyme, celery seed and pepper; simmer for 20 minutes. Remove garlic
clove; add drained beans; pour into 1½-quart casserole dish. Make
biscuit dough; drop by large spoonfuls over top of mixture. Bake in a
hot oven 425°F for about 20 minutes until biscuits are done. One 4-oz.
can of sliced mushrooms may be drained and added to this recipe, if
desired.
                                                            _6 Servings_


_ASPARAGUS CROQUETTES_

  1 No. 2 can Asparagus Tips (or No. 1 square can)
  2 tablespoons Water
  Dash of Salt
  Dash of Pepper
  Dash of Celery Salt
  1 Egg
  ⅔ cup dry fine Bread Crumbs
  3 tablespoons Fat

Drain asparagus, reserving liquor for soup. Add water, salt, pepper and
celery salt to egg; beat slightly. Roll asparagus in bread crumbs; dip
into beaten egg; re-roll in bread crumbs. Sauté breaded asparagus in a
skillet of hot fat until golden brown, turning occasionally. Serve with
a cheese sauce or chili sauce.
                                                       _4 to 5 Servings_


_CHEESE SAUCE_

  1½ tablespoons Butter or Margarine
  1½ tablespoons Flour
  ½ teaspoon Salt
  Dash of Pepper
  1½ cups Milk
  ¾ to 1 cup grated Cheddar Cheese

Melt butter or margarine in a saucepan. Add flour, salt and pepper;
blend thoroughly. Add milk slowly. Continue cooking, stirring constantly
until sauce has thickened. Sprinkle cheese in slowly, stirring
constantly until melted and well blended.
                                        _Approximately 1¾ cups of Sauce_

    [Illustration: Bean stew]


_BEAN STEW_

  1 No. 2 can Kidney Beans or Soya Beans
  1 cup chopped Celery
  1½ cups canned Tomatoes
  ¼ cup chopped Green Pepper
  1 tablespoon minced Onion
  1 teaspoon Salt
  Dash of Dry Mustard
  ½ teaspoon Worcestershire Sauce
  ⅛ teaspoon Thyme

Drain beans, reserving liquor. Add enough water to liquor to make a cup.
Pour into saucepan. Add celery, tomatoes, green pepper, onion, salt,
mustard, Worcestershire sauce and thyme to liquor. Simmer in a covered
saucepan for 20 minutes, until celery and green peppers are tender. Add
kidney beans and reheat. Thicken if desired, by adding ½ teaspoon of
flour dissolved in 2 tablespoons of cold water and simmer for 5 minutes
longer. Serve with cooked rice or macaroni and a green salad.
                                                            _5 Servings_


_SWEET POTATO SCONES_

  1⅔ cups sifted Enriched White Flour
  4 teaspoons Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon Salt
  1 tablespoon Brown Sugar
  ¼ cup Shortening
  ½ No. 2½ can (1¾ cups) solid packed Sweet Potatoes
  1 Egg, beaten
  ¼ cup Milk
  2 teaspoons Orange Rind

Sift together flour, baking powder, salt and brown sugar. Add mashed
sweet potatoes, mix well. Cut in shortening with pastry blender or two
knives until consistency of coarse cornmeal. Add beaten egg, milk and
orange rind; stir quickly until well mixed. Turn on lightly floured
board and knead lightly. Press or roll until 1 inch thick; cut in
diamond shapes. Place on a greased cookie sheet. Bake in a hot oven
425°F for 20 minutes. Serve with salad, creamed chicken or ham.
                                                             _10 Scones_


_BAKED SPINACH AND CORN_

  1 No. 2½ can Spinach, drained
  1 teaspoon Vinegar
  1 tablespoon Butter or Margarine
  1 tablespoon minced Onion
  1 No. 2 can Cream Style Corn
  ½ teaspoon Salt
  Dash of Pepper
  1 slice partially cooked Bacon

Place drained spinach in greased baking dish. Sprinkle vinegar over
spinach. Melt butter or margarine in a saucepan; sauté onions; add corn,
salt, and pepper; stir well; pour over spinach. Place bacon on top;
brown in a hot oven 425°F for 25 minutes.
                                                            _6 Servings_


_SPINACH_

  1 No. 2½ can Spinach
  ¾ teaspoon Dry Mustard
  1 teaspoon Sugar
  ½ teaspoon Salt
  1 tablespoon Butter or Margarine
  1 tablespoon Vinegar
  1 hard-cooked Egg

Drain spinach, chop slightly. Add mustard, sugar, salt, butter or
margarine and vinegar to liquor; boil rapidly in a saucepan to about ¼
cup. Add spinach; heat thoroughly. Garnish with chopped or sliced egg.
                                                            _6 Servings_


_PORK CHOPS CREOLE_

  4 Loin Pork Chops
  3 tablespoons Flour
  1 teaspoon Salt
  ¼ teaspoon Pepper
  ¼ teaspoon Garlic Salt
  ¼ teaspoon Thyme
  4 slices Onion
  ½ cup uncooked Rice
  1 No. 2 can Tomatoes

Dredge pork chops in flour seasoned with one half of the salt, pepper,
garlic salt and thyme. Brown chops in a little fat. Place chops in
bottom of casserole dish; top with slices of onion and rice. Season
tomatoes with remaining salt, pepper, garlic salt and thyme. Pour
tomatoes over rice and chops. Bake, covered, in a moderate oven 350°F
for one-half hour. Remove cover and continue to bake another half hour,
basting occasionally.
                                                            _4 Servings_


_JULIENNE BEETS WITH HORSERADISH SAUCE_

  1 No. 2 can Julienne Beets
  1 tablespoon Vinegar
  1 tablespoon Butter or Margarine
  ¼ teaspoon Salt
  2 tablespoons Flour
  1 cup Evaporated Milk
  2 tablespoons prepared Horseradish

Drain beets, reserving liquor; add vinegar and water to liquor to make 1
cup. Melt butter or margarine in a saucepan; add salt and flour; blend
thoroughly. Add evaporated milk; then add beet liquor slowly. Continue
to cook, stirring constantly until sauce thickens. Add horseradish and
beets. Heat thoroughly, stirring occasionally.
                                                       _5 to 6 Servings_


_ASPARAGUS LUNCHEON ROLLS_

  1 No. 2 can Asparagus Tips (or No. 1 square can)
  8 to 10 thin slices Enriched White Bread
  ⅓ cup Butter or Margarine
  ⅓ cup grated American Cheese

Drain asparagus, reserving liquor for soup or vegetable cocktail. Remove
crusts from bread; brush both sides with melted butter or margarine.
Roll slices of bread tightly around 2 to 3 spears of asparagus, starting
at one corner and rolling diagonally. Fasten ends with toothpicks. Place
on greased baking sheet; sprinkle with cheese. Bake in a hot oven 450°F
for 10 minutes until toast is browned. Serve as a hot sandwich with
salad.
                                                       _4 to 5 Servings_

    [Illustration: Fruit dessert rolls]


_FRUIT DESSERT ROLLS_

  1 No. 1 Tall can Fruit Cocktail
  ⅓ cup Sugar
  1 cup sifted All-Purpose Flour
  2 teaspoons Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon Salt
  3 tablespoons Shortening
  ¼ cup Milk
  ½ tablespoon Butter or Margarine
  2 tablespoons Brown Sugar
  ½ teaspoon Cinnamon
  ¼ teaspoon Nutmeg
  2 teaspoons Lemon Juice
  ½ teaspoon Lemon Rind

Drain fruit; add water to juice to make 1 cup. Pour sugar and juice into
a saucepan; boil for 10 minutes. Sift flour, baking powder and salt into
a mixing bowl; cut in shortening. Gradually add milk until flour sticks
together but is rather dry. Roll biscuit dough into a narrow oblong
piece about ¼-inch thick. Spread fruit over dough; dot with butter or
margarine. Mix together brown sugar, cinnamon and nutmeg; sprinkle over
fruit; then sprinkle with lemon juice and lemon rind. Roll as for jelly
roll. Cut into 1½-inch slices. Place rolls into a greased oblong baking
dish. Pour in hot syrup. Bake immediately in a hot oven 450°F for 25
minutes. Serve plain, with cream or with hard sauce.
                                                            _6 Servings_


_SPICED FRUITS_

  1 No. 2½ can Fruit Cocktail
  ¼ teaspoon Dry Mustard
  ⅛ teaspoon Ground Cloves
  ⅛ teaspoon Cinnamon
  1 tablespoon Lemon Juice or Vinegar

Drain fruit juice into saucepan; add spices and lemon juice or vinegar.
Boil juice until reduced to about ½ the amount. Add fruits; heat
thoroughly. Serve hot or cold as a relish with meats or chicken.
                                                          _Makes 3 cups_


_GOLDEN FRUIT PUNCH_

  3 tablespoons Tea
  1 quart Boiling Water
  3 cups Sugar
  5½-oz. can Lemon Juice
  1 No. 2 can Orange Juice
  1 No. 2 can Grapefruit Juice
  1 No. 2 can Pineapple Juice
  5 quarts of coarsely crushed Ice

Pour boiling water over tea; allow it to steep for 3 minutes. Strain and
dissolve sugar in tea; cool. Add chilled lemon, orange, grapefruit,
pineapple juices. Add coarsely crushed ice. Garnish with mint, pineapple
sticks and cherries; or curls of lemon and orange rind; or with orange,
banana, strawberry slices.
                 _Approximately 30 (6-oz.) servings—45 (½ cup) servings_


_CRANBERRY AND RAISIN PIE_

  ½ cup Seedless Raisins
  1 cup Boiling Water
  2 tablespoons Sugar
  1 tablespoon Cornstarch
  1 tablespoon Lemon Juice
  1 No. 300 can Whole Cranberry Sauce
  1 8-inch unbaked Pastry Shell

Cook raisins in boiling water for 10 to 15 minutes. Drain and add water
to raisin liquor to make 1 cup. Mix sugar and cornstarch together in a
saucepan. Slowly add liquor; cook 10 to 15 minutes, stirring constantly
until clear and thick. Add lemon juice, raisins and cranberry sauce;
blend thoroughly. Pour mixture into pastry shell; place strips of pastry
over top, lattice fashion. Bake in a hot oven 425°F for 40 minutes.
                                                            _6 Servings_


_FRUIT CUSTARD_

  1 No. 2½ can Sliced Peaches or Apricot Halves
  2 cups Milk
  ¼ teaspoon Salt
  3 Eggs, separated
  ¼ cup Sugar
  1 tablespoon Flour
  6 tablespoons Sugar
  ½ teaspoon Vanilla

Chill fruit. Scald milk and salt in top of double boiler. Beat yolks
until light and creamy. Add ¼ cup sugar and flour. Stir some hot milk
into egg mixture. Stir mixture into remaining milk in double boiler;
continue stirring over hot water until custard thickens and coats spoon.
Remove; add vanilla and chill. Drain fruit; place in serving dish. To
make meringue beat egg whites until stiff; then gradually beat in sugar.
Drop by heaping tablespoons into a skillet of hot water for 3 to 4
minutes. Remove carefully with slotted spoon and drain well; place over
fruit. Pour in chilled custard. Garnishes of slivered almonds or
chocolate bar may be used if desired.
                                                            _6 Servings_


_SOFT CUSTARD SAUCE (For use on Pumpkin Whip)_ ⇒

  2 Egg Yolks, slightly beaten
  2 tablespoons Sugar
  ½ teaspoon Salt
  1 cup Milk, scalded
  ¼ teaspoon Vanilla

Combine egg yolks, sugar and salt in top of double boiler. Slowly add
milk and stir until sugar is dissolved. Cook over hot water, stirring
constantly, until custard coats spoon; remove from heat; cool quickly by
setting pan in cold water. Add vanilla.
                                           _Approximately 1¼ cups Sauce_

    [Illustration: Pumpkin whip]


_PUMPKIN WHIP_

  1 cup canned Pumpkin
  ½ teaspoon Salt
  ¼ teaspoon Nutmeg
  ¼ teaspoon Cinnamon
  2 Egg Whites
  ¼ cup Sugar

Mix pumpkin thoroughly with ¼ teaspoon salt, nutmeg and cinnamon. Beat
egg whites and ¼ teaspoon of salt until stiff; gradually add sugar,
beating thoroughly after each addition. Fold in spiced pumpkin. Chill
thoroughly. Serve in sherbet glasses with chilled Soft Custard Sauce.
Lady fingers or sponge cake and candied fruits are desirable garnishes.
                                                            _4 Servings_

    [Illustration: CANCO tested]

                        _Home Economics Section_
                          American Can Company
                  230 PARK AVENUE, NEW YORK 17, N. Y.

                                          D11-925 B.P.—Printed in U.S.A.




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Sorted the Table of Contents to match the order of recipes in the text.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KITCHEN TESTED RECIPES FROM CANNED FOODS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


