The Project Gutenberg eBook of Bennett's Small House Catalog, 1920
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Bennett's Small House Catalog, 1920

Author: Inc. Ray H. Bennett Lumber Co.

Release date: February 13, 2016 [eBook #51205]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BENNETT'S SMALL HOUSE CATALOG, 1920 ***

                               Bennett's
                          Small House Catalog

                                 1920

                    Ray H. Bennett Lumber Co., Inc.

[Illustration: FRONT COVER
Bennett Homes
Better Built Ready Cut

RAY H. BENNETT LUMBER CO., INC.
NORTH TONAWANDA--N.Y.]

                             Bennett Homes
                        Better Built Ready Cut

                    RAY H. BENNETT LUMBER CO., INC.
                         NORTH TONAWANDA--N.Y.

                                LUMBER
                            LATH--SHINGLES
                            WINDOWS--DOORS
                               MILL WORK

                         NORTH TONAWANDA, N.Y.


Dear Friend,

We send this catalog to you with just one thought in mind, Service. As
you turn the pages and study the various houses, remember that we are
planning and building for YOU. No trouble is too great, no detail too
small, if by personal consideration and supervision we can provide you
with your ideal home.

Our architects have studied the requirement of comfortable, convenient,
up-to-date houses. In the designs shown in this catalog, you will find
embodied their ideas--the results of considering the greatest
convenience at the least cost.

Not only do we supply you with blue prints of the house you select, but
our special service department is ready to assist you in your interior
decorating. Then too, our service department can give you any
information you require in regard to the erection of your house.

You naturally will want to know the approximate cost of erecting the
house of your choice, the cost of the mason work, plumbing, lighting,
heating, etc. This we shall be glad to furnish you, if you will write to
us for such information.

In buying a Bennett Home, you are really gratifying your individual
tastes. You have infinite choice of designs, any of which can be
slightly or moderately altered. You can choose your own color for
outside paint and inside finish. Cupboards and closets of convenient
size and situation, bay windows, French doors, fire places, stairways,
colonnades,--all these are yours to command.

We have already selected for you the best framing materials, lumber and
hardware. The little touches that make the home and radiate the
personality of the owners--these we leave to your individual choice.

It is YOUR home that you are to build, and we offer you our assistance
and co-operation.

Cordially Yours,

RAY H. BENNETT LUMBER CO., INC.

JAS|RN



Bennett Homes
Better-Built Ready-Cut

PRICES OF BENNETT HOMES DECEMBER 1, 1921

PRICES ARE NET F. O. B. CARS NORTH TONAWANDA, N. Y.

DELIVERED PRICES QUOTED ON REQUEST.

TERMS: Net Cash with Order.

TERMS:

     =1. Cash with Order.= 5% discount from gross amount allowed when Cash
     in full is sent with order, or

     =2. 25% Cash with Order.= Balance sight draft with order bill of
     lading attached. No discount from gross amount allowed under these
     terms.

WE GUARANTEE SATISFACTION OR MONEY BACK.


                                          5% Cash
    Name               Page     Gross     Discount       Net

  Aberdeen, Plan A      30    $1944.78    $ 97.23     $1847.55
  Aberdeen, Plan B      30     2418.89     120.94      2297.95
  Arcadia, Plan A       31     1610.33      80.51      1529.82
  Arcadia, Plan B       31     1907.57      95.37      1812.20
  Atherton              32     2481.17     124.05      2357.12
  Auburn, Plan A        56     1074.09      53.70      1020.39
  Auburn, Plan B        56     1273.94      63.69      1210.25
  Avon                  10     2940.28     147.00      2793.28

  Beverly, Plan A       60     1142.60      57.13      1085.47
  Beverly, Plan B       60     1224.00      61.20      1162.80
  Bison                 22     2342.62     117.13      2225.49
  Bryant                12     2465.12     123.25      2341.87

  Charlotte, Plan B     11     3184.52     159.22      3025.30
  Clarendon             39     3345.17     167.25      3177.92
  Cleo                  26     2313.83     115.69      2198.14
  Cloverdale, Plan A    55     1380.97      69.04      1311.93
  Cloverdale, Plan B    55     1519.36      75.96      1443.40
  Concord, Reg.         61     1317.45      65.87      1251.58
  Concord, Plan B       61     1585.31      79.26      1506.05
  Colonial              44     4243.05     212.15      4030.90

  Delaware, Plan A      58     1747.45      87.37      1660.08
  Delaware, Plan B      58     1949.84      97.49      1852.35
  Dover, Reg.           50     2120.89     106.04      2014.85
  Dover, Plan B         50     2275.89     113.79      2162.10

  Emerson               62     1697.23      84.86      1612.37
  Erie                  45     2281.00     114.05      2166.95

  Flanders              35     2024.85     101.24      1923.61
  Forsyth               38     3049.37     152.46      2896.91
  Franklin              17     2550.71     127.53      2423.18
  Frederick             46     3669.70     183.48      3486.22
  Fulton                25     2552.78     127.63      2425.15

  Genesee               41     2202.63     110.13      2092.50

  Hamilton              24     2994.63     149.73      2844.90
  Harriet               33     2776.88     138.84      2638.04
  Hartley               43     2753.12     137.65      2615.47
  Harvard               14     2071.13     103.55      1967.58

  Ideal                 23     2654.70     132.73      2521.97
  Ilion                 13     2440.36     122.01      2318.35

  Janis                 40     3088.00     154.40      2933.60

  Kenmore, Plan A       54      804.91      40.24       764.67
  Kenmore, Plan B       54     1039.82      51.99       987.83

  Lancaster             34     2905.94     145.29      2760.65
  La Salle              21     3076.84     153.84      2923.00
  Lawton, Plan A        53     1647.97      82.39      1565.58
  Lawton, Plan B        53     1825.67      91.28      1734.39
  Lincoln               16     2849.67     142.48      2707.19

  Madison               66     2510.10     125.50      2384.60
  Maidstone, Plan A     52     1131.47      56.57      1074.90
  Maidstone, Plan B     52     1386.96      69.34      1317.62
  Monroe                59     2100.69     105.03      1995.66

  Nelson                47     1728.63      86.43      1642.20
  New Hartford          19     2185.30     109.26      2076.04
  Niagara               20     2459.91     122.99      2336.92

  Olean                 42     2012.08     100.60      1911.48
  Ontario               64     2051.56     102.57      1948.99

  Potomac               18     3124.68     156.23      2968.45

  Raymond               15     2305.83     115.29      2190.54
  Richard               48     2045.57     102.27      1943.30
  Rochester             49     2340.15     117.00      2223.15

  Salem                 28     2538.93     126.94      2411.99
  Shamrock, Plan A      57     1124.27      56.21      1068.06
  Shamrock, Plan B      57     1429.11      71.45      1357.66
  Sherrill, Plan A      51     1551.68      77.58      1474.10
  Sherrill, Plan B      51     1898.22      94.91      1803.31
  Stanley               65     1230.88      61.54      1169.34

  Tremont               67     4051.07     202.55      3848.52

  Waverly               63     2006.09     100.30      1905.79
  Woodward              29     1723.77      86.18      1637.59

  York                  27     1914.00      95.60      1818.40

  =SUMMER COTTAGES=, Pages 68-69

  Wenona                68     $842.07     $42.10      $799.97
  Newport               68      786.86      39.34       747.52
  Ivernia               69      702.34      35.11       667.23
  Linwood               69      800.36      40.01       760.35

  =GARAGES=, Pages 69-70

  Buick            10 × 14     $170.12     $ 8.50      $161.62
  Buick            10 × 16      182.48       9.12       173.36
  Buick            12 × 16      196.45       9.82       186.63
  Buick            12 × 18      210.21      10.51       199.70
  Buick            12 × 20      217.08      10.85       206.23

  Cadillac         18 × 16      275.84      13.79       262.05
  Cadillac         18 × 18      293.09      14.65       278.44
  Cadillac         18 × 20      306.98      15.34       291.64
  Cadillac         20 × 18      306.98      15.34       291.64
  Cadillac         20 × 20      325.52      16.27       309.25
  Cadillac         27 × 20      417.76      20.88       396.88

  Hudson           10 × 14      169.83       8.49       161.34
  Hudson           10 × 16      181.72       9.08       172.64
  Hudson           12 × 16      199.97       9.99       189.98
  Hudson           12 × 18      208.73      10.43       198.30
  Hudson           14 × 16      212.73      10.63       202.10
  Hudson           14 × 18      226.63      10.33       215.30

  Peerless         18 × 16      288.10      14.40       273.70
  Peerless         18 × 18      301.76      15.08       286.68
  Peerless         18 × 20      315.26      15.76       299.50
  Peerless         20 × 18      315.26      15.76       299.50
  Peerless         20 × 20      327.42      16.37       311.05

  Bennett Special   8 × 12       90.94       4.54        86.40
  Bennett Special   8 × 14       97.61       4.88        92.73
  Bennett Special   8 × 16      110.18       5.50       104.68
  Bennett Special  10 × 12       99.22       4.96        94.26
  Bennett Special  10 × 14      109.25       5.46       103.79
  Bennett Special  10 × 16      122.23       6.11       116.12

[Illustration: Bennett Homes Better-Built Ready-Cut Order Form

FORM 211-5-20 120M-PK-1000]

This book is the story, in word and picture, of actual homes proven by
living people to be Beautiful, Practical, Substantial. ¶ The designs and
plans are the final creations, after years of study and experience, of
Foremost American Authorities on Home Architecture and Construction. ¶
Economy is the controlling thought in these plans--not economy that
merely cheapens but that which eliminates all unnecessary costs without
sacrifice of appearance, strength or utility. ¶ Bennett Homes are truly
Better-Built--better to look at, better to live in and better to last.

[Illustration]

CATALOG No. 18

Copyright 1920 by

=_Ray H. Bennett Lumber Co., Inc.
NORTH TONAWANDA - N. Y._=

ESTABLISHED 1902




INDEX


Page

Bennett Advantages, 7

Bennett Economies, 4-7

Bennett Method, 4-7

Bennett Plant, 1


Cellars, 9

Chimneys, 9

Colonnades, 36-37


Decorating Service, Inside Back Cover

Doors, 36-37

Double Home, 46-67

Duplex Home, 46-67


Economies, 4-7


Foundation Plans, 9

French Doors, 36-37


Garages, 69-70
  Buick
  Hudson
  Peerless
  Cadillac
  Bennett Special, 69

Guarantee, Order Form


Hardware, 36-37

Heating, 71-72

History--Home Building, 3

Houses, 10-35 and 38-67
  Aberdeen, 30
  Arcadia, 31
  Atherton, 32
  Auburn, 56
  Avon, 10
  Beverly, 60
  Bison, 22
  Bryant, 12
  Charlotte, 11
  Clarendon, 39
  Cleo, 26
  Cloverdale, 55
  Concord, 61
  Colonial, 44
  Delaware, 58
  Dover, 50
  Emerson, 62
  Erie, 45
  Flanders, 35
  Forsyth, 38
  Franklin, 17
  Frederick, 46
  Fulton, 25
  Genesee, 41
  Hamilton, 24
  Harriet, 33
  Hartley, 43
  Harvard, 14
  Ideal, 23
  Ilion, 13
  Janis, 40
  Kenmore, 54
  Lancaster, 34
  LaSalle, 21
  Lawton, 53
  Lincoln, 16
  Madison, 66
  Maidstone, 52
  Monroe, 59
  Nelson, 47
  New Hartford, 19
  Niagara, 20
  Olean, 42
  Ontario, 64
  Potomac, 18
  Raymond, 15
  Richard, 48
  Rochester, 49
  Salem, 28
  Shamrock, 57
  Sherrill, 51
  Stanley, 65
  Tremont, 67
  Waverly, 63
  Woodward, 29
  York, 27


Kitchen Cabinets, 36-37


Landscape Service, Inside Back Cover

Lighting, 71-72

Linen Closet, 36-37

Lock Sets, 36-37


Masonry, 9

Medicine Cabinet, 36-37

Mirror Door, 36-37


Paints, 9

Plaster, 9

Plumbing, 71-72

Prices, with letter


References, 2

Reverse Plans, 8


Specifications--general, 8-9

Specifications--detail, with each home

Stairways, 36-37

Summer Cottages, 68-69
  Wenona
  Newport
  Ivernia
  Linwood


Two Family Home, 46-67

Trim--interior, 36-37


Wardrobe, 36-37

Windows, 36-37


[Illustration: 3 Letters of Reference

REFERENCES

THE STATE NATIONAL BANK NORTH TONAWANDA, N.Y.

BUFFALO TRUST COMPANY BUFFALO, N.Y.

THE FIRST TRUST CO. OF TONAWANDA TONAWANDA, N.Y.

REFERENCES

OUR CUSTOMERS EVERYWHERE ANY BANK OR TRUST COMPANY COMMERCIAL AGENCIES.]

    "_=Home-keeping hearts are happiest;
      For those who wander they know not where
    Are full of trouble and full of care;
      To stay at home is best.=_"
               --LONGFELLOW

The first home was purposely built beside the "Sacred Fire".

The story runs that fire came as a gift from the Gods to Man. And so
heavenly seemed its qualities of beauty, light and warmth, that Man
reverenced it--ceased wandering and built his abode around its glowing
radiance.

Through the ages--from the rugged cave, the rough tent of animal skins,
the crude log cabin, down to the Home Beautiful of To-day--home building
has been the strong primal instinct. Men have practiced all the pursuits
of peace and war for those things for which home stands--love, family,
hospitality, security, worship. Indeed, the home building spirit is the
very backbone of civilization. Intelligent, thoughtful men always desire
their families to live the home life, because they know that the best of
physical, mental and moral powers are developed under home's benign
influence.

Almost the first thought of the Pilgrims after they had landed on
America's new shores was of a home. And so immediately they built
themselves sturdy houses of the straight-shafted pine trees that stood
everywhere about the rugged shores. And some of these homes are still
standing, amazing testimony to the vigor and endurance of wood.

Today, more than ever before, people are seriously considering how they
shall live. They realize that the dwelling place has a marked influence
upon living and character--that the inspiration of home, next to
religion, is the greatest in life.

Perforce, many must live part of their lives in the rented house. But
however desirable, no family can ever acquire quite that deep-seated
love and interest for, nor have the incentive to adorn and beautify, a
dwelling place for which they pay toll to a landlord. But when the place
which shelters the family belongs to them, when they know that every
thought and every dollar they put into it is a permanent investment
which pays big dividends in the family happiness and contentment--then
that place, however lowly or humble, becomes truly a home. Naturally
then, the tendency is strongly toward the owned private home.

The dainty cottage--the inviting semi-bungalow--the comfortable
Colonial--the cosy story-and-a-half--these are the leading types of
homes to-day. And when there is built into them that particular beauty,
and those conveniences--modern sanitation, lighting, ventilation and
heating--that will suit the taste of the individual family, their mode
of living and their pocketbook--then indeed does the dwelling place
become "a thing of beauty and a joy forever".

Bennett Homes, Better-Built and Ready-Cut, satisfy every desire and
every need of home-lovers--for the dwelling-place which shall possess
charm, convenience and endurance to the greatest extent consistent with
the desired investment.

[Illustration: =A Better-Built idea--routing (instead of cleating)
stair-stringers for fine workmanship, and accurate fit.=]


HOW SCIENCE SOLVED THE HIGH COST OF HOME-BUILDING

Up to the present, the great drawback to home-building has been the
excessive cost, by the individually-built-house method.

Plans by experienced architects have been costly; the cost of lumber has
been high; the amount of labor necessary to cut and trim rough and
finished lumber has been a serious item; there have been endless
worries--delays--extra costs; plans have looked good on paper, but have
not worked out well; contractors have been known to be careless about
the quality of the material and of the work on the job.

What will avoid all the usual waste, delays, disappointments,
and--what will cut the cost of building a home? Science
says--"_simplify_"--"_standardize_"--"_eliminate waste_."

"_This is the day of brains that plans for thousands_ at a time, instead
of one. Why is it necessary to plan every individual home that is built?
There's a wiser, more economical way. Once the plan for a house has been
tried and proven true, use it many times over; let hundreds of people
divide the cost--let hundreds of people reap the benefit of these
plans."

"_This is the day of machinery_, the day for producing in tremendous
quantities, thereby accomplishing in minutes that which would consume
hours, days and weeks to achieve by usual methods. After having worked
out plans to the highest point of economy, why not cut the materials by
labor-saving machines _instead of the old hand method_, thereby reducing
labor and waste to a minimum."


  +==================================+
  |  ¶ ALL CHANCES FOR ERRORS AS TO  |
  | QUANTITY AND QUALITY ARE         |
  | ELIMINATED BY PURCHASING ALL     |
  | MATERIALS AT A STATED PRICE FROM |
  | ONE COMPANY--FROM BENNETT.       |
  +==================================+


SCIENCE'S ANSWER IS THE BENNETT-WAY

The best designs and plans have been produced for hundreds to share the
benefits--a huge modern mill in the heart of the lumber market has been
equipped with labor-and-waste-saving machinery of the latest type--and
YOU, who want to build a home, reap the advantages and savings of the
Bennett-Way in securing one of finer design, greater convenience, and
genuine durability.

Perhaps right here, it is well to establish the difference between a
Bennett Ready-Cut Home and a portable house.

The object of the portable system is to produce a building construction
which may be put together to form a temporary shelter--taken apart
again--moved from place to place as desired. Manufacturers of portable
buildings cannot and do not represent their products to be permanent.

But Bennett Homes, Better-Built and Ready-Cut, are built for permanency.
Once your Bennett Home is completed, there is absolutely no difference
between it and any well constructed home, except, perhaps, that our
designs are more attractive and impressive than the average homes one
sees.


HOW RENT-MONEY COUNTS

This table shows what rent amounts to in ten and twenty years, with six
per cent interest compounded annually, and gives an idea of the value of
the house one can pay for by applying rent toward paying for a home.

  Rent per Month         In 10 Years           In 20 Years
     $ 8.00               $1,265.35            $ 3,531.41
      12.00                1,898.02              5,279.11
      17.00                2,688.86              7,504.24
      20.00                3,163.36              8,828.52
      25.00                3,954.20             11,035.65
      30.00                4,745.04             13,242.78
      35.00                5,535.88             15,449.91
      50.00                7,908.40             22,071.30

[Illustration: =Tonawanda, heart of the Lumber Market. Great lumber-docks
on one side, main trunk-line railroads on the other.=]


ATTRACTIVE DESIGNS

There are more than fifty designs and plans offered on the following
pages. They have been carefully and expertly selected from hundreds
submitted. These designs are not merely dreams of architects or artists.
They are actual houses which have been built, lived in and proven
practical and pleasurable in every detail. In considering a BENNETT
BETTER-BUILT HOME, you are offered a very wide selection of various
styles and sizes, so that you may choose a home that will suit your
particular needs, tastes, locality, and pocketbook.

In building the Bennett Way you have this genuine advantage--you know,
before you build, just exactly how your home will look after it is
completed. Do you know _that_ when your local architect or contractor
designs your home for you? He may convince you that his design is what
you want, and induce you to accept it, even against your own better
judgment. Though you may not be pleased with the design he has prepared,
nevertheless you accept his ideas rather than submit to the additional
expense and delay of a change. BENNETT BETTER-BUILT HOMES correspond in
every detail with the actual photographs shown in this catalog. Should
the design you select require some slight alterations, we shall be very
glad to make such changes, if practical, at actual cost.


ECONOMY IN DRAFTING

The first of a series of savings for you starts in our drafting room.

It is quite necessary for the architect to charge a considerable fee for
his drawings, for he must pay expenses and a profit. The drawings for
our houses are even more elaborate, and the first cost of production is
naturally much greater. Yet there is this gain for you: when the
drawings are once made, hundreds of blue prints are made from them at
practically a negligible cost. Therefore, we furnish you with blue
prints from our drawings _absolutely free_ of fees or of any charge.

[Illustration: =Two large schooners unloading a giant shipment at the
spacious Bennett Docks.=]

[Illustration: =Millions of feet of choice lumber air-drying for your and
other fine homes.=]


ECONOMY IN STANDARDIZATION

Next we help you realize a decided saving through standardization of
materials.

In designing an attractive home, a professional architect can give
little thought to standard lengths or shapes of material. Our Bennett
Better-Built designers, however, put forth both thought and effort
toward producing, not only an attractive home, but one which is
economical of rough and finished lumber, millwork, etc.

For instance, there are certain standard lengths and widths of lumber,
and certain standard styles and sizes of windows, doors, window frames,
door frames--in fact of every kind of millwork. Standard items can be
manufactured in tremendous quantities at very low cost while special
styles and sizes require readjustment of machinery, and the waste
(sometimes 33 and 1-3 per cent) of standard-sized materials to meet
special requirements. We manufacture such an extensive variety of styles
and sizes in building materials of so many kinds, that an appearance as
artistic as you may wish can easily be produced without resorting to the
expense of special materials.

Another important application of standardization lies in the spacing of
windows and the like. Insofar as appearance is concerned, 6 inches one
way or another usually makes but little difference in the spacing of
windows. But from the standpoint of economy, it is decidedly better to
have the spacing in even feet. For instance, windows spaced 12 or 14
feet apart permit the use of 12 or 14 foot standard length boards,
without waste; whereas, if the windows were spaced 12' 6" apart, it
would necessitate the cutting up of a 14' or 16' board with a waste on
every board that goes to make up the full height of the window.


ECONOMY IN USE OF LABOR-SAVING MACHINERY

By the use of gigantic, powerful machinery, we save you a large
percentage of labor cost, and inaccuracies that always waste hand-cut
lumber.

The prices quoted in our catalog furnish you with material sufficient to
complete every listed detail of the home which you select. In addition,
it covers the cost of cutting every piece of material so that when it
reaches its destination, it is ready to nail. There will be no wasting
of time waiting for "something forgotten that must be ordered," waiting
for one man to cut and fit a part before another can go ahead.

[Illustration: Machines sawing and resawing lumber for homes--saving
hours and days over hand methods.]

You cannot possible go astray, because--as we said before--our blue
prints are thorough and complete, showing the exact location of each and
every piece of material. It would not be difficult to erect the entire
building with only the blue prints at hand. Nevertheless, to facilitate
the work, we furnish a bill of material, itemizing each and every piece,
and instructing where it should be placed.

As a further safeguard against error and confusion, we include a set of
instructions written by men who have had years of actual experience in
constructing houses.


ECONOMY IN CARPENTRY

The entire time consumed by the carpenter for calculating the best plan
for framing, has been eliminated. This time is entirely saved, because
with our Bennett Better-Built system, the planning is completely done in
our office before the material is shipped, and our _Special Notch
System_ makes the work speedy.

As you have watched work on a house, have you ever stopped to figure how
very much of a workman's time was spent in first measuring, then
cutting, then trying and perhaps refitting the material--all this is
against the very small amount of time required for fastening and
nailing? Well, we save you all that fuss and waste by furnishing the
material not merely cut, but cut to fit more accurately than hand labor
ever could.

Immediately upon receipt of your order, the blue-prints of the design
you have selected, the bill of material and a set of instructions are
mailed to you. At that same time, a duplicate bill of material is sent
into our mill, with instructions to start cutting. Within a few hours
the material for the frame of your house is completed--which means that
the work which would have required many days of expensive labor on the
job, is accomplished in hours by our machines--more economically, more
accurately, many times over.


ECONOMY IN MILLWORK

All Bennett Better-Built doors, windows, door frames, window frames,
door trim, window trim and mouldings are manufactured in
quantities--therefore at a very low cost of production, of which you
derive the benefit. Powerful and precise machines saw and resaw, rout
stair stringers, mortise, and fit doors and windows, cut and shape
woodwork, smooth and sand all sorts and sizes of lumber--with a quality
of fine workmanship in dozen and score lots impossible by any other
method.

And remember--any saving in labor must be considered a double saving,
because the more time required for the erection of your home, the longer
you are paying out money for labor on the new and for rent where you are
living.


ECONOMY IN WATER TRANSPORTATION OF RAW MATERIALS

The docks of the Ray H. Bennett Lumber Company, Inc., are located the
best of any in North Tonawanda. You will realize the importance to you
of location, when we tell you that the largest lumber steamers coming
down the great lakes, direct from the saw mills, land at our docks. Thus
we are enabled to take advantage of lake-steamer cargo-shipments, and
save something for you.

[Illustration: Thousands of doors--absolutely clear grade--knotless, and
beautifully grained.]

You will also appreciate that we, as buyers of cargoes of lumber
totalling millions of feet, are entitled to a lower price than the buyer
of a carload of lumber containing only about twenty thousand feet. This
impresses the fact that we are in a position to furnish you better
quality materials at lower prices. We handle lumber in huge
quantities--our stock sizes are secured in big units--therefore, our
goods are manufactured and handled at a much lower cost.

You can easily see that our ideal location for the securing of our raw
materials means large savings to you. We have enormous stocks on hand at
all times and are ideally equipped for fast work.


ECONOMY IN EXCEPTIONAL SHIPPING FACILITIES

North Tonawanda, N. Y., where the Bennett Plant is located, is one of
the largest lumber markets in the United States. This is due to the fact
that North Tonawanda is a made-to-order center for distribution. Its
shipping facilities are conceded to be unsurpassed in the country.
Practically all of the great railway systems are in direct connection,
enabling us to give you the remarkable service--the vitally important
quick shipments--for which we are famed--in which we excel.


ECONOMY IN BENNETT BULK BUYING

We have, as yet, made little mention of our vast purchasing power, nor
of the fact that you are purchasing your material at wholesale prices.

[Illustration: Window warehouse--thousands of dollars' worth of finely
constructed frames ready for glazing.]

We purchase, annually, many millions of feet of material directly from
the saw mills, thereby eliminating unnecessary expenses and profits. We
buy at rock-bottom prices, less all possible discounts for quantity, for
prompt payment, etc.

[Illustration: One of our modern Planers--helping to put the celebrated
finish on Bennett interior woodwork.]

And then our giant purchases are brought by large lake steamers to our
docks and unloaded directly into our yard. On one side our material
comes in; it moves almost automatically through our yards to the cutting
and finishing mills; it leaves them on the railroad side of our
property. With our advantages, the cost of handling is therefore reduced
to a minimum which only a few of the largest establishments can hope to
equal.


BENNETT ADVANTAGES--In a Nutshell

1. Designs and plans proven the "best" of this country's architectural
and practical experts.

2. Elimination of architects' and contractors' fees.

3. Materials from the heart of the lumber market--brand-new, bright
stock.

4. Saving of waste through standard sizes, lengths, shapes.

5. Ready-cut, ready-to-erect features as against cut-and-try on the job
method.

6. Quantity production of standardized millwork.

7. Transportation and handling charges minimized.

8. Huge buying facilities.

9. Services of an organization, celebrated for its financial strength,
for ability and for integrity.

10. All-in-all a real HOME for you and yours at a price that represents
the greatest possible value for the money you elect to put into it.

In every paragraph of these specifications you will note how thoroughly
we have planned for strength and endurance in the construction of your
home--how we employ only the best grades of lumber, accurately cut and
fashioned by the most precise workmanship.

In the first place, please understand the importance of our notched
construction. See the photograph in the lower corner of next page. The
frames of our houses are a great improvement over the common practice,
both in matters of accuracy of fit, of strength and rigidity. The notch
method is considered costly when done by hand labor, but it is always
considered desirable. The Bennett methods of doing by machines in
minutes what would take hours or days by the cut-on-the-job way, gives
you extra quality without extra cost.

Another thing we wish you to note is the double and triple strength of
joists and studding, where extra stresses are sure to be met, or
absolute rigidity is an essential. See the three studs at the corners as
shown by the photo of "notch" construction.

Notice that we furnish bridging for floor joists; that our stairs are
cut accurately, as in the best houses, instead of using mere nailed-on
cleats.

Notice how we select and match interior woods for beauty of grain--how
we sand them so they will take a most beautiful finish.

Notice that the outside of our houses--door and window frames, and
siding,--is of _Redwood_, celebrated for its extraordinary long life,
and so approved by the U. S. Government experts.

Notice our hardware and such items as kitchen cabinets, wardrobes,
medicine cabinets, even building paper, and lastly notice our double
flooring for both floors.

In every last item, Bennett Homes are truly Better-Built--all in all you
will get a most attractive, most livable, most enduring dwelling place,
giving you a dollar for dollar value that is unequalled in the lumber
market.




General Specifications


DIMENSIONS

All rooms show =actual= inside measurements and not from outside of
building to center of inside partition or from center of partition to
center of partition, as is sometimes given.

PLANS

One set is furnished with each house. They are so complete in detail,
that if carefully followed, it is impossible to go wrong. Reversed plans
will be furnished without extra cost.

MATERIALS IN GENERAL

All lumber for Bennett "Better-Built" Homes is shipped directly from
enormous stocks in our yards. It is all thoroughly seasoned, and
guaranteed equal to or better than the grades specified. Thorough
seasoning means less waste and consequently lower freight charges. It
also means that shrinkage, bound to occur with green lumber, has
occurred before the lumber is cut for your home.

[Illustration]

QUANTITY OF MATERIALS

An unqualified guarantee is contained on your order blank that we will
furnish material to entirely complete your home in accordance with the
following general specifications and with the particular specifications
contained on the individual page of photograph and plans.

BASEMENT FRAMES AND SASH

Are not included in your order unless illustration shows siding or
shingles to the grade lines, because these are used when the foundation
is laid. We plan to have your material on the ground as soon as the
foundation is finished and has had sufficient time to set. If we were to
furnish basement frames and sash, it would be necessary either to ship
them by express, creating additional expense, or it would be necessary
to delay the foundation work until the lumber arrived. We cannot see
where enough benefit is derived to make up for this additional expense
and delay. If, however, you decide to have us furnish them, we will ship
them according to your instructions.

FOUNDATION WALL PLATE OR BOND TIMBER

2 in. × 6 in. No. 1 Hemlock, surfaced four sides and cut to fit,
furnished to lay on top of the foundation wall to insure an even bearing
for the first floor joists.

GIRDER

Size 6 in. × 6 in. or 6 in. × 8 in., (as listed under each design)
depending upon the size house. No. 1 Hemlock, surfaced four sides and
cut to fit. It is a well-known fact that a built-up timber is stronger
than a solid timber, and is much easier to handle. We, therefore,
furnish material cut to proper length to make a built-up timber.

GIRDER POSTS

Iron stanchions 4 in. in diameter. These posts are furnished in
sufficient number for spacing not more than 8 ft. apart.

FIRST FLOOR JOISTS

2 in. × 8 in. or 2 in. × 10 in. according to span, No. 1 Hemlock,
Surfaced four sides and cut to fit; spaced 16 in. on centers and =doubled=
under all bearing partitions.

SECOND FLOOR JOISTS

2 in. × 8 in. or 2 in. × 10 in. according to span, No. 1 Hemlock,
surfaced four sides and cut to fit; spaced 16 in. on centers.

CEILING JOISTS AND COLLAR BEAMS

2 in. × 4 in. or 2 in. × 6 in., depending upon span, No. 1 Hemlock,
surfaced four sides and cut to fit; 16 in. on centers.

BRIDGING

2 in. × 2 in. Hemlock, cut to fit. A double row between all 2 in. × 8
in. and 2 in. × 10 in. joists having a span of 12 ft. or over.

RAFTERS

2 in. × 4 in. or 2 in. × 6 in. depending on size of house and pitch of
roof, No. 1 Hemlock, surfaced four sides, spaced 24 in. on centers. The
rafters are all carefully laid out and cut in our mill, ready to erect
on the job.

STUDDING

2 in. × 4 in. No. 1 Hemlock, surfaced four sides, all cut to fit; spaced
16 in. on centers. =Trebled= at corners of outside walls and =doubled= at
sides of door and window openings where extra strength is required. Top
plates of all partitions and outside walls are =double=; single plates at
bottom. Side wall plates are =notched= to receive the studding, a
celebrated Bennett feature. It is impossible to set the studding wrong.
This is an improvement over the ordinary method of framing. See
illustration on opposite page.

WALL SHEATHING

=Dressed and matched= and cut to fit. This is another important item of
Bennett quality. No. 1 Hemlock.

ROOF SHEATHING

1 in. × 4 in. No. 1 Hemlock, surfaced one side, cut to fit. We furnish
this material in quantities to allow for 2-1/4 in. spacing, as is common
practice, when shingles are used. In case you decide to use Asphalt
Slate Surfaced Roofing, or Asphalt S. S. Shingles, it is necessary to
lay the sheathing tightly together. We furnish dressed and matched
sheathing for this purpose at a slight additional cost.

PORCH FLOOR JOISTS

2 in. × 6 in. No. 1 Hemlock, surfaced four sides and cut to fit. Spaced
16 in. on centers.

PORCH CEILING JOISTS AND RAFTERS

2 in. × 4 in. No. 1 Hemlock, surfaced four sides and cut to fit. Spaced
24 in. on centers.

SUB FLOORING

1 in. No. 1 Hemlock =Dressed= and =Matched= and cut to fit, furnished for
both =first= and =second floors=.

FINISH FLOORING

13/16 in. × 2-1/4 in. or 13/16 in. × 3-1/4 in. Clear Flat Grain Yellow
Pine or Clear Fir. Double Flooring is another proof of the Bennett
Better-Built idea--it secures rigidity and soundproofness. Furnished in
standard lengths.

PORCH FLOORING

1-1/8 in. × 3-1/4 in. Clear Fir, cut to fit.

PORCH CEILING

7/16 in. Clear Yellow Pine, surfaced and beaded one side and matched,
cut to fit.

ATTIC FLOORING

When attic stairs are shown in plans, we furnish 13/16 in. × 3-1/4 in.
No. 2 Yellow Pine, cut to fit. When attic stairs are not shown, no
flooring is furnished.

CORNICE CEILING

3/4 in. × 3-1/4 in. =Clear Fir=, surfaced and beaded one side and matched,
cut to fit, used instead of roof boards over exposed rafter ends.

OUTSIDE FINISH

=Clear Redwood=, =Clear Fir or Sound Knotted White Pine=, surfaced four
sides.

SIDING

1/2 in. =Clear Redwood Bevel Siding, furnished in standard lengths. Or=

=Extra *A* Washington Red Cedar= Shingles will be furnished instead of
siding without extra charge, if so desired. It is commonly known, and an
admitted fact that =Redwood is unequalled for exterior protection=.

DOOR FRAMES AND WINDOW FRAMES

=Clear Redwood= cut to fit, and shipped knocked-down. The sills for all
outside doors are 1-3/4 in. × 7-1/4 in. hardwood. All outside casing for
window and doors are 7/8 in. × 4-1/2 in. with drip cap.

INSIDE DOORS

1-3/8 in. Fir, two or five panel, mortised for lock sets. See pages 36
and 37.

FRONT AND REAR DOORS

Both glazed. Front doors are furnished as shown in the individual house
picture. 1-3/4 in. thick No. 1 grade solid Chestnut, unless otherwise
specified, =mortised= for front door lock set. Rear door 1-3/8 in.,
=mortised= for lock set. See pages 36 and 37 for all doors.

ROOF SHINGLES

Extra Clear Washington Red Cedar 5-2 inches, (*) at butt. To lay 4-1/2
in. to the weather. Bennett multi-strip slate-surfaced shingles or
Bennett Asphalt Slate-Surfaced Shingles will be furnished at a nominal
cost. *Note: The "5 to 2" inches, refers to the thickness of the
shingles, and means that five shingles placed one on top of the other
with butts together, measures full 2 inches thick at the butt end.

SIDE WALL SHINGLES

For side walls, where shown in catalog, are Premium Brand Extra *A*
Washington Red Cedar Shingles 6 to 2, furnished to be laid 5 in. to the
weather. Siding will be furnished instead of shingles, if so desired.

SCAFFOLDS AND BRACES

We furnish these as necessary, depending upon the size of the house.

LATH

No. 1 Spruce or Hemlock 48 in. standard. No lath furnished for cellar or
attic, unless ordered extra.

GROUNDS

5/8 in. × 7/8 in. Hemlock. To nail around all inside door openings as a
guide for plastering.

STAIRS

The stairs are carefully designed for the individual requirements of
each home. The material is the highest grade of Yellow Pine to match the
beauty of the other interior finish. They are carefully machined in our
mills and are shipped to you knocked down, ready to set up. See
illustration of manufacture on page 4. See pages 36 and 37 also.

CELLAR AND ATTIC STAIRS

Furnished cut to fit whenever shown in the plans.

PANTRY AND CLOSET SHELVING

Material for shelves is furnished for each closet and pantry, shown in
the catalog plans.

KITCHEN CABINET

Whenever kitchen cabinets are shown in the plans they are included in
the price for the home. They are shipped to you in the knock-down
complete (including hardware). The material is clear grade Yellow Pine.
See pages 36 and 37.

MEDICINE CABINET

A built-in medicine cabinet is furnished with each house having a
bathroom. Each cabinet is complete in every detail and includes a
bevel-mirror door. Shipped ready to set in place. See pages 36 and 37.

COLONNADES

Where a colonnade is shown in the plans, it is included in the price of
the home. The material is, of course, Yellow Pine to match the other
fine interior finish of the home. Each colonnade is manufactured in owr
own mill under our own supervision, and we guarantee you the very best
of materials and the finest workmanship. Two styles of colonnades are
shown on pages 36 and 37 of our catalog. In case a colonnade is not
included in the plan of the house you select, and you wish to install
one, we will, upon application, gladly quote prices.

INSIDE DOOR AND WINDOW TRIM

Clear Yellow Pine of the finest quality obtainable, all carefully
matched and sanded. The casings are 13/16 in. × 3-5/8 in. in width; back
band 1-1/8 in. × 1-1/8 in.; the window stool 7/8 in. × 3-5/8 in.; the
apron 7/8 in. × 3-1/4 in. This design is one of the choicest on the
market. See pages 36 and 37.

BASE, PICTURE MOULDING, CHAIR RAIL AND HOOK STRIPS

Clear Yellow Pine, shipped in standard lengths to be cut on the job;
base 13/16 in. × 7-5/8 in. on first floor, 13/16 in. × 5-5/8 in. for
second floor. Picture moulding 13/16 in. × 1-1/2 in. Chair rail 5/8 in.
× 3-1/2 in. Hook strips 13/16 in. × 2-3/4 in. Chair rail for kitchen and
bath. Hook strips for all closets.

WINDOWS

1-3/8 in. Clear White Pine, check rail, made to be used with pulleys and
weights. Glass set in and puttied. Styles to correspond with those shown
in the individual house pictures. All windows more than 26 inches in
width, glazed with =double= strength glass.

PORCH MATERIAL

All porch materials are manufactured from the best weather-resisting
woods of standard designs. Porch steps are painstakingly cut to fit in
our mill and shipped to you knocked-down with 1-1/8 in. treads.


HARDWARE

MORTISE LOCK SETS

Design illustrated on pages 36 and 37. Furnished in two styles of
finish--Antique Copper, or Sand Blast Dull Brass. Unless otherwise
specified in your order, we will furnish the Antique Copper. A cylinder
front door lock set is furnished with all houses listed at $2400.00 or
more. For houses listed at less, the standard bit key front door lock
set is furnished.

DOUBLE ACTING FLOOR HINGES AND DOOR PLATES

Furnished with all houses shown with a double swinging door between the
kitchen and dining room.

HINGES

Finished to match other hardware. Three hinges are furnished on all
front doors.

SASH LIFT, SASH LOCKS AND WINDOW STOP ADJUSTERS

Furnished for all sliding sash windows, finished to match the lock sets,
two sash lifts to each window.

BATHROOM HARDWARE

All bathroom hardware is =nickel plated=.

KITCHEN CUPBOARD AND CABINET HARDWARE

All =hinges=, =turns=, =etc.=, are included in price quoted and
furnished to match other hardware.

NAILS

Sufficient quantities of all sizes furnished for all purposes.
Galvanized nails for shingles.

BUILDING PAPER

=Tarred Paper= is furnished for underneath the siding, and between the
finish and sub-flooring.

DOORBELL

We furnish an attractive front door bell set.

MISCELLANEOUS HARDWARE

Our hardware list includes sash cord, window weights, attic sash sets,
base knobs, coat hooks, chimney flashing and valley tin, but does not
include eavetroughing.


PAINTS, OILS AND VARNISHES

EXTRA FINE QUALITY READY-MIXED PAINT

Sufficient in quantity for three good coats on outside walls. A special
hard drying floor paint is furnished to cover the porch floor and steps
two coats. Color card furnished upon request.

SPAR VARNISH

Although it costs less to furnish paint for the porch ceiling, we are
furnishing a high grade spar varnish for two coats. Spar varnish is also
furnished to cover the front door.

INTERIOR VARNISH

A very high grade varnish is furnished for two good coats on all doors,
windows and interior trim. This varnish is exceedingly durable and can
be rubbed within 36 to 48 hours. It is not affected by hot or cold water
and will not crack.

Practically every home owner prefers his bathroom painted rather than
varnished. All bathrooms in Bennett Better-Built Homes are especially
attractive, owing to the fact that they are finished in white enamel and
all hardware is furnished nickel plated. Enamel undercoater is furnished
to cover the woodwork, two coats. Two coats of Bennett White Enamel on
top of this makes an attractive and durable surface. Our White Enamel
Paint will not turn yellow. Putty, oil, sandpaper and turpentine in
proper quantities to meet requirements are furnished.

Although we do not include floor varnish or wall paints in our
specifications, owing to the wide variety of ways for finishing floors
and walls, we will upon request be glad to figure your exact needs and
quote upon them.

SHINGLE STAIN

When shingles are used on outside walls, we furnish shingle stain
instead of paint. We do not furnish stain for roof shingles, except at
an additional cost on order.

FOUNDATION, CHIMNEY, FIREPLACES

Although we show on our plans, the location of foundation, chimney,
fireplace, etc., we do not include these items in our prices, nor do we
carry the materials in stock. The express and freight charges to be met
in shipment would offset any advantages we might offer. For the same
reason, we do not furnish plaster. We will, however, gladly co-operate
with our customers by offering suggestions or furnishing data regarding
same.

PLUMBING, HEATING AND LIGHTING

See pages 71 and 72 for plumbing, heating and lighting fixtures.

The quotations covering the installation of plumbing, heating and
lighting equipment vary so much that it is advisable to consider each
separately.

Our Equipment Department will furnish you with information and
estimates.

[Illustration: Notches Make Assembling Easy]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Avon_= 26 ft. × 40 ft. over all 7 Rooms and Bath]

What "Sterling" means to silver, our "Avon" means to the semi-bungalow
home. It is the hallmark of genuine worth.

Rarely do you find so stately, yet so graceful lines. Consider the broad
and downward sweeping roofs of main structure and porch, the overhanging
eaves, the supporting brackets, the solid pillars and house-wide
veranda. And such a wonderful place inside! You'll hesitate a minute in
the vestibule--but it's in the hospitable living room you wish to be.
There's a restful hearth and fireside at the farther end; or, if you
prefer, a triple window to give a wide view of outdoors. And--what's
unique--the stairway rising charmingly from one corner of the roomy,
cheerful dining room. The kitchen is compact, convenient.

And think of it--_two_ airy, sizable bedrooms on the main floor. Yet
there are two more sleeping rooms--one extra large--the bath, storeroom,
and a linen closet upstairs. Notice the ample closet room, the coat
closet, the flood of light and air possible in every room of this home.

Oh! there are features in the "Avon" to tell you about for a long
time--but write us you are interested in it especially, and we will send
the whole splendid story.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--our "Chautauqua," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

French doors between vestibule and living room. _See pages 36-37._

Prices on oak floors and trim for vestibule, living room and dining
room, maple flooring in kitchen, quoted on application.

Our No. 1 kitchen cupboard and medicine cabinet included in the selling
price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "AVON"

FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: "AVON"

SECOND FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: _Charlotte_ 26 ft. × 38 ft. over all 8 Rooms, Vestibule,
Bath]

There's a quiet, rich dignity to the Charlotte--a home beyond the
ordinary for a good-sized family. The shingle sides are novel and
pleasing. Interesting brackets support the wide, overhanging eaves.
Dormers provide triple windows--one, a bay!

You enter a cozy reception hall, with its pretty stairway and landing.
An attractive colonnade arch leads into a well lighted living room. Here
you may have your cozy fireplace--or, if you prefer, none at all. French
doors communicate with an unusually attractive dining room. Many will be
pleased with the bedroom and bath on first floor. Note the splendid
bedrooms with roomy closets on second floor--bath with an easy access, a
linen closet, a large kitchen cabinet.

Truly, the Charlotte is an _achievement_--in rare design--in perfection
of every detail--in wonderful value for its low price.

SPECIFICATIONS

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--our "Conesus," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick. _See pages 36-37._

French doors between living room and dining room.

Niagara Colonnade between hall and living room. _See pages 36-37._

Prices on oak floors and trim for vestibule, living room and dining
room, maple flooring in kitchen, quoted on application.

Our No. 1 kitchen cupboard and two medicine cabinets included in selling
price. _See pages 36-37._

[Illustration: "Charlotte" FIRST FLOOR PLAN B]

[Illustration: "Charlotte" SECOND FLOOR PLAN B]

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Bryant_= 28 ft. × 24 ft. over all 6 Rooms and Bath]

If your desires lean toward the home beautiful, yet modest, containing
all necessary conveniences for modern living, you will study the Bryant
with considerable interest.

Though of complete styling, it is unburdened with expensive "fuss and
feathers." The roof treatment is artistically handled on porch, dormer
and sides. A shingled second story adds to the smart effect.

A good-sized porch leads to a spacious living room, while to the right
stands a gem of a dining room. Especially mark the stairway, closed or
open as you may wish--and a distinct gain in conservation of warmth in
cold weather. Off the nearby kitchen is a dandy storage closet. The
downstairs bedroom may be as readily used for den or study.

Upstairs there is a convenient bathroom, and two roomy sleeping chambers
with extra large closets. There is the innovation of a bright sewing
room--a room all for mother.

Splendidly designed, sturdily built in every detail, you can choose the
Bryant as a home that will meet your future as well as present needs.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--our "Mohawk," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

Our No. 2 kitchen cupboard and medicine cabinet included in the selling
price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "BRYANT"

FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: "BRYANT"

SECOND FLOOR PLAN]


Batavia, N. Y.
Nov. 11, 1917.

     _Gentlemen_:--

     _Five years ago_ I bought all my lumber from you to build my house
     and I am very much pleased with it. I saved a good big bit by
     dealing with you.

R. P.



[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Ilion_= 22 ft. × 34 ft. over all 8 Rooms, Bath, Pantry]

Trimness is personified by this neat, compact, all-shingle
house--trimness and comfort, for the common-sense interior arrangement
is in keeping with the all-around beauty and durability of the exterior.

Notice that you reach the porch by means of the steps on the side--this
advantage securing fine privacy for time spent on the veranda.

One enters a reception hall that opens either toward the amply-spaced
living room, or a quiet den (which might readily be used as an office,
if desired). The dining room is complete with a triple-window bay,
insuring a wealth of light and an ideal place for house-plants and
flowers. The kitchen and the generous pantry are in that close proximity
which modern home management dictates nowadays. Side and rear doors are
combined in an entrance at grade.

And then step upstairs! Three bright, airy, double-windowed bedrooms
greet you--rooms of liberal width and depth, each one having an
adjoining extra-size closet.

Taken altogether, the Ilion is a home every foot useful--spacious yet
compact--best of all, quite reasonable.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists and rafters 2 in. × 4 in.

Front door--our "Saranac," of Solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

Cased opening between reception hall and living room and between living
room and dining room.

Windows divided upper sash as shown in illustration.

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "ILION"

FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: "ILION"

SECOND FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Harvard_= 22 ft. × 24 ft. over all 6 Rooms and Bath]

The Harvard possesses a style and character peculiarly its own.
Distinctly modern in arrangement and construction--both the exterior and
interior arrangement showing thought and care. The broken roof lines,
hooded entrance and pergola porch are the attractive exterior features.
The living room is large and cheerful, well lighted from all sides. An
attractive stair leads from this room to the second floor.

The dining room is very attractive with grouped windows at the side and
a French door opening onto the private porch. The kitchen is of a
convenient size and well lighted. Our cupboard No. 2 illustrated on page
37 is a part of the finish in this room and is supplied as a part of the
equipment. Direct access from kitchen to front door is had without
passing through other rooms.

Space for refrigerator, etc., is provided in cellar entryway. The cellar
stairway arrangement is very convenient from both kitchen and front part
of house, provides a side entrance and does away with extra expense of
outside cellar stairs.

The second floor is divided into three comfortable bedrooms and a bath,
the latter being easily accessible to all rooms and stairs. Large
wardrobes are provided for two of the bedrooms and off the front bedroom
is a large closet for storage.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists and rafters 2 in. × 4 in.

Front door--our "Mohawk" of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

Our kitchen cupboard No. 2, wardrobe and medicine cabinet included in
the selling price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "HARVARD"

FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: "HARVARD"

"SECOND FLOOR PLAN"]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Raymond_= 24 ft. × 24 ft. over all 6 Rooms and Bath]

Good taste is exemplified in every line of the Raymond. It has been well
described as "most prosperous looking." The consistent use of wide
clapboarding is indeed a pleasing feature, and there is a touch of
genuine originality in the roof treatment around the front dormer. The
roominess of the wide veranda is a harmonizing part of the generous
proportions of the whole.

A luxurious living room greets you as you enter from the vestibule. The
dining room, just to the rear and on a corner gladdens you with its
brightness. Your attention is also called to the plentiful light
provided throughout--six windows in the living room, three in the dining
room and three in the kitchen.

The same cheerfulness is continued in the arrangement of the three
spacious bedrooms upstairs. Each sleeping room has its own closet or
wardrobe, and the bathroom is conveniently placed near the head of the
stairs.

It seems hardly true that such substantiality in the design, such
desirability in the arrangement, could be secured in dimensions 24 ft. ×
24 ft. But the Raymond proves how beautiful, practical, substantial,
Bennett Homes are.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--our "Mohawk," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

Our No. 1 kitchen cupboard and medicine cabinet included in the selling
price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "RAYMOND"

FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: "RAYMOND"

SECOND FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Lincoln_= 30 ft. × 26 ft. over all 7 Rooms and Bath]

Some of the most artistic homes are those provided with a slightly
terraced lawn, porch and first floor practically at grade. The Lincoln
is a strikingly attractive example of such a plan. Seemingly a part of
the landscape on which it rests, it blends itself easily into all its
surroundings.

As you step onto the veranda, you are struck by its wide expanse--while
before you an attractive door with little side windows holds your
admiration. A hospitable fireplace commands your attention as you enter,
and you marvel at the brightness of the whole room, for there are in
reality two sides practically of glass. A very large opening calls your
attention to a dining room made most tempting by a window seat just
under triple windows. If you wish to retire for a quiet conversation, a
bit of rest or reading, the cozy den satisfies your every wish.

The stairway to the second floor is hidden, but ascends easily to a
large halfway landing, and then reverses to the second story. Here you
find two splendid bedrooms, each with ample closet space, and a slightly
smaller room, balancing the bathroom on the other corner!--conveniently
near which is a linen closet.

Notice especially in the front bedrooms the casement windows opening
underneath the dormer roof. Notice, too, that in one of these bedrooms
you might easily have your upstairs fireplace.

For the average family with tastes that run to homes with personality,
we sincerely believe the Lincoln offers a real first choice.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--special design of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in., 1-3/4
in. thick, glazed with clear glass.

Prices on oak floors and trim for vestibule, living room and dining
room, maple flooring in kitchen, quoted on application.

Our kitchen cupboard No. 1 and medicine cabinet included in the selling
price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: SECOND FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Franklin_= 24 ft. × 32 ft. over all 7 Rooms and Bath]

For such modest proportions there are few homes presenting greater
roominess than the Franklin. Think of it--only 32 ft. long and 24 ft.
wide, yet containing a 23 ft. living room, a sizable dining room and
kitchen, three comfortable bedrooms, and an additional sewing room, and
nursery or extra bedroom.

The generous veranda of this house is a distinctive feature. Notice the
graceful harmony between slope of the porch and the main roof. See the
brackets, and the exposed rafters. Consider the well-chosen position of
the dormers, left and right, the latter being the only one in view from
where you look.

Out of the living room mounts a pretty stairway. At the right, a wide
opening leads to a delightful dining room. The kitchen connects with a
double swinging door, and besides the cabinet contains a closet with
room enough to serve a number of purposes. There's a bedroom on the
first floor, with its own large closet.

Upstairs--two good-sized bedrooms, both with large closets, and an extra
room all centering on the upstairs hall. Notice that a complete bath is
here. Particularly note that there are two windows in each bedroom.

It's no wonder that the Franklin is a popular choice among Bennett
owners. Such roominess, such completeness is rarely found in a home so
inexpensive.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--our "Mohawk," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass.

Our kitchen cupboard No. 1 and two medicine cabinets included in the
selling price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "FRANKLIN"

FIRST FLOOR PLAN B]

[Illustration: "FRANKLIN"

SECOND FLOOR PLAN B]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Potomac_= 26 ft. × 38 ft. over all 8 Rooms and Bath]

Summer or winter, indoors or out, the Potomac is a place of happiness,
contentment and comfort for any family.

It would seem that our architects have outdone themselves on the
exterior of this home. The overhanging second story, spacious porch and
solid chimney, pattern of shingling--these features and a score of
others speak for themselves.

But perhaps it is on the interior that our designers have secured the
most remarkable results. The front door opens on a beautiful living room
extending the house width, stairs at the left leading to a halfway
landing. Nearby perhaps you may locate your broad fireplace and hearth.
Graceful French doors yield from this living room upon a sunny dining
room--that, in turn, opens upon a first-floor bedroom, and, through a
double swinging door, the nicely ordered kitchen.

Note well that adjoining four-windowed breakfast room. Picture the
youngsters and yourselves seated at its sun-flooded table upon its
built-in seats, starting the day right in its cozy, cheery atmosphere.

Underneath the broad sloping roof are three most attractive bedrooms.
There are two large closets and a wardrobe, and the bath is easily
reached from any sleeping room.

The Potomac is indeed a home you will like living in--beauty, utility,
endurance to delight you for years to come.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--our "Mohawk," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

Breakfast table and seats included in selling price.

Our No. 2 kitchen cupboard and medicine cabinet included in the selling
price. _See pages 36-37._ Awning not included.

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "POTOMAC"

FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: "POTOMAC"

SECOND FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_New Hartford_= 26 ft. × 24 ft. over all 6 Rooms and Bath]

Distinction has been remarkably well attained in this little gem of a
home. The clever treatment of the front--novel porch pillars, lattice
work and white trim--makes a neat and artistic contrast with the darker
tones of the shingled body of the house.

The porch is one of those all-embracing verandas, broad enough for the
whole family and their friends. Living and dining room are each amply
proportioned, with wide opening between, making large space available
for dances, parties, and such affairs. The downstairs bedroom might just
as well be a den, study or private office, if preferred.

The second floor sleeping quarters are well lighted, with the
opportunity for cozy window corners under the dormer. Placing an
enclosed stairway at the rear of the house is a fortunate departure in a
home of this size, from the accustomed practice--just one more example
of the all-around distinctiveness of this appealing home.

One man who has built many homes and sold them, runs to the New Hartford
as his "best bet". You, too, will find this distinctive home a most
livable--or if you prefer, a most salable place.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in.

Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--our "Mohawk," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in., 1-3/4
in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

Cased opening between living room and dining room.

Our No. 1 kitchen cupboard and medicine cabinet included in the selling
price.

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "NEW HARTFORD"

FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: "NEW HARTFORD"

SECOND FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Niagara_= 24 ft. × 30 ft. over all 6 Rooms, Bath, Hall]

Here's a home of comfort and contentment in the highest degree. Rich
simplicity marks every item of its ingenious architecture--and its
pleasing and practical arrangement means a most satisfying livableness
for a modest sized family.

There are crisp, clean-cut lines from the tip of its gable down to its
very foundations. The shingled triangles in green, the gently sloping
roofs, the generous porch and its pillars, the details of the trim--all
add their bit to the striking appearance of the whole.

But let's call and see the interior. Here's a charming reception hall
for a first glimpse. A broad archway points the way to a sociable living
room, amply provided with windows yet with plenty of space for piano and
furniture. A splendid dining room, with outlook to the side and rear,
connects to a compact but uncrowded kitchen.

Ascending the rich stairway by two easy flights, we come upon a cheerful
front bedroom--with a closet to enthuse the most exacting wife. Just a
step back is the complete bath--and nearby are the other sleeping
chambers, again each with spacious closet room.

But now, we rest our case with you. One last word--if the Niagara
_satisfies_ your needs and pocketbook, we sincerely assure you that
enduring happiness and comfort will be your reward in it.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 4 in.

Front door--our "Chautauqua," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

Prices on oak floors and trim in hall, living room and dining room,
maple flooring in kitchen, quoted on application.

Our No. 1 kitchen cupboard and medicine cabinet included in the selling
price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "NIAGARA"

FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: "NIAGARA"

SECOND FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_La Salle_= 26 ft. × 36 ft. over all 8 Rooms, 2 Baths]

Inviting--Distinctive--Practical! This description reveals the secret of
the LaSalle's great popularity. Note the artistic overhanging eaves--and
the dormers, in front and on either side. These give balance and
substantiality. They afford, too, the roominess of a one and one-half
story home, with the smart lines of a semi-bungalow design.

See how well-lighted are the bedrooms. Particularly note the ample
closet room. And one room upstairs might well be used as a den, sewing
room, or nursery.

There is a cosy, sunny bay window in the dining room--there is a window
seat there! The roomy, well-protected porch is a splendid feature. The
kitchen is ample, but most compact and convenient. And the two
bathrooms, one on each floor, give a final touch to an ideal plan.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in.

Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--our "Chautauqua," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

Prices on oak floors and trim for living room and dining room, maple
flooring in kitchen, quoted on application.

Our No. 1 kitchen cupboard and two medicine cabinets included in the
selling price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: LA SALLE

FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: LA SALLE

SECOND FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Bison_= 24 ft. × 24 ft. over all 5 Rooms and Bath]

For the family interested in a permanent abode that shall combine
utility with refined architectural features, the Bison is a home with a
genuine appeal.

Every line of its design bespeaks good taste. Especially unique is its
undercut porch, a place wide and roomy for the whole family and guests,
too. The unusual treatment of railing, brickwork and pillars also makes
it distinctly attractive.

The living room always proves a great attraction--both to the family and
to visitors. A handsome stairway leads upward from the left of this
bright room, while the inviting dining room with its prized bay window
greets you through a pretty colonnade. The kitchen is compact, light,
and equipped with a labor-saving cabinet.

Upstairs, also, you will find the same combination of bright, cheerful
quarters. The bathroom is nearby, and large closet and storage room
serve for keeping some family belongings without cluttering up the
useful rooms.

Surely the Bison would make you a most livable home!


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--our "Conesus," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass.

Colonnade arch between living room and dining room. _See pages 36-37._

Our No. 1 kitchen cupboard and medicine cabinet included in the selling
price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: SECOND FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Ideal_= 26 ft. × 28 ft. over all 6 Rooms, Bath, Alcove]

The Ideal might well be termed "A big little home." Attractiveness here
is gained by clever application of symmetry and proportion. The broad
porch with unique columns could easily be converted into an outdoor
living room with screens in summer and glass in winter.

The interior is cheerful and homelike. The living room and dining room,
connected by a wide cased opening, may be used as one on occasions. A
grade entrance is included in the rear, so that the basement may be
reached from outdoors without passing through the kitchen. Note, too,
the refrigerator may be iced from outdoors.

At the head of the stairs on the second floor is the bath, in an "ideal"
location, convenient to all bedrooms, also economically located for
plumbing. The alcove provides a sewing room or a child's bedroom.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--our "Saranac," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

Prices on oak floors and trim for living room and dining room, maple
flooring in kitchen, quoted on application.

Our No. 1--6 ft. pantry cabinet in pantry. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "IDEAL"

FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: "IDEAL"

SECOND FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Hamilton_= 28 ft. × 36 ft. over all 8 Rooms and Bath]

Examine the Hamilton minutely and you will agree that it embodies most,
if not all, of the attributes of that "Dream Home" which you have so
long planned.

While it doesn't lack a single detail of that refined architecture which
our modern standards demand, it nevertheless is a most practical
dwelling-place.

Note the dignified yet tasteful exterior design--the good-looking
foundation, spacious porch, and graceful dormers on front and sides.
Then look within--a generous living room with cheery fireplace,
liberal-sized dining room, a secluded retreat in the form of the den,
convenient kitchen, and three large, light, airy bedrooms and bath
upstairs.

In the Hamilton you have all advantages of the semi-bungalow
construction--compactness and proper economy--combined with the ample
elbow-room of a full-sized home, designed and built for lifetime
usage--and sufficiently reasonable to be within the means of most folks
with home-owning aspirations.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--our "Chautauqua," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

French doors between living room and dining room. _See pages 36-37._

Prices on oak floors and trim for living room and dining room, maple
flooring in kitchen, quoted on application.

Our No. 1 kitchen cupboard and medicine cabinet included in selling
price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "HAMILTON"

FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: "HAMILTON"

SECOND FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Fulton_= 28 ft. × 26 ft. over all 7 Rooms and Bath]

The Fulton is true to its type--a very happy appearance combined with a
very desirable plan. The broad, sloping roof, broken by a well-formed
dormer, and unusually wide porch lend dignity to the whole exterior of
this home. If one wishes, shingles may well be used in the place of the
siding protecting the first story, and variegated colors used in
soft-toned effects.

You enter the Fulton through the charming reception hall. From there the
stairway winds to the second story. There's a wide cased opening
introducing you to the living room, at one end of which you may have an
inviting fireplace built if you wish. The dining room receives light
from two sides. Between it and kitchen is a pantry, both exits enclosed
by double-swinging doors.

The upstairs of this home consists of three fine sleeping rooms, each
with an extra large closet. The plan is finally completed by the usual
bath.

In a setting of trees and bushes, this home is truly pleasing, and
combined with its most livable plan and low price, offers the soundest
kind of an investment for the home builder.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--special design, of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass.

Niagara colonnade between hall and living room.

Our kitchen cupboard No. 1 and medicine cabinet included in the selling
price.

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "FULTON"

FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: "FULTON"

SECOND FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Cleo_= 28 ft. × 36 ft. over all 6 Rooms, 1 Bath]

Here is an unsurpassed bungalow--in architecture, in arrangement, in
convenience.

Wide eaves, exposed rafter ends, perfect harmony of line, a substantial
porch that excels in charm--these delight from without.

And within!--An ideal floor plan affords three well-lighted bedrooms, a
spacious living room, well-arranged kitchen and bath conveniently
located to all rooms, and made desirably private by a small hall.
Between living and dining rooms is an impressive colonnade arch. There's
the luxury of a fireplace if you wish it--and high casement windows at
either side with nooks beneath for bookcases or furniture.

Truly unusual is the Cleo!--truly beautiful, truly roomy, truly
practical, and best of all, modestly priced.

[Illustration]


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First floor joists 2 in. × 8 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in.

Front door--our "Mohawk," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

Prices on oak floors and trim for living room and dining room, maple
flooring in kitchen, quoted on application.

Wardrobe in rear bedroom.

Our kitchen cupboard No. 2 and medicine cabinet included in the selling
price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "CLEO"

FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_York_= 26 ft. × 34 ft. over all 5 Rooms and Bath]

Here is a type of bungalow rightfully popular in the suburban districts
of America's big cities. Its general appearance is quite substantial,
yet broken roof lines, the careful placing and design of windows, the
selection of porch pillars and outside trim give a pleasing balance and
harmony one never tires of.

Inside this home you are at once attracted by the warm hospitality of
the living room. Two windows at front and side each let in all the
sunlight you want. You may have your prized open fireplace; and there's
a casement window at the side, underneath which your bookcase may go.
Just beyond you catch a glimpse of the dining room. Through a door to
the right, but out of sight, are the two bedrooms--one with four
windows! There are large closets, a linen closet, and the usual bath.
The kitchen is furnished with our celebrated cabinet; a door leads to a
grade entrance and to the cellar.

There's a wonderful porch--wide and deep, with room for many a lounging
chair, a veranda-swing, or any comfort you may elect.

Owners of the York are most enthusiastic about its individuality, its
livableness, its economy both in first and in upkeep cost.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--our "Conesus," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

Prices on oak floors and trim for living room and dining room, maple
flooring in kitchen, quoted on application.

Our kitchen cupboard No. 2, medicine cabinet and linen closet included
in the selling price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: FLOOR PLAN]

     =EVERY ITEM CORRECT=

Beaver Dams, N. Y.
Feb. 27, 1918.

     Gentlemen:--

     Lumber received and unloaded. Every item correct, and we are more
     than pleased with the quality. Thank you for your _promptness_ and
     the _square deal_ given us.

J. R. S.



  +=======================+
  | ¶ IN THE HAPPINESS OF |
  | A BENNETT HOME        |
  | LIES THE HEALTH AND   |
  | STRENGTH OF THE WHOLE |
  | FAMILY.               |
  +=======================+

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Salem_= 28 ft. × 40 ft. over all 6 rooms and Bath]

The Salem seems to fit especially well on a terraced lawn, and its
architecture harmonizes well with a "woodsy" setting; or equally well
where some of the trees and bushes have been left out of the landscape.
To the passerby, this home appears as a rather large and substantial
place, the veranda and the main roof gable each lending to this effect.
Bracketed and extending eaves add to the beauty of this home. And
whether finished with regular siding or shingles, the whole house
attracts favorable attention.

One feature is the semi-protection afforded the front entrance to this
house. Still another is the possibility of a wonderful fireplace on one
end, and underneath casement windows at either side, shelves or cases
for your favorite books. There is a pair of charming French doors by
which you enter the dining room.

The three sleeping rooms of this home are all arranged on one side--all
bright and livable. The bath is separated by entrance into a small
private hall. Two of the bedrooms have closets, the third a wardrobe
closet; and in addition there is the indispensable linen closet. The
kitchen is equipped with a large Bennett Cabinet, and access to outdoors
is had through a grade entrance at the rear.

A family who lives in one of the Salems calls it "The best home ever."
Perhaps they are prejudiced, but if you owned one we feel certain you,
too, would be as enthusiastic over it.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Attic joists 2 in. × 6 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--our "Mohawk," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass.

French doors between living room and dining room.

Prices on oak floors and trim for living room and dining room, maple
flooring in kitchen, quoted on application.

Our kitchen cupboard No. 1, medicine cabinet, linen closet, attic stairs
and flooring included in the selling price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "SALEM" FLOOR PLAN]


February 12, 1917.

     Gentlemen:--

     I want to recommend the fine quality of material you have sent me.
     The _finishing lumber is particularly fine_. You have saved me, on
     my house, as good as $400.00.

Yours respectfully,
W. A. K.



  +=====================+
  |  ¶ ARTISTIC DESIGNS |
  | WITHOUT INCREASE    |
  | IN COST IS THE WORK |
  | OF BENNETT MASTER   |
  | ARCHITECTS.         |
  +=====================+

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Woodward_= 26 ft. × 32 ft. over all 5 Rooms and Bath]

Inside and outside, common sense is personified in the Woodward--a
modest but becoming home which thoroughly expresses that "chummy" spirit
which has brought the bungalow into such universal favor. The
comfortable atmosphere of the Woodward begins in the spacious porch to
which a touch of artistry has been added by the neat colonnades. It's a
well-sized, welcoming type of porch which adds to the good appearance of
the entire house.

The favorable impression created by the attractive exterior is enhanced
as one steps inside. Compactly arranged, but comfortably sized, the
entire room scheme provides living, sleeping, eating and all
accommodations of sufficient comfort for a family of several persons.

Placing the sleeping rooms on the right side of the house with the day
rooms on the left is an appealing plan as it simplifies housework. Both
bedrooms have plenty of light and air, while commodious closet space is
provided. The bathroom is accessibly located and completes a decidedly
practical arrangement.

If the amount of money you have set aside for a home is near the price
of the Woodward, you can make it yours with full assurance that its
satisfaction will be as great as its economy.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--special design, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and 1-3/4 in. thick.

Our kitchen cupboard No. 2 and medicine cabinet included in the selling
price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "WOODWARD"

FLOOR PLAN]

  +=========================+
  |  ¶  ONE SHOULD KNOW     |
  | IN THE BEGINNING        |
  | WHAT HIS HOME WILL      |
  | COST IN THE END. YOU    |
  | ALWAYS DO WHEN BUILDING |
  | A BENNETT HOME.         |
  +=========================+


Caledonia, N. Y.
January 18, 1917.

     _Gentlemen:_--

     Please send your catalog once in a while. The house I am living in
     was built with lumber from you, and my wife and I are both well
     pleased and when I can boost your business I will do it, as a
     number of persons have asked where I get such good lumber.

Yours truly,
L. F.



[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Aberdeen_= 24 ft. × 32 ft. or 28 ft. × 36 ft. over all 5
Rooms and Bath or 6 Rooms and Bath]

Here is a very smart bungalow that has a host of admirers among our
customers. As you look at it from the side view shown here, the things
that impress you are the many clever touches to break the straight lines
of the home. There is the dormer resting easily on the broad expanse of
the front roof. There is the massive chimney at the side, typifying the
solidity of this kind of a house. There is the bay window that helps
enlarge the dining room. Note particularly that the porch is a part of
the house itself, and not merely just "stuck on."

At the front door you are introduced to the comfortable living room, the
fireplace at one end, the dining room just beyond. To the left are the
two sleeping rooms, both with space aplenty for all usual bedroom
furniture.

Please especially note there is a coat closet and a linen closet, a
kitchen cabinet, and all the requisites of a well-appointed home.

In Plan "B," we have extended the dimensions to include another bedroom,
a closet for each bedroom, and a rear entry-way.

If you are quite taken with the Aberdeen, you will be still more amazed
to learn how modest an outlay is required to bring its comforts and
conveniences to your fireside.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height approximately 9 ft.

Floor joists floor plan A 2 in. × 8 in.

Floor joists floor plan B 2 in. × 10 in.

Ceiling joists floor plan A 2 in. × 4 in.

Ceiling joists floor plan B 2 in. × 4 in.

Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--our "Mohawk," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass.

Cased opening between living room and dining room.

Our kitchen cupboard No. 2 and medicine cabinet included in the selling
price, plan A. _See pages 36-37._

Our kitchen cupboard No. 1 and medicine cabinet included in the selling
price, plan B. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "ABERDEEN"

FLOOR PLAN "A"]

[Illustration: "ABERDEEN"

FLOOR PLAN "B"]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Arcadia_= 32 ft. × 24 ft. or 36 ft. × 24 ft. 5 Rooms and
Bath]

Nearby this charming Arcadia is another house practically the same size,
practically the same cost, yet--you would say the Bennett-Built home is
worth all of five hundred dollars more. The increased value is due to
clever refinements our architects have given to the Arcadia.

How inviting this home is--and how picturesque with that pergola porch,
when in summer, flowering vines have wound their way around and over it.
And let showers come--there is protection from storm and sun while yet
enjoying the outdoor breezes on this porch.

But come indoors--Plan "A" first, please. Are you quite fond of a big,
hospitable living room--then here you find your wishes realized. Toward
the front is the dining room, light and cheerful, with roomy kitchen
right behind. On the other side two bedrooms--two windows apiece!--and
bathroom between.

But perhaps you would prefer the bedrooms at the back, and closets
instead of wardrobes; perhaps you like a practical extension to the
kitchen which you have in the back room with its cool place for ice box
and its covered way to the cellar--all this and more you will find in
"B."

Choose either plan that fits your needs and your tastes best--your
choice will delight you many a day to come.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--our "Chautauqua," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass.

Our kitchen cupboard No. 1 and medicine cabinet included in the selling
price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "ARCADIA"

FLOOR PLAN 'A']

[Illustration: "ARCADIA"

FLOOR PLAN B]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Atherton_= 28 ft. × 24 ft. over all 6 Rooms and Bath]

The Atherton is solid worth from the ground up. There is the delightful
spacious porch, the dormer sheltered windows in the sloping roof, the
wide eaves that secure graceful lines.

And the interior! Seldom do you see so large and lovely a living
room--there's the interesting touch of a stairway that wins the heart--a
fireplace for snug warmth and hospitality.

You step through a cased opening into the dining room, to find four
large windows to assure brightness and cheer. A peep into the
convenient, well-lighted kitchen discovers a splendid Bennett
kitchen-cupboard.

The upstairs speaks for itself--three large bedrooms and a good-sized
bath.

Beautiful--substantial! For people who like to be deeply attached to
their home, the Atherton is a real choice.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First floor joists 2 in. × 10 in.

Second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--our "Mohawk," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

Prices on oak floors and trim for living room and dining room, maple
flooring in kitchen, quoted on application.

Our No. 1 kitchen cupboard, our wardrobe, medicine cabinet and linen
closet included in the selling price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "ATHERTON"

FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: "ATHERTON"

SECOND FLOOR PLAN]

  +===================================+
  |  ¶ BENNETT BEAUTIFUL HOMES ARE    |
  | THE PRODUCT OF CREATIVE           |
  | THOUGHT--PLUS YEARS OF EXPERIENCE |
  | IN ARCHITECTURAL DESIGNING.       |
  +===================================+

     =APPROVES--WITH NEW ORDER=

_Gentlemen_:--

Moshannon, Pa., May 22, 1919.
     Your way of doing fair and square business is perfectly
     satisfactory. I never used any lumber as near the standard as I get
     from the Bennett Lumber Co., and I prove same in separate envelope
     _with a nice order_.

C. S. L.



[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Harriet_= 28 ft. × 26 ft. over all 6 Rooms and Bath]

Here is a home that breathes hospitality. It seems to say "Come
in--you'll like living here a long, long while."

You enter the living room--and like it at once. It extends clear across,
with a cheery fireplace here and a cozy bay window seat there!

The dining room looms large, well-lighted, with windows carefully placed
to accommodate your furniture.

The kitchen, you discover, is bright with light from three windows. You
exclaim over the six-foot kitchen cabinet and approve the grade
entrance.

Up the stairs you find three large bedrooms with plenty of closet room,
a linen closet, and the bathroom _right over the kitchen_, to reduce
plumbing costs! Then, last but not least, that big convenience--a large
and well-lighted attic.

Sum it up for yourself--"to the very end, the Harriet makes one want to
stay."


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Attic stairs and attic flooring supported by 2 in. × 6 in. floor joists.

Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--our "Mohawk," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

Our No. 1 kitchen cabinet, medicine cabinet and linen closet included in
selling price.

Window seat in bay.

Prices on oak floors and trim for living room and dining room, maple
flooring in kitchen, quoted on application.

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: HARRIET

FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: HARRIET

SECOND FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Lancaster_= 30 ft. × 26 ft. over all 7 Rooms and Bath]

Quiet but rich dignity is this home's expression. The rustic stone
chimney and broken ashlar porch wall are most attractive, though brick
may be substituted without loss of beauty. The broad, low dormer and
wide eaves lend a substantial appearance. The shingled exterior is in
keeping with the design; but in case siding is preferred, harmony would
not be destroyed.

Off the reception hall is a handy little closet for coats and rubbers.
French doors, there are--and a wide fireplace.

See that double swinging door off the kitchen; cupboard in the pantry;
direct passage from kitchen through hall to front door. Upstairs--three
large bedrooms and closet space aplenty.

For charm outside and in, and for convenient roominess, the Lancaster is
indeed most desirable.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First floor joists 2 in. × 10 in. Second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in.

Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--our "Mohawk," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

French doors between living room and reception hall. _See pages 36-37._

Windows as shown in illustration.

Our No. 2 kitchen cupboard and medicine cabinet included in selling
price.

Prices on oak floors and trim in reception hall, living room and dining
room, maple flooring in kitchen, quoted on application.

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "LANCASTER"

FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: "LANCASTER"

SECOND FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Flanders_= 24 ft. × 22 ft. over all 6 Rooms and Bath]

Staunchness is instantly apparent in the practical, good-looking design
of the Flanders. You can readily picture this house providing you with
all the requirements of modern home-life without burdening you with an
investment in unnecessary and costly non-essentials.

Glance at the first floor arrangement and you will see a sensible
grouping of all necessary downstairs rooms. There's a tidy hall, with
the essential coat closet. The stairway ascends from the right. The
living room, bright with light from three broad windows, and another
corner room (dining room) furnish an ideal layout.

Coming to the upstairs we will find three thoughtfully proportioned
bedrooms, with spacious closet or wardrobe space. The bathroom at the
head of the stairs is accessibly located for both floors. For good
service you can safely select the Flanders--and in addition secure a
genuine bargain.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 4 in.

Front door--our "Chautauqua," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

Cased opening between living room and dining room.

Our No. 2 kitchen cupboard and medicine cabinet included in the selling
price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "FLANDERS"

FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: "FLANDERS"

SECOND FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: Style A Bookcase Colonnade Style B]

[Illustration: Interior Window]

[Illustration: Exterior Window]

[Illustration: Stairway]

[Illustration: Cottage Door]

[Illustration: Medicine Cabinet]

     =Beautiful Graining, Expert Matching, Distinguish These Bennett
     Articles of Trim=

[Illustration: Exterior--Mohawk]

[Illustration: Exterior--Saranac]

[Illustration: Exterior--Chautauqua]

[Illustration: Exterior--Conesus]

[Illustration: Mirror Door]

[Illustration: Interior Door]

[Illustration: Niagara Colonnade]

[Illustration: Inside LOCK SETS Outside]

[Illustration: Linen Closet]

[Illustration: Wardrobe]

[Illustration: French Doors]

[Illustration: Kitchen Cabinet No. 2]

[Illustration: Kitchen Cabinet No. 1]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Forsyth_= 36 ft. × 26 ft. over all 8 Rooms and Bath]

Here's a design of individuality--practical, substantial.

There's delight upon entering the convenient central hall, to find each
room big, airy, inviting.

You peep into the living room to spy casement windows upon either side
of a fireplace.

That library! A few Forsyth owners use it as a bedroom by substituting a
single door; but most, rejoicing in French doors, never make a change.

There are many conveniences--the large kitchen cabinet, broom closet,
the ease of access to all rooms. And see--! Every bedroom on the second
floor possesses _two windows_ and a closet.

All in all--where could you purchase such splendid architecture and
livableness as in this modest-priced Forsyth?


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 10 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--our "Chautauqua," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

Vestibule door--our "Chautauqua," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in.
and 1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

Prices on oak floors and trim in vestibule, hall, living room, library
and dining room, maple flooring in kitchen, quoted on application.

Our No. 1 kitchen cupboard, medicine cabinet and linen closet included
in selling price.

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "FORSYTH"

FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: "FORSYTH"

SECOND FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Clarendon_= 36 ft. × 24 ft. over all 7 Rooms and Bath]

Could you peep through the walls of this Colonial home, you would find
yourself regarding an interior as charming as the exterior is
picturesque.

But step through that unique latticed entrance and see the house-deep
living room--with its hospitable fireplace and casement windows, with
nooks for bookcases or built-in seats, and captivating French doors. And
what a comfortable lounging place the side veranda furnishes!

French doors upstairs, too, give access from bedrooms to balcony. Note
the clever touch in the broken roof lines, increasing the size of the
bedrooms--better yet, veritable _sunrooms_.

Be assured this remarkably beautiful home, built the Bennett-Way, is a
real dividend-paying investment in beauty, comfort and convenience.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 4 in.

Front door--Special design of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass.

Vestibule door, of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and 1-3/4 in.
thick, glazed with clear glass.

French doors between living room and porch. _See pages 36-37._

Prices on oak floors and trim in vestibule, hall, living room and dining
room, maple flooring in kitchen, quoted on application.

Our No. 1 and No. 2 kitchen cupboards, medicine cabinet and linen closet
included in the selling price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "CLARENDON"

FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: "CLARENDON"

SECOND FLOOR PLAN]

  +======================+
  |  ¶ BENNETT BUILT-IN  |
  | CONVENIENCES REDUCE  |
  | THE COST OF          |
  | HOUSE FURNISHING AND |
  | INTRODUCE EFFICIENCY |
  | INTO THE BUSINESS OF |
  | HOUSEKEEPING.        |
  +======================+


     =BETTER THAN CLAIMED=

     Little Valley, N. Y., April 30, 1919.

     _Gentlemen:_--Thank you very much for the honest deal. Everything
     is okay. Many were sure that I would not get what I ordered, but
     they were much mistaken. They have seen my lumber and say it is
     fine, and a number of persons thinking of building said they are
     going to get their lumber from you.

Yours truly,

J. F. R.



[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Janis_= 28 ft. × 30 ft. over all 8 Rooms and Bath]

Coziness plus serviceability characterize the Janis--a cozy porch, a
complete first floor scheme, and four commodious bedrooms and bath
upstairs.

The exposed rafters underneath the roof, the brick chimney, the roof
brackets, the clever placing of the trimmings secure an approval for the
exterior appearance which is turned to enthusiasm by the attractive
rooms within.

One can picture real hospitality in the Janis. The broad, cheerful porch
is a fitting introduction to the bright, spacious living room with its
welcoming fireplace. The reception hall is an appreciated convenience.
French doors between reception hall and living room, and between this
last and the dining room add remarkably to the home's smart interior.
The dining room has a bay with a tasty window seat. The kitchen is about
the same "just right" place as in all our plans. There's a convenient
lavatory, too.

The Janis has a well-modeled second floor arrangement. The bedrooms are
large-sized and amply proportioned with good light. Three of them are
corner rooms.

Choose this home for its ever-attractive styling, the economy of its
floor plans, the unique features of its interior--and you will have
purchased a thing of permanent pleasure and profit.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--our "Saranac," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

French doors between reception hall and living room; between living room
and dining room. _See pages 36-37._

Prices on oak floors and trim in reception hall, living room and dining
room, maple flooring in kitchen, quoted on application.

Our No. 1 kitchen cupboard, medicine cabinet and linen closet included
in the selling price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "JANIS"

FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: "JANIS"

SECOND FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Genesee_= 26 ft. × 24 ft. overall 6 Rooms and Bath]

Here's a home that wins wide approval, not so much because it is "the
economical square house," but more because it includes decided
variations in plan.

For the exterior--the well-placed dormer adds character to the roof. The
wide-eaved porch lends dignity to the front. The novel siding supplies
individuality.

You are immediately impressed with the roomy living-room--and the fine
balance of fireplace at one end and ascending stairway at the other. The
dining room is wonderfully cheerful, and with its wide opening to living
room is especially prized. The kitchen receives light and air from two
sides. The grade entrance saves an extra outside door, yet gives easy
access to basement and outdoors.

The bedrooms and the bath all center on an attractive upstairs hall. And
see how ample is all closet space. Surely you find every available foot
of space utilized to good advantage in this clever "Genesee."


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Rafters main roof 2 in. × 6 in. Dormer and porch 2 in. × 4 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in.

Front door--our "Mohawk," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

Prices on oak floors and trim for living room and dining room, maple
flooring in kitchen, quoted on application.

Our No. 1 kitchen cupboard and medicine cabinet included in selling
price.

Bungalow siding for exterior.

Windows divided upper sash as shown in illustration.

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "GENESEE"

FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: "GENESEE"

SECOND FLOOR PLAN]

  +==================================+
  |  ¶ LABOUR AND MATERIAL ARE       |
  | TOO EXPENSIVE TO WASTE. IT       |
  | DOESN'T PAY TO GUESS AT THE      |
  | COST OF EITHER. BUY FROM BENNETT |
  | AND BE SURE OF YOUR COSTS        |
  +==================================+

     =NO WASTE=

     Whippany, N. J., May 22, 1919.

     _Gentlemen_:--I bought lumber of you 25% cheaper than the same
     quality of goods here. I did not have to throw away any, as I often
     have to with that bought here.

F. D. J.



[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Olean_= 22 ft. × 26 ft. over all 6 Rooms and Bath]

Though somewhat more conservative than others of our two-story designs,
the Olean, nevertheless, is dressed with smart lines that lift it out of
the ordinary.

The overhanging roof with rafters exposed underneath, the brackets
supporting the front, the broad veranda with its stately columns, the
placing of the windows and door--all give fine dignity to this home.

On the first floor you find a rather generous living room; stairs on one
side, two pleasant windows opposite and a wide opening leading to the
square dining room, made pleasant by light from two sides. The kitchen
is set by itself, and access to the side entrance and the cellar is
gained through a compact and serviceable entry.

On the second floor there is one quite remarkable bedroom, and two
others of just the right size. The usual bath is found near the
bedrooms. Especially, notice the triple windows in the large bedroom and
the extra large closet that room boasts.

The modest investment required in the Olean represents, we believe, a
home value second to none.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 4 in.

Front door--our "Conesus," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

Wardrobe in two rear bedrooms.

Our kitchen cupboard No. 1 and medicine cabinet included in the selling
price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "OLEAN"

FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: "OLEAN"

SECOND FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Hartley_= 24 ft. × 28 ft. over all 6 Rooms, Bath, Sleeping
Porch]

If a family's choice leans toward the "square" house, it is fairly
certain that the Hartley will be one of those seriously considered--for
in it a rare degree of appearance, livableness, and economy of plan have
been combined.

The front of this home is quite impressive. To begin with, there's a
porch embracing the entire width of the house. Its gently sloping roof
blends in with the shingle covered second story. Broad top roofs, front
and sides, are adequately broken with wide dormers, giving a final touch
to an exterior already most attractive.

As you enter the reception hall a pretty stairway leads up to the
half-way landing. Directly ahead is one of those highly desirable
conveniences, a coat closet. Then, through a wide opening, you are
greeted by a sight of a rather large living room--the bright dining room
just beyond adding its share to the home's invitation. The kitchen is
replete with both cabinet and pantry! There is a rear and a side
entrance, the last at grade.

We will let the three fine bedrooms, the big closets, tell their own
story--and pass the bath with just the name of it, but--here is
something to talk about, an outdoor sleeping place! There's a real treat
for some of the family in that feature--who will the lucky ones be?

For the "right" kind of a home, at the "right" kind of a price--consider
thoughtfully the Hartley.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Attic joists 2 in. × 6 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--our "Mohawk," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

Prices on oak floors and trim in hall, living room and dining room,
maple flooring in kitchen, quoted on application.

Our No. 2 kitchen cupboard and medicine cabinet included in the selling
price. _See pages 36-37._

Attic stairs and flooring included in selling price.

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "HARTLEY"

FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: "HARTLEY"

SECOND FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Colonial_= 38 ft. × 26 ft. 7 Rooms and Bath]

Here's a masterpiece in designing--both for beauty of exterior and for
ideal arrangement. This house faithfully reproduces the atmosphere of
Colonial days, yet with touches of modernism which have been tried and
approved by best architectural practice.

Perhaps the first unique thing you notice are the seats at either side
of the doorway--then the quaint Colonial door with its narrow side
windows. As the door swings back you are welcomed, through French doors,
to a magnificent living room, fireplace at the farther end, and built-in
bookcases underneath pretty casement windows. Through the door or window
at the right of the room you spy the privacy of a well-sheltered porch.

Just in front of you the stairway leads straight to the second story.
Through another pair of French doors, you note the dining room. At the
rear of the hall is a convenient lavatory and underneath the stairs a
very useful coat closet.

As you notice the corner location of each bedroom, and the large closets
in each, stop a passing minute in the rear bedroom at the right to see
that you may have a fireplace here, too.

The Colonial is a design quite beyond the ordinary for a cost quite less
than ordinary. Does it suit your needs?--Then write us for more definite
information.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 10 in.

Attic joists 2 in. × 6 in.

Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--as illustrated, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and 1-3/4 in. thick.

French doors between hall and living room, also between hall and dining
room.

Bookcase on each side of fireplace.

Prices on oak floors and trim in hall, living room and dining room,
maple flooring in kitchen, quoted on application.

Pantry and kitchen cabinets furnished in Yellow Pine.

Attic stairs and flooring included in the selling price.

Seats for front entrance included in the selling price.

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "COLONIAL"

FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: "COLONIAL"

SECOND FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Erie_=

24 ft. × 26 ft. over all 6 Rooms, Bath, Hall]

However much house styles may change, that most practical of all plans,
the square house, always remains in vogue. And "The Erie" is genuinely
an all-prized design of this most popular type.

There is a prosperous, substantial appearance to this home. It is free
from elaboration--yet full of the spice of style. The extending roof
with its distinctive dormer, the shingled upper story, the wide expanse
of porch, the solid type of porch pillars--everything bears out the
impression that here live people of a most desirable American type. The
first room inside is a reception hall, serving the purpose of receiving
the casual caller, and of providing the place from whence a simple
stairway winds toward the upstairs. The living room is a square one with
five windows to guarantee a flood of light. From here a
colonnade-opening leads to the dining room on one of the back corners of
the house. This room is also bright with light. The kitchen is the usual
compact and complete Bennett arrangement. There is a passageway from the
kitchen to the front hall.

The upstairs arrangement of this home is as ideal as that of the lower
floor--every room a corner room. Three spacious sleeping chambers--each
with its own capacious closet--a convenient bath and a handy linen
closet complete the layout.

"The Erie," outside and inside, is a most inviting home--its arrangement
is most practical and most complete--its construction and finish of a
quiet, rich and enduring type.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--our "Chautauqua," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. x 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

"Niagara" colonnade between living room and dining room. _See pages
36-37._

Our No. 1 kitchen cupboard, medicine cabinet and linen closet included
in selling price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "ERIE"

FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: "ERIE"

SECOND FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: _=Frederick=_

24 ft. × 42 ft. over all Two-Family Dwelling 5 Rooms, Bath--Each]

It is a thrifty family who, in building its own home, provides for a
tenant to pay taxes and upkeep and, besides, a comfortable profit. To
such a family, the Frederick has much to recommend it. Red Cedar Shingle
and Redwood clapboard side wall protection has been provided to give
more than usual character to the design, and lasting life. The spacious
substantial porches provide outdoor comfort for both families. The whole
exterior is one of fine balance and dignity.

Upstairs and down the living rooms are ample, attractive, a casement
window enriching each; just back are the dining rooms with three
splendid windows apiece. Airy, light kitchens connect through double
swinging doors. There's a back entryway with room for the refrigerator.
On the other side of the house are the two bedrooms--two windows
apiece--with bath just between. There are coat closets, clothes closets,
medicine and kitchen cabinets, and wardrobes to satisfy every need. And
last but not least--you may make extra rooms in the attic.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

     Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

     Ceiling height second floor approximately 9 ft.

     Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

     First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

     Ceiling joists 2 in. × 6 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

     Front door--our "Saranac," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in.
     and 1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

     Prices on oak floors and trim in hall, living room and dining room,
     maple flooring in kitchen, quoted on application.

     Wardrobes in rear bedrooms.

     Our kitchen cupboards No. 1 and medicine cabinets included in the
     selling price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "FREDERICK"

FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: "FREDERICK"

SECOND FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Nelson_=

24 ft. × 36 ft. over all 5 Rooms, Bath, Hall]

There is fine simplicity in the Nelson. Here is a dwelling-place to
satisfy exacting tastes for a refined home of modest proportions.

One likes the clean-cut columns and railing on the friendly porch--the
exposed rafters--the well-proportioned dormers.

The ample-sized rooms are expressly planned for a wealth of sunshine,
yet with sufficient wall-space for placement of furniture.

Conveniences! Note the coat closet--the hall affording privacy to the
bath--the ideal location of the kitchen cupboard for simplified serving.
There's a pretty cased arch between living and dining room, and between
hall and living room.

A sound purchase--if you wish beauty, comfort and durability--is the
substantial Nelson.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--our "Conesus," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

Our No. 2 kitchen cupboard, wardrobe and medicine cabinet included in
the selling price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "NELSON"

FLOOR PLAN]

  +============================+
  |  ¶ BY BUYING ALL MATERIAL  |
  | FROM ONE CONCERN           |
  | THE BLAME FOR DELAYS       |
  | AND SHORTAGES, IF ANY, CAN |
  | BE PLACED WHERE IT JUSTLY  |
  | BELONGS. SEE THE BENNETT   |
  | GUARANTEE.                 |
  +============================+

     =SAVED $800=

Six Mile Run, Pa.
May 23, 1919.

     _Gentlemen_:--

     I had estimates from three lumber dealers and the best price I
     could get was $2,200.00. Your bill, delivered, was $1,314.05. My
     carpenter said he never worked on nicer material in thirty years.

     You surely did treat me fair and honest and prompt in all matters.
     I am pleased with my new home. Inside trim is surely fine.

     Thanking you and wishing you success,

W. A. F.

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Richard_=

26 ft. × 34 ft. over all 5 Rooms and Bath]

In the Richard, the keynote in architecture and arrangement alike, is
Utility. Day-by-day usefulness has been built into each unit of its
construction from the pleasant porch to the much-used storeroom on the
second floor.

This house has been created to accommodate a small family with modest
needs and tastes. But if more bed rooms are required, two large
comfortable well lighted rooms with closets may be secured on the second
floor at a nominal expense. Stairs leading from dining room and matched
flooring for entire second floor are included in selling price.

Like all Bennett-Built Homes, the Richard has well-lighted and
well-proportioned rooms without an exception. There has been
incorporated every advantage of a costly home, built on a basis of
strictest economy.

It is a substantial, durable, dependable house that embodies every vital
feature for a happy home within the means of a moderate income.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 6 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--glazed cottage design, 3 ft. x 6 ft. 8 in. and 1-3/4 in.
thick. _See pages 36-37._

Our No. 2 kitchen cupboard and medicine cabinet included in the selling
price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "RICHARD"

FLOOR PLAN B]

Emporium, Pa.

     _Gentlemen_:--

May 20, 1919.

     The material furnished me was as good as I expected it to be. And
     as near as I could estimate, think the price was at least 20%
     cheaper delivered here than I could have bought the same grade of
     material from our local dealers.

M. F. L.

Upland, Pa.

_Gentlemen_:--

May 10, 1919.

     I received my lumber all O. K. several days ago and have just
     finished working with it. I must say that I was more than pleased
     with it. It was all perfect goods.

C. N. H.



Lockport, N. Y.

_Gentlemen_:--      May 20, 1919.

     I am perfectly satisfied with the quality of your lumber. Your
     prices are enough lower so I can save from one to two hundred
     dollars on a house bill, which is an item any contractor should
     consider.

C. T. N.


[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Rochester_=

22 ft. × 32 ft. over all 7 Rooms and Bath]

Charm has been our watchword in the creation of the Rochester--a
charming exterior as well as a charming room arrangement. A house of
modest proportions at moderate cost has been attained without
sacrificing either inside or outside attractiveness.

The sloping roof lines blend in gracefully with the shingled walls and
the veranda. Entering the home, one finds a living room indeed luxurious
for a home of this size. A dandy dining room and the usual kitchen,
together with a secluded den, complete the first floor layout.

Upstairs, three bedrooms, each large and double-windowed and furnished
with roomy closets, and the bath are the remaining details that combine
to make the Rochester a home of great popularity. Interested?--then we
would like to send you all the good news about it--write.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft. Ceiling slightly hipped.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in.

Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door as illustrated, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and 1-3/4 in. thick,
glazed with clear glass.

Our No. 1 kitchen cupboard and medicine cabinet included in the selling
price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "ROCHESTER"

FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: "ROCHESTER"

SECOND FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Dover_=

26 ft. × 36 ft. over all 6 Rooms and Bath]

The Dover is a splendid example of how the all-on-one-floor bungalow
home can luxuriously and comfortably house a large family.

In appearance, this home is ideally balanced. Graceful roof lines blend
into its shingled sides. Porch pillars carry through the idea of
substantiality. Overhanging eaves give the final touch to the bungalow
theme.

Let us analyze the Dover from the viewpoint of solid comfort. The
twenty-six foot porch promises plenty of outdoor comfort and air. The
living room provides space for not only the whole family but several
guests in addition. The dining room is large enough to accommodate a
holiday dinner party. In case of large entertainments, the two rooms can
practically be opened into one. The three bedrooms suffice for a family
of five or six--or with less people, a guest room is available. There's
a kitchen ample for all needs.

You may have noticed where you can build a fireplace in the living room.
That bay in the dining room you can plan for flowers and plants, or just
a cozy cushioned seat. You have made a note of that celebrated
step-saver, the kitchen cabinet. Did you see the closets for each
sleeping room?

If it's a bungalow home that meets your fondest wishes, and the Dover
satisfies your needs, then we can assure you that it will be ideal.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Ceiling joists plan B 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--special design, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and 1-3/4 in. thick,
glazed.

French doors between living room and dining room.

Our kitchen cupboard No. 2 and medicine cabinet included in the selling
price. _See pages 36-37._

Attic stairs and flooring included in the selling price of plan B.

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "DOVER"

FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: "DOVER"

FLOOR PLAN B]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Sherrill_=

22 ft. × 32 ft. or 24 ft. × 36 ft. over all 6 Rooms and Bath or 5 Rooms
and Bath]

The Sherrill is a home of snug contentment--the type of home that will
nestle alongside a country road or adorn a city street, presenting a
charming appearance anywhere. The broad porch, dormer window and
graceful roof make an unusually pleasing exterior. The profile or side
view is equally interesting. For the interior arrangement, two alternate
plans are offered. The one provides three bedrooms, the other two.
Living, dining room, kitchen and bath are found in generous size in
both. A wide opening between living and dining room in each case
provides an advantageous feature for "affairs." Select the plan you
prefer--either one will provide you with a lifetime service of true
satisfaction.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

=PLAN A=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First floor joists 2 in. × 8 in. Rafters 2 in. × 4 in.

Front door--our "Mohawk," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass.

Cased opening between living room and dining room.

Our kitchen cupboard No. 1 included in the selling price. _See pages
36-37._

=PLAN B=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First floor joists 2 in. × 8 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--our "Mohawk," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass.

Cased opening between living room and dining room.

Wardrobe in rear bedroom.

Our kitchen cupboard No. 2 included in the selling price. _See pages
36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "SHERRILL"

FLOOR PLAN "A"]

[Illustration: "SHERRILL"

FLOOR PLAN "B"]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Maidstone_=

22 ft. × 26 ft. or 22 ft. × 30 ft. overall 5 Rooms and Bath--or just 4
Rooms]

"Be it ever so humble, there's no place like home"--might well have been
written with this cosy cottage in mind. Though quite humble, the
Maidstone is decidedly "homey".

Most houses of a like size are usually quite ugly--but see how a
bracketed roof, cleverly shingled side walls, and the artistic use of
exterior trim, transforms this Bennett-Built Cottage into a really
attractive home.

But now let's look indoors--into the smaller plan, first. For simple
purposes, can you conceive a simpler layout? Just two partitions, and
you have--living and dining room, kitchen, and two bedrooms.

But some families desire a bit different arrangement, a separate dining
room, and a bath. There you find it in Plan "B"--with a closed back
entry thrown in for good measure. And notice the sheltered porch,
whichever plan you favor.

If the Maidstone fills your needs, the satisfaction you will find living
in it will be as great as your surprise at its low cost.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 8 ft. 6 in.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 4 in.

Front door--our glazed cottage design, 2 ft. 8 in. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick. _See pages 36-37._

Our kitchen cupboard No. 2 and medicine cabinet included in the selling
price. (Plan B.) _See pages 36-37._

Our kitchen cupboard No. 2 included in the selling price. (Plan A.) _See
pages 36-37._

(If basement is not wanted in Plan B, omit rear addition and basement
stairs, saving in price.)

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "MAIDSTONE"

FLOOR PLAN "A"]

[Illustration: "MAIDSTONE"

FLOOR PLAN "B"]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Lawton_=

24 ft. × 30 ft. or 24 ft. × 36 ft. over all 5 Rooms, Bath or 6 Rooms,
Bath]

Simplicity is in the keynote of this cottage home--a simplicity,
however, enriched by clever lines of roof, porch and whole-house
architecture.

Plan "A" provides for a moderate-sized family--a cheerful, roomy living
room, rather good-sized dining room and a compact, convenient kitchen.
The bedrooms contain room aplenty for bed, dresser and other bedroom
furnishings; and, of course, there is the very necessary bath. In "B"
there's an additional bedroom for the family of larger numbers. In
addition there are closets off the sleeping rooms. The kitchen and bath
are differently located--the dining room is slightly increased to
accommodate the larger number of persons.

You will agree, we are confident, that for compact design, yet plenty of
room to keep out of each other's way, either of the two Lawton plans
offers a most pleasing choice.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

Front door--our "Conesus," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

Our kitchen cupboard No. 2 and medicine cabinet included in the selling
price. _See pages 36-37._

Price on rear addition and basement stairs same as shown with Maidstone,
plan B, quoted on application.

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "LAWTON"

FLOOR PLAN "A"]

[Illustration: "LAWTON"

FLOOR PLAN "B"]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Kenmore_=

20 ft. × 18 ft. or 24 ft. by 20 ft. over all 3 or 4 Rooms]

The one best way to prove a home's worth is by the testimony of those
who have lived in it. By such people the Kenmore is classified as a
"snug, perfect little place."

We need not dwell at length on the exterior, for you can see what goes
to make it up.

The interior is as easy to understand, too. The living room is of
unusual size for such a kind of home. The single bedroom has light and
air from two sides, and to save extra cost, we included our wardrobe
clothes closet. In the kitchen, again to save extra cost, we have
included our cabinet.

In Plan "B," we have provided an extra bedroom and quite sizable
closets, leaving the living room with space aplenty, and having added
enough room in the kitchen so that the family may eat at a table over in
the corner.

There is a lot to say about the economy of either Kenmore. But let the
price of it argue for itself. If it suits you, we can fill your order in
a few hours.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Girders 6 in. × 6 in.

First floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 4 in.

Front door--glazed cottage design, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and 1-3/4 in.
thick. _See pages 36-37._

Our kitchen cupboard No. 2 included in the selling price. _See pages
36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "KENMORE"

FLOOR PLAN "A"]

[Illustration: "KENMORE"

FLOOR PLAN "B"]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Cloverdale_=

20 ft × 30 ft. or 22 ft × 30 ft. over all 5 Rooms alone or 5 Rooms and
Bath]

Of all tidy, economical cottages, its friends vote "The Cloverdale"
ideal--most wholesome. Though covering only 600 sq. ft., the proportions
of length, width and height have been admirably balanced, and a neat
porch added. Notice the bracketed roof, exposed rafter ends, extending
porch roof with richly shaped pillars, windows and door nicely balancing
the whole front.

In plan "A," there's a most restful living room with one end for a cozy
fireside. A wide opening leads to an ideal dining room. The kitchen,
directly back, contains our labor-saving cabinet. The two bedrooms are
practically alike, both well lighted, well aired and provided with
wardrobes, giving all the convenience of regular closets.

In "B," by adding two feet to the width and saving a bit on the living
room, we have slightly enlarged the dining room and made the plan
complete with snug bath and fine pantry. The bedrooms, too, are slightly
larger.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

Plan A girders 6 in. × 6 in.; Plan B girders 6 in. × 8 in.

First floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 4 in.

Front door--glazed cottage design, 2 ft. 8 in. × 6 ft. 8 in. _See pages
36-37._

Our No. 2 kitchen cupboard included in the selling price, Plan A. _See
pages 36-37._

Our No. 2 kitchen cupboard and medicine cabinet included in the selling
price, Plan B. _See pages 36-37._

Price on rear addition and basement stairs same as shown with Maidstone,
plan B, page 52, quoted on application.

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "CLOVERDALE"

FLOOR PLAN "A"]

[Illustration: "CLOVERDALE"

FLOOR PLAN "B"]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: _=Auburn=_

20 ft. × 28 ft. or 22 ft. × 30 ft. over all 4 Rooms and Bath or 5 Rooms
and Bath]

For rock-bottom economy, we know of no "buy" that betters the Auburn.
Though minus the comfort of a roof over porch, this home does include a
place to enjoy the outdoor air. Overhanging roof, shingled sides, and a
clever handling of the windows and doors gives the Auburn a smart effect
not found in the common house of this type.

For economy of space and work, the living and dining room have been
combined in plan "A," but space has not been sacrificed in the sizable
kitchen, nor has closet room been overlooked in either of the bedrooms.

In plan "B," the house dimensions have been slightly increased to secure
a separation of living room from dining room, and the addition of a
pantry off of the kitchen. A slight enlargement of the bedrooms was also
possible--especially since wardrobes could satisfactorily take the place
of closets.

Could you see this home as it actually exists and compare its appearance
and finish, outside and in, with others of the same type, you would not
hesitate a minute in choosing the Auburn--further, a comparison of costs
would confirm your selection.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

     Ceiling height first floor approximately 8 ft. 6 in.

     Girders 6 in. × 6 in.

     First floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

     Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 4 in.

     Front door--our Glazed Cottage design, 2 ft. 8 in. × 6 ft. 8 in.
     _See pages 36-37._

     Our kitchen cupboard No. 2 and medicine cabinet included in the
     selling price. _See pages 36-37._

     Price on rear addition and basement stairs as shown with Shamrock,
     plan B, page 57, quoted on application.

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._


[Illustration: FLOOR PLAN "A"]

[Illustration: FLOOR PLAN "B"]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: _=Shamrock=_

22 ft. × 26 ft. or 30 ft. over all Five rooms and Bath or Four rooms]

Here is a solid, substantial, livable type of cottage home--a dwelling
not only well-built, but also most convenient and comfortable.

The Shamrock provides all of the essentials of an attractive exterior
without expensive and unnecessary frills and innovations. Yet there are
snappy touches of design--bracket-supported roof, exposed rafter,
combined shingle and regular siding effects--to differentiate this home
from the ordinary.

You will observe that you can have your choice of two floor plans. Plan
"B" includes a connecting bathroom which is eliminated in "A," as that
plan is designed for localities where sewerage connections are not
available. Plan "A" also extends the living room to include the dining
accommodations, making possible a four-foot contraction in the depth of
the house, and thus a substantial saving in cost.

The porch is ample and well protected. The rooms are fairly proportioned
and well lighted. Note the convenient built-in wardrobes in the
good-sized bedrooms, and the additional rear room (or summer kitchen)
provided in "B."

Either plan will provide you with a satisfying, serviceable home--for an
investment that is decidedly modest.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

     Ceiling height first floor approximately 8 ft. 6 in.

     Girders 6 in. × 6 in.

     First floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

     Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 4 in.

     Front door--glazed cottage design, 2 ft. 8 in. × 6 ft. 8 in. and
     1-3/4 in. thick. _See pages 36-37._

     Wardrobes in bedrooms.

     Our kitchen cupboard No. 2 included in the selling price. _See
     pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._


[Illustration: FLOOR PLAN "A"]

[Illustration: FLOOR PLAN "B"]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: _=Delaware=_

30 ft. × 26 ft. or 34 ft. × 24 ft. 5 rooms and Bath.]

Here's a cottage bidding for your favor not merely because of its modest
building cost, but also because of unique beauty and balance of
design--nothing overdone, and nothing forgotten. Notice how this compact
little home invites approval with its graceful overhanging eaves, the
individuality of its half-siding and half-shingle exterior, and its
broad, roomy porch.

And inside! Two rooms on the front--both the large living room and the
cozy dining room! In Plan "A" notice especially the well-located pantry;
and the hall giving privacy to bedrooms and bath. In Plan "B" see that
convenient bathroom arrangement, and the kitchen made roomier, the
pantry room cared for in this plan by one of our efficient kitchen
cabinets.

In both plans you find the same serviceable refrigerator location, and
side and back entrance combined in one--with the cellar easily reached
by a few steps.

Comparing all--where can you find more distinctive appearance, more
compact utility than in this "homey" little Delaware?


=SPECIFICATIONS=

     Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

     Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

     First floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

     Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

     Front door--our "Mohawk," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in.
     and 1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass.

     Our kitchen cupboard No. 2 and medicine cabinet included in the
     selling price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._


[Illustration: FLOOR PLAN "A"]

[Illustration: FLOOR PLAN "B"]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: _=Monroe=_

30 ft. × 32 ft. over all 5 Rooms and Bath]

The all-in-one floor scheme of bungalow-homes is quite as much in their
favor as their comparatively modest cost--from both viewpoints the
Monroe is a faithful example of this design.

There's an air of stability to this home--solidity and endurance, yet
not a bit overdone. And notice the harmony of roof lines; the extending
and protecting eaves, with rafter ends just showing here and there. And
if you like them better, shingled side walls in soft-toned colors might
be used, certainly with no loss of effect.

Perhaps a most striking feature of the interior is its large inviting
living room, with a truly pleasant dining room just to the right--a wide
opening between, a decided advantage when entertaining. And do not
overlook the kitchen's easy access to cellar, to entry and sheltered
back porch. The lady of the home will be glad to see that handy linen
closet; to especially mark the cheerful bedrooms, and their ample closet
space.

What more of convenience, of roomy compactness could be asked in this
home--what better dollar-for-dollar value.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

     Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

     Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

     First floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

     Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

     Front door--our "Mohawk," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in.
     and 1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass.

     Prices on oak floors and trim for living room and dining room,
     maple flooring in kitchen, quoted on application.

     Our kitchen cupboard No. 1, medicine cabinet and linen closet
     included in the selling price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._


[Illustration: "MONROE"

FLOOR PLAN]


  +====================+
  |  ¶ IT IS NEVER THE |
  | SIZE OF A HOME     |
  | THAT MAKES IT      |
  | ATTRACTIVE,        |
  | BUT THE CARE       |
  | WITH WHICH IT      |
  | IS DESIGNED        |
  | AND KEPT.          |
  +====================+


Freeport, Pa., May 20, 1919.


Gentlemen:--

     All lumber in fine condition, and better than we had expected.
     Claim to have _saved $300_. Your business methods were most
     satisfactory to us.

Yours truly,

J. A. McE.



[Illustration]

[Sidenote: Beverly

20 ft. × 28 ft. or 30 ft. over all 5 Rooms or 4 Rooms and Bath]

This sturdy, practical, pleasing home offers everything to be desired in
comfortable living quarters, while reducing the cost of home-building to
a most moderate basis.

Notice, please, the novel hooded type of porch, the bevel glass door,
the general tidy appearance of the whole front.

Observe the choice of two floor plans; the bathroom being omitted in
"A," but an extra sleeping chamber being gained. Both plans provide the
same splendid house-wide living room, sizable dining room and kitchen;
both include an efficient kitchen cabinet; both provide ample
clothes-keeping facilities in the shape of large wardrobes.

You can choose whichever plan is most suited to your conditions with the
certainty that you are selecting a home that embodies both economy and
service in the highest sense.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

=PLAN A=--

     Ceiling height first floor approximately 8 ft. 6 in.

     Girders 6 in. × 6 in.

     First floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

     Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 4 in.

     Front door--our "Saranac," design, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and 1-3/4
     in. thick, glazed. _See pages 36-37._

     Our kitchen cupboard No. 2 included in the selling price. _See
     pages 36-37._

=PLAN B=--

     Ceiling height first floor approximately 8 ft. 6 in.

     Girders 6 in. × 6 in.

     First floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

     Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 4 in.

     Front door--our "Saranac," design, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in. and 1-3/4
     in. thick. _See pages 36-37._

     Our kitchen cupboard No. 2 and medicine cabinet included in the
     selling price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._


[Illustration: FLOOR PLAN "A"]

[Illustration: FLOOR PLAN "B"]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Concord_=

20 ft. × 30 ft. or 22 ft. × 30 ft. over all 5 Rooms and Bath]

Beyond the rather striking economy which we believe you find in
purchasing your home the Bennett-Way, there is considerable increased
worth both in the appearance and in the quality of material that we send
you to put into your home--the Concord is fully up to Bennett standards.
To its rather simple proportions has been added an overhanging,
bracketed roof, and a snug porch.

The pattern of the window sash and frames and the shingled sides also
add their bit to this comfortable looking little home. The floor plan
itself speaks for the interior of the home. But let's call your
particular attention to the rather generous closet space off both
bedrooms, the well-lighted and well-aired rooms, the convenient kitchen
cabinet--all contained in the modest proportions of 20 ft. by 30 ft.

We believe the selling price of the Concord is quite in keeping with the
most efficient home economy ideas. Certain it is that from other owner's
experiences, we can guarantee enduring and entire satisfaction with the
Concord, if it is your choice.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

     Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

     Girders 6 in. × 6 in.

     First floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

     Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 4 in.

     Front door--cottage design, 2 ft. 8 in. × 6 ft. 8 in. and 1-3/4 in.
     thick, glazed. _See pages 36-37._

     Our kitchen cupboard No. 2 included in the selling price. _See
     pages 36-37._

     Our kitchen cupboard No. 1 and Niagara Colonnade included in
     selling price of Plan B.

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._


[Illustration: FLOOR PLAN "CONCORD"]

[Illustration: "CONCORD"

FLOOR PLAN B]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Emerson_=

24 ft. × 32 ft. over all 5 rooms and Bath]

This is an extremely neat and inexpensive home to build, easy to keep in
order, easy to heat and make comfortable. The porch across the front
will be a great comfort in summer, and at little expense it may be
screened and converted into a comfortable out-of-door room.

The vestibule will help keep out the cold of winter, and the adjoining
coat closet provides a splendid place for wraps and rubbers. The living
room is large and comfortable. The wide-cased opening leading from the
dining room gives it an effect of still greater proportion and the
dining room is also attractive with its grouped windows. The interior
hall arrangement provides easy access to bath and bedrooms. The
well-lighted kitchen is of convenient size and is particularly pleasing,
providing a light, cheery, comfortable room within easy access of the
dining room. The cellar entrance at grade, you will find another
desirable feature.

The ownership of the Emerson will prove a never-ending source of
satisfaction and content.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

     Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

     Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

     First floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

     Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 4 in.

     Front door--our "Chautauqua" of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in.
     and 1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass.

     Our No. 2 kitchen cupboard and medicine cabinet included in selling
     price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._


[Illustration: FLOOR PLAN "EMERSON"]

[Illustration: ¶ FEW INDIVIDUALS WHO DESIGN THEIR OWN HOMES KNOW HOW TO
ARRIVE AT THE COST OF MATERIAL AND LABOUR.]

Hopewell Junction, N.Y.
May 20, 1919.

_Gentlemen_:--

     The building material shipped me came in good condition, was of
     good grade which rather _surprised_ some of our _old carpenters_,
     it being much better quality than they have been using. I hope to
     build another house as soon as this one is finished, and shall
     remember you with the order.

Sincerely,

J.L.F.


[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Waverly_=

24 ft. × 38 ft. over all 5 Rooms and Bath]

The beauty and charm of this comfortable bungalow are instantly
appreciated by every true home lover. It is a masterpiece in bungalow
architecture. See the low sloped roof, wide bracketed eaves, grouped
windows, built-up rail, shingled side walls, a true California bungalow
and a favorite in that country which has become a model for all the
world. The front porch is an unusually pretty feature. What an
attractive departure the balusters and timbered effect are from the
usual combination of rail and balusters. The bay window is just what is
needed to break up the wall space and adds greatly to the general
pleasing effect. Picture this bungalow on your lot, side walls stained a
light seal brown, moss green for the roof, with pure white trimming,
shrubbery nestled along the front and corners of the porch. Wouldn't you
be proud to say "This is my home"? Often an attractive exterior will be
found to conceal a poor arrangement of rooms. This is not the case with
the Waverly. Careful attention has been given to details and we believe
that every housewife will appreciate the excellent floor plan
arrangement. You enter direct from the porch into one of the prettiest
living rooms you have ever seen. Triple windows in front and side are
among the attractive features of this room, allowing worlds of sunshine
and cheer to enter, but still leaving plenty of wall space for
furniture. The high casement windows in the end were separated purposely
to provide a place for your piano. The well-lighted dining room is
separated from the living room by an attractive colonnade-arch. The
kitchen is conveniently located for serving and for easy access to the
grade cellar entrance. Bedrooms and bath open into an interior hall
which makes these private but within easy access of all rooms. We are
sure that the Waverly will meet your highest expectations.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

     Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

     Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

     Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 4 in.

     Front door--our "Conesus," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in.
     and 1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass.

     Niagara colonnade between living room and dining room. _See pages
     36-37._

     Our kitchen cupboard No. 2, wardrobes and medicine cabinet included
     in the selling price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._


[Illustration: FLOOR PLAN "Waverly"]


=MORE THAN SATISFIED=

Olean, N. Y.
December 28, 1919.

_Gentlemen_:--

     Be assured we shall not forget you whenever we may have occasion to
     mention or suggest ready-cut houses, for our Erie is more than
     satisfactory.

N. E. P.


[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Ontario_=

26 ft. × 34 ft. over all 5 Rooms and Bath]

Can you imagine a more pleasing and homelike design than the Ontario at
such a moderate cost? Great care was used to secure this attractive,
harmonious exterior and still retain the exceptionally convenient and
practical arrangement of rooms. The front porch with its large tapering
columns, wide overhanging bracketed eaves and roof dormer at side, all
serve to give this design a distinct individuality. The vestibule and
coat closet will be found a desirable arrangement. The living room and
dining room are made especially attractive with triple windows, having
an extra wide cased opening between the living room and the dining room,
making this practically one room--a feature desired by many. The kitchen
is of a convenient size and well lighted. Our kitchen cupboard No. 2 is
a part of the finish in this room and is supplied as a part of the
equipment. The grade entrance is another added convenience. A large
storage space is provided for in the attic, attic stairs and flooring
being included in the selling price. Bedrooms are of good size with
large closet-space. The interior hall arrangement provides easy access
to bath and bedrooms. If you are looking for comfort and a home of which
you may be proud, select the Ontario.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

     Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

     Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

     First floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

     Second floor joists 2 in. × 6 in.

     Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

     Front door--our "Mohawk," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in.
     1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

     Our No. 2 kitchen cupboard and medicine cabinet included in the
     selling price. _See pages 36-37._

     Attic stairs and flooring included in selling price.

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._


[Illustration: FLOOR PLAN "ONTARIO"]

     =PROMPT AND EFFICIENT SERVICE=

Richmondville, N. Y.

December 27, 1919.

_Gentlemen_:--

     I desire to thank you for the prompt and efficient service which
     you have given me and for the prompt attention which has been given
     to all of my orders and assure you that if I can do any good in
     this section, I will gladly do it.

     My new home is nearly completed and as soon as the lawn is graded
     and some shrubbery placed, in the spring, I will send you a picture
     of same.

C. A. B.



[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Stanley_=

26 ft. × 20 ft. over all 4 Rooms]

To combine attractiveness, individuality and economy in one design
requires skill, but you will find that the Stanley possesses them all. A
more attractive cottage could hardly be imagined. You can see that the
pretty exterior effect is obtained by the use of a well proportioned
porch, large built-up porch columns, broad overhanging roof, clapboards
for side walls with shingles and panels for gables. One of our most
attractive front doors, the "Conesus," and the latest style of panel
sash are furnished with this design.

The living room, bedrooms and kitchen are expertly arranged to secure
the greatest amount of comfort and convenience. If a basement is
desired, an enclosed cellar addition may be added at rear in place of
the stoop, at small cost. Notice that each room has two windows, thus
insuring perfect ventilation.

Two roomy closets give ample space for clothes. Either living room or
kitchen is sufficiently large to be used also as a dining room.

On the whole this cottage is altogether charming and will strongly
appeal to those who desire a modern four-room house but whose purse
places a limit on the amount to be expended.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

     Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

     Girders 6 in. × 6 in.

     First floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

     Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 4 in.

     Front door--our "Conesus," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in.
     and 1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

     Our No. 2 kitchen cupboard included in selling price. _See pages
     36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._

[Illustration: "STANLEY" FLOOR PLAN]


=GOES TOGETHER LIKE A CHARM=

Norfolk, Va.
December 17, 1919.

_Gentlemen_:--

     Please send catalogue to enclosed list. These people are all
     thinking of building and have shown great interest in my Ilion.

     From the favorable comments I hear concerning my house you should
     be able to stir up some business here.

     I am making good progress with my house. The stuff goes together
     like a charm.

L. M. K.

(Note: His Ilion proved so eminently satisfactory that he has since
placed an order for the Potomac.)

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Madison_=

24 ft. × 28 ft. over all 8 Rooms and Bath]

The Madison is planned to meet the requirements for a square house that
can be built on a lot of medium size and still give comfortably large
rooms. Notice how well the rooms are arranged to utilize every inch of
space. This hospitable front porch will be appreciated during the summer
when at a little expense, it may be screened and converted into a
comfortable out-of-door room. The enclosed porch balustrade with its
added seclusion is a very desirable feature in a house set close to the
street.

The reception hall in this home is an unusually attractive and cozy
apartment with its broad staircase and pretty landing. A wide-cased arch
leads into the comfortable living room. It is not necessary to crowd
your furniture in this room or set it at an angle, for there is plenty
of wall space for the largest pieces. You will like the beautiful,
well-lighted dining room with its built-in window-seat and grouped
windows. See how nicely you can arrange your buffet, serving table and
china cabinet and still have plenty of wall space for chairs. Every
housewife will appreciate the thought we have given in designing the
kitchen. See how conveniently you can arrange your equipment to save
unnecessary steps. The range at the inside wall, the sink and work
tables in front of windows, your large kitchen cabinet placed just
right. Notice the convenience in the icebox arrangement, only a step or
two from the kitchen, still out of the way and iced without going into
the kitchen. The arrangement of rooms on the second floor is ideal. The
bedrooms are large and well lighted with plenty of closet space. The
bath is within easy reach of all bedrooms as well as the stairs.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

     Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

     Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

     Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

     First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

     Ceiling joists 2 in. × 4 in. Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

     Front door--our "Conesus," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8 in.
     and 1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages 36-37._

     Our No. 1 kitchen cupboard, wardrobes and medicine cabinet included
     in the selling price of this house. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._


[Illustration: "MADISON" FIRST FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: SECOND FLOOR PLAN "MADISON]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: =_Tremont_=

32 ft. × 34 ft. over all Twin House 6 Rooms and Bath--Each]

To meet the present and constantly increasing demand for a practical
twin house that can be erected on an average city lot, we present this
attractive design. From the exterior, one would never even suspect that
this house contained two complete suites of rooms.

The vestibule divides the porch so that each family has its own private
porch. From the large, well-lighted living room, separated by a wide
cased arch is the attractive dining room.

Notice the convenient coat closet, a very essential feature in every
home.

The kitchen is very conveniently located for serving. The built-in
cupboards and shelves extend the full width. The entryway provides space
for the refrigerator, brooms, etc. On the second floor, you have three
nice bedrooms, each one provided with wardrobes. The bath is
conveniently located at the end of the hall within easy access of
chambers and stairs. A large, well-lighted attic and attic stairs have
also been provided for with floor and partition dividing the attic which
are also included in the price of this house.

The Tremont offers an excellent investment, rental income doubled. The
proportional greater cost over a single house is insignificant when
compared with the net profit.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

     Ceiling height first floor approximately 9 ft.

     Ceiling height second floor approximately 8 ft.

     Girders 6 in. × 8 in.

     First and second floor joists 2 in. × 8 in.

     Ceiling joists 2 in. × 6 in.

     Rafters 2 in. × 6 in.

     Front door--our "Chautauqua," of solid Chestnut, 3 ft. × 6 ft. 8
     in. and 1-3/4 in. thick, glazed with clear glass. _See pages
     36-37._

     Oak floors and trim for living room and dining room quoted on
     application. Special kitchen cupboard, wardrobes and medicine
     cabinet included in the selling price. _See pages 36-37._

_See pages 8-9 for general specifications._


[Illustration: FIRST FLOOR PLAN "TREMONT"]

[Illustration: SECOND FLOOR PLAN "TREMONT"]

[ILLUSTRATION]

=GENERAL SPECIFICATIONS FOR BENNETT SUMMER COTTAGES=

     Cedar posts for two foot grade.

     Foundation sills--4 × 6 in. No. 1 Hemlock, cut to fit.

     Floor joists--2 × 6 in. No. 1 Hemlock, cut to fit, spaced 2 ft. O.
     C.

     Studding--2 × 4 in. No. 1 Hemlock, dressed four sides, cut to fit,
     spaced 2 ft. O. C. Walls 8 ft. high.

     Rafters--2 × 4 in. No. 1 Hemlock, dressed four sides, cut to fit,
     spaced 2 ft. O. C.

     Wall ties--2 × 4 in. No. 1 Hemlock, dressed four sides, cut to fit.

     Wainscoting--Dressed, matched and beaded, 2 ft. high, where shown
     in illustration, cut to fit.

     Siding 1 × 6 in. Fir novelty siding, tongued and grooved, dressed
     both sides, cut to fit.

     Roof Sheathing--1 × 6 in. No. 1 Hemlock, dressed and matched, cut
     to fit.

     Roof Covering--Bennett 3-ply prepared roofing, or extra *A* Red
     Cedar Shingles, if preferred.

     Exterior Finish--White Pine, cut to fit.

     Flooring--1 × 4 in. Yellow Pine or Fir, dressed and matched, cut to
     fit.

     Partitions--1 × 4 in. No. 1 Ceiling, dressed and matched and beaded
     both sides, cut to fit. Partitions 7 ft. high. (The rooms are all
     open to rafters.)

     Doors and windows glazed as shown in illustrations. (Interior doors
     furnished where shown in plans.)

     Interior door and window trim--1 × 3 in. Yellow Pine.

     Paint for two good coats outside, including the porch floor and
     steps, any color. (Color card mailed upon request.)

     Hardware, nails, locks, hinges.

     No paints, stains or varnishes furnished for interior.

     No masonry, lath, plaster or plaster board furnished.

     Screens, storm doors and storm windows not included--prices quoted
     on application.

     Stoops and steps included when shown in plans, cut to fit.

     Reversed plans will be furnished without extra cost.


Bennett Summer Cottages are designed with the same care as Bennett
Homes. The lumber and mill work furnished throughout is the same high
grade as used with our best houses.

[Illustration: WENONA]

[Illustration: "WENONA"]

[Illustration: "NEWPORT"]

[Illustration: NEWPORT]

=We Guarantee Entire Satisfaction or Money Back=

We guarantee to furnish all lumber, shingles, finishing lumber, doors,
windows, frames, floor and interior trim, hardware, nails, paints of
sufficient quantity and equal to or better than the grades specified, to
complete the house according to the plans and specifications on opposite
page. We further guarantee that there will be no extras, and that all
material will reach you in perfect condition. Should any shortages
occur, we agree to replace the material either by shipping the necessary
material or paying you whatever it costs to buy locally.

[Illustration: IVERNIA]

[Illustration: "IVERNIA" FLOOR PLAN]

All of the material in these cottages comes to you completely ready-cut,
every piece plainly marked. Plans and instructions are so simple and
easily understood, that they can be erected in from three to five days
by unskilled labor.

Every piece of material is guaranteed accurately cut to fit.

[Illustration: "LINWOOD" FLOOR PLAN]

[Illustration: LINWOOD]


=Specifications for Bennett Special Garage=

     Studding--2 × 4 in. No. 1 Hemlock, spaced 36 O. C. cut to fit.

     Circular Rafters cut from 2 × 12 in. No. 1 Hemlock, cut to fit.

     Siding--1 × 6 in. Fir novelty siding, dressed and matched, cut to
     fit.

     Hardware--All necessary hardware and nails included in selling
     price.

     Roof Sheathing--1 × 6 in. No. 1 Hemlock, dressed and matched, cut
     to fit.

     Roof Covering--Bennett 3-ply roofing.

     Doors--1 × 4 in. Ceiling, cut to fit.

     Paint--Two coats paint for outside.

     Floor--No material for floor is furnished. If such is desired, we
     will, upon request, gladly quote prices.

[Illustration: THE BENNETT SPECIAL]

[Illustration: BENNETT SPECIAL GARAGE]

[Illustration: HUDSON--Touring Car Size]

[Illustration: BUICK--Roadster or Medium Size]

[Illustration: PEERLESS--Double Large-Car Size]

[Illustration: CADILLAC--Double Large-Car Size]


=GARAGES=

Up to the Bennett Better-Built standard in every item, yet low priced.
Very quickly erected. Well lighted, snug, substantial. Liberal space for
cars, with working room aplenty at sides.


=SPECIFICATIONS=

=STUDDING=: 2 in. × 4 in. No. 1 Hemlock, spaced 24 in. on centers. Cut to
fit.

=RAFTERS=: 2 in. × 4 in. No. 1 Hemlock, spaced 24 in. on centers, surfaced
4 sides. Cut to fit.

=SIDING=: 1 in. × 6 in. Clear Fir Novelty. Cut to fit.

=ROOF SHEATHING=: See individualized specifications.

=HARDWARE=: All necessary hardware and nails included in selling price.

=FLOOR=: No material for floor is furnished. If such is desired, we will
upon request, gladly quote prices.

=WALL PLATES=: 2 in. × 4 in. No. 1 Hemlock, double at top, single at
bottom of studding. Cut to fit.

=ROOF COVERING=: See individual specifications.

=DOORS=: As shown in illustration. Glazed opening 8 in. × 8 in.

=WINDOWS=: See individual specifications.

=PAINT=: Sufficient quantity of Bennett House Paint for two good coats,
colors as specified by purchaser.


=BUICK=

=ROOF SHEATHING=: 1 in. × 6 in. No. 1 Hemlock, dressed, matched and cut to
fit.

=ROOF COVERING=: Asphalt Slate-Surfaced Roll-Roofing. Shingles will be
furnished at a slight additional cost, if desired.

=WINDOWS=: Two sliding sash windows and frames 26 in. × 26 in. glazed. For
various sizes see price list.


=HUDSON=

=ROOF SHEATHING=: 1 in. × 4 in. No. 1 Hemlock, spaced 2-1/4 in. apart. Cut
to fit.

=WINDOWS=: Three 3-light sash, and frames, each light 10 in. × 20 in.,
glazed.

=ROOF COVERING=: Extra Clear Red Cedar Shingles, laid 4-1/2 in. to the
weather.

For various sizes see price list.


=PEERLESS=

=ROOF SHEATHING=: 1 in. × 4 in. No. 1 Hemlock, spaced 2-1/2 in. apart. Cut
to fit.

=ROOF COVERING=: Extra Clear Red Cedar Shingles, laid 4-1/2 in. to the
weather.

=WINDOWS=: Three 3-light sash and frames, each light 10 in. × 20 in.
glazed.

=SIDE DOOR=: 2 ft. 8 in. × 6 ft. 8 in. mortised for lock set. For various
sizes see price list.


=CADILLAC=

=ROOF SHEATHING=: 1 in. × 4 in. No. 1 Hemlock, spaced 2-1/4 in. apart. Cut
to fit.

=WINDOWS=: Three 3-light sash and frames, each light 10 in. × 20 in.,
glazed.

=ROOF COVERING=: Extra Clear Red Cedar shingles, laid 4-1/2 in. to the
weather.

For various sizes see price list.


[Illustration: FLOOR PLAN

"THE CADILLAC"]

[Illustration: FLOOR PLAN

"THE PEERLESS"]

[Illustration: FLOOR PLAN

"THE HUDSON"]

[Illustration: FLOOR PLAN

"THE BUICK"]




MODERN EQUIPMENT FOR YOUR HOME

[Illustration: Bathroom]

Bennett Plumbing Fixtures

_A BATHROOM LIKE THIS WILL BE A CREDIT TO YOUR HOME_

The Home Equipment Book offers a variety of high grade, attractive
fixtures to choose from.

Be sure to get this book.

[Illustration: Furnace]

Bennett Pipeless Furnace

Cold weather comfort and convenience. Costs little more than a stove.

Heats the entire house with one register. Warm air is forced to all
rooms and cold air is drawn off the floors.

Requires little attention. Burns any kind of fuel. Hard or soft coal,
coke or wood.

Easy to install. A man and a boy can set it up in a single day.

No need to cut up your floors and walls.

Economical in fuel. Heats up quickly.

No heat wasted in the basement. Keeps cellar cool for fruits and
vegetables.

_For sizes and prices see HOME EQUIPMENT BOOK._

[Illustration: Lighting fixtures]


HOME EQUIPMENT BOOK

A Guide For the Home Owner. It Will Help You Equip Your New Home With
Modern Conveniences at a Saving.

_Send For Your Copy Today_

RAY H. BENNETT LUMBER CO., Inc.




Bennett Home Equipment Service

Puts the Finishing Touch on Home Comfort

[Illustration: =KITCHEN SINK=

An attractive sink, massive in construction, cast in one solid piece
from best grade of gray iron and heavily white enameled. All corners are
rounded to prevent accumulation of grease and dirt. Deep rim hides
entire painted bottom of sink. Furnished with drain board on either
right or left hand side. Length, 52 inches over all. Size of sink, 20 ×
28 inches. _See Home Equipment Book for other styles and sizes._]

[Illustration: =LAUNDRY STOVE=

Combination laundry stove and heater. Heats laundry room and supplies
hot water for domestic use. Has flat oval top plate, 16 in. wide, and
25-1/2 in. long. Will accommodate a wash boiler or six flatirons. Has
durable grate with draw center. Water jacket surrounds entire firepot.
Has capacity for heating 60 gallons of water. _See Home Equipment Book
for price._]

[Illustration: =LAUNDRY TUB=

Two-compartment laundry tub made from best grade of imported Portland
cement and crushed granite. Moulded in one solid piece. Inside corners
are nicely rounded so tub can be easily kept clean. Top edges are fitted
with patent metallic rim and wringer guard. _See Home Equipment Book for
other sizes._]

[Illustration: =KEROSENE WATER HEATER=

A kerosene heater which is absolutely efficient. Heats just as well as
gas. Has double copper coils. Patented burner. No wicks. Heats water
quickly and economically. Complete with kerosene tank of one gallon
capacity. _See Home Equipment Book._]

[Illustration: =RANGE BOILER=

Galvanized range boiler for storing hot water under pressure. Connected
to water front in the kitchen stove or to a coil in the furnace, or
heated by water heater. Insures a constant supply of warm water for
domestic use. Furnished in 30, 40 or 52 gallon sizes. _See Home
Equipment Book._]

[Illustration: Efficient gas burning water heater with black sheet steel
casing. Water runs through double copper coil and is heated by large
burner shown at bottom. Conical shape of coil provides maximum heating
efficiency. Suitable for heating 30 gallon range boiler. _See Home
Equipment Book for larger heaters._]

[Illustration: =WARM AIR FURNACE=]


=Heating, Plumbing, Lighting Service--Free=

Modern heating, sanitary plumbing and electric lighting are essential to
home contentment. Let our service department solve your equipment
problems without placing you under any obligations. Our experts will
gladly give you reliable advice on every point.

You will find our Home Equipment Book an interesting guide in selecting
fixtures to suit your taste.

[Illustration: =WATER SUPPLY OUTFIT=]

BAKER, JONES, HAUSAUER, INC., PRINTERS
BUFFALO, N. Y.




INTERIOR DECORATING SERVICE FREE

Sometime ago the thought came to us:

"We build our Bennett Homes soundly and artistically on the outside and
inside. We use the finest trained talent in the country to give our
home-builders the very best to be had in architecture and workmanship.
Why not assist our home-keepers in selecting and arranging the
furnishings of those homes?"

Every woman wants her home to express charm, personality, good taste.
But every woman does not care to employ a high-priced interior
decorator. Yet it must be conceded that someone who does nothing all day
but plan colors, lights and furniture arrangement, can save, through
wide experience, long days and nights of anxious thought for the
home-keeper. To get just the prettiest arrangement for rooms really does
take much valuable time and much trouble.

So we have taken into our Organization two women advisers for our
home-keepers. These women are expert interior decorators who do nothing
but plan for our Homes Beautiful. It does not matter whether your home
and the amount of money you wish to spend be small or large--our experts
will help you plan to the very best advantage with whatever you care to
spend. Too, they will either plan entirely, or help you plan--as you
choose. They know, thoroughly, every home that we build--every nook and
corner of every one of them. They have furnished some many times
over--every time differently. If you wish merely suggestions as to
various color schemes in walls, floors, hangings, or if you wish to use
furniture you already have, but in a new way--or if you desire to
furnish your homes entirely, down to the last detail of picture hanging
and effective plant-placing, they are glad and willing to answer any and
every question and to give all advice in their power.

An especial feature of their service is helping you plan your kitchen
efficiently, according to modern methods of steps and energy saving.
They have planned many hundreds of model kitchens and can help you stock
and arrange yours so that you will save time from drudgery of routine,
for the enjoyment of a book, the good outdoors, or your social life.





Bennett Saving Will Pay Your Expenses to The Falls and Niagara Frontier

_See_ the world-wonder--Niagara Falls--only twenty minutes' ride from
our door.

_See_ Beautiful Buffalo with its wonderful park and drives--the
celebrated million dollar Albright Art Gallery--Lake Erie--Niagara River
and Gorge.

_See_ the "home" of Bennett Homes--large lake steamers, enormous stocks
of lumber, modern mills, carpenter shops, machines.

Come! We will deem it a pleasure to show you every possible courtesy.
_Take advantage of this opportunity to travel!_

[Illustration: TONAWANDA AND THE BENNETT DOCKS

NIAGARA FALLS

ART GALLERY--BUFFALO]

                          _Enjoy a visit to_

                   _Ray H. Bennett Lumber Co. Inc._

                        _NORTH TONAWANDA--N.Y._

                          _Established 1902_

[Illustration back cover]










*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BENNETT'S SMALL HOUSE CATALOG, 1920 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


