The Project Gutenberg eBook of Mississippi Piney Woods: A Photographic Study of Folk Architecture
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Mississippi Piney Woods: A Photographic Study of Folk Architecture

Author: Patti Carr Black

Release date: April 10, 2020 [eBook #61801]
                Most recently updated: October 17, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MISSISSIPPI PINEY WOODS: A PHOTOGRAPHIC STUDY OF FOLK ARCHITECTURE ***

                        Mississippi Piney Woods:
               a photographic study of folk architecture


                                   by
                            Patti Carr Black

                             an exhibition
                                 at the
                  Mississippi State Historical Museum

    [Illustration: Cover photograph: Grist mill at Lake Bounds, Clarke
    County]




                        MISSISSIPPI PINEY WOODS
               a photographic study of folk architecture


                                   by
                            Patti Carr Black


             Mississippi Department of Archives and History
                          Jackson, Mississippi
                                  1976
                             Reprinted 1980

    [Illustration: Map]

  Tennessee Hills
  Black Prairie
  Pontotoc Ridge
  Flat Woods
  North Central Hills
  Jackson Prairie
  Brown Loam and Loess Hills
  Delta
  PINEY WOODS

My appreciation and thanks to the many residents of the Piney Woods who
gave me directions, information, and access to their homes, especially
Miss Gertie Ainsworth, Hulan Purvis, Bob and Patricia Harris, Clarence
Smith, Charles A. McGee, S. D. Sullivan, and Mrs. L. E. Turner.




                              Introduction


    [Illustration: Opposite: Sam Hosey house near Moss, Jasper County]

  “Then a house appeared on its ridge ... as if something came sliding
  out of the sky, the whole tin roof of the house ran with new blue. The
  posts along the porch softly bloomed downward, as if chalk marks were
  being drawn, one more time, down a still misty slate. The house was
  revealed as if standing there from pure memory against a now moonless
  sky. For the length of a breath, everything stayed shadowless, as
  under a lifting hand, and then a passage showed, running through the
  house, right through the middle of it....”
                                                           —Eudora Welty

The dogtrot house described by Eudora Welty in _Losing Battles_ is in
every Mississippian’s memory. Dogtrots, a part of the Mississippi
landscape since the early 19th century, were one of the most popular
forms of folk structures in the state, particularly in the southeastern
section.

The study of folk architecture has been largely ignored in Mississippi,
with the major attention going to large mansion houses. Even the term
“antebellum” has been used to refer only to affluent homes. Many
dogtrots, log houses, and other rural homes in Mississippi are
antebellum (built before the Civil War) and are far more widespread and
characteristic of 19th century Mississippi architecture.

The houses built by the pioneers themselves represent an important and
basic element of Mississippi culture. They reveal the ingenuity and
courage and affirmation of men and women who built their homes with
little money, limited materials, and no formal training as architects
and builders. Few of these structures are left standing in their
original form and every day brings the destruction of more. This study
is intended to be a sampling, not an exhaustive survey of Piney Woods
folk architecture. It was undertaken with the support and encouragement
of Dr. Byrle Kynerd, director of the Mississippi State Historical Museum
and Dr. William Ferris of Yale University and was made possible by a
grant from the National Endowment for the Arts.




                            The Piney Woods


The southeastern quarter of Mississippi, known as the Piney Woods,
extends southward from Interstate 20 to within twenty miles of the Gulf
Coast, and from the Alabama line to the Brown Loam Belt west of the
Pearl River. It is a high rolling land, once covered by dense stands of
long-leaf pine, and patches of hardwood in the bottoms. Numerous rivers
and creeks criss-cross its sandy soil. The Leaf and Chickasawhay form
the Pascagoula River that empties into Pascagoula Bay. The Pearl River,
with its tributaries, the Strong and the Bogue Chitto, empties into the
Gulf of Mexico.

The Piney Woods, originally inhabited by the Choctaw Indians, was ceded
to the United States by a series of treaties beginning with the Treaty
of Mount Dexter in 1805. In the great migration after the War of 1812,
settlers began coming in by horseback, on foot, by wagon teams, moving
west across the Fort Stephens-Natchez road and the Three-Chopped Way and
down Jackson’s Military Road. They came by flatboat down the rivers, and
later by steamboat up the Pearl. They came from the Carolinas, Georgia,
and Tennessee to the land described by J. F. H. Claiborne in 1840 as
“covered exclusively with the long-leaf pine; not broken, but rolling
like the waves in the middle of the great ocean. The grass grows three
feet high and hill and valley are studded all over with flowers of every
hue.”




                             Early Settlers


The pioneers of the Piney Woods were not agriculturists. They were
primarily livestock graziers and hunters, whose chief interest in the
land was to have a place for a cabin, a few out-buildings and stock
pens, small corn and vegetable patches, and open range for their
livestock. In 1870 William H. Sparks of Natchez wrote about the
settlements in the Piney Woods. He said they “were constituted of a
different people (from the agricultural population farther west): Most
of them were from the poorer districts of Georgia and the Carolinas.
True to the instincts of the people from whom they were descended, they
sought as nearly as possible just such a country as that from which they
came, and were really refugees from a growing civilization consequent
upon a denser population and its necessities. They were not
agriculturists in a proper sense of the term; true, they cultivated in
some degree the soil, but it was not the prime pursuit of these people,
nor was the location sought for this purpose. They desired an open,
poor, pine country, which forbade a numerous population. Here they
reared immense herds of cattle, which subsisted exclusively upon coarse
grass and reeds which grew abundantly among the tall, long-leafed pine,
and along the small creeks and branches numerous in this section.
Through these almost interminable pine forests the deer were abundant,
and the canebrakes full of bears. They combined the pursuits of hunting
and stock-minding, and derived support and revenue almost exclusively
from these.”

Gradually, in the second wave of migration, farmers began moving into
the Piney Woods, men who desired the ownership of the land rather than
its free use. Older settlers began to decrease their herds and increase
their fields, but by 1860 still only a fraction of the land was
“improved land.” Because the soil was poor and the farms tended to be
small, the plantation system and slavery never thrived there. The number
of slaveowners were few and the Piney Woods has remained predominantly
white.

In the closing decade of the 19th century, the railroads opened the
country to the lumber industry. Northern lumber companies bought vast
areas, sawmills were established, lumber towns sprang up. In less than
thirty years the great pine forests were stripped, ghost towns were
left, and the stumps of cut-over land attested to the ravaging of the
forests. Reforestation has restored much of the land to
loblolly-shortleaf pine forests, and industrialization is slowly
changing the character of the Piney Woods.




                           Folk Architecture


Because of the availability of trees, log houses were the most common
type of house built in the Piney Woods during the 19th century. The most
typical style, still found today, is the “double-pen” construction, also
called “dogtrot” or “two-pens-and-a-passage.”

Scholars disagree on the origin of the dogtrot. Some have attributed it
to Scandinavian influence, while others have shown a close relationship
to the double-pen houses of Africa. Henry Glassie has suggested that the
dogtrot developed in the lower Tennessee Valley around 1825. However, a
description of a dogtrot in Mississippi as early as 1789 has been
recorded. In _Narrative of a Journey Down the Ohio and Mississippi in
1789-90_ (Cincinnati, 1888) Samuel S. Forman of New Jersey described his
uncle’s house that he visited on a plantation bordering St. Catherine
Creek, four miles from Natchez:

  The place had a small clearing and a log house on it, and he put up
  another log house to correspond with it, about fourteen feet apart,
  connecting them with boards, with a piazza in front of the whole. The
  usual term applied to such a structure was that it was “two pens and a
  passage.” This connecting passage made a fine hall, and altogether
  gave it a good and comfortable appearance.

It seems probable that the dogtrot construction was a natural physical
development, possibly happening in various countries simultaneously.
Shorter logs or timbers were more easily handled and the size of a cabin
possibly was determined by the length of logs the builder could handle.
Later when an additional room was needed, the corner timbering of the
log pen made it impossible to butt the units together. The space left
between the pens was made wide enough to be useful.

All of the log dogtrots studied in the Piney Woods were built in stages,
following the same pattern. The settler built a one-room log house or
“pen.” Later, as his family and fortune increased he built an identical
log pen and connected the two with a common roof, leaving a passageway
or “dogtrot” between the pens and providing an overhang for porches
front and back. One pen usually served as a kitchen and living room and
the other as a bedroom. The covered passage formed an area for household
activities, children’s play, and a cool sitting spot for summer
evenings. Today the passageway is more likely to house the “deep
freeze.” As the family grew and more rooms were needed, the sides of the
front or back porch were walled off and called “shed rooms” or “drop
sheds” (Fig. 1).

All log houses were not dogtrots, and dogtrot construction was not
limited to log houses. Many later frame houses were built in the popular
style. When Hulan Purvis of Rankin County decided to build a frame house
for his family in 1910, he emulated the construction of his father’s
dogtrot, using the same type of “long-strawed” pine, but pine that had
been planed at the sawmill rather than hewn by hand (Fig. 23).

Many of the early dogtrots have been remodelled, enclosing the
passageway for a central room (Fig. 25). Others have been abandoned or
destroyed. Not all houses with open passageways are dogtrots. The Bob
Goodloe house in Smith County is an example of a non-dogtrot because the
two sides of the house are not of equal size or symmetrical relationship
(Fig. 26).




                                 Tools


The only tool a man actually needed to build a log house was an axe.
With an auger, an adze, a drawing knife, a froe and maul, a broadaxe, or
saw, he could build it more efficiently. Tools and building techniques
were passed down from generation to generation. One such technique
enabled a man to raise the walls higher than he could lift a log by
placing two logs at an angle against the wall to serve as a skid and
using forked sticks or ropes to guide the logs into place.

Another technique was splitting logs by standing them vertically between
scaffolding and sawing downward, lowering the scaffolding as the log was
cut.

    [Illustration: 1. Sullivan House, near Mize, Smith County. Built
    1810-20 by Tom Sullivan in “Sullivan’s Hollow.”
    Present owner: Shep Sullivan]

    [Illustration: 2. First sheriff’s office, Pike County. Built in 1815
    by Laban Bacot.
    Present owner: Mrs. Lloyd Hamilton]

    [Illustration: 3. John Walters cabin, Rankin County, 1860s.
    Present owner: James Huff]

    [Illustration: 4. Tool shed, Walthall County.
    Present owner: George Wingo]

    [Illustration: 5. Blacksmith shop, Lake Bounds, Clarke County, ca.
    1900.
    Present owner: Mrs. Gertrude Gatlin]

    [Illustration: 6. Jonathan Ainsworth house, near Harrisville,
    Simpson County, ca. 1860-70.
    Present owner: Miss Gertie Ainsworth]

    [Illustration: 7. SADDLE NOTCH
    Aunt Judy cabin, Wiggins, Stone County, ca. 1870. Present owner: B.
    C. Batson]

    [Illustration: 8. V-NOTCH
    Sullivan house, Smith County, ca. 1810-20. Present owner: Shep
    Sullivan]

    [Illustration: 9. HALF-DOVETAIL NOTCH
    Wiley McNeill house, Clarke County, ca. 1820-30. Present owner:
    Charles McGee]

    [Illustration: 10. SQUARE NOTCH
    Lang barn, near Shubuta, Clarke County. Built over an 1815-1830
    dogtrot. Present owner: Mrs. Mildred Wilkins]

    [Illustration: 11. HALF-SQUARED
    Strong River farm house, Simpson County. Present owner: Mrs. Guy
    Gillespie]

    [Illustration: 12. SADDLE-V COMBINATION
    Carter Place, George County, pre-Civil War. Present owners: Mr. and
    Mrs. Bill Bailey]

    [Illustration: 13. Heart pine section for foundation block. Wiley
    McNeill house, Clarke County, ca. 1820-30. Present owner: Charles
    McGee]

    [Illustration: 14. Native sand rocks for foundation block. John A.
    McLeod house, Forest County, 1920. Present owner: Mrs. Lida Rogers]

    [Illustration: 15. Porch well. Sam Hosey house, near Moss, Jasper
    County. Present owner: Ross Hosey]

    [Illustration: 16. Bricks replaced mud-and-stick chimney in 1951.
    The original foundation stones remain. Wiley McNeill house, Clarke
    County.]

    [Illustration: 17. Loft windows. Wiley McNeill house, Clarke County.
    ca. 1820-30.]

    [Illustration: 18. Shingle or board roof. Tool shed, Walthall
    County.
    Present owner: George Wingo]

    [Illustration: 19. Window shutter. John Walters cabin, Rankin
    County, 1860s.
    Present owner: James Huff]

    [Illustration: 20. Detached kitchen. David Bracey Ward house, Silver
    Creek, Lawrence County.
    Present owner: Mrs. Alma Hedgepeth]

    [Illustration: 21. Jonathan Ainsworth house, near Harrisville,
    Simpson County, ca. 1860-70.
    Present owner: Miss Gertie Ainsworth]

    [Illustration: 22. William Jackson Purvis house, Rankin County,
    pre-1880.
    Present owner: Hulan Purvis]

    [Illustration: 23. Hulan Purvis house, Rankin County, 1910.
    Present owner: Hulan Purvis]

    [Illustration: 24. Sullivan house, near Mize, Smith County, 1810-20.
    Present owner: Shep Sullivan]

    [Illustration: 25. Press Bond house, Bond, Stone County, ca. 1870.
    Present owner: Mrs. Mary Alice Coker]

    [Illustration: 26. A non-dogtrot. Bob Goodloe house, Burns, Smith
    County.
    Present owner: Bob Goodloe]

    [Illustration: 27. Parker “tent” (1880), oldest cabin on Salem
    Church Campground, established in 1842.]

    [Illustration: 28. Boykin Methodist Church, Smith County, 1858.]

    [Illustration: 29. China Grove Methodist Church, Walthall County,
    1854.]

    [Illustration: 30. A-roof. Deen barn, Jefferson Davis County.]

    [Illustration: 31. Lang barn, Clarke County. Built over an 1815-1830
    dogtrot.]

    [Illustration: 32. Log barn, Carter Place, George County.
    Present owner: Mr. and Mrs. Bill Bailey]

    [Illustration: 33. A decorative tree mobile]

    [Illustration: 34. Bedsprings for a gate]

    [Illustration: 35. Street light reflectors used as post covers to
    prevent rotting]

    [Illustration: 36. 7-up sign used for backsplash]




                              Construction


The log houses were built of peeled or “skunt” logs of native longleaf
pine, called “lightered,” “yellow,” “heart” or “long-strawed” pine. The
settler selected trees with straight smooth trunks approximately the
same size. The trees were felled, cut into the correct length, and
peeled. They were hauled to the building site with ox or mule teams. The
foundation blocks were usually vertical sections of large heart pine
logs (Fig. 13), although some houses used native iron rock as foundation
stones (Fig. 14). These foundations held the sills of the house a foot
or two off the ground so that the light and air under the house
protected it from dampness and “wood lice” or termites. In some cases,
the sills were laid directly on the earth. The sills of the Wiley
McNeill house, Clarke County, laid on the ground around 1830, today show
little sign of rotting or termite damage. The resin in heart pine acts
as a natural preservative, making the wood almost indestructible.

Some of the houses were built with whole peeled logs (Fig. 4); others
with split logs (Fig. 5) and still others with square-hewn logs
(Fig. 6). The logs were notched or “scribed” at the corners to fit
securely and steadily. The style of the notch varied with the cultural
background, skill or preference of the builder. Saddle notching,
V-notching, Half-dovetailing, Square cornering, Halved cornering and a
saddle-V combination are found in the Piney Woods (Figs. 7-12). Of
these, the half-dovetail is the most difficult to produce. It is self
locking, as is the Saddle and V-notch, while the Square and Half-Square
require the use of pegs to hold the timber in place.

The spaces between the logs were either chinked with clay and moss or
battened with split pine pickets. The log houses left standing today in
the Piney Woods are generally battened inside and out with pine boards.
Exacting builders squared off the corners, but usually logs were left to
extend beyond the notches. The floor joists rested on the sills and were
fitted to make an even base for the floor of wide hand-planed pine
boards. Many of the earlier houses had clay floors, but no house was
found still retaining the dirt floor.

The ceiling, made of wide rough-hewn board, was attached to ceiling
joists, providing a loft space in many of the houses. Small ladder-like
stairs led through a hole in the ceiling to the loft, which was
sometimes used for sleeping quarters or for storage of seeds, herbs,
nuts, and gourds, (Fig. 17).

The rafters were made of small, peeled pine poles. Pine planks nailed to
the rafters formed the base of the shingle roof. Straight grained pine
trees were selected for roof shingles. The tree was cut into blocks
eighteen to twenty inches long and split into “bolts.” A froe and maul
were used to rive out the boards to a half-inch thickness and the roof
was covered with the boards overlapping (Fig. 18). In the Piney Woods,
such shingle roofs were called “board” roofs. Today most have been
replaced by tin or masonite. The overhang of the roof provided about
eight feet front and rear for porches.

Each pen usually had a window on both sides of the fireplace, cut into
the wall after the log pen was built. There were no window panels in the
early houses, but thick shutters made of hand-planed pine boards (Fig.
19).

Each pen had a fireplace. The early chimneys were “catted,” made of
“stick and mud,” and built on a foundation of native rocks, such as sand
or iron rocks. The chimney was framed up with carefully laid pieces of
oak strips. Prairie grass or sage was mixed with water and clay and
thrown over each rung of the framing. The log grass overlapped each
rung, filling the spaces. After the entire frame was covered, it was
dressed down with mud. When the clay hardened, the chimney was ready for
fire. Fireplaces were fitted with a bar and hooks to hold vessels for
heating water and cooking. These inflammable stick-and-mud chimneys and
fireplaces were replaced with bricks after kilns began operating (Fig.
16).

As a house grew, usually a kitchen was built behind and away from the
house as a protection against fire. It was connected to the house by a
board walkway either covered or uncovered (Fig. 20). It is rare today to
find the detached kitchen still standing for most house owners, with
access to electricity, tore down the kitchen wing and made a kitchen
shed from a portion of the back porch. In the 20th century, outdoor
toilets gave way to modern plumbing in shed rooms.

Before “running water” was available, it was considered a great
convenience to have an additional well in the house. These wells were
usually on a front porch and had a narrow cylinder for drawing water
(Fig. 15).

The Ainsworth house in Simpson County, the Purvis house in Rankin
County, and the Sullivan house in Smith County are well-preserved log
dogtrots.

Jonathan Ainsworth built his log house on the Florence-Harrisville road
in north Simpson County between 1860-1870 (Fig. 21). Gertie Ainsworth,
present owner and granddaughter of Jonathan, was born in the house as
was her father, Charles Houston Ainsworth.

Made of squared split-logs approximately 14 inches in diameter, the
house was built in stages, following the typical pattern of progression.
The 24-foot square north pen was constructed first with square notching.
An identical pen was added a few years later, leaving a passageway
between, with the whole house roofed over to provide a front and back
porch. Soon afterwards, a kitchen and dining room, each about twelve
feet square, were built off the rear of the house. In 1937, these
structures were torn down and the north pen again became the kitchen and
the south portion of the back porch was walled up as a bedroom. Later,
with the arrival of electricity, the north back porch was walled up for
a kitchen. None of the outbuildings are the original ones. The present
corn crib was built in 1911; the “car house” in 1925; the barn in 1935.
Miss Ainsworth remembers fruit houses, which were built of small logs
and daubed with mud. The house does not have plumbing and Miss Ainsworth
still draws her water from the well conveniently placed on the front
porch.

The Purvis house stands in the Walters Community in southeast Rankin
County (Fig. 22). William Jackson Purvis began building the house prior
to 1880. The fourth generation of his family now lives there.

Although both rooms have been ceiled and paneled in recent years and the
south fireplace removed, the basic exterior remains unchanged.

The original pen was built on the east side of present-day Highway 43
and moved to the west side around 1882. The code for reassembling the
pen can still be seen carved in the logs.

The north pen was added some twenty years later. The split-logs of pine
are put together with V-notching. An unusual feature is a storm-pit
built under the north pen with an entrance through an opening in the
floor.

In 1905 when the first son married, the north portion of the front porch
was walled off for the newly-weds. In the 1970s the north rear porch was
walled off as a kitchen and the south rear porch as a bathroom. The
house now has both electricity and plumbing.

A functioning farm until recently, the out-buildings include a smoke
house, cow barn, mule barn, blacksmith shop, seed house, chicken house,
and tool shed. The blacksmith shop still contains the old bellows and a
handmade grinding tool. The tool shed holds hand-carved mule hames, a
hand-pegged rake, and other garden tools.

Tom Sullivan built his one-room cabin of square-hewn logs in Choctaw
Indian country. The area later became known as Sullivan’s Hollow, Smith
County. The original log cabin was built 1810-1820 when Sullivan
migrated from Georgia, and his descendants have lived in it ever since.

A double-pen was added later using split logs instead of the original
square-hewn. Three shed rooms have been added over the years, the last
one for a bathroom in 1965 (Fig. 24).

Interior walls are battened with pine boards and the ceiling is made of
“sawed” boards. The mud-and-stick chimneys on each end were replaced by
brick chimneys in 1915. The dogtrot passageway is usually closed up in
the winter months with plastic panels. The house is occupied today by
Shep Sullivan, a sixth generation descendant of the builder.




                             The Campground


Serving a special function were the campgrounds where Protestant
religious meetings were held once or twice a year, usually during
“laying-by” time. The early camp meetings were held in an arbor-like
shelter constructed of oak posts with V-tops forming a frame for
horizontal poles that were then covered with leafy branches. This
shelter was called the tabernacle. Rough plank seats were constructed by
laying long planks on supports held up by stakes driven in the ground.
The dirt floor was covered with pine straw or sawdust to keep the dust
down and the pulpit was made of rough planks. Smaller shelters called
tents where the people camped out were built around the tabernacle and
furnished with pine plank or pole beds and tables, straw and shuck
mattresses. Later more substantial campgrounds, such as present-day
Salem Church campground, were built with a permanent tabernacle and
sturdy cabins. The Salem Campground on the Jackson-George County line is
the oldest extant campground in the state (Fig. 27). The first camp
meeting at Salem was held in 1826 and the present site was selected in
1842. The campground today is still arranged in the original U-shape,
but the materials of the buildings have been replaced. The tabernacle is
built of rough lumber, with three sides open and log posts supporting
the roof. The floor, covered with pine straw, holds wooden benches which
can seat 300 people. The cabins which surround the tabernacle are still
traditionally known as “tents.” Each cabin has two rooms, one for
sleeping, one for eating, cooking, or sitting, and the floors are
covered with pine straw. A wooden bench adorns each front porch. The
oldest tent on the campground is the Parker tent built around 1880.
Meetings have been held every year at Salem Campground since 1826 except
for two years during the Civil War.




                                Churches


After transportation improved and as the country became more thickly
populated, churches were built. Rural Piney Woods churches were simple
structures. Boykin Methodist Church (Fig. 28) near Burns and Piney Grove
Church at Polkville are typical examples. The pioneer church building
was rectangular, made of rough sawn pine, with pine shutters at the
windows and home-made benches fronting toward the home-made pulpit.
There was no ceiling, with the room rising to exposed hand-hewn rafters.
Often there were two front doors, one for the men and one for the women,
and one rear door. On the grounds of Piney Grove, one can still see the
long stretch of tables which were built for “protracted meetings” which
took the place of camp meetings. Instead of camping out, the people
attended services during the day and went home for the night. There was
always “dinner on the ground” at the protracted meeting.

Churches in more affluent areas generally had slave galleries, cabinet
work on the pews, and glass windows. China Grove Methodist Church built
in 1854 in Walthall County is a good example (Fig. 29).




                                 Barns


Although roof styles vary, the barn type used almost exclusively in the
Piney Woods is the transverse-crib barn. Henry Glassie, folk historian,
has theorized that the transverse-crib barn developed in the southern
Tennessee Valley. The Piney Woods settlers came from that area in large
numbers. Roof styles include the gambrel and the pitched roof, but the
most prevalent style is the A-roof (Figs. 30-32).




                              Grist Mills


Each community usually had one farmer who built a water mill for
grinding corn into meal. Lake Bounds in Clarke County has been the site
of a grist mill since the beginning of the 19th century. The present
mill was built by J. M. Martin in 1935 and is still operating.




                          Recycling Materials


Dr. William R. Ferris pointed out in _Mississippi Folk Architecture_,
that “salvaged” items are common in folk structures.

Items discarded as “junk” in non-folk culture become functional or
decorative in folk culture. A tour through the Piney Woods is a study in
the art of recycling. Bed-springs become a garden gate. Prince Albert
tobacco cans decorate a flower bed, rubber tires become planters,
styrofoam egg cartons become tulips. Materials are imaginatively
transformed into new uses (Figs. 33-36).




                               Conclusion


Folk architecture, defined as traditional structures built by craftsmen
with no formal training in architecture, is disappearing. It came from
and belonged to people whose lives were closely bound to the soil. Today
technology is continuing to alter the cultural landscape and the mobile
house trailer, the concrete-block structure, the prefabricated house are
the new folk structures.

    [Illustration: Mississippi State Historical Museum]




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of Project Gutenberg's Mississippi Piney Woods, by Patti Carr Black



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MISSISSIPPI PINEY WOODS: A PHOTOGRAPHIC STUDY OF FOLK ARCHITECTURE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


