The Project Gutenberg eBook of Three Visitors to Early Plymouth
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Three Visitors to Early Plymouth

Editor: Sydney V. James

Author: Emmanuel Altham
        John Pory
        Isaack de Rasieres

Author of introduction, etc.: Samuel Eliot Morison

Release date: August 25, 2021 [eBook #66135]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Original publication: United States: Plimoth Plantation, Inc, 1963

Credits: Steve Mattern, Stephen Hutcheson, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THREE VISITORS TO EARLY PLYMOUTH ***

    [Illustration: NEW ENGLAND ABOUT 1625]




                            _Three Visitors
                           to Early Plymouth_


  LETTERS ABOUT THE PILGRIM SETTLEMENT IN NEW ENGLAND DURING ITS FIRST
                              SEVEN YEARS

          BY JOHN PORY, EMMANUEL ALTHAM AND ISAACK DE RASIERES

                     Edited by Sydney V. James, Jr.
              with an Introduction by Samuel Eliot Morison

    [Illustration: _Plimoth Plantation_]

                    © Plimoth Plantation, Inc., 1963




                                Contents


  INTRODUCTION                                                       vii
  EDITOR’S PREFACE                                                    xi
  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS                                                   xiii
  JOHN PORY (1572-1635)                                                3
      John Pory to the Earl of Southampton, January 13, 1622/1623,
          and later                                                    5
      John Pory to the Governor of Virginia (Sir Francis Wyatt),
          Autumn, 1622                                                14
  EMMANUEL ALTHAM (1600-1635/1636)                                    21
      Emmanuel Altham to Sir Edward Altham, September, 1623           23
      Emmanuel Altham to Sir Edward Altham, March, 1623/1624          36
      Emmanuel Altham to James Sherley, May, 1624                     42
      Emmanuel Altham to Sir Edward Altham, June 10, 1625             53
  ISAACK DE RASIERES (1595-1669 or later)                             63
      Isaack de Rasieres to Samuel Blommaert, c. 1628                 65
  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE                                                81
  INDEX                                                               83




                              Introduction


We all know what the Pilgrim Fathers wrote about themselves and their
settlements on the (not so) “stern and rockbound coast”; but how many
people know that they were visited thrice, between 1622 and 1627, by
outsiders who left on record candid accounts of what they saw? That is
the reason for this book. These three accounts—one by a gentleman from
Virginia, one by an Englishman straight from England, and the other by a
Dutchman from New Amsterdam—are brought together between two covers, so
that we can see how the Pilgrims and New Plymouth appeared to visitors
who shared neither their particular beliefs nor their intention to live
in New England.

John Pory’s, the Virginian account, was discovered early in this century
and published in a small limited edition, long since out of print. De
Rasieres’ Dutch account is best known; it was discovered in
mid-nineteenth century, was promptly translated, and has several times
been printed. Three of the Altham letters have never before been
printed. The manuscripts were purchased by the late Dr. Otto Fisher, who
kindly permitted us to publish this _editio princeps_. The fourth Altham
letter, printed some years ago, has been included, as it rounds out the
story.

Pory’s account is valuable for the vivid description of the bounties of
nature at Plymouth and along the coast of Maine. We are sorry he did not
have time to investigate the Indians’ tall tale of mammoth Massachusetts
oysters. He confirms Edward Winslow’s story about Governor Bradford’s
exchange of diplomatic messages (snakeskin and bullets) with Canonicus,
somewhat suggesting what now goes on between Washington and Moscow.
Bradford refers pleasantly to Pory’s visit in his _Of Plymouth
Plantation_ chapter xiii, and notes that he borrowed the Governor’s copy
of Henry Ainsworth’s _Annotations upon the Fourth Book of Moses_ for
shipboard reading on his passage to England.

The Altham letters provide the first new information about the Plymouth
Colony to appear in fifty years. Captain Emmanuel Altham of the pinnace
_Little James_, which arrived at Plymouth in 1623, gives us a fresh
description of the settlement, its meager resources in livestock, and
its abundant store of fish and timber. An important item for Pilgrim
lore is the description of Bradford’s marriage feast, which the Governor
was too modest to include in his History. Altham gives a vivid
characterization of Massasoit, the guest of honor, and notes the
delicacy of that chieftain in bringing only one of his five wives to the
party. And he corroborates Winslow’s story of Miles Standish’s
expedition against Wessagusset.

Altham, as one of the English Adventurers who financed Plymouth Colony,
adds appreciably to our knowledge of how that business was done. He
thoroughly disapproves of the faction among the Adventurers that was
responsible for inflicting the Rev. John Lyford on Plymouth. Altham’s
present to his brother of a “great king’s pipe” that “doth stink
exceedingly of Indian tobacco” makes a humorous postscript to this very
interesting series of letters.

De Rasieres’ letters, although well known, have never before been
printed in so full and accurate a translation. They open with a
description of Manhattan Island only three years after the settlement of
New Amsterdam, and of the shores of Long Island Sound. They describe
Algonkian Indian customs such as the making of wampum, the growing of
Indian corn, with recipes for corn bread and porridge, and methods of
dealing with unfaithful wives and roving husbands. Once arrived at New
Plymouth, De Rasieres describes the settlement with great care—the
clapboarded houses, the square fort on Burial Hill, and the Sabbath
church parade to beat of drum, which has become classic. Nor does he
neglect the government of the colony or the customs of the neighboring
Indians.

Detractors of the Pilgrim Colony will find no ammunition in these three
contemporary descriptions. The Virginian, the Englishman, and the
Dutchman found much to admire in the Colony and nothing to disparage.
They have given us fresh reason to respect the faith and fortitude of
that little band in its struggle to maintain a toe hold on the edge of
the American wilderness.

                                                    Samuel Eliot Morison

February 1963




                            Editor’s Preface


Letters which have survived over three hundred years, escaping the
ravages of fire, water, vermin, and people who wanted to wrap fish, have
a claim to our respect. All the more so if they shed light on a subject
of as widespread interest as early Plymouth. As editor of the letters
presented here, therefore, I had better explain what has happened to
them in my hands and make it known that my intentions were honorable. In
order to win as many readers for these letters as possible, I have put
them into modern style in certain respects. To those written originally
in English, the letters by Emmanuel Altham and John Pory, I have given
modern spelling without changing the words, and punctuation to make them
into sentences and paragraphs in twentieth-century fashion as much as
possible. I have followed the general approach described by Samuel Eliot
Morison in the preface to his edition of William Bradford’s _Of Plymouth
Plantation_ (New York, 1952), pp. vii-ix. I have also followed his
example in many details, such as spellings. However, anything Pory or
Altham wrote which is acceptable to modern usage has been left alone,
regardless of consistency within this book. I have standardized proper
names ruthlessly, except for some which have no modern or official form,
as is the case with most old Dutch place names. Since Isaack De
Rasieres’ Dutch has been translated directly into modern English, it has
not needed the same treatment.

Footnotes have been supplied mainly to give information useful for an
understanding of the letters, not exhaustive comparisons with other
documents. Some notes give original spellings which others may not wish
to modernize as I have done it in the text. Bibliographical information
in the footnotes is supplemented by the bibliographical note at the end
of the book.

The dates used in the letters are reproduced exactly. This means that
they are of the Julian Calendar or Old Style, used by Englishmen until
September 1752. In the biographical sketches of the letter writers,
also, the old dating system has been followed. Not only was the day of
the month different from the modern calendar (during the 1600’s Old
Style dates ran ten days behind New Style, so that December 11, O.S.,
was December 21, N.S.) but the beginning of the year was reckoned from
March 25, although all of March was called the first month of the year.
This confused even the users of the Julian Calendar, who frequently
tried to prevent mistakes by giving both the outgoing and the incoming
year numbers to dates in March before the 25th—for example, March 9,
1629/1630. Hoping to minimize confusion for the modern reader, I have
adopted a rarer version of this practice, giving two year numbers to all
dates from January 1 to March 24.




                            Acknowledgements


The chief debt of gratitude which the editor and Plimoth Plantation,
Inc., must acknowledge is to the owners of the letters printed here. The
late Dr. Otto Fisher, of Detroit, made the book possible by permitting
the publication of the three letters from Emmanuel Altham to Sir Edward
Altham. The Massachusetts Historical Society has kindly consented to the
reprinting of the other Altham letter. The John Carter Brown Library, of
Providence, has given permission to print the extracts from Pory’s
letters. Permission to reprint those parts of the translation of the
letter by Isaack de Rasieres covered by copyright has been granted by
Barnes & Noble, Inc.

As editor I have received assistance of various kinds which deserve a
public word of thanks—from Professor Rosalie Colie of Wesleyan
University, Professor John H. Parks of Kent State University, the New
York Historical Society, the Cleveland Public Library, and from my wife.

                                                         Sydney V. James

Eugene, Oregon




                               JOHN PORY




                               John Pory (1572-1635)


John Pory had led a full life before he visited Plymouth and New England
in 1622, on his way home from a three-year term as Secretary to the
Governor and Council of Virginia. Born into the family of a Norfolk
gentleman, a graduate of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, he had
been an apprentice to the great historian of English seafaring, Richard
Hakluyt. After producing a successful book on Africa in 1600, he left
the scholarly life, served eminent men as private correspondent on news
from London, sat in Parliament from 1605 to 1611, acted as aide to
various diplomats, went on missions for King James I and his Privy
Council, and traveled in Ireland, France, Italy, Greece, and Turkey. By
1619, when he received his Virginia appointment, he had many friends, a
restless foot, large girth, and fondness for wine.

The New World was a strange one for Pory, but always optimistic, he
turned his back on conviviality and news of the capital to accept water
and good books with enthusiasm. He also made a name for himself as an
explorer on a small scale and earned lasting fame as the very able
speaker of the first colonial assembly, called in 1619.

Even before leaving England for America, Pory embroiled himself in the
party strife which led to the downfall of the Virginia Company in 1624.
Appointed by the “ins,” at the request of his cousin, Gov. Yeardley,
Pory ultimately sided with the group led by the Earl of Warwick, the
“outs” from 1619 to 1624. He earned an appointment to the panel of
Commissioners to inspect affairs in Virginia for the Privy Council in
1624, and on his return, received a place on the board chosen to
establish royal government in the colony. He spent several years at his
old occupation of London correspondent before he made his home in
Lincolnshire, where he died in 1635.

John Pory stopped at New England on his way back to England partly on
Company business. Ships had often gone north from Virginia to fish,
before the king granted monopoly rights over fishing to the Council for
New England, created in 1620. The Virginia Company thought its interests
damaged, continued to sell licenses to fish in the disputed area, and
futilely protested the monopoly in the Privy Council. Pory was to get
the Company firsthand information about the fishing business in New
England, see what the Council for New England was actually doing, and
assess the prospects of the Plymouth settlement. The extracts from his
letters which follow were probably written as reports.

The originals of Pory’s letters are gone, as far as anyone knows. What
exists is a copy, probably made by Richard Norwood, surveyor of the
“Summer Isles” (Bermudas). The manuscript is unsigned, undated and
consists of extracts from two letters by John Pory and a description of
Bermuda by Norwood. It is in the John Carter Brown Library, Providence,
Rhode Island. The whole text, edited, annotated, and introduced by
Champlin Burrage, was printed under the title, _John Pory’s Lost
Description of Plymouth in the Earliest Days of the Pilgrim Fathers_
(1918). This edition, plus photostats of the manuscript, were used in
the preparation of the text printed here.




                John Pory to the Earl of Southampton[1]


                   January 13, 1622/1623, and later.

By whom this New Plymouth (situated, according to Captain Jones[2] his
computation, in 41 degrees and 48 minutes) is now presently inhabited,
your Lordship and the honorable Company do know better than myself. For
whom how favourably God’s providence in thought and in deed, quite
besides any plot or design of theirs, hath wrought, especially in the
beginning of their enterprise, is worthy to be observed. For when, as
your Lordship knows, their voyage was intended for Virginia, being by
letters from Sir Edwin Sandys and Mr. Deputy Ferrar recommended to Sir
Yeardley[3] (then Governor) that he should give them the best advice he
could for trading in Hudson’s River, whether it were by contrariety of
wind or by the backwardness of their master or pilot[4] to make (as they
thought it) too long a journey, they fell short both of the one and the
other, arriving first at that stately harbour called Cape Cod,[5] called
by Indians “Pamet”; from whence in shallop the pilot, a more forward
undertaker than performer, promised to bring them to be seated in a
pleasant and fertile place called Anquam,[6] situate within Cape Ann,[7]
about forty leagues from Plymouth. After some dangerous and almost
incurable errors and mistakings, he stumbled by accident upon the
harbour of Plymouth; where, after the planters had failed of their
intention, and the pilot of his, it pleased Almighty God (who had better
provided for them than their own hearts could imagine) to plant them on
the seat of an old town which divers [years] before had been abandoned
of the Indians. So they both quietly and justly sate down without either
dispossessing any of the natives, or being resisted by them, and without
shedding so much as one drop of blood. Which felicity of theirs is
confirmed unto them even by the voices of the savages themselves, who
generally do acknowledge not only the seat, but the whole seigniory[8]
thereto belonging, to be, and do themselves disclaim all title from it;
so that the right of those planters to it is altogether unquestionable—a
favor which, since the first discovery of America, God hath not
vouchsafed, so far as ever I could learn, upon any Christian nation
within that continent. Yet can it not be denied but that these of the
Summer Islands[9] are blessed with the same privilege according to the
saying of St. Paul, “If the firstfruits be holy, the lump is also
holy.”[10]

But to leave this privilege to them whom it concerns, and to describe to
your Lordship the excellency of the place. First, the harbour is not
only pleasant for air and prospect, but most sure for shipping, both
small and great, being land-locked on all sides. The town is seated on
the ascent of a hill, which besides the pleasure of variable objects
entertaining the unsatisfied eye, such is the wholesomeness of the place
(as the Governor[11] told me) that for the space of one whole year of
the two wherein they had been there, died not one man, woman or child.

This healthfulness is accompanied with much plenty both of fish and fowl
every day in the year, as I know no place in the world that can match
it. In March the eels come forth out of places where they lie bedded all
winter, into the fresh streams, and there into the sea, and in their
passages are taken in pots. In September they run out of the sea into
the fresh streams, to bed themselves in the ground all winter, and are
taken again in pots as they return homewards. In winter the inhabitants
dig them up, being bedded in gravel not above two or three foot deep,
and all the rest of the year they may take them in pots in the salt
water of the bay. They are passing sweet, fat and wholesome, having no
taste at all of the mud, and are as great as ever I saw any.

In April and May come up another kind of fish which they call herring or
old wives[12] in infinite schools, into a small river[13] running under
the town, and so into a great pond or lake of a mile broad, where they
cast their spawn, the water of the said river being in many places not
above half a foot deep. Yea, when a heap of stones is reared up against
them a foot high above the water, they leap and tumble over, and will
not be beaten back with cudgels. Which confirmeth not only that of
Horace, “_Naturam expellas furca licet_,” etc.,[14] but that also which
was thought a fable of Friar Beatus Odoricus, namely, that in some parts
where he had travelled, the fish in the springtime did cast themselves
out of the sea upon the dry land.[15] The inhabitants during the said
two months take them up every day in hogsheads. And with those they eat
not they manure the ground, burying two or three in each hill of
corn—and may, when they are able, if they see cause, lade whole ships
with them. At their going up they are very fat and savory, but at their
coming down, after they have cast their spawns, they are shot, and
therefore lean and unwholesome. Into another river some two miles to the
northeast of Plymouth,[16] all the month of May the great smelts pass up
to spawn, likewise in troops innumerable, which with a scoop or a bowl,
or a piece of bark, a man may cast up upon the bank.

About mid-May come into the harbour the main school of bass and
bluefish, which they take with seines[17]—some fishes of a foot and a
half, some of two foot, and some of three foot long—and with hooks,
those of four and five foot long. They enter also at flowing water[18]
up into the small creeks, at the mouths whereof the inhabitants,
spreading their nets, have caught 500 and 700 at a time. These continue
good May, June, July and August. Now as concerning the bluefish, in
delicacy it excelleth all kind of fish that ever I tasted; I except not
the salmon of the Thames in his prime season, nor any other fish. We
called it by a compound name of black, white, blue, sweet, fat—the skin
and scale, blue; the flesh next under the scale for an inch deep, black
and as sweet as the marrow of an ox; the residue of the flesh
underneath, purely white, fat, and of a taste requiring no addition of
sauce. By which alluring qualities it may seem dangerously tending to a
surfeit, but we found by experience that having satisfied (and in a
manner glutted) ourselves therewith, it proved wholesome unto us and
most easy of digestion.

In the same bay, lobsters are in season during the four months—so large,
so full of meat, and so plentiful in number as no man will believe that
hath not seen. For a knife of three halfpence, I bought ten lobsters
that would well have dined forty labouring men. And the least boy in the
ship, with an hour’s labour, was able to feed the whole company with
them for two days; which, if those of the ship that come home do not
affirm upon their oaths, let me forever lose my credit!

Without the bay, in the ocean sea, they have all the year long in a
manner goodly fishing of cod and hake, as in other parts of Canada.
Within two miles southward from their plantation do begin goodly ponds
and lakes of fresh water, continuing well nigh twenty miles into the
land, some with islands in them, the water being as clear as crystal,
yielding great variety of fish.

Mussels and clams[19] they have all the year long; which, being the
meanest of God’s blessings here, and such as these people fat their hogs
with at a low water, if ours upon any extremity did enjoy in the South
Colony,[20] they would never complain of famine or want, although they
wanted bread. (Not but that, by God’s blessing, the South Colony using
their industry may in few years attain to that plenty, pleasure and
strength as that they shall not need much to envy or fear the proudest
nations in Europe.) Oysters there are none, but at Massachusetts, some
20 miles to the north of this place, there are such huge ones, by
savages’ report, as I am loth to report. For ordinary ones, of which
there be many, they make to be as broad as a bushel, but one among the
rest they compared to the great cabin of the _Discovery_, and being
sober and well-advised persons, grew very angry when they were laughed
at or not believed! I would have had Captain Jones to have tried out the
truth of this report. And what was the reason? If, said I, the oysters
be so great and have any pearls in them, then must the pearls be
answerable in greatness to the oysters, and proving round and orient
also, would far exceed all other jewels in the world! Yea, what strange
and precious things might be found in so rare a creature! But Captain
Jones his employing his pinnace in discovery, his graving of the ship,
his haste away about other occasions and business, would not permit him
to do that which often since he wished he could have done.

From the beginning of September till the end of March, their bay in a
manner is covered with all sorts of water fowl, in such sort of swarms
and multitudes as is rather admirable than credible. The reasons of
their continual plenty for those seven months in the year may be their
continual tranquility of the place, being guarded on all sides from the
fury of the storms; as also the abundance of food they find at low
water, the bottom of the bay then appearing as a green meadow; and
lastly, the number of freshets running into the bay, where after their
powdered salads, their brackish shellfish and other cates,[21] they may
refresh and quench their thirst. And therefore, this bay is such a pond
for fowl as in any man’s knowledge of our nation that hath seen it, all
America hath not the like.

(Thus far I proceeded and dated my letter at Angra,[22] Jan. 13,
1622[/1623].)

Touching their fruit, I will not speak of their meaner sort, as of
rasps,[23] cherries, gooseberries, strawberries, delicate plums and
others. But they have commonly through the country five several sorts of
grapes, some whereof I tasted, being fairer and larger than any I ever
saw in the South Colony, but of a muscatel taste,[24] which being
transplanted, would prosper better in the south. But wine vines may
compare with Martha’s Vineyard, which I dare say will fall to the south
of 40 degrees,[25] and will be an earthly paradise to him that can be
master of it. Sassafras wanteth not all over this main. In this land, as
in other parts of this main, they have plenty of deer and of turkeys as
large and as fat as in any other place.

So much of the wholesomeness and plenty of the country. Now as
concerning the quality of the people, how happy were it for our people
in the Southern Colony, if they were as free from wickedness and vice as
these are in this place! And their industry as well appeareth by their
building, as by a substantial palisado about their [town] of 2700 foot
in compass, stronger than I have seen any in Virginia, and lastly by a
blockhouse which they have erected in the highest place of the town to
mount their ordnance upon, from whence they may command all the harbour.

As touching their correspondence with the Indians, they are friends with
all their neighbours—as namely with those of Cohasset[26] and
Massachusetts to the north, with the great king of Pocanocket[27] to the
southwest, with those of Pamet, Nauset, Capawack[28] and others to the
east and south. And notwithstanding that those of the isle Capawack are
mortal enemies to all other English, ever since Hunt most wickedly stole
away their people to sell them for slaves,[29] yet are they in good
terms with them of Plymouth, because as they never did wrong to any
Indians, so will they put up no injury at their hands. And though they
gave them kind entertainment, yet stand they day and night precisely
upon their guard. True it is that Narragansett,[30] situate to the west
of Pocanocket, being set on either by the French or Flemings,[31] sent
them a snake’s skin full of arrows in token of hostility and defiance.
In answer whereof, having filled the same with shot and powder, they
sent it back again with this message: that whensoever[32] he should be
welcome, and should find them ready to entertain him. The shot and
powder he liked not, nor would meddle with it, but caused it to be cast
into the river.

One thing which made them to be much respected was the revenge which
they attempted in the night upon Corbitant,[33] the chief man about the
great king, because they were (though falsely) informed that he had
slain Tisquanto, Sir Ferdinando Gorges his Indian,[34] who lived as
their servant under their protection, interpreting the injury done to
him as done to themselves. Besides, when Tisquanto was earnestly
required to be sent home by the great king, they choose rather to hazard
a falling out with him than to break their faith and promise with
Tisquanto, who had been sure to have gone to the pot if they had
delivered him up. Which faith and courage of theirs hath made other
distracted Indians to retire themselves into their protection, of whose
labour and service they have made good use, but especially of
Tisquanto’s.

And since I have taken occasion to speak both of amity and enmity, give
me leave to note unto your Lordship the general enemy of all, both
Christians and Indians in Canada, that inhabit toward the ocean, being
(as they of New Plymouth relate) an Indian nation of man-eaters called
Mohawks,[35] who go armed against arrows with jacks[36] made of cordage,
and they themselves use clubs only.

Of the language of the natives about Plymouth and Cape Cod I have
collected a small dictionary, wherein I find many words agreeing with
those of the South Colony and of the eastern shore of the bay.[37] I
have one great design; namely, to find out what sea that is, which the
Frenchmen put down in their cards[38] to west in 40 degrees over against
the bottom of the said bay, whether or no an inlet of the South Sea.[39]
It must be done, by the grace of God, through the guidance of the
Susquehannas,[40] a most barbarous nation and supposed to be man-eaters.
Yet upon this condition I will adventure myself with them by land: if I
may have a convenient bark [in which] to keep for my security three or
four hostages.




                 John Pory to the Governor of Virginia
                          (Sir Francis Wyatt)


                             Autumn, 1622.

Whereas heretofore a vulgar error, namely that fish is not to be had
here[41] at all times of the year, had generally possessed the minds of
all men, experience hath now taught us the contrary: that in some two
months of the cod, which never bites but in the daytime, comes
altogether as good a fish called a hake, to be caught in the night. The
places of fishing upon this coast are as universal as the times, for it
is experimented now by one John Gibbs,[42] who this summer hath passed
five or six times between this place and New Plymouth, that a man cannot
cast out a hook at any ledge at sea in that distance, but he shall draw
up goodly fish at pleasure—upon whose relation divers mean to fish the
next year more toward the southwest. And Cape Cod itself hath not that
name for naught: for it is thought that one shallop’s fishing only would
suffice the whole plantation of New Plymouth all the year long. To the
east and north of this place is found as great plenty as to the south
and west. Now whether there be any cod or no to the south of the place
(as the Company[43] desire to be informed), although Mr. Vengham,[44] a
man of experience in those parts, do seem to doubt. Yet a Flemish[45]
pilot, who is to conduct Captain Argall his pinnace into Hudson’s
River,[46] putteth down in his plot a place some fifteen leagues to the
west of Elizabeth’s Island, which he calleth Cod Island.[47]

And by the way, that you may know how strongly the Flemings make title
from 40 to 44 degrees, they call Hudson his river, “Prince Maurice his
river”; Cape Cod, the “States Hooke”; Sagadahoc or thereabouts, “Prince
Henricks river”; and the great bay wherein Port Royal (taken by Captain
Argall from the French) was seated, “Grave Williams Bay.”[48] And in the
same place they confine Virginia within the Cape Henry and Charles, as
if it had no further extension both north and south. Also, to the south
of Hudson’s River, they name the country “_Aquahanacke_.”[49]

Besides that plantation of New Plymouth in 41 degrees and one half, and
that other in Massachusetts[50] in 42 or thereabouts, there is a third
in Canada at Damerill’s Cove[51] in 43 and 45 minutes, at the cost of
Sir Ferdinando Gorges, consisting of some thirteen persons, who are to
provide fish all the year with a couple of shallops for the most timely
loading of a ship, and to keep that island to be farmed out in Sir
Ferninando’s name to such as shall there fish. And lest the French or
the savages should root them out in winter, they have fortified
themselves with a strong palisado of spruce trees of some ten foot high,
having besides their small shot one piece of ordnance and some ten good
dogs.

Howsoever they speed, they undertake an hazardous attempt, considering
the savages have been this year, as those to the north use to be by the
French, furnished (in exchange of skins) by some unworthy people of our
nation with pieces, shot, powder, swords, blades and most deadly arrow
heads; and with shallops from the French, which they can manage as well
as any Christian, as also their pieces, it being an ordinary thing with
them to hit a bird flying. And how little they are to be trusted here as
well as in Virginia, may appear by the killing lately of the master of a
ship of Plymouth[52] with eighteen of his company among the islands
toward the northeast, which was the cause that the same ship lost her
fishing voyage and went empty home.

Now, as concerning the soil, it is all along, as far as I could
perceive, rocky, rough and uneven; and, that as I hear, from a little on
this side [of] Cape Cod as far as to Newfoundland, being all along the
sea coast a labyrinth of innumerable islands or broken lands rent in
sunder by intricate channels, rivers and arms of the sea. Upon these
rocky grounds do grow naturally fir, spruce, birch and other trees, and
in some open places abundance of rasps, gooseberries, hurts[53] and such
fruit; in other places, high[54] rank grass for the grazing of cattle,
to make hay withal; as likewise, great plenty of pease like our English
pease, growing naturally without any tilth. Upon these rocky places,
there is passing good soil, yet culturable with hoe and spade rather
than with the plow. Yet they say that up the river Prinaquie[55] there
is a place of even champian[56] country without any rocks, abounding
with variety of excellent timber, and like at Anquam[57] nearer unto
Cape Ann,[58] a level of more beauty and largeness.

Within an infinity of rocks may be intombed abundance of rich minerals,
among which silver and copper are supposed to be the chief. Out of these
rocks do gush out delicate streams of water which, together with the
temper of the air, maketh this place marvelous wholesome in summer—which
is the cause I have not known one man sick all the time I was there,
save only that villain which accused you falsely concerning Swabber, and
died (aboard the _Bona Nova_) as he had lived, frantic.[59] Yet is the
air too cold here for the summer, but with an easterly wind subject to
fogs and mists.

The people[60] seem to be of one race with those in Virginia, both in
respect of their qualities and language. They are great lovers of their
children and people, and very revengeful of wrongs offered. They make
their canoes, their arrows, their bows, their tobacco pipes and other
their implements far more neat and artificially than in those parts.
They dress, also, and paint leather; and make trousers, buskins, shoes
with far greater curiosity. Corn they set none in their parts toward the
north, and that is the cause why Indian corn, pease and such like is the
best truck[61] for their skins—and then in winter especially, when
hunger doth most pinch them, which is the season when the French do use
to trade with them. They have the same names of numbers with them in the
south. _Accamus_ (in the southern language, a dog) they call here
_Aramouse_. For _Malta_ (no), they pronounce _Madda_; for _Matcheray_
(nought), _Mathat_; for _Mitchin_ (to eat), _Mitterim_; for _Kijos_ (the
sun), _Hijos_; and many other like or self-same words spoken by the
rebels[62] of the South Colony. Neither is their manner of singing and
dancing much different. Their babes here also they bind to a board and
set them up against a wall, as they do here in the south. Likewise,
their head they anoint with oil mixed with vermillion; and are of the
same hair, eyes and skin that those are of.




                            EMMANUEL ALTHAM




                            Emmanuel Altham (1600-1635/1636)


Emmanuel Altham was born a gentleman, though his family had its
connections with commerce and the legal profession rather than the
titled aristocracy. His two older brothers successively held the
family’s country seat at Mark Hall, Latton, about twenty miles north of
London. As a younger son, Altham inherited little of his parents’ wealth
and so, over objections by his relatives, sought excitement and his
fortune in the expanding world of English overseas trade. Altham began
as an investor in the Company of Adventurers for New Plymouth, served
for a time as agent of the Company, and became an admirer of the
colonists and New England with such ardor that he could more easily
envision the colony’s future success than see the hardships which the
planters were enduring when he first arrived. He went to the New World
with a sense of honor, moreover, rather than the qualities of a
hard-driving trader. Perhaps he was not a typical Adventurer: his
devotion to the cause of colonization and taste for the heroic side of
commerce rather than the ledger went beyond the ordinary, and helped
keep English backing for the Pilgrim plantation alive when profit did
not.

Altham crossed the Atlantic to Plymouth the first time in the summer of
1623. He went as “Captain” of the _Little James_ (James Bridge, master),
the pinnace of about 44 tons which the Company was sending to the
plantation for use in fishing and fur-trading expeditions. In 1623, the
expert in charge of sailing a ship was her “master,” and if there was a
captain, he had command over the military and mercantile affairs of the
voyage. Since his ship carried authorization to operate as a privateer,
Altham had the decision about taking prizes as well as the transaction
of business. After a year in New England waters, described in the first
three of Altham’s letters printed here, he recrossed the ocean with the
ship. She was seized for the satisfaction of debts to two of the
Company’s members, Thomas Fletcher and Thomas Goffe, who sent her (but
not under Altham) on a second voyage in 1625.

Altham’s fourth letter from New England describes the occasion of his
second expedition, on his own. Evidently his hopes for a future with the
colony faded, for he returned to England some time before July 1626 and
soon afterwards began to look for employment as a soldier with the East
India Company.

Through the influence of his brother, Sir Edward, he was sent to the
Company’s fort at Surat and spent over two years in exploits around the
Indian Ocean. The East India Company’s business was a mixture of trade
and raid—competing with the Portuguese for control of port cities in
India and the trade to which they gave access. The climax of these
years, for Altham, was an expedition to Madagascar and Mozambique to
intercept the fleet of caracks from Portugal.

After a visit to England in 1630, Altham returned to India a more
important man: Factor and Captain of the fort at Armagon (now abandoned,
at a place about sixty miles north of Madras), the Company’s main post
on the east side of India. He served the firm well, rebuilt the
fortifications, and finally began to accumulate wealth. He expected to
return to England permanently and live in style—had even begun to order
paintings and fancy bedding, but died at Armagon in January, 1635/1636.

The originals of the letters of Emmanuel Altham to Sir Edward Altham
belonged to Dr. Otto Fisher, of Detroit, who before his death generously
consented to their first publication here. The letter of Altham to James
Sherley has been published in Massachusetts Historical Society,
_Proceedings_, XLIV, 182-189, from a transcript of the original in the
English Public Records Office (Admiralty Court Misc., bundle 1142), with
editorial comment and notes by J. F. Jameson.




                  Emmanuel Altham to Sir Edward Altham


                            September, 1623

Most loving and kind brother,

My promise doth put me in remembrance, with the first opportunity of a
messenger,[63] to write unto you. And if I were not by promise, yet that
special nearness that is between us obliges me to the same, for as I
have always to this time found your constant affections towards me, so
have I, and shall continually, acknowledge the same.

And now, loving brother, since I have undertaken a voyage not altogether
pleasing to some of my friends—and because of my forwardness in the
same, I may be taxed with many censures—therefore, as it doth more
nearly concern me, I will here lay down not what my ear hath heard, but
what I have with my eyes seen to be true.

After our departure from the Cowes in the Isle of Wight, we recovered
our desired passage three months and one day after, being the 5th of
August, with many bitter a storm. And I have learned by this voyage that
God hath made the seas more for use than pleasure, but I praise the Lord
for his goodness that I never had my health better. And likewise by the
blessings of God, I have and hope to learn that at sea which will prove
for my extraordinary advantage. But everyone hath a time, although some
sooner than others.

After our arrival in New England, we found all our plantation in good
health, and neither man, woman or child sick. And here, likewise, we
found the other ship set forth by the Company,[64] who came from
Portsmouth six days after us, and arrived here at New England ten days
before, with all her people well—as we with our people did the like. And
yet one good wife Jennings[65] was brought abed of a son aboard our ship
and was very well. And then, we had an old woman in our ship about four
score years of age, which was in good health—and this I speak not as
needful to write of, but to show that God did give us our health when we
looked not for it, and to those, likewise, that had not been well a year
before on the shore.

And now to come more nearer to that I intend to write of, and first of
the situation of the place—I mean the plantation at Patuxet.[66] It is
well situated upon a high hill close unto the seaside, and very
commodious for shipping to come unto them. In this plantation is about
twenty houses, four or five of which are very fair and pleasant, and the
rest (as time will serve) shall be made better. And this town is in such
manner that it makes a great street between the houses, and at the upper
end of the town there is a strong fort, both by nature and art, with six
pieces of reasonable good artillery mounted thereon; in which fort is
continual watch, so that no Indian can come near thereabouts but he is
presently seen. This town is paled round about with pale of eight foot
long, or thereabouts, and in the pale are three great gates.
Furthermore, here is belonging to the town six goats, about fifty hogs
and pigs, also divers hens. And lastly, the town is furnished with a
company of honest men, that do, in what lies in them, to get profit to
the adventurers.

And now to speak more at large of the country and what profit is to be
raised here; and first, to speak of the fishing that is in this country.
Indeed it is beyond belief, but I can assure you thus much: that if a
man be well provided with all things necessary for to make a fishing
voyage, he may easily make his voyage two for one.[67] But lest this
should seem incredible to some, I will give you an instance of the same.
Before we got hither to Patuxet, we had many fogs at sea, insomuch that
we were driven to lie at hull and to take down all our sails—and so went
to fishing. In one hour we got 100 great cod, and if we would have but
stayed after the fog broke up, we might quickly [have] loaded our
ship—and, I am persuaded, had we been prepared with all things necessary
for a fishing voyage, we might have loaded our ship in a week. I think
we got 1000 in all. And indeed, when we had nothing else to do, my
people took delight to catch them, although we threw them away again, as
I think we did 300. One fish we got, I think, weighed 100 pound: it was
as big a cod as ever was seen. We got many turbots, likewise, and one
turbot we got gave all our ship a meal and to spare. And to speak what
voyages of fishing hath been found and made this year, here hath been at
Monhegan, Damerill’s Cove, Anquam, Pemaquid, Sagadahoc, and the Isles of
Shoals[68]—all principal places for fishing—about 400 sail. And every
one of them, by their confession, say that they have made good voyages,
and now most of them are gone into Spain, to sell their fish where they
have ready gold for it. And now to speak what sorts of other fish are
here to be had. Here are great store of sturgeon—I mean abundance;
likewise great of salmon, bass, trout, eels—and lobsters such infinite
that when we have them the very multitude of them cloys us. There are
likewise great store of other fish which I cannot remember, as clams and
oysters.

And now to speak somewhat of our store of beaver’s skins that are round
about us both to the norward and southward. And now at this present, we
are going to the southward into Hudson’s River, where the Dutchmen have
all their skins of the savages. We hope there to get good store of
beaver’s, otter’s and martin’s skins, as also fox skins and raccoon
skins—all which will yield money good store in England. And towards
Christmas we are to return to our plantation again. And then, before the
fishermen come in February to the norward, we mean to go trade for all
the skins that are to be had thereabout, and then to take the best stage
for fishing in the country, and so to fish in the beginning of the
year;[69] and then about May, 1624, to go trading for furs again. And
then it may be so, that we will come home about Christmas come
twelvemonth, but look not for me before I come. Divers occasions of
employments may fall out so that I may be hindered—and indeed, I shall
not desire to come for England unless I bring good store of profit with
me, which I make no doubt of, by God’s help.

Thirdly, I will speak somewhat of the timber in the country, which will
raise great profit to the Adventurers. We have here as good timber as
ever I saw—of many sorts. We have here cedar, beech, pine, oak, and
divers other sorts, of which we have here sent a sample of about two or
three hundred pounds worth, and with it a good many beaver’s skins and
furs of divers sorts.

Fourthly, we will say somewhat of the sarsaparilla and sassafras—as
also, alkermes berries[70]—all which are worth good store of money in
England, and of which, when I come myself, God willing, I will bring a
pattern to London. For when I was at London, sarsaparilla was of two
shillings a pound, at the least, and we have here enough to load a ship.

Fifthly, to speak of the profit that may arise by salt—and I make no
doubt we shall make much salt before I come for England. And if we could
but have salt to sell to the fishing ships that come hither yearly, I
think we might compare our plantation to the Spaniards’ Indies. And we
have good hopes of making salt about a mile from our plantation, and it
shall be put in execution ’ere long.[71]

Sixthly and lastly, here are many other things in this country to raise
profit, as for example, at the place whereto we are now bound with our
ship to the southward—the place is called Capawack[72]—there is a
mountain of bole armeniac[73] and divers other metals. No English hath
been there, but only one Captain Dermer whom was killed by the savages
there;[74] for the savages in this place are very strong and are men of
very able bodies. But notwithstanding, we mean to put it upon trial and
to go well armed among them. We hope there to get store of skins.

And now, having spoken what is but the truth concerning the profit that
may with small labor be got for the Company of Adventurers, I will now,
as briefly as I can, show you what good will redound to those that live
here. And first, of the fish in the country, which, as I said before, is
of all sorts in infinite number; and two, for the fowl that are in the
country. Here are eagles of many sorts, pigeons, innumerable turkeys,
geese, swans, duck, teel, partridge divers sorts, and many others fowl,
[so] that one man at six shoots hath killed 400. And then to speak of
the healthfulness of the air. It lieth in 42 degrees of northerly
latitude. We have here the wind come off the land all the day time, and
in the night off the sea, which is wondrous wholesome. Some few have had
agues at the first coming over, but not sick above a week—and myself was
ill for three or four days, but I thank these good friends of mine at
the plantation, I am recovered pretty well, thanks be to God. Thirdly,
those that live here need never want wood, for here is great store. Four
(fourthly), here is as good ground as ever I heard of, whenas the ground
yield five or six hundred for one—nay, some 1400![75] And this year they
have great store of corn—as goodly corn as ever I saw—of which I have
sent you six ears. And if God will, when I come myself, you nor my
worshipful friend, Sir John Leventhorpe, shall not want so much beaver’s
skins as will make each of you a hat. But to our purpose, I say that
none of these commodities can be got without a little pains, and the
most pains and cost is to be stowed at the beginning; for men must
provide for the worst, that they may have provision for themselves a
twelvemonth if these things fail—and then the[y] must take pains to
build them houses and the like. And because I have spoken somewhat large
of the country—and indeed I have good cause, because if I were well
provided with all things necessary, as servants and the like, I could
live here contentedly with great pleasure—but I shall better think and
determine of such matters when more important business doth not call me
aside.

And now I will speak somewhat of the savages in the country about—I mean
the native Indians. The nearest that any dwell unto [Plymouth] is
fourteen miles, and their town is called Manomet. Only without our pales
dwells one Hobomok, his wives and his household (above ten persons), who
is our friend and interpreter, and one whom we have found faithful and
trusty. He I carry away with me to the southward. And now, likewise, in
this bay wherein we live, in former time hath lived about 2000 Indians.
Here is not one living now, nor not one living which belonged to this
plantation before we came, so that the ground on which we are planted
belongs to nobody.[76]

And now to speak of the king of the country, who is a great emperor
among his people. Upon the occasion of the Governor’s marriage,[77]
since I came, Massasoit was sent for to the wedding, where came with him
his wife, the queen, although he hath five wives. With him came four
other kings and about six score men with their bows and arrows—where,
when they came to our town, we saluted them with the shooting off of
many muskets and training our men. And so all the bows and arrows was
brought into the Governor’s house, and he brought the Governor three or
four bucks and a turkey. And so we had very good pastime in seeing them
dance, which is in such manner, with such a noise that you would wonder.
And at that time when we gave Massasoit his hat, coat, band and feather,
I craved a boy of him for you, but he would not part with him; but I
will bring you one hereafter.

And now to say somewhat of the great cheer we had at the Governor’s
marriage. We had about twelve pasty venisons, besides others, pieces of
roasted venison and other such good cheer in such quantity that I could
wish you some of our share. For here we have the best grapes that ever
you say[78]—and the biggest, and divers sorts of plums and nuts which
our business will not suffer us to look for.

And now to speak somewhat of Massasoit’s stature. He is as proper a man
as ever was seen in this country, and very courageous. He is very subtle
for a savage, and he goes like the rest of his men, all naked but only a
black wolf skin he wears upon his shoulder. And about the breadth of a
span he wears beads about his middle. And these beads they make
themselves, which they account as gold above silver before the beads we
bring out of England.

Lastly, to speak a little in what peace and friendship we are with the
savages, which peace we have had with Massasoit ever since our coming.
And he never expressed his love more to us than of late; for in the
Massachusetts there was a colony—I may rather say a company of idle
persons, for they had no civil government among themselves, much less
were they able to govern and rule Indians by them. And this plantation
was begun about one year and one half since by one Mr. Weston,[79] who
came this year to see his plantation. But by many notorious deeds among
themselves, and also having in their necessity stolen corn from the
Indians, the Indians began to condemn them and would have killed all the
English, but they feared that when the English of Patuxet did hear what
they had done, then they would set upon the squaw sachem in the
Massachusetts and so kill all the Indians in the Massachusetts.
Whereupon they determined another resolution: to cut the English at
Patuxet, whom they stand in fear of now, and the English at
Massachusetts both at one time. But in the mean time, the great
Massasoit sent to Patuxet for some physic, because he was fallen very
sick, and so, by God’s help, he was cured. And upon his recovery, he
made known the plot of the Indians of Massachusetts against us, and told
us that if we would not go fight with them, he would. So at the return
of our surgeon from Massasoit, came a messenger from Mr. Weston’s
plantation at Massachusetts, telling us that there was a plot against us
by the Indians of Massachusetts. Whereupon the Governor, Mr. William
Bradford (well worthy the place), sent Captain Standish with some six or
seven others to the Massachusetts to bring away the head of him that
made the broil. And so, by God’s goodness, he killed our chief enemy and
five or six others without any hurt to our part, and brought away the
head of the chiefest of them.[80] And [it] is set on the top of our
fort, and instead of an ancient,[81] we have a piece of linen cloth dyed
in the same Indian’s blood, which was hung out upon the fort when
Massasoit was here. And now the Indians are most of them fled from us,
but they now seek to us to make peace. But we are informed by Hobomok
that eight shallops of Indians, well provided, are coming this way. They
say themselves that they come to fight with other Indians that have
killed a friend of theirs, but if they come at us to offer any violence,
I doubt they will never carry their shallops back again—it may be, not
with their lives. And these Indians, we hear, have muskets and fowling
pieces, with powder and shot, which they have bought of the Frenchmen in
Canada and of the Englishmen at the Isle of Monhegan; but that trade is
already stopped by the King’s proclamations concerning the same trade.

And now, loving brother, I have little else to write of unto you—but
only one thing I thank you kindly for, and that was for the last letter
you sent me in England, wherein you desire [me] to hold fast to the
truth and likewise to be diligent in my place. Of both which make no
doubt—no! be persuaded that I will rather die a thousand deaths than
once to shame God or my country. And now, seeing that I am entered into
this place, doubt not but that I will always increase in knowledge. And
indeed, when I undertook this voyage at first, I always held the art of
navigation to be most hard and difficult, but now, through some practice
and reading, I have attained to that I hope never to forget. And I hope
by that time I see old England to be able to conduct a ship myself, safe
into any harbor in New England. But God disposeth of all things. And
truly, I never lived better to my content nor among those who can more
respect me as the Company in old England and here[82] likewise do, who
think nothing too good for me. I praise God, I have my health ’till now
that I wrote this letter—but I mended apace.

And now, loving brother, I must make an end, although I think no pains
sufficient to express my love unto you. I doubt not but you will show
yourself a friend to me in taking care for that little stock I have. I
am desirous it should increase—and in your hands, if you think it
profitable to you. I know you will deal the more providently for me,
because of divers reasons well known to yourself. I pray let that same
£100 be taken of my Mr. Hawes or his heirs when it is due (and that will
be about March, 1624), and if you and my brother Hawtry[83] think good,
take it into your own hands. I have wrote to my brother Hawtry to buy me
the books of English voyages, which will do me great good. I pray look
that they be bought me, and send by this messenger that is come from New
England and hath lived there three years. And he comes away about
December from London, that he may come with the fishermen, to be here in
February. I pray let those books be of the same voyages that is lately
put forth by Mr. Purchas, minister about Ludgate.[84]

Thus much I have thought good to let you understand concerning the
estate of myself and New England, and now I will take my leave of you,
desiring the God of hosts to guide you and yours in your going out and
coming, so that all your labors may prosper under your hands, and that
your life in this world of misery may be such a life that may prepare
you to a better in the world to come.

And thus, my kindest love and best affections being remembered to you,
desiring you to accept of this mite (being compared to my mind).
Likewise, as I am bound to respect, so let my love be remembered to my
sister your wife, and to my worthy friend, Sir John Leventhorpe, and to
his good lady, and all the rest of that noble house, as to my Lady Fowle
and Sir John Fowle, my brother Thomas, and my sister Mary.[85] And I
pray merrily tell her it will be no tarrying for me because I know not
when I shall come into England. But I pray likewise tell [her] that I
could here give her much land if she will come and live among this wild
scene of Indians. I hope this will make her smile. And now, I pray let
my love be remembered to my aunt Wolley, hoping that she will have me in
her mind, although not in her eye; I mean I hope she will remember me at
her death, which must be one day.[86] Pray remember me likewise to Mr.
Denn and his wife and old goodwife Stracy, and to my worthy Adventurer
Henry Stracy, who, if he claims his money, let him have it, I pray you,
for I see it will come in with profit. Pray likewise remember my love to
Mr. Bland and William Watson, and pray tell them thus much: that because
a ship could not be got when I had cattle in my hands, and likewise
because I could get nobody to join with me, I put that money into the
common stock; and it shall be answered in that, which, if they be not
contented, I will repay again. The like, I pray, do to goodman Wells.
Remember me to him and tell him I find great need of his cousin, the
potter.[87] I pray, sir, let them read this letter—either the same or a
copy of the same—and so, likewise, I pray let my noble friend, Sir John
Leventhorpe; although I have wrote to him, yet I refer him to
particulars in your letters.

And so I take my leave of you; but I pray remember me to my father Adee
and mother Adee, and to all the rest of my friends to whom I am by any
way tied—as to Seth Haggar and Edward Skoles, whose so long continuance
and good service in your house have caused me to speak well of them.

And thus I end, desiring the Lord to direct you in all your ways, words
and actions, and to guide you by his Holy Spirit and so to enable you,
that in what you have been wanting to glorify his name in this world
among men, your heart may be more and more touched with the reverence of
so great a God, and to labor more and more to glorify him here, that so
you may be glorified by him in the world to come, where one day, if I
see you not in this world, I make no doubt but to meet you, which God,
for Christ Jesus’ sake grant unto us. And so I bid you, Farewell!
Farewell in the Lord; and the God of heaven, earth, seas and all things
be with you and protect you in your going forth and coming in. And so,
being guided and directed by God’s holy angels, you may not be ashamed
to show yourself before God and the Lord Christ at that great day of
account when all things shall be made known. And so, even from my heart
and soul, I take my leave of you and the rest of my other friends who
are mentioned in my other letters. _Vale!_

I shall be glad to hear from you. In the beginning of December, pray
send your letters to Mr. Sherley’s in Crooked Lane.[88] Divers matters I
could write, but only this let me tell you: that I would entreat you to
stir up a few friends to venture four or five hundred pounds with me
when I come myself. For I then intend to make a voyage to fish, which I
make no doubt but I can get two of one in eight months. This thing I
thought good to impart to you, and do entreat you to provide such a
course against I come home, if you can.

Forth, this is a most ordinary voyage undertaken.

Thus I rest,

                       your most loving brother,

                                                        EMMANUEL ALTHAM.

I have sent my sister Altham six ears of Indian corn and beans to sow in
her garden. Also, I have sent you a tobacco pipe which I had of the
Indians.




                  Emmanuel Altham to Sir Edward Altham


                           March, 1623/1624.

Loving and kind brother,

My love being remembered to you and the rest of my loving friends, these
few words being caused by the fitness of a messenger, they are to let
you understand that I am in good health and so have been a long time, as
I hope also of you.

I have been upon a voyage to the southward of New England, where we have
discovered many brave places where never any Christians were before. And
this part of the country—I mean to the southward of New England—is far
better land and more commodious places for situation than are in any
part of this country besides.[89] For there is not only good ground in
abundance, with excellent good timber, but here are great store of furs
which now the Dutchmen get because our Company of New England have not
sent by us so good trucking stuff as they should have, and so have
disappointed themselves much. Insomuch that whereas we thought for to
have got with our pinnace three or four hundred pounds worth of skins,
we have now got small store, to my exceeding great grief.

But this is not all they have hindered themselves of, for in their
plantation is the better half women and children, and divers of the rest
are very unwilling, so that only the burden of the plantation lieth on
the shoulders of some few who are both honest, wise and careful.[90] And
if it were not for them few, the plantation would fall, and come to
nothing—yea, long before this time; and it is so much the more likely
because that now by a sudden fire one half of the plantation was burnt
down by fire, upon the 5th of November last, wherein was burnt and
spoiled the goods of all such that came this last time into New England
and are now by reason of this loss forced to come again for England.[91]

But, although it hath pleased God to lay his heavy hand on these poor
people and plantation, yet the fault is neither in some of the planters
here nor in the unfruitfulness of the country. For I assure thus much:
that a better country was never seen nor heard of, for here are a
multitude of God’s blessings; but they are not to be enjoyed by idle
people that think to have all things at wishing for. But if men will
take pains at first, they may live afterwards bravely. Indeed, in this
country is no clothes to be had, nor divers other things which a man may
make a good shift without. Yea, here is all things to be had to a
contented mind; and it is not for men to live here that think of their
former prosperity and company—friends and kinsfolk, but it is good for
such that resolve to forget and leave all these things for a time, and
do labor as they think to live by it hereafter.

Neither can I speak but well of the profits that are to be raised here
by fishing—indeed, it is such that you would admire. But the best
actions whatsoever, being badly undertaken, come to little or no effect.
So this plantation, being undertaken by men unexperienced in
plantations, is like to feel the smart of it. And also, how is it
possible that those men that never saw fishing in their lives should
raise profit by fishing? And if they had known it never so well, yet if
they had not [been] able of body, they could not perform any matter; for
how shall women and children do men’s labors? The reason, in conclusion:
this I say to you, that unless some other means be taken, which to do is
impossible, no means of profit can be raised to the Adventurers for
their money again.

If any man thinks to adventure money to have land, this I tell thee:
that if they will give me a very small matter, I will make sure to them
10,000 acres of as good land as any in England. And this I am sure of.
But although at this time I do fully declare to you the estate of this
plantation, yet I pray conceal it ’till others have reported the like.
And although these matters may seem strange to you, in regard of the
ample relations that have been made in the praise of this plantation,
yet take it no otherwise than thus: that it hath been the Company’s
fault in England, who have sent over so many helpless people that the
Governor here (who is a wise gentleman) will not entertain some of them.
And secondly, their fault hath been that the planters here have not had
good trucking stuff to please the Indians. Indeed, no question, if we
had commodity, we might have skins great store. And now I hope this is
apparent to you, that the fault is not in the country, which is so good
that if my ability would reach, I would settle some plantation—and yet,
I hope I would not over-reach myself with hopes—but until that time I do
resolve, if I can conveniently, to come hither a-fishing yearly, if God
bless me homewards. And I do not doubt but to do the like that other men
do, for other ships that come the last year (and this year) have got
more fish than their ships could carry; and so carry it for Spain and
sell it for great rates. But of this hereafter, if God bless me now
home.

Indeed, the Lord hath preserved me miraculously. For, coming to anchor
by a great many sands, when it was little wind, it proved at last great
store of wind and a great storm, insomuch that our anchors came home and
almost laid us upon the sands. And the storm increasing, we were fain to
cut our mainmast overboard, and had much ado to save our lives in our
ship. But thanks be to God, we were saved and our ship, and are at this
time in a good harbor at Patuxet,[92] blessed be God! And here in this
harbor we are to stay this winter, for this country is subject to
wonderful storms in the winter time; and here it is very cold weather.
Yet we have very poor fare here all this winter, being cold water[93]
and beef, sometimes, because we have but little of it; and now and then
we have good store of fowl. But for all these crosses and
disheartenings, I was never better nor better contented in my life,
which I thank God for, for I know it cannot be mended with wishes and
wailings.

Thus much have I declared unto you concerning our plantation, entreating
you to keep it close from the Company and not to think the worse of this
country, in which nature hath almost emptied herself to replenish it.
And although our beginning is bad, yet I hope that the fishing voyage I
am now bound out upon will bring somewhat to the Adventurers, and also
enable my own judgment to undertake the like for myself, if God prosper
me now. Indeed, if the making of salt here did not require a greater
charge of money from the Company, it would do well; but this I say: that
if salt be made here to reap store of profit, it requires a greater
charge than hath been laid out already, which I think the Company will
not disburse without seeing more hopes of profit.

Thus entreating you not to expect me before I come, for when it will be
I know not—indeed, I do not desire to come before I have made what
profit I can to the Adventurers; which, if it may not be, I have done my
utmost and I hope they will accept of it. In the mean time, my love and
well wishes being remembered to you, to my sister and to all your
children, especially to my three cousins, James, John and
Leventhorpe.[94] I pray likewise remember my service to my most worthy
and kind friend, Sir John Leventhorpe and his Lady, to both whose
services I acknowledge myself bound many ways. Likewise, pray remember
me to Sir John Fowle and his Lady, and to my brother Thomas, and also to
my sister Mary, and to all the rest of that worthy stock. Also, pray
have my love remembered to Mr. Denn and his wife, and also to Henry
Stracy, goodman Watson, and Mr. Bland and Thomas Wells.[95] And pray
tell them that if they mislike their adventure I have put into the
Company for them, I will return them their monies again; but I pray do
you agree with them as you will. I pray, good sir, be as a loving
brother to me (which I doubt not of) in increasing my little stock
which, if God take me away, may be the better for yours. But whether I
live or die, you shall never be the worse for it. Thus, loving, loving
brother, have I wrote in haste, entreating you to hold me excused if I
have done anything that might not seem worthy of your love. Thus taking
my leave of you, of the rest of my good friends, I bid you farewell,
entreating the Lord to be with you and to guide you in your ways; that
so, you having dealt honestly and conscionably here, serving the Lord in
truth and uprightness of heart, you may for the same be rewarded in the
kingdom of heaven, where all tears and sorrows shall pass away; which
God, for Christ’s sake, grant unto us. Even so, Farewell, loving
brother; and, if it be God’s will, to send us once again to meet.

Your ever-loving and kind brother, till death,

                                                        EMMANUEL ALTHAM.

I pray remember my love to Edward Skoles and Seth Haggar.[96] And I pray
let Edward Skoles know I would have wrote to him, but my leisure would
not give me leave.




                    Emmanuel Altham to James Sherley


                               May, 1624.

Most worthy friends,

Your loving letters I have both received much about one time (being
about the middle of April, 1624), wherein I conceive both your great
love and care over me, which for my part shall never be rewarded with
ingratitude. It pleased God that your ship called the _Charity_ arrived
at Plymouth in New England about five weeks after her departure from the
English coast, but the certain day I know not, because I was at that
time sixty leagues from thence at Pemaquid a-fishing. But after she had
delivered her passengers and goods, she went immediately to Cape Ann,
where, in all likelihoods, they are like to make a good voyage, if God
withhold it not. For in all possibility, the settled course which
yourself and the Company have taken will bring in much profit—for
indeed, it is the only means above all other. Yet notwithstanding, the
trade of furs may help, but that is not so sure a thing, by reason of
divers (as I may call them) interlopers.

So soon as Mr. Peirce his coming into the land[97] came to my ears, I
was forced much against my mind, both by the importunity of Mr. Bridge
and insolences of all our company, to make a voyage from Pemaquid to
Plymouth; which, had I not undertaken, although with much hazard of my
person, all our company had and would have dispersed themselves. And if
either myself or the master would detain them, they openly threatened a
more speedy revenge: either to kill us or to blow our ship up. But these
things are past, and the party dead who spake it, and I fear that God
who knoweth all hearts, prevented him by death from acting those
villainous projects which, by his words in his life, he professed to
do.[98] The occasions of this was two: first, in regard provisions went
very hard with us, and the next was a foolish and needless fear they had
of their wages. To prevent all this and farther mischief, I went to
Plymouth about the beginning of April; where, by the way, I was forced
with contrary winds and foul weather to stay somewhat longer than I
wished. But at my coming to Cape Ann, I there found Mr. Winslow and
master Peirce,[99] for which I was very joyful. And so, having received
of them divers commendations and letters from yourself and my other
friends, I went with all possible speed to Plymouth to know the
Governor’s resolution. For thus it was, that provisions we had but very
few before Christmas, but were fain to have some pease out of Plymouth
store.[100] And so, because we were going to fish among our countrymen,
we thought to get divers things by reason of Mr. Bridge his
acquaintance, but these our hopes were much frustrated. For, coming to
the fishermen, we could have no provision without present pay, which I
was destitute of, notwithstanding I offered to become bond for anything
I took up. But they not regarding neither the Company’s nor my word did
rather solicit our men to come work with them, for their victuals, and
to leave the ship, than to show any love or friendship to us in helping
us. Therefore, rather than our company should go away and our voyage be
overthrown, we were constrained to use a present, though unwilling
means[101] to get some provision (as bread and pease) which before we
were destitute of. So, having dispatched my business at Plymouth and
received my order from the Governor, Mr. Bradford, and his Assistants,
which was that look what fish we had caught in our pinnace should
presently be brought to Cape Ann and to deliver it to Mr. Peirce, and
afterwards to aid and help Mr. Peirce in his voyage, in what we could,
both with our men and boats. To all which, as I am in duty bound, so I
consented unto it, and with all convenient speed went away to our ship,
Mr. Winslow being with me.

And by this time, which was about the last of April, I thought Mr.
Bridge had killed about 10,000 fish, for more I think our salt would not
have saved; but by the backwardness of our people, and strange mishap,
these hopes were quite altered. For, coming within one day’s journey of
our ship, this untimely news came to me that our pinnace was cast away
and Mr. Bridge and two of our men drowned, being John Vow and Peter
Morrett. All which news did not a little trouble me, knowing what great
cost and charge you have been at for us, and also knowing that upon the
good and prosperity of the ship and voyage depended part of my
reputation and profit. But this unwelcome news did, in conceit, deprive
of both. But coming home to our ship, I there found this news true thus
far: that Mr. Bridge, our master, was drowned and the two men, and the
ship in a very strange manner spoiled. For thus it fortuned that upon
the 10th of April, 1624, happened a great storm, and some of our cables
that we were moored withal gave way and slip off on the place they were
made fast to ashore. And so, the wind and sea being very high, drave our
ship ashore upon rocks where she beat.[102] In the meantime, being
night, the master and company arose, and every man shifted for
themselves to save life; but the master going into his cabin to fetch
his whistle, could not get into any boat about the ship, the sea brake
so over the ship. And so by that means, before a boat could come, the
ship overset and drowned him and the other two. And the rest, that were
got into our shallops that hung about the ship, had much ado to recover
the shore—your cousin, for one. For the ship oversetting, pitch her
mainyard into one boat where were six or seven of our men, and so sunk
her. For those that could then swim got to the shore with much hurt; the
rest that could not swim were drowned. And so, before the next morning,
our ship was quite under water sunk, and nothing to be seen save only
the tops of her masts sometimes, for the sea did rake her to and fro
upon the rocks. All which disasters did not a little trouble me, for our
ship was not only spoiled, our men drowned, but we that were saved lost
the most part of what we had in the ship. Myself, especially, lost my
books and some clothes, and most of what I had. But my comfort is that
God will restore me something one day again, for afflictions are but
trials of his love. We lost three shallops, and our ship’s boat and
another shallop we borrowed which we[103]

After my coming to our ship and seeing how all things stood, and that
although the ship were much spoiled and bruised—insomuch that some of
our neighbors very dishonestly enticed our men to leave the ship and to
seek out for their victuals, showing them that the ship was
unrecoverable and using many arguments of disuasion to them, God
knoweth, who were willing to entertain anything against us before, but
now laying hold on of this opportunity rejoicing or[104] I here[105]
departed. But at my coming home, I got them all together and sought far
and near for help to recover our ship, if it were possible, which to do
seemed difficult. But by the help of one Mr. Cooke of Bastable[106] and
divers of his friends and my acquaintance, weighed her out of the water,
and so by the help of many hands we got the ship into a place nearby,
convenient to see what possibility there was of saving the ship. So,
having viewed her, there was broken of her starboard side six or seven
plank and some timbers, which we mended with help; and on her larboard
side, half her plank, timbers and knees were broken in such sort that
then she was thought impossible to hold together, by reason of the hurt
she had received outward and the shaking of the beams and timbers
inwardly. But blessed be God, by the help and means that I have got of
carpenters, she is now made up as strong and sufficient for the sea as
ever she was.[107] And if not one of our company come in her, yet by the
help of God, we being fitted with a sufficient man master, I will come
in her.

And do not doubt but, through God’s mercies, to do well in her, although
for this time we shall not make so good a voyage as is expected. For
whereas we thought to have got ten or twelve thousand fish, we had
scarce one thousand, and some of that was lost, and all our salt. For
the ship being beat ashore, brake down our stages, and there we lost
both the salt and fish that was in it. And all the rest of the salt,
powder, provision, and many other things (which, if God spare my life, I
will give account of) were lost. The rest of the things that we saved
shall safely and truly be delivered by me to you, with an account of all
our men’s carriages and behaviors, that so you may reward some and
reprove others.

And now, loving sir, since that I have troubled you with writing thus
far, pardon me if I be too tedious; for it makes me continually be the
more larger to you in writing, because I know both you and many other
good men have laid out much money upon Plymouth plantation, and
especially as for the goods upon this ship. So do I conceive and know
your eyes are upon us in a more especial manner. And for that this
voyage hath not begun nor ended so well as either you or I could wish,
yet I pray pardon me for a while in the same, until I shall come to
speak with you and the rest of the Company. For until then, I will
neither commend my care and diligence, nor discommend the want of either
of them, for full soon may a man err. But as my labor and care was never
wanting heretofore, so, until I shall make a full accomplishment of this
troublesome voyage and then to deliver all things into your own hand, I
will continue the same. And as at this time I have no man to assist me
that I can trust (the master being gone), so will I strain to the
uttermost of my knowledge to bring everything to the same order it was,
and then to come for England, if our Governor pleaseth. And he hath sent
me word that he will provide me a sufficient man for master,
notwithstanding Richard Gardiner[108] hath earnestly requested it,
claiming it as his due by place, but some say not by sufficiency. I will
say no more concerning him because I know you shall understand it by
others; only thus much I must needs say: that so far as he could, he was
willing to help us with the ship. And now he takes it somewhat unkindly
that, seeing the Company have sent our ship’s company assurance for
their wages, that he is not intimated therein. So much for that, which
is to be left to your and the Company’s wisdom.

And once again let me be pardoned if I seem to be overbold. I understand
by your letter to Mr. Bridge that you are somewhat discontented with me
for not taking a Frenchman which we met withal; but to the contrary,
wonderfully commend and extol Mr. Bridge for his courage and forwardness
in the same, notwithstanding my backwardness. To answer which, I will do
in few words. It so happened that about 400 leagues off the Lands End of
England, we met with a small Frenchman. As I take it, he was of
Rochelle.[109] In the morning we had sight one of another and he stood
right with us and we with him. Coming near us, he spied us to be an
Englishman, so he stood away from us and by a sudden puff of wind brake
his mainmast. For we being desirous to hear news and also to see if he
had any skins aboard or if he had been a-trading on the coast of New
England, we stood after him and hailed him what he was and whence for.
He told us he was of Rochelle and that he had but 7000 of cor-fish[110]
aboard of him and that he was come from the Bank of Newfoundland
a-fishing; and also that his ship was leaky, so he made the more haste
home before he had made his voyage. But we mistrusting him, sent our
boat aboard him to see if he had skins, but in conclusion we saw he was
very poor and had not been ashore on no place; and so gave us some fish
which at that time we stood in great need of as also of wood (of which
he had none because he had not been on land nowhere). All these things
being considered, I hope you will not blame me, for I would do in your
behalf in that kind rather more than less than my commission would bear
me out in. But this ship was 500 leagues from any part of New England
when we met her and if I should have done it, I had brought a great
trouble both upon you and myself. For I will assure you and all the
Company that if you will but get a letter of mart[111] and a safe
protection from His Majesty of England for taking of Frenchmen on
Newfoundland Bank, you might easily with this pinnace take and leave
what ships you list. For we had sight of twenty sail of Frenchmen at one
time, and I believe never a one had any ordnance. But to end, pray
pardon me if I have done amiss, but what I did, I have done (in my
opinion and in the opinion of all the companies at Plymouth) for your
peace and my own safety. For the Governor hath seen my commission and
saith, himself, I could not have answered it. Therefore, pray blame me
not for my good will and care, for I should be very loth to lose a
friend for nothing and upon no occasion, especially when friends are
hard to get. And as at this time, although I might complain of my time
all spent because it hath been a troublesome time to me, yet I am quite
of another mind; for as I was called by God to this place, so, through
his blessing, I will discharge it honestly, whether I lose or get by it.

But out of all question, the course that you have settled now[112] will
bring in profit enough, for they make salt at Plymouth, and have good
store of boats, all which is means to bring in profit. And I make no
question now but that New Plymouth will quickly return your money again.
For the most part they are honest and careful men. However, they have
had many crosses; yet now they will flourish, God blessing them, which
God grant.

I do understand that Thomas Dawson, the surgeon,[113] hath been very
large on his tongue concerning myself, or that I should be displaced by
Mr. Bradford, and many other contumelious speeches, as also he informed
you about the Frenchman. For all which, I pray, sir, if you see him,
certify him that I will make him answer it in England; and although it
cost £100, I will make him see the jail for it. And there he shall lie,
if God bless me homeward. If it please God to deal otherwise with me, I
pray God give him more grace, but I hope you do not believe him. But I
would wish you rather suspect him, for he is the veriest villain that I
ever knew, as hath been testified by his carriage both to Plymouth
company, your own self and Company, and also to me. And truly, I fear
that I shall justly lay that to his charge which if it be prosecuted
will go near to hang him.

At this time I do expect news from our Governor, Mr. Bradford, and as I
think, he will determine that we shall bring home Mr. Peirce[114] his
cor-fish and train.[115] But I think it will fall out otherwise, for I
have at this present received a letter from one of my acquaintance that
is owner of a ship in this country, and he proffers me for to hire our
ship and to take our men out and to put them into his own ship, which
goeth for the Straits.[116] And so by this means I hope to get a good
freight and to save wages and provisions for some of my own company. And
this answer I have returned him: that I demand £140 for our ship, and to
come for England presently; so that then we shall be defrayed of all
charge and have our ship brought home for nothing. And indeed, we must
be forced to come for England very soon, because we have no provisions
nor have any means to get any. But of all these things I write in what I
think, for I have (and ever will do) refer all these matters concerning
your ship to the Governor and his Assistants’ directions; and if good
suffer me, they shall be followed.

I pray, sir, let the 40_s._ I gave Mr. Mastige a bill for be paid at
first sight, for he did me a great kindness in it; for otherwise I could
not have got some bread which I did.

Thus my love being remembered to yourself and wife, with thanks for your
token I received by Mr. Winslow, being three gallons of “hot water.”
Pray remember my love [to] Mr. Terrill Bacco, Mr. Stubs and his wife,
your brother Robert, and Mr. John Sherley and his wife, to Mr. Brewer,
Mr. Collier, Dr. Ran, Mr. Marshall, Mr. Thorrell, and to Mr. Pocop (my
good friend), and especially to Robert Cushman, and all these the rest
of my loving friends of the Company and out of the Company.[117]

And I pray, sir, if you please, let the Company see my letter. For look,
what I have wrote to you in particular, so much would I have wrote to
them in general, but time did wonderfully prevent me, in such manner
that I am put to straits every way.

I pray remember me kindly to my two brothers and my sister, and the rest
of my loving friends; and pray let them know I could not have time to
write to them. Only I pray tell them I am well, and that I hope one day
to see them again, but the time is uncertain. Yet I fear we shall come
sooner than I desire, since our great expectation is so hindered by
misfortune. But I do not doubt of the profit that may be raised the next
year, for now you have laid as good a ground-plot as ever was—and better
than before, for without this course of fishing, you cannot have your
monies again.[118] Thus, praying to God daily for them and you and for
all well-willers to this foreign plantation, I ever rest

                    yours and others’, to my power,

                                                        EMMANUEL ALTHAM.

I pray tell Mrs. Bridge I will save her husband’s things for her, so
much as we saved, it being almost all lost.

The haste of this messenger makes me forget divers things which I should
have wrote to you of; but I hope all things will be for the best, seeing
it can be no better. For be not discouraged at this bad news, but hope
the next year for better, which I do promise, if you hold on the course
begun.

_Vale!_


[Addressed:] To the worthy and my most respected loving, kind friend,
Mr. James Sherley, Treasurer for New Plymouth Adventurers, dwelling on
London Bridge, at the Golden Horseshoe.


New England, the 28th of May [?], 1624.


Pray send these three letters to Mr. Nathaniel [Hawes] at the Three
Cocks in Cheapside.




                  Emmanuel Altham to Sir Edward Altham


                             June 10, 1625.

Loving brother,

In regard of that near bond wherewith I am tied to you, I cannot but
seek all opportunities to inform you how it fareth with me—and at this
time the more, in regard I am so far separated from you in the remotest
parts of the west. And at this time I desire to be the more large,
knowing your expectations will be frustrated by me, by not coming into
England, the cause of which hath happened accidentally. For considering
with myself of the many troubles and crosses and losses, with much
hindrance of my time, which happened unto me at my last being there,
upon serious consideration with myself, I durst not put myself so soon
upon the same so rawly again. For first, thinking with myself how ill I
was dealt withal by Mr. Pemberton and his associates, for whose good I
was up early and late, and whose ship I furnished with all manner of
provisions, ready to take her voyage to sea;[119] yet, because there was
a jar between him and the Adventurers I formerly served (whom I found
always loving unto me and in whose service I being, I employed my body
and mind for their good), he thought I had concealed some things from
him, whereby he took himself prejudiced. Whereas, I, meaning well, stood
as neuter; which, if I had sticked to one side, I had done better—but if
to him, not with a good conscience. For as heretofore I have related, he
sought the overthrow of a whole colony of people, which since hath
appeared more apparent. For at the arrival of Mr. Pemberton’s ship and
ours in this country, we both lighted upon one harbor,[120] where the
New Plymouth Colony kept a stage for their fishing. Which stage they of
Pemberton’s ship, by order from him, seized upon by a wile; but in the
interim were glad to compound, or else it had cost them the loss of
their lives and ship. For the plantation sent twenty men in arms to
regain it by land, and our ship[121] lay by theirs to fight with them if
any onset were given. But they, loving to sleep in a whole skin, laid
down their arms and abandoned the plantation’s right; otherwise it had
cost them some blood, if not their lives. Since which time, their agents
here[122] do trouble this poor people, and have set factions among them,
which I fear, in time, will be their overthrow, if God prevent it not in
time. After which falling off with the one side in London, the other
promised me more if I would serve them than I had demanded of the other;
but they, as foolishly as the other side knavishly,[123] admitted so
many of the Company for adventuring—and upon such terms which are too
large to write, disheartened me from them likewise. For they would have
had me to adventure £50 with them in ready money, whereas others
adventuring the like sum had a receipt for ten or twenty pounds more
being upon old accounts. So in conclusion, I had cause to refuse both,
or else to adventure my money I knew not how. After all which, it being
left to my choice till the last, I made choice of this course: to expend
some money in provisions for myself, and to live in the country here a
little, that so I might not be censured for leaving off my voyage so
fully intended. And although I went not in that nature I made account
of, yet since my arrival here, which was upon the 4th of March, and
seeing how things have been carried, I repent no whit, but rejoice in
that I dealt with neither.

For my being here a while and marking the carriages of these fishing
affairs, I doubt not but in time to manage them without the direction of
others, which thing is the chiefest cause of my stay. For it is my
resolution to adventure this ways again, but never to have any other but
myself to be the chief manager of it, for a honest man had better deal
with savages than with seamen, whose god is all manner of wickedness.
And although the expense of my time will be much, yet as I shall not be
any great gainer, so shall I be no great spender; yet I doubt not to be
a safer, if God bless me in those courses that I will take. For I intend
not to sit idle, but to use all means to help myself; and the next year,
I hope to be settled in some certain course of plantation. It may be
your acquaintance with Sir Samuel Argall[124] (if it be any) may do me
some good, for I hear he intends to adventure for a plantation in this
country the next year; in which business I doubt not but I could do him
some good by reason of my acquaintance here with the natives. To which
purpose I have writ to a merchant in London named Mr. Cross in
Bartholomew Lane, who is of my acquaintance and the principal agent in
that adventure. If you see it convenient, I pray speak to Sir Samuel,
who I know to be judicious and discreet and a lover to all plantations.

But for all this, I am not so wedded to my own desires as to reject your
good advice. For if you think it better for me to leave this country
than to tarry in it, showing your reasons, I will come home to my own
country the next year. But if I be not advised by you to that purpose,
my resolutions are settled here for some longer time if I see any good
to come of it. And in the mean time, I pray excuse me to my friends who
have expected me this year, and according to your own discretion, frame
them answer. However, I desire you, if Mr. Bland and William Watson
enquire of me, I pray pay them their monies for their adventure, if they
do in any sort suspect it or desire it; as also goodman Stracy and Wells
who, I know, long look for it, and from whose censures I desire to be
freed, although of right they should stand to the hazard of profit and
loss. But seeing it was adventured by my means, I desire to repay them
again, for I think that by reason of Mr. Pemberton and his factions, a
£10 share will never yield twenty shillings. For he by his falsities
made the Company in England leave from supplying this people here, and
now they here will not join again with the Adventurers, but will live of
themselves.[125] I am right sorry that I have adventured so much
myself—much more that I persuaded you and some other friends to
adventure your monies in a business so strange to us all. But it is too
late; only I shall be more cautelous[126] while I live, and look to my
own better, for although that by these many mishaps I have been a loser,
yet I hope that my stock at home in your hands will increase—if I be
dealt honestly by, by them who had it when I came this way, which I hope
you will take to your care. And for the more security of it, I desire
you to take £400 of mine into your hands and to allow me an yearly
annuity for it, such as in reason shall be thought fit by my brother
Hawtry, my cousin Banks[127] and yourself. The other part of my means I
will reserve to adventure when I see an opportunity, as being
sufficient; which money, likewise, I refer to the care of you and my
brother Hawtry to dispose of it as you think most for my good. But I
pray you that those things I have sent for—which things are specified in
a note here enclosed, let them all be bought for me, and let your man
help Mr. Sherley to put them up for me in very good cask, for fear of
wet. All which things are not for my private spending, but are to barter
away to others to my most advantage. And to that end, let Mr. Sherley be
furnished with monies, so that I may not fail of my expectations by the
next shipping. I have also given Mr. Sherley order to receive £20 for me
of one William Peirce, master of that ship I went over in the last year,
being called the _Hopewell_. The said Peirce his bond I left with one
Mr. Richard Tapper, grocer at Plymouth[128] by the town hall, who is my
friend and did promise me to deliver it, it being enclosed in a letter
directed to Mr. Sherley, if he were living, or to Mr. Nathaniel Hawes at
the Three Cocks. Which bond, I hope, is come long before this time; but
if it should not, I have given order to Mr. Sherley to send to him for
it at the first receipt of my letter. And to Mr. Sherley hath Peirce
promised me to deliver the money at his first coming into England, which
will be about the 1st of September, 1625. In the mean time, pray solicit
Mr. Sherley to do his best for me. Also to this Mr. Richard Tapper,
grocer at Plymouth, and to one goodman Cheire, a throwster, who are both
known to Mr. Sherley and are my friends. To them I have written to send
me two hogsheads of white pease, two hogsheads of meal, four bushels of
oatmeal, five hundredweight of biscuit, three or four she-goats, and
four pair of leather buskins (to keep one free from the mosquitoes which
are here infinite).

I pray, sir, do your best that these commodities be bought for me,
which, if they come safe to me, I hope to make a good voyage of it. For
all these things in the note are for the most part to trade with the
Indians, which will make a good return, if God give me life and
health—especially those knives and beads, of all which I have sent Mr.
Sherley patterns of, with notes of their quantities, that I might have
such as I have wrote for. I could have at this time sent home £20 worth
of beaver, but I keep it by me for my more necessary occasions in
trading. And if I can do nothing worthy my stay, I intend, if possibly,
to see Virginia, and in my way homewards, to see Spain and France, that
so I may be complete in travel, which will be worth my time.

Thus remembering my true love unto you with thankful acknowledgment of
your continual care and love towards me, I desire you to remember my
love to your wife, my sister, my aunt Wolley, Mr. Denn, and the rest of
my friends whose names want of time makes me not mention. Especially, as
I am most bound, pray forget me not, but remember my love and service to
the right worshipful Sir John Leventhorpe and his Lady, and to all my
brothers and sisters there.

Farewell!

So, committing you to the Lord’s protection, I rest

                 your truly loving brother ’till death,

                                                        EMMANUEL ALTHAM.


Patuxet, this 10th of June, 1625.

This is my first letter.

I have sent you an Indian tobacco pipe, being the first and rarest that
ever I saw. I desire you to keep it for my sake, it being a great king’s
pipe in this country. I have sent it by Mr. Winslow to deliver you with
his own hands—who, if he doth meet you at London, pray gratify his pains
with a pint of wine, for he is my loving friend, and one who cometh this
way again about next November, by whom I do much desire to hear from
you, and in whom I have put my trust to buy my commodities to trade with
the Indians here. The pipe cannot be transformed to a better smell, for
it doth stink exceedingly of Indian tobacco.




                           ISAACK DE RASIERES




                          Isaack de Rasieres (1559-1669 or later)


Born in Holland, Isaack de Rasieres was sent to America by the Dutch
West India Company in 1626 to be chief trading agent (_Opper Koopman_)
for the Company and Secretary to the new Director-General of New
Netherland, Peter Minuit. While duties in government and commerce
impeded each other so much that he wanted to drop his Secretaryship, De
Rasieres dealt with the Plymouth Colony in his dual capacity. After an
encouraging exchange of letters, he went to visit Governor Bradford in
October, 1627, to reach an agreement on trade between the two colonies.
De Rasieres, a man who liked order and futilely tried to impose it on
the fur trade under his control, saw in the Pilgrim colony much that he
strove for in New Netherland.

Among the wares which De Rasieres took to start business was a large
quantity of sewan (i.e., wampum or “wampumpeag”), the belts of beads
made from parts of the shells of the quahog, whelk, or periwinkle, which
served as a kind of money among Indians who traded with the Dutch. De
Rasieres hoped to spread the use of this medium of exchange among the
New England natives, and with the fifty fathoms purchased from him in
1627, the Pilgrims accomplished this aim in two years. But instead of
taking a big portion of their profit to New Netherland to buy wampum, as
De Rasieres had planned, the Plymouth traders found other sources of
supply and quickly rose to first place in the fur trade in New England.
Sewan was easy to get from coastal tribes; the supply could not be
controlled by anyone, as the shell-fish which make the raw material are
very numerous. So De Rasieres merely helped turn the trading ambitions
of the Plymouth Colony from fish to fur, the means by which the province
ultimately paid its debts to the last of the Adventurers.

Some time after his return to Fort Amsterdam, De Rasieres lost his
position as a result of factional disputes among the employees of his
Company, and returned to Holland. He married a niece of one of the
directors of the West India Company in 1633 and went to Brazil with her
four years later, in the Company’s employ. Later information about him
indicates only that he was still in Brazil in 1651, raised a family, and
was thought to be in Barbados in 1669, after the Portuguese had ousted
the Dutch from Brazil.

The text of De Rasieres’ letter to Samuel Blommaert which follows is
substantially that by William I. Hull (from the original in the National
Archives at the Hague) in J. F. Jameson (ed.), _Narratives of New
Netherlands 1609-1664_ (“Original Narratives of Early American History”;
1909), 102-115. The fragment translated by J. A. C. Fagginger Auer in H.
R. Shurtleff, _The Log Cabin Myth_ (edited and with introduction by S.
E. Morison; 1939), 106-107, has been incorporated in the Hull version,
and the editor has changed the punctuation in spots and standardized
proper nouns when possible. One sentence, partly omitted in other
English versions, appears here thanks to translation by Prof. Rosalie
Colie of Wesleyan University, who has kindly checked the rest of the
English text against the Dutch. Notes by Jameson retained here have been
marked, “J.F.J.”

An earlier translation by J. Romeyn Brodhead, from a transcript of the
Dutch original, appears in New York Hist. Soc., _Collections_, second
series, II, 343-354. The Dutch text, edited by A. Eekhof, has been
printed in _Nederlandsch Archief voor Kerkgeschiedenis_, new series, XV
(1919), 249-280.

De Rasieres’ letter bears no date. Statements in it indicate that it was
written after his return to Holland probably in 1628 or 1629. Several
pages are missing in the middle.




              Isaack de Rasieres to Samuel Blommaert[129]


                                c. 1628.

Mr. Blommaert:

As I feel myself much bound to your service, and in return know not how
otherwise to recompense you than by this slight memoir, (wherein I have
in part comprised as much as was in my power concerning the situation of
New Netherland and its neighbors, and should in many things have been
able to treat of or write the same more in detail, and better than I
have now done, but that my things and notes, which would have been of
service to me herein, have been taken away from me), I will beg you to
be pleased to receive this, on account of my bounden service, etc.

On the 27th of July, Anno 1626, by the help of God, I arrived with the
ship, _The Arms of Amsterdam_, before the bay of the great Mauritius
River,[130] sailing into it about a musket shot from Godyn’s Point,[131]
into Coenraet’s Bay[132] (because there the greatest depth is, since
from the east point there stretches out a sand bank on which there is
only from 9 to 14 feet of water); then sailed on, northeast and
north-northeast, to about half way from the low sand bank called Godyn’s
Point to the Hamels-Hoofden,[133] the mouth of the river, where we found
at half ebb 16, 17, 18 feet water, and which is a sandy reef a musket
shot broad, stretching for the most part northeast and southwest, quite
across, and, according to my opinion, having been formed there by the
stream, inasmuch as the flood runs into the bay from the sea,
east-southeast; the depth at Godyn’s Point is caused by the tide flowing
out along there with such rapidity.

Between the Hamels-Hoofden the width is about a cannon’s shot of 2,000
[yards]; the depth 10, 11, 12 fathoms. They are tolerably high points,
and well wooded. The west point is an island, inhabited by from eighty
to ninety savages, who support themselves by planting maize. The east
point is a very large island,[134] full 24 leagues long, stretching east
by south and east-southeast along the sea-coast, from the river to the
east end of the Fisher’s Hook.[135] In some places it is from three to
four leagues broad, and it has several creeks and bays, where many
savages dwell, who support themselves by planting maize and making
sewan,[136] and who are called Siwanoys and Shinnecocks.[137] It is also
full of oaks, elms, walnut and fir trees, also wild cedar and chestnut
trees. The tribes are held in subjection by, and are tributary to, the
Pyquans, hereafter named.[138] The land is in many places good, and fit
for plowing and sowing. It has many fine valleys, where there is good
grass. Their form of government is like that of their neighbors, which
is described hereafter.

The Hamels-Hoofden being passed, there is about a league width in the
river, and also on the west side there is an inlet, where another river
runs up about twenty leagues,[139] to the north-northeast, emptying into
the Mauritius River in the highlands, thus making the northwest land
opposite to the Manhattas an island eighteen leagues long. It is
inhabited by the old Manhattans; they are about two hundred to three
hundred strong, women and men, under different chiefs, whom they call
_Sackimas_. This island is more mountainous than the other land on the
southeast side of the river, which opposite to the Manhattas is about a
league and a half in breadth. At the side of the before-mentioned little
river, which we call “Achter Col,” there is a great deal of waste reedy
land; the rest is full of trees, and in some places there is good soil,
where the savages plant their maize, upon which they live, as well as by
hunting. The other side of the same small river, according to
conjecture, is about 20 to 23 leagues broad to the South River,[140] in
the neighborhood of the Sancicans, in so far as I have been able to make
it out from the mouths of the savages; but as they live in a state of
constant enmity with those tribes, the paths across are but little used,
wherefore I have not been able to learn the exact distance; so that when
we wish to send letters overland, they (the natives) take their way
across the bay, and have the letters carried forward by others, unless
one amongst them may happen to be on friendly terms, and who might
venture to go there.

The island of the Manhattas extends two leagues in length along the
Mauritius River, from the point where the Fort “New Amsterdam” is
building. It is about seven leagues in circumference, full of trees, and
in the middle rocky to the extent of about two leagues in circuit. The
north side has good land in two places, where two farmers, each with
four horses, would have enough to do without much clearing at first. The
grass is good in the forest and valleys, but when made into hay is not
so nutritious for the cattle as here,[141] in consequence of its wild
state, but it yearly improves by cultivation. On the east side there
rises a large level field, of from 70 to 80 morgens of land,[142]
through which runs a very fine fresh stream; so that that land can be
plowed without much clearing. It appears to be good. The six farms, four
of which lie along the River Hellgate,[143] stretching to the south side
of the island, have at least 60 morgens of land ready to be sown with
winter seed, which at the most will have been plowed eight times. But as
the greater part must have some manure, inasmuch as it is so exhausted
by the wild herbage, I am afraid that all will not be sown; and the more
so, as the managers of the farms are hired men. The two hindermost
farms, Nos. 1 and 2, are the best; the other farms have also good land,
but not so much, and more sandy; so that they are best suited for rye
and buckwheat.

The small fort, New Amsterdam, commenced to be built, is situated on a
point opposite to Noten Island;[144] [the channel between] is a gun-shot
wide, and is full six or seven fathoms deep in the middle. This point
might, with little trouble, be made a small island, by cutting a canal
through Blommaert’s Valley, so as to afford a haven winter and summer,
for sloops and ships; and the whole of this little island ought, from
its nature, to be made a superb fort, to be approached by land only on
one side (since it is a triangle), thus protecting them both.[145] The
river marks out, naturally, three angles; the most northern faces and
commands, within the range of a cannon shot, the great Mauritius River
and the land; the southernmost commands, on the water level, the channel
between Noten Island and the fort, together with the Hellgate; the third
point, opposite to Blommaert’s Valley, commands the lowland. The middle
part, which ought to be left as a market-place, is a hillock, higher
than the surrounding land, and should always serve as a battery, which
might command the three points, if the streets should be arranged
accordingly.

Up the river the east side is high, full of trees, and in some places
there is a little good land, where formerly many people have dwelt, but
who for the most part have died or have been driven away by the
Wappenos.[146]

These tribes of savages all have a government. The men in general are
rather tall, well proportioned in their limbs, and of an orange color,
like the Brazilians; very inveterate against those whom they hate; cruel
by nature, and so inclined to freedom that they cannot by any means be
brought to work. They support themselves by hunting, and when the spring
comes, by fishing. In April, May and June, they follow the course of
these,[147] which they catch with a drag-net they themselves knit very
neatly, of the wild hemp, from which the women and old men spin the
thread. The kinds of fish which they principally take at this time are
shad, but smaller than those in this country ordinarily are, though
quite as fat, and very bony; the largest fish is a sort of white salmon,
which is of very good flavor, and quite as large; it has white scales;
the heads are so full of fat that in some there are two or three
spoonfuls, so that there is good eating for one who is fond of picking
heads. It seems that this fish makes them lascivious, for it is often
observed that those who have caught any when they have gone fishing,
have given them, on their return, to the women, who look for them
anxiously. Our people give the same report; it is the same with them
when they eat a great deal at one time, as can be shown by the shirts.

As an employment in winter they make sewan, which is an oblong bead that
they make from cockle-shells, which they find on the sea-shore, and they
consider it as valuable as we do money here, since one can buy with it
everything they have. They string it, and wear it around the neck and
hands; they also make bands of it, which the women wear on the forehead
under the hair, and the men around the body; and they are as particular
about the stringing and sorting as we can be here about pearls. They are
very fond of a game they call _Senneca_, played with some round rushes,
similar to the Spanish feather-grass, which they understand how to
shuffle and deal as though they were playing with cards; and they win
from each other all that they possess, even to the lappet with which
they cover their private parts, and so they separate from each other
quite naked. They are very much addicted to promiscuous intercourse.
Their clothing is simple as to leave the body almost naked. In the
winter time they usually wear a dressed deer skin; some have a bear’s
skin about the body, some a coat of scales, some a covering made of
turkey feathers which they understand how to knit together very oddly,
with small strings. They also use a good deal of duffel cloth, which
they buy from us, and which serves for their blanket by night, and their
dress by day.

The women are fine looking, of middle stature, well proportioned, and
with finely cut features, with long and black hair, and black eyes set
off with fine eyebrows. They are of the same color as the men. They
smear their bodies and hair with grease, which makes them smell very
rankly. They are very much given to promiscuous intercourse.

They have a marriage custom amongst them, namely, when there is one who
resolves to take a particular person for his wife, he collects a fathom
or two of sewan, and comes to the nearest friends of the person whom he
desires, to whom he declares his object in her presence, and if they are
satisfied with him, he agrees with them how much sewan he shall give her
for a bridal present. That being done, he then gives her all the Dutch
beads he has, which they call _Machampe_, and also all sorts of
trinkets. If she be a young virgin, he must wait six weeks more before
he can sleep with her, during which time she bewails or laments over her
virginity, which they call _Collatismarrenitten_. All this time she sits
with a blanket over her head, without wishing to look at anyone, or
anyone being permitted to look at her. This period being elapsed, her
bridegroom comes to her. He in the meantime has been supporting himself
by hunting, and what he has taken he brings there with him; they then
eat together with the friends, and sing and dance together, which they
call _Kintikaen_. That being done, the wife must provide the food for
herself and her husband, as far as breadstuffs are concerned, and
[should they fall short] she must buy what is wanting with her sewan.

For this reason they are obliged to watch the season for sowing. At the
end of March they begin to break up the earth with mattocks, which they
buy from us for the skins of beavers or otters, or for sewan. They make
heaps like molehills, each about two and a half feet from the others,
which they sow or plant in April with maize, in each heap five or six
grains; in the middle of May, when the maize is the height of a finger
or more, they plant in each heap three or four Turkish beans, which then
grow up with and against the maize, which serves for props, for the
maize grows on stalks similar to the sugar-cane. It is a grain to which
much labor must be given, with weeding and earthing-up, or it does not
thrive; and to this the women must attend very closely. The men would
not once look to it, for it would compromise their dignity too much,
unless they are very old and cannot follow the chase. Those stalks which
are low and bear no ears, they pluck up in August, and suck out the sap,
which is as sweet as if it were sugar-cane. When they wish to make use
of the grain for bread or porridge, which they call _Sappaen_, they
first boil it and then beat it flat upon a stone; then they put it into
a wooden mortar, which they know how to hollow out by fire, and then
they have a stone pestle, which they know how to make themselves, with
which they pound it small, and sift it through a small basket, which
they understand how to weave of the rushes before mentioned. The finest
meal they mix with lukewarm water, and knead it into dough; then they
make round flat little cakes of it, of the thickness of an inch or a
little more, which they bury in hot ashes, and so bake into bread; and
when these are baked they have some clean fresh water by them in which
they wash them while hot, one after another; and it is good bread, but
heavy. The coarsest meal they boil into a porridge, as is before
mentioned, and it is good eating when there is butter over it, but a
food which is very soon digested. The grain being dried, they put it
into baskets woven of rushes or wild hemp, and bury it in the earth,
where they let it lie, and go with their husbands and children in
October to hunt deer, leaving at home with their maize the old people
who cannot follow. In December they return home, and the flesh which
they have not been able to eat while fresh, they smoke on the way, and
bring it back with them. They come home as fat as moles.

When a woman here addicts herself to fornication, and the husband comes
to know it, he thrashes her soundly, and if he wishes to get rid of her,
he summons the Sackima with her friends, before whom he accuses her. And
if she be found guilty, the Sackima commands one to cut off her hair in
order that she may be held up before the world as a whore, which they
call _poerochque_; and then the husband takes from her everything that
she has, and drives her out of the house. If there be children, they
remain with her, for they are fond of them beyond measure. They reckon
consanguinity to the eighth degree, and revenge an injury from
generation to generation unless it be atoned for; and even then there is
mischief enough, for they are very revengeful.

And when a man is unfaithful, the wife accuses him before the Sackima,
which most frequently happens when the wife has a preference for another
man. The husband being found guilty, the wife is permitted to draw off
his right shoe and left stocking (which they make of deer or elk skins,
which they know how to prepare very broad and soft, and wear in the
winter time); she then tears off the lappet that covers his private
parts, gives him a kick behind, and so drives him out of the house; and
then “Adam” scampers off.

It would seem that they are very libidinous—in this respect very
unfaithful to each other; whence it results that they breed but few
children, so that it is a wonder when a woman has three or four
children, particularly by any one man whose name can be certainly known.
They must not have intercourse with those of their own family within the
third degree, or it would be considered an abominable thing.

Their political government is democratic. They have a chief Sackima whom
they choose by election, who generally is he who is richest in sewan,
though of less consideration in other respects. When any stranger comes,
they bring him to the Sackima. On first meeting they do not speak; they
smoke a pipe of tobacco. That being done, the Sackima asks, “Whence do
you come?” The stranger then states that, and further what he has to
say, before all who are present or choose to come. That being done, the
Sackima announces his opinion to the people, and if they agree thereto,
they give all together a sigh, “_He!_” and if they do not approve, they
keep silence, and all come close to the Sackima, and each sets forth his
opinion till they agree. That being done, they come all together again
to the stranger, to whom the Sackima then announces what they have
determined, with the reasons moving them thereto.

All travellers who stop over night come to the Sackima, if they have no
acquaintances there, and are entertained by the expenditure of as much
sewan as is allowed for that purpose. Therefore, the Sackimas generally
have three or four wives, each of whom has to furnish her own seed-corn.

The Sackima has his fixed fine of sewan for fighting and causing blood
to flow. When any are

[At least four pages of the letter are missing. In them, De Rasieres
probably mentioned the occasion of his trip to Plymouth in September and
October, 1627, and described the country along the way.]

Coming out of the river Nassau,[148] you sail east-and-by-north about
fourteen leagues, along the coast, a half league from the shore, and you
then come to “Frenchman’s Point” at a small river where those of Patuxet
have a house made of hewn oak planks, called Aptucxet,[149] where they
keep two men, winter and summer, in order to maintain the trade and
possession. Here also they have built a shallop, in order to go and look
after the trade in sewan, in Sloup’s Bay[150] and thereabouts, because
they are afraid to pass Cape Malabar,[151] and in order to avoid the
length of the way; which I have prevented for this year by selling them
fifty fathoms of sewan, because the seeking after sewan by them is
prejudicial to us, inasmuch as they would, by so doing, discover the
trade in furs;[152] which if they were to find out, it would be a great
trouble for us to maintain, for they already dare to threaten that if we
will not leave off dealing with that people, they will be obliged to use
other means. If they do that now, while they are yet ignorant how the
case stands, what will they do when they do get a notion of it?

From Aptucxet the English can come in six hours, through the woods,
passing several little rivulets of fresh water, to New Plymouth,[153]
the principal place in the district Patuxet, so called in their patent
from His Majesty in England.

New Plymouth lies in a large bay to the north of Cape Cod, or Malabar,
east and west from the said point[154] of the cape, which can be easily
seen in clear weather. Directly before the commenced town lies a
sand-bank,[155] about twenty paces broad, whereon the sea breaks
violently with an easterly and east-northeasterly wind. On the north
side there lies a small island[156] where one must run close along, in
order to come before the town; then the ships run behind that bank and
lie in a very good roadstead. The bay is very full of fish, of cod, so
that the Governor before named has told me that when the people have a
desire for fish they send out two or three persons in a sloop, whom they
remunerate for their trouble, and who bring them in three or four hours’
time as much fish as the whole community require for a whole day—and
they muster about fifty families.

At the south side of the town there flows down a small river of fresh
water, very rapid, but shallow, which takes its rise from several lakes
in the land above, and there empties into the sea; where in April and
the beginning of May, there come so many shad from the sea which want to
ascend that river, that it is quite surprising. This river the English
have shut in with planks, and in the middle with a little door, which
slides up and down, and at the sides with trellice work, through which
the water has its course, but which they can also close with slides.

At the mouth they have constructed it with planks, like an eel-pot, with
wings, where in the middle is also a sliding door, and with trellice
work at the sides, so that between the two [dams] there is a square
pool, into which the fish aforesaid come swimming in such shoals, in
order to get up above, where they deposit their spawn, that at one tide
there are 10,000 to 12,000 fish in it, which they shut off in the rear
at the ebb, and close up the trellices above, so that no more water
comes in; then the water runs out through the lower trellices, and they
draw out the fish with baskets, each according to the land he
cultivates, and carry them to it, depositing in each hill three or four
fishes, and in these they plant their maize, which grows as luxuriantly
therein as though it were the best manure in the world. And if they do
not lay this fish therein, the maize will not grow, so that such is the
nature of the soil.

New Plymouth lies on the slope of a hill stretching east towards the
sea-coast, with a broad street about a cannon shot of 800 feet long,
leading down the hill; with a [street] crossing in the middle,
northwards to the rivulet and southwards to the land.[157] The houses
are constructed of clapboards, with gardens also enclosed behind and at
the sides with clapboards, so that their houses and courtyards are
arranged in very good order, with a stockade against sudden attack; and
at the ends of the streets there are three wooden gates. In the center,
on the cross street, stands the Governor’s house, before which is a
square stockade upon which four patereros are mounted, so as to enfilade
the streets. Upon the hill they have a large square house, with a flat
roof, built of thick sawn planks stayed with oak beams, upon the top of
which they have six cannon, which shoot iron balls of four and five
pounds, and command the surrounding country. The lower part they use for
their church, where they preach on Sundays and the usual holidays. They
assemble by beat of drum, each with his musket or firelock, in front of
the captain’s door; they have their cloaks on, and place themselves in
order, three abreast, and are led by a sergeant without beat of drum.
Behind comes the Governor, in a long robe; beside him on the right hand,
comes the preacher with his cloak on, and on the left hand, the captain
with his side-arms and cloak on, and with a small cane in his hand; and
so they march in good order, and each sets his arms down near him. Thus
they are constantly on their guard night and day.

Their government is after the English form. The Governor has his
Council, which is chosen every year by the entire community, by election
or prolongation of term. In inheritances they place all the children in
one degree, only the eldest son has an acknowledgment[158] for his
seniority of birth. They have made stringent laws and ordinances upon
the subject of fornication and adultery, which laws they maintain and
enforce very strictly indeed, even among the tribes which live amongst
them. They speak very angrily when they hear from the savages that we
live so barbarously in these respects, and without punishment. Their
farms are not so good as ours, because they are more stony, and
consequently not so suitable for the plow. They apportion their land
according as each has means to contribute to the eighteen thousand
guilders which they have promised to those who had sent them out;[159]
whereby they have their freedom without rendering an account to anyone.
(Only if the King should choose to send a governor-general, they would
be obliged to acknowledge him as sovereign overlord.) The maize seed
which they do not require for their own use is delivered over to the
Governor, at three guilders the bushel, who in his turn sends it in
sloops to the north for the trade in skins among the savages; they
reckon one bushel of maize against one pound of beaver’s skins; the
profits are divided according to what each has contributed, and they are
credited for the amount in the account of what each has to contribute
yearly towards the reduction of his obligation. Then with the remainder
they purchase what next they require, and which the Governor takes care
to provide every year. They have better sustenance than ourselves,
because they have the fish so abundant before their doors. There are
also many birds, such as geese, herons and cranes, and other
small-legged birds, which are in great abundance there in the winter.

The tribes in their neighborhood have all the same customs as already
above described, only they are better conducted than ours, because the
English give them the example of better ordinances and a better life;
and who also, to a certain degree, give them laws, in consequence of the
respect they from the very first have established amongst them.

The savages utilize their youth in labor better than the savages round
about us: the young girls in sowing maize, the young men in hunting.
They teach them to endure privation in the field in a singular way, to
wit:

When there is a youth who begins to approach manhood, he is taken by his
father, uncle, or nearest friend, and is conducted blindfolded into a
wilderness, in order that he may not know the way, and is left there by
night or otherwise, with a bow and arrows, and a hatchet and a knife. He
must support himself there a whole winter with what the scanty earth
furnishes at this season, and by hunting. Towards the spring they come
again, and fetch him out of it, take him home and feed him up again
until May. He must then go out again every morning with the person who
is ordered to take him in hand. He must go into the forest to seek wild
herbs and roots, which they know to be the most poisonous and bitter;
these they bruise in water and press the juice out of them, which he
must drink, and immediately have ready such herbs as will preserve him
from death or vomiting. And if he cannot retain it, he must repeat the
dose until he can support it, and until his constitution becomes
accustomed to it so that he can retain it.

Then he comes home, and is brought by the men and women, all singing and
dancing, before the Sackima; and if he has been able to stand it all
well, and if he is fat and sleek, a wife is given to him.

In that district there are no lions or bears, but there are the same
kinds of other game, such as deers, hinds, beavers, otters, foxes,
lynxes, seals and fish, as in our district of country. The savages say
that far in the interior there are certain beasts of the size of oxen,
having but one horn, which are very fierce. The English have used great
diligence in order to see them, but cannot succeed therein, although
they have seen the flesh and hides of them which were brought to them by
the savages. There are also very large elks there, which the English
have indeed seen.

The lion skins which we sometimes see our savages wear are not large, so
that the animal itself must be small; they are of a mouse-gray color,
short in the hair and long in the claws.

The bears are some of them large and some small; but the largest are not
so large as the middle-sized ones which come from Greenland. Their fur
is long and black and their claws large. The savages esteem the flesh
and grease as a great dainty.

Of the birds, there is a kind like starlings, which we call “maize
thieves,” because they do so much damage to the maize. They fly in large
flocks, so that they flatten the corn in any place where they alight,
just as if cattle had lain there. Sometimes we take them by surprise and
fire amongst them with hail-shot, immediately that we have made them
rise, so that sixty, seventy, and eighty fall all at once, which is very
pleasant to see.

There are also very large turkeys living wild; they have very long legs,
and can run extraordinarily fast, so that we generally take savages with
us when we go to hunt them; for even when one has deprived them of the
power of flying, they yet run so fast that we cannot catch them unless
their legs are hit also.

In the autumn and in the spring there come a great many geese, which are
very good, and easy to shoot, inasmuch as they congregate together in
such large flocks. There are two kinds of partridges; the one sort are
quite as small as quails and the other like the ordinary kind here.
There are also hares, but few in number, and not larger than a
middle-sized rabbit; and they principally frequent where the land is
rocky.

This, sir, is what I have been able to communicate to you from memory,
respecting New Netherland and its neighborhood, in discharge of my
bounden duty. I beg that the same may so be favorably received by you,
and I beg to recommend myself for such further service as you may be
pleased to command me in, wherever you may find me.

In everything your faithful servant,

                                                     ISAACK DE RASIERES.




                          Bibliographical Note


The standard sources of information on early Plymouth are quickly named:
William Bradford, _Of Plymouth Plantation_ (1952, or other edition); the
items in Alexander Young (ed.), _Chronicles of the Pilgrim Fathers_
(1844), most of which were printed for “Everyman’s Library” under the
same title, 1910; and G. F. Willison, _The Pilgrim Reader_ (1953). Other
books which proved useful in the preparation of this one have been cited
in footnotes. In addition to these, several ought to receive notice.

On John Pory there are articles in _Dictionary of National Biography_
(by Charlotte Fell-Smith) and _Dictionary of American Biography_ (by A.
C. Gordon, Jr.). See also Leo Africanus, _The History and Description of
Africa_, translated by John Pory, ed. and intro. by Robert Brown (1896);
W. F. Craven, _Dissolution of the Virginia Company_ (1932) and _The
Southern Colonies in the Seventeenth Century_ (1949); S. M. Kingsbury
(ed.), _Records of the Virginia Company of London_ (1933, 1935), III,
IV; Mass. Hist. Soc., _Collections_, fourth series, IX, 8-47; J. H. R.
Yardley, _Before the Mayflower_ (1931).

Emmanuel Altham’s name until now has been virtually missing from the
Pilgrim literature. The late Dr. Otto Fisher, of Detroit, had a file
containing such information as exists on Altham and his family, compiled
by Victor C. Sanborn and Oliver R. Barrett with the aid of
correspondents in England. Dr. Fisher kindly let the editor of this
volume use the file.

The life of Isaack de Rasieres is covered and illuminated by J. F.
Jameson, “Introduction” to “Letter of Isaack de Rasieres to Samuel
Blommaert, 1628 (?),” _Narratives of New Netherland, 1609-1664_
(“Original Narratives of Early American History”; 1909), 98-99; and
“Letter from Isaack de Rasière to the Amsterdam Chamber of the West
India Company, September 23, 1626,” in A. J. F. van Laer (translator and
editor), _Documents Relating to New Netherland, 1624-1626, in the Henry
E. Huntington Library_ (1924), 171-251, 260-276. See also A. C. Flick
(editor), _History of the State of New York_ (1933), I, II.

About New England in general and the fishing business, see also C. F.
Adams, _Three Episodes in Massachusetts History_ (1894), I; C. K.
Bolton, _The Real Founders of New England_ (1929); I. S. Proper,
_Monhegan the Cradle of New England_ (1930); Frances Rose-Troup, _John
White the Patriarch of Dorchester_ (1930) and _The Massachusetts Bay
Company and its Predecessors_ (1930); C. K. Shipton, _Roger Conant of
Massachusetts_ (1945); and William Vaughan, _The Golden Fleece_ (London,
1626), Part III.




                               Footnotes


[1]Henry Wriothesley, Earl of Southampton, Treasurer (chief executive)
    of the Virginia Company of London, 1620-24.

[2]Thomas Jones, Captain of the _Discovery_, the ship in the service of
    the Virginia Company on which Pory was traveling. (Not to be
    confused with Christopher Jones, master of the _Mayflower_ in 1620.)

[3]Sandys was Treasurer of the Virginia Company, 1619-20, a notable
    Puritan and opponent of royal absolutism, influential in granting a
    patent to the Pilgrims and their backers permitting them to
    establish a “particular plantation” in Virginia, which then extended
    as far north as 41°, thus including the mouth of the Hudson River.
    John Ferrar was Deputy to the Treasurer in 1620. Sir George
    Yeardley, knighted and sent out as Governor to Virginia in 1619, was
    the candidate of Sandys’s party.

[4]Christopher Jones or John Clarke, a pilot experienced in the northern
    route to Virginia (on which a ship sighted land at or near Cape Cod
    and proceeded down the coast to Chesapeake Bay).

[5]Provincetown, Mass.

[6]Gloucester or Annisquam, Mass.

[7]“Anna” in the manuscript.

[8]Englishmen tended to translate Indian customs into feudal law.
    Plymouth and the territory around it had been the home of a tribal
    group of which Squanto was the only survivor. Neighboring Indians
    traditionally had no rights there. The Pilgrims interpreted the
    claims of Massasoit, the Wampanoag chief, as feudal overlordship
    over southeastern Massachusetts, so the vacant parts of it which
    they took up logically had to be a feudal domain of some kind.

[9]Bermudas.

[10]Romans 11:16.

[11]William Bradford.

[12]Alewives.

[13]Town Brook.

[14]The whole passage reads: “Naturam expelles furca licet, tamen usque
    recurret, et mala perrumpet furtim fastidia victrix.” “You may drive
    out Nature with a pitchfork, yet she will ever hurry back, and, ere
    you know it, will burst through your foolish contempt in triumph.”
    Horace, “Epistles, Book I, Epistle x,” _Satires, Epistles and Ars
    Poetica_ with English translation by H. Rushton Fairclough (Loeb
    Classical Library, 1932), 316, 317.

[15]Odoric of Pordenone (c. 1286-1331, formally beatified in the
    eighteenth century) was a Franciscan friar and missionary who
    traveled widely in the Far East. The story of his travels became
    popular in the fourteenth century, but fell from favor as it gained
    a reputation for embroidery. The phenomenon to which Pory refers
    occurred at a place described as “Moumoran” in the printed version
    with which Pory was probably familiar, that in Hakluyt, _Principal
    Navigations_ (1599), II, 57.

[16]A stream running from the Smelt Pond to Plymouth Bay, entering it at
    the mouth of the Jones River, about two miles northwest of Plymouth.

[17]“Skeines” in the manuscript.

[18]High tide in tidal streams.

[19]“Muskles and slammes” in the manuscript.

[20]Virginia.

[21]Delicacies.

[22]Chief town on Terceira, one of the Azore Islands, where Pory was
    detained a prisoner on his way to England.

[23]Raspberries.

[24]The “musky” flavor common to the muscat grape varieties. “Muskadell”
    in the manuscript.

[25]Pory was wrong; it is north of 41°.

[26]“Conahassit,” an old form, in the manuscript.

[27]Massasoit, chief of the Wampanoag or Pocanocket Indians, who lived
    in the territory around present-day Bristol, R. I., which was then
    called Pocanocket.

[28]Pamet is present-day Truro, Nauset is the area from Eastham to the
    Denises, both on Cape Cod. Capawack is the island, Martha’s
    Vineyard.

[29]Capt. Thomas Hunt took two dozen Indians captive in 1614, some at
    Plymouth, some on Cape Cod, and sold several as slaves at Málaga.
    While Hunt’s deeds were not excusable, they were merely the worst of
    several such incidents. Capt. John Smith pointed out that Hunt could
    not be responsible for the special hostility of the Capawack Indians
    toward the English. Rather, their ill will may be traced to the
    kidnaping of Epenow and Coneconam by Capt. Harlow, in 1614 or
    earlier; the series of degrading experiences which Epenow underwent
    at the hands of English captors; his influence on his countrymen
    after his return to Capawack; and the somewhat mysterious friction
    between him and Capt. Dermer in 1620, in which the latter was
    mortally wounded. The Capawack Indians probably feared reprisal for
    this and related incidents. Capt. John Smith, _Generall Historie of
    Virginia, New England, and the Summer Isles_ (1632), 204-205; Samuel
    Purchas, _Hakluytus Posthumus or Purchas His Pilgrimes_ (1625), IV,
    1778, 1828, 1841, 1849; James P. Baxter, _Sir Ferdinando Gorges and
    His Province of Maine_ (Prince Society, 1890), I, 104n-106n; W. F.
    Gookin, _Capawack alias Martha’s Vineyard_ (1947), 8-17.

[30]Canonicus, the Narragansett sachem.

[31]Netherlanders who traded around the mouth of the Hudson River before
    the actual founding of New Amsterdam in 1626.

[32]Whenever the king might come.

[33]“Combotant” in the manuscript.

[34]Squanto, the Pilgrims’ friend and sole survivor of the Patuxet
    natives, had been one of the Indians gathered by Sir Ferdinando to
    get information about New England. Gorges sent him back to America
    in 1618 or 1619 as guide to Capt. Dermer.

[35]“Monhaccke” in the manuscript. In the early seventeenth century,
    Iroquois Indians ranged as far east as New Hampshire.

[36]Hip-length coats of some protective strength.

[37]Eastern shore of Chesapeake Bay, where Pory had held land.

[38]Charts.

[39]Pacific Ocean. The French knew about the Great Lakes.

[40]Indians, quite powerful in Pory’s day, living in the lower part of
    the river valley of the same name.

[41]The letter was written at the fishing grounds off northern New
    England, probably Monhegan.

[42]In 1628 John Gibbs was master of the _Marmaduke_ in the service of
    the New Plymouth Adventurers.

[43]Virginia Company of London.

[44]William Vengham. He was living and selling cured fish at Monhegan
    (probably by arrangement with the island’s owners) in 1624, and
    perhaps when Pory was in the region.

[45]“Tlemmish” in the manuscript.

[46]In 1622, the Council for New England made Sir Samuel Argall its
    “Admiral” with the duty of excluding unlicensed operators from the
    Council’s territory, North America from 40° to 48°. American
    Antiquarian Society, _Proceedings_, Apr. 1867, 66-83.

[47]Possibly an illusion, possibly Block Island. It appears as
    _Cabeleaus Eyleut_ (?) on the “Carte Figurative” (1616), reproduced
    in T. A. Janvier, _The Dutch Founding of New York_ (1903), between
    pages 20 and 21.

[48]Pory was mixed up. Boston Bay was _Graaf Hendrycks Bay_; Casco Bay
    (or sometimes the water between Cape Ann and Portsmouth, N. H.),
    _Graaf Willem_’s; Port Royal is now Annapolis Basin, Nova Scotia.
    The Dutch names in the text have been left in the half-translated
    state in which Pory wrote them. In modern Dutch, “States Hooke”
    would be _Staten Hoek_.

[49]_Aquamachukes_ on the “Figurative Map” (1616), _Aquauachuques_ on
    map by Vander Donck (1656), reproduced in J. Winsor (ed.),
    _Narrative and Critical History of America_ (1884), IV, 433, 438.

[50]Weston’s rowdy crew at Wessagussett.

[51]Damariscove Island, off Boothbay, Me.

[52]Plymouth, England.

[53]Huckleberries.

[54]“Hugh” in the manuscript.

[55]This river is not identifiable. It may be an error in copying
    “Pentagoet,” the French name for the Penobscot.

[56]Flat, open.

[57]Gloucester or Annisquam.

[58]“Anna” in the manuscript.

[59]The _Bona Nova_ was a ship often employed in the Virginia trade.
    Nothing further is known about Swabber and the dead man.

[60]Indians.

[61]Goods for barter.

[62]Indians who performed the massacre of 1622 in Virginia.

[63]Edward Winslow, who left Plymouth for England on the _Anne_, Sept.
    10, 1623.

[64]The other ship was the _Anne_, of 140 tons, William Peirce, master.
    The Company of Adventurers for New Plymouth (sometimes called by
    variants of this name) was the organization of merchants who helped
    finance the Plymouth settlement. They “adventured” their money; the
    Pilgrims were “planters,” although in modern estimation they were
    more adventurous.

[65]The only passenger known to have a name similar to Jennings was John
    Jenny, who lived to be an important man in the Plymouth Colony. This
    woman may have been one in his series of wives.

[66]Indian name for Plymouth.

[67]Double his money.

[68]Monhegan and Damerill’s Cove (Damariscove) are islands off the coast
    of Maine, each with a well-protected small harbor. Pemaquid is the
    peninsula east of Boothbay, Me.; Sagadahoc is the extension of the
    Kennebec River below its junction with the Androscoggin. Anquam is
    Gloucester or Annisquam on Cape Ann, Mass. The Isles of Shoals are
    off New Hampshire.

[69]A fishing stage, built over rock ledges near some convenient harbor,
    was a scaffold or “wharf built of spruce trees, boards, and beach
    stones where the fish could be cleaned,” salted and cured in the
    sun. The fishermen raced from Europe to get the best places, so a
    ship already in New England waters could hope to beat them all. S.
    E. Morison, _The Story of the “Old Colony” of New Plymouth_ (1956),
    122. The new year began on March 25 in the Old Style dating system.

[70]“Alcerme” in the manuscript. Both Altham and Capt. John Smith
    believed that alkermes berries existed in North America. Perhaps
    they thought cranberries were the same things. Actually, alkermes
    berries are insects (species _coccus ilicis_) which live in the bark
    of the kerm oak, a tree found around the Mediterranean Sea. The
    pregnant females have a bright red color, and juice squeezed from
    them was used as a dye and a cordial, especially in times when they
    were still thought to be a vegetable.

[71]A master salter went over on the _Anne_, but he proved a better
    talker than practitioner of his business. The Pilgrims gave him a
    lot of help, but he made no salt. In spite of the logic of the idea,
    saltmaking never became important in the Plymouth Colony.

[72]Martha’s Vineyard, Mass.

[73]“Bowle alminact” in the manuscript. The term had many variants, but
    referred to an astringent earth found in Armenia, used as a styptic.

[74]Capt. Thomas Dermer made two voyages of exploration along the
    Atlantic coast between Monhegan and Virginia in 1619 and 1620,
    employed by Sir Ferdinando Gorges and others interested in
    developing New England. He learned much and tried to establish peace
    with the Indians, but in his dealings with those near Narragansett
    Bay (where he liberated some French mariners) and Martha’s Vineyard,
    he may have stirred up fear of the English. He was mortally wounded
    in a fight with Epenow, an Indian who had once been a captive of Sir
    Ferdinando and shown off as a curiosity in England. W. F. Gookin,
    _Capawack alias Martha’s Vineyard_, 14-17.

[75]This is not impossible with Indian corn, but exceedingly unlikely.

[76]Hobomok was a Wampanoag, from west of Plymouth; Squanto, the last of
    the Indians formerly living around Patuxet, had died in 1622.

[77]William Bradford married his second wife, Alice, daughter of
    Alexander Carpenter, widow of Edward Southworth, Aug. 14, 1623.

[78]Saw. “Say” is an obsolete equivalent.

[79]Thomas Weston, the London merchant who originally promoted the
    Company of Adventurers for New Plymouth in 1620. He wanted profit
    from the business and, when his patience wore thin with a complete
    settlement, sent out the private all-male colony which Altham here
    refers to. Without family considerations, the men were expected to
    stick to money-making activities like trade with the Indians and
    grow food for themselves in their spare time. The colony was planted
    at Wessagusset in present Weymouth, Mass., after sixty or so “lusty
    men” had lived at the charge of the Pilgrims during the summer of
    1622. Weston was devoted to America as well as profit and shady
    deals, though, and went to Virginia and Maryland as a planter for
    several years before dying in England, deep in debt. C. M. Andrews,
    _Colonial Period of American History_ (1934), 1, 261-265, 330-331.

[80]Capt. Standish and his company went to the Wessagusset settlement to
    warn the men of the conspiracy. After days of cautious waiting and
    veiled exchange of threats with some of the leading Massachusetts
    Indians, Standish got four of them into a room with about an equal
    number of his men and assassinated three, including Pecksuot and
    Wituwamat, whose head he took to Plymouth. In other ambuscades, with
    some aid by Weston’s men, the Pilgrim expeditionary force killed
    several others. The Wessagusset settlers, who had been reduced to
    great want and dependence on the Indians, abandoned their place,
    most going to the Maine coast to work for the fishermen and get
    passage back to England. The story is told most fully in Edward
    Winslow, “Winslow’s Relation,” in Young (ed.), _Chronicles of the
    Pilgrim Fathers_ (“Everyman’s Library,” 1936), 313-332, or some
    other edition of Winslow’s _Good News from New England_.

[81]Flag.

[82]Adventurers and Planters were both members of the Company under the
    terms of the agreement made in 1620. Settlers were accounted as
    having put in the value of a £10 share.

[83]Ralph Hawtry, husband of Altham’s sister Mary.

[84]Samuel Purchas, _Hakluytus Posthumus or Purchas His Pilgrimes_
    (London, 1625), 4 vol. The books had been announced as early as
    1621.

[85]The Leventhorpes were neighbors and close friends of the Althams.
    Sir Edward Altham married one of Sir John’s daughters. Sir John
    Fowle had married another daughter. “My brother Thomas” was the son
    and heir of Sir John Leventhorpe. Mary Leventhorpe was another
    daughter.

[86]Margaret Wolley at least had him in her will, proved in 1635, eight
    months before Altham’s death.

[87]Mr. Denn was rector in Latton, a man of Puritanical leanings. Stracy
    was a tenant of the Althams; Mr. Bland, a minister and family
    friend; Watson, a London gunsmith; Wells, a tenant of the Althams.

[88]James Sherley, goldsmith and treasurer of the Company of
    Adventurers.

[89]On this voyage, Altham went as far as the Narragansett Indians; that
    is, at least to western Rhode Island of today.

[90]Before experience showed the falsity of the idea, promoters of
    colonies in America thought of the settlements as glorified trading
    posts. This plan did work in Asia and logically ought to have in
    America if, as men like Altham or other Adventurers thought, profit
    was to be gained by trade and farming be only a spare-time adjunct.

[91]Not all went back. Nor was the damage so great; three or four houses
    burned down. The common store house and its contents were saved by
    means of good organization and wet cloths, although the fire started
    in an adjoining shed. Bradford said the blaze was started by some
    sailors from a ship in the service of the Council for New England.
    The men, who wanted a cheerful atmosphere for a carousal, built a
    big fire which may have gone out of control. Evidence also turned up
    to show that the storehouse was deliberately lit. Bradford, _Of
    Plymouth Plantation_, 136-137.

    Furthermore, the town was more than restored quite soon. Captain
    John Smith printed a description of Plymouth in 1624 which, in
    addition to information about the government and economy of the
    settlement, reported that “At New Plymouth is about 180 persons,
    some cattle and goats, but many swine and poultry; thirty-two
    dwelling houses, whereof seven were burnt the last winter, and the
    value of five hundred pounds in other goods. The town is impaled
    about half a mile in compass. In the town upon a high mount they
    have a fort well built with wood, loam and stone, where is planted
    their ordnance; also a fair watchtower, partly framed, for the
    sentinel.” This passage, in original spelling, may be found in
    “Generall Historie of Virginia, New England, and the Summer Isles,”
    edition of 1624, reprinted in Edward Arber and A. G. Bradley (eds.),
    _Travels and Works of Captain John Smith_ (1910), II, 782.

[92]Plymouth. The ship was anchored outside Plymouth harbor when the
    storm blew up and almost drove her on the flats called Brown’s
    Islands.

[93]Englishmen of the seventeenth century thought life barely possible
    without beer.

[94]Altham’s nephews, sons of Sir Edward.

[95]See notes 21, 23, 25 to preceding letter.

[96]Old family servants. See preceding letter.

[97]On the _Charity_.

[98]The troublemaker probably was one of the men drowned in the wreck of
    the _Little James_ (see below). The sailors of the pinnace, however,
    had been discontented since early in the voyage. They believed they
    had signed on for privateering, to get their pay in shares of prize
    ships. After a near mutiny at Plymouth, Gov. Bradford helped arrange
    regular wages for them, and kept them on the ship for the
    exploration of southern New England, but they still insisted that
    they would not go on a fishing voyage. “A Letter of William Bradford
    and Isaac Allerton, 1623,” _American Historical Review_, VIII
    (1902-03), 296.

[99]William Peirce was to be shipmaster of the _Charity_ on her return
    voyage. Edward Winslow had returned from England on that ship.

[100]In 1624 all goods in the general storehouse at Plymouth belonged to
    the Company.

[101]Probably they took supplies from the trading post near the mouth of
    the Piscataqua River (near modern Portsmouth, N. H.) kept by David
    Thompson. In his will, Altham left 40s. to a mistress Thomson in New
    England, presumably the man’s widow, as repayment of a debt she did
    not know of.

[102]At Damariscove Island, off Maine. The harbor usually gave ships
    good protection in rough weather.

[103]“A sentence written lengthways in the margin, and not completed.”
    J. F. Jameson, in Massachusetts Historical Society, _Proceedings_,
    XLIV, 184n.

[104]’Ere.

[105]From Plymouth.

[106]Probably master of a fishing vessel from Barnstaple, Devonshire,
    England. “Bastable,” however, is to be found on Cape Ann on Capt.
    John Smith’s map of New England (1614 and later versions), and there
    were more or less permanent residents on Cape Ann by 1624.

[107]Bradford, who wrote over twenty years after the event, remembered
    the salvage episode as though Altham had not been involved: “...
    some of the fishing masters said it was a pity so fine a vessel
    should be lost and sent them [i.e., the Plymouth settlers] word that
    if they would be at the cost, they would both direct them how to
    weigh her and let them have their carpenters to mend her. They
    thanked them and sent men about it, and beaver to defray the charge,
    without which all had been in vain. So they got coopers to trim I
    know not how many tun of cask, and being made tight and fastened to
    her at low water, they buoyed her up; and then with many hands
    hauled her on shore in a convenient place where she might be wrought
    upon. And then hired sundry carpenters to work upon her, and other
    to saw plank, and at last fitted her and got her home.” Bradford,
    _Of Plymouth Plantation_, 163.

[108]One of the passengers on the _Mayflower_, “Richard Gardiner became
    a seaman and died in England or at sea.” Bradford, _Of Plymouth
    Plantation_, 447.

[109]La Rochelle. This meant that the ship was owned and manned by
    French Protestants. La Rochelle was a Huguenot stronghold under the
    Edict of Nantes and became the center of resistance to royal
    attempts to revise the privileges of Protestants. English public
    opinion backed the Huguenots and tended to regard the people of La
    Rochelle as partners in an international religious struggle. When it
    came to national rights over trade, however, French Protestants were
    to be treated as foreigners, though with more consideration than
    Catholics.

[110]Codfish “caught close to shore, landed within a couple of days, and
    lightly salted and cured largely in the sun.” Morison, _Story of the
    “Old Colony” of New Plymouth_, 122.

[111]Letter of marque.

[112]To seek profit in fishing.

[113]Dawson, surgeon on the _Little James_, used language such that
    Altham “and others durst not go to sea with [him]; ... such that we
    were constrained to dismiss him,” and replace him with a man from
    the _Anne_. “A Letter of William Bradford and Isaac Allerton, 1623,”
    _Am. Hist. Rev._, VIII, 300.

[114]Peirce and the _Charity_ had gone to the fishing areas about the
    time of the wreck.

[115]Oil extracted from fat-fleshed fish by heat or pressure. Fish other
    than cod had little market in Europe. In later centuries, the term,
    “train-oil,” was given to whale oil.

[116]Of Gibraltar.

[117]Besides Robert Cushman, several of these men were probably
    Adventurers for New Plymouth—Thomas Brewer, William Collier, John
    Thornell, John Pocock.

[118]English opinion, including Gov. Bradford’s at this time, agreed
    that profit from New England would come by fishing. Many made money
    in this way, but the New Plymouth Company lost heavily by it.

[119]Mr. Pemberton, apparently a New Plymouth Adventurer and merchant,
    sent his ship under the sponsorship of the Dorchester Adventurers,
    the company founded under the inspiration of Rev. John White of
    Dorchester, which became the ancestor of the Massachusetts Bay
    Company. Pemberton probably was a close relative of another
    Adventurer, John Pemberton, a minister and enemy of the Leyden
    congregation Separatist element among the Plymouth settlers. John
    Pemberton received letters from John Lyford against the religious
    practices and government at Plymouth, and was a leader in the
    factional strife in the Company of Adventurers which led to its big
    split in 1625 after a debate over Lyford.

[120]At Gloucester on Cape Ann, Mass.

[121]_Hopewell_, William Peirce, master.

[122]Lyford and Oldham, whose letters of complaint Bradford seized in
    1624, continued their machinations against the Pilgrim church and
    government. Lyford had repented spectacularly after his first
    exposure, but went back to work, still believing he had more friends
    in the colony than dared speak up. He called down a list of
    complaints from the Pemberton party among the Adventurers, but only
    as they withdrew from the Company. Lyford and Oldham were exiled by
    the colonial government, Lyford leaving after a second exposure and
    Oldham after a period of near insanity, on the day when Altham
    arrived the second time.

[123]The fools merely wanted to draw more capital to the sinking
    enterprise; the knaves had ulterior motives, probably inspired by
    Lyford’s suggestion that every man sent to the settlement at
    Plymouth be given rights as an Adventurer (by juggling the accounts)
    in order to outvote the Bradford regime.

[124]Argall, formerly associated with the Virginia Company, had become a
    leading member of the Council for New England. Other Council members
    took grants of land for themselves; Argall may have planned to, but
    he died on an English expedition to attack Cadiz in 1626.

[125]Because of the debts contracted in their name by their agents and
    the London merchants, the Plymouth settlers had to remain in the
    Company as reorganized by a minority of the Adventurers headed by
    James Sherley. Between July and October, 1626, Isaac Allerton, as
    the colony’s agent, arranged a deal to buy the interests of the
    remaining Adventurers (including Altham) on an installment plan.
    Bradford, _Of Plymouth Plantation_, 182-186; Bradford, “Letter
    Book,” Mass. Hist. Soc., _Collections_, 1st ser., III, 48.

[126]Wary, circumspect.

[127]Hawtry’s son-in-law, a lawyer.

[128]Plymouth, England.

[129]Blommaert was a merchant in Amsterdam and a director of the West
    India Company, 1622-29, 1636-42.

[130]The official name of the Hudson River for several years (named
    after Maurice, Prince of Orange). “Mauritse” in the original.

[131]Sandy Hook. [J. F. J.]

[132]Sandy Hook Bay. [J. F. J.]

[133]The Narrows, between Staten Island and Brooklyn.

[134]Long Island.

[135]Montauk Point.

[136]Wampum.

[137]The Siwanoys lived north of Long Island Sound, from the Bronx to
    Norwalk, Conn.; the Shinnecocks inhabited the east end of Long
    Island. “Souwenos,” in the original, is a name applied promiscuously
    by early Dutch cartographers.

[138]No doubt in the missing portion; the Pequots are apparently meant.
    [J. F. J.] The Pequots lived to the west of Narragansett Bay, in the
    eastern part of Connecticut.

[139]Probably the Kill van Kull and the Passaic or Hackensack River was
    thought to connect with the Wallkill River and Rondout Creek.

[140]Delaware River.

[141]In Holland. [J. F. J.]

[142]A morgen is about two acres. [J. F. J.]

[143]East River. The West India Company’s six farms lay east of the
    present Bowery, and extended from a fresh-water swamp occupying the
    site of the present Roosevelt and James Streets northward to
    Eighteenth or Twentieth Street. [J. F. J.]

[144]Governor’s Island.

[145]I.e., both Fort Amsterdam and the little island itself. Blommaert’s
    Vly was a low, damp depression running northeast and southwest about
    on the line of the present Broad Street. [J. F. J.]

[146]This name applies more properly to one of the Indian dialects
    spoken in the vicinity of Manhattan. J. G. Wilson (ed.), _The
    Memorial History of the City of New York_ (1892), I, 49.

[147]The fish. [J. F. J.]

[148]Blackstone River, Upper Narragansett Bay, and Sakonnet River.

[149]The short cut across the base of Cape Cod, now taken by ships
    through the Cape Cod Canal, was used by the Plymouth settlers and
    the Indians, who went up Scusset creek on the north side and down
    the Manomet River on the southwest. The site of the trading post
    built on the Manomet, near Buzzard’s Bay, has been excavated and the
    house restored. It is in the town of Bourne and can be reached as
    follows: “after crossing the Bourne Bridge over the Canal [heading
    toward Cape Cod], turn sharp right; next, bear left at a fork and
    follow Shore Road to signs indicating the Post; turn right under the
    railroad bridge and follow a dirt road through woods to the Post.”
    Morison, _Story of the “Old Colony” of New Plymouth_, 131n.

[150]Narragansett Bay.

[151]Cape Cod, especially Monomoy Point.

[152]In New Netherland and western New England, especially the
    Connecticut valley.

[153]De Rasieres, however, protested to Gov. Bradford that he had not
    walked “so far this three or four years, wherefore I fear my feet
    will fail me; so I am constrained to entreat you to afford me the
    easiest means” to get from the Aptucxet trading post to Plymouth. So
    the Governor sent a boat to pick him up at Scusset. Bradford,
    “Letter Book,” Mass. Hist. Soc., _Collections_, 1st ser., III, 54.

[154]On an east-and-west line from the outer tip of Cape Cod.

[155]Plymouth Beach. [J. F. J.]

[156]The Gurnet and Saquish Head.

[157]He reverses the actual bearings; and the street first mentioned was
    longer, 1,150 feet. [J. F. J.]

[158]A double share. [J. F. J.]

[159]In 1626, Isaac Allerton on behalf of the Plymouth settlers, agreed
    to buy the interests of the remaining London Adventurers for £1800,
    which De Rasieres translated into guilders by a simple formula. In
    July 1627, though De Rasieres may not have been well informed of the
    event, a group of leading men in the Colony, led by Bradford, became
    “Undertakers” for six years to pay this debt (and about £600 in
    other debts owed by the Colony) by means of a monopoly on the
    external trade of the settlement, including all dealings with the
    Indians. According to the agreement, each colonist who was a Freeman
    of the Company (i.e., had agreed to the purchase in 1626 and
    acquired rights to a share in the division of lands) made an annual
    payment to the Undertakers of three bushels of corn or six pounds of
    tobacco as they might specify. Bradford, _Of Plymouth Plantation_,
    184-188, 194-196.




                                 Index


                                   A
  Allerton, Isaac, 77
  animals near Plymouth, 79-80
  _Anne_, 23
  Annisquam, Massachusetts, 6, 17, 25
  Anquam, 6, 17, 25
  Aptucxet trading post, 74
  Argall, Sir Samuel, 15, 55
  _Arms of Amsterdam, The_, 65


                                   B
  Bacco, Terrill, 51
  birds near Plymouth, 10, 11, 78-80
  Bradford, William, 29, 31, 43, 44, 47, 49, 50, 63, 76-78
  Brewer, Thomas, 51
  Bridge, James, 21, 42, 43, 48, 52


                                   C
  Canonicus, 12
  Capawack, _see_ Martha’s Vineyard
  Cape Ann, 6, 17, 42-44, 46, 54
  Cape Cod, 5, 11, 14, 16, 74
  _Charity_, 42
  Clarke, John, 5
  Cod Island, 15
  Cohasset, Massachusetts, 11
  Collier, William, 51
  Corbitant, 12
  Company of Adventurers for New Plymouth, 21-24, 30, 32, 35, 43,
          47, 51, 53-56, 77
  Council for New England, 4, 15, 55
  Cushman, Robert, 51


                                   D
  Damariscove Island, 15, 25, 44
  Damerill’s Cove, _see_ Damariscove Island
  Dawson, Thomas, 49
  Dermer, Thomas, 12, 27
  _Discovery_, 5
  Dutch in North America, 12, 26, 36, 63, 65, 67-69
  Dutch West India Company, 63, 64, 68


                                   E
  Eastham, Massachusetts, 11
  Epenow, 12, 27


                                   F
  Ferrar, John, 5
  fish and fishing, near Plymouth, 7-10, 14, 25, 38, 75-76;
      off northern New England, 14, 25, 42-44, 54-56
  Fletcher, Thomas, 22
  French in New England and Canada, 12, 13, 15-16, 32
  fur trade in New England, 26, 36, 58, 74


                                   G
  Gardiner, Richard, 47
  Gibbs, John, 14
  Gloucester, Massachusetts, 6, 25
  Goffe, Thomas, 22
  Gorges, Sir Ferdinando, 12, 15, 27


                                   H
  Hawes, Nathaniel, 33, 57
  Hobomok, 29, 31
  _Hopewell_, 54, 57
  Hudson River, 12, 15, 26, 65-68
  Hunt, Thomas, 11-12


                                   I
  Indians near Plymouth, 11-13, 16-18, 27-32, 77-79
  Isles of Shoals, 25


                                   J
  Jenny, John, 24
  Jones, Christopher, 5
  Jones, Thomas, 5, 10


                                   L
  _Little James_, 21, 22, 42-50
  Lyford, John, 53, 54


                                   M
  Marshall, John, 51
  Martha’s Vineyard, 11-12, 27
  Massachusetts Indians, 30-31
  Massasoit, 11, 29-31
  minerals on New England coast, 17, 27
  Mohawk Indians, 13
  Monhegan Island, 14, 25, 27, 32


                                   N
  Narragansett Indians, 12
  New Amsterdam, 67, 68
  New Netherland, description of, 65-69;
      Indians of, 66, 67, 69-73
  Norwood, Richard, 4


                                   O
  Odoric of Pordenone, 8


                                   P
  Pamet, 6, 11
  Patuxet, _see_ Plymouth
  Peirce, William, 23, 42-44, 50, 54, 57
  Pemaquid, 25
  Pemberton, ——, 53, 54, 56
  Pemberton, Rev. John, 53
  Plymouth [New Plymouth] in New England, crops grown at, 28;
      description of, 6-11, 24-32, 36-37, 75-78;
      economic prospects of, 37-40, 49, 51;
      fire at in 1623, 37;
      Indian claims to, 6, 29
  Pocanocket, 11, 12
  Pocock [Pocop], John, 51
  Prinaquie River, 16
  Purchas, Rev. Samuel, 33


                                   S
  Sagadahoc, 15, 25
  salt-making near Plymouth, 27
  Sandys, Sir Edwin, 5
  Sherley, James, 35, 56-58
  Sherley, John, 51
  Squanto [Tisquanto], 12, 13
  Standish, Miles, 31
  Susquehanna Indians, 13


                                   T
  Tapper, Richard, 57
  Thompson, David, 44
  Thornell [Thorrell], John, 51
  timber in New England, 26
  Truro, Massachusetts, 11


                                   V
  vegetation, near Plymouth, 10, 26, 30;
      on New England coast, 16
  Vengham, William, 14
  Virginia, 3, 11, 15, 16, 27
  Virginia Company of London, 3, 5, 14


                                   W
  wampum, 63, 69-71, 73
  Wessagussett, 15, 30, 31
  Weston, Thomas, 30, 31
  Winslow, Edward, 23, 43, 44, 51, 58


                                   Y
  Yeardley, Sir George, 3, 5


THREE VISITORS TO EARLY PLYMOUTH

                    _About the Author and the Book_

Sydney V. James was born in Chicago in 1929 and graduated from Harvard
College in 1950. Specializing in the American colonial period as a
student of Professor Samuel Eliot Morison, he worked intensively on the
history of the Plymouth Colony. He was awarded the degrees of A.M.
(1951) and Ph.D. (1958) in history at Harvard University. Mr. James’
thesis, written under the supervision of Oscar Handlin, has been
published by the Harvard University Press as _A People Among Peoples:
Quaker Benevolence in Eighteenth-Century America_. He has authored
articles for the Bulletin of Friends Historical Association and the
William and Mary Quarterly.

Mr. James is presently an Assistant Professor at the University of
Oregon, having taught previously at Kent State University and Brown
University. In 1950, he married Jean Wooster Middleton. They have two
children: Samuel, 10, and Catherine, 7.

THREE VISITORS TO EARLY PLYMOUTH was designed and printed by The
Stinehour Press of Lunenburg, Vermont for Plimoth Plantation, Plymouth,
Massachusetts. The type used is Monotype Bulmer and the paper is
Warren’s Olde Style.




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THREE VISITORS TO EARLY PLYMOUTH ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


