The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Molly Maguires and the detectives
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Molly Maguires and the detectives

Author: Allan Pinkerton

Release date: August 6, 2025 [eBook #76641]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: G.W. Carleton, 1877

Credits: Peter Becker, KD Weeks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MOLLY MAGUIRES AND THE DETECTIVES ***


------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          Transcriber’s Note:

This version of the text cannot represent certain typographical effects.
Italics are delimited with the ‘_’ character as _italic_. A
superscripted character is preceded by the ‘^’ character.

Full-page illustrations were inserted in pairs, not always strictly
following the sequence of events they describe. In order to reduce the
interruptions of the text, the captions have been separated to fall on
convenient paragraph breaks in the vicinity of the passages they depict.

Minor errors, attributable to the printer, have been corrected. Please
see the transcriber’s note at the end of this text for details regarding
the handling of any textual issues encountered during its preparation.

                           ALLAN PINKERTON’S
                           DETECTIVE STORIES.




                                VOL. VI.





                                  THE
                             MOLLY MAGUIRES
                                  AND
                            THE DETECTIVES.

[Illustration: “_The trial at Mauch Chunk was attended by all the
celebrities of the Carbon County bar._”]

[Illustration: “_A consultation was held, in my private parlor, over the
business offices of the Agency, No. 45 South Third Street._”]


                                  THE
                             MOLLY MAGUIRES
                                  AND
                            THE DETECTIVES.

                                   BY

                            ALLAN PINKERTON,

                               AUTHOR OF

          “THE EXPRESSMAN AND THE DETECTIVE,” “THE MODEL TOWN
              AND THE DETECTIVES,” “THE SPIRITUALISTS AND
                      THE DETECTIVES,” ETC., ETC.


                       NEW AND ENLARGED EDITION.

[Illustration]

                               NEW YORK:
                  _G. W. Carleton & Co., Publishers._
           LONDON: S. LOW & CO.  PHILADELPHIA: H. W. KELLEY.
           CHICAGO: T. A. LANTRY & CO. BOSTON: D. O’LOUGHLIN.
                               MDCCCLXXX.
                     [_SOLD ONLY BY SUBSCRIPTION._]




                           COPYRIGHTED 1877.
                          BY ALLAN PINKERTON.

                         _All rights reserved._


                                 TROW’S
                     PRINTING AND BOOKBINDING CO.,
                               PRINTERS,
                        _205-213 East 12th St._,
                               NEW YORK.




                               CONTENTS.

                           CHAPTER I.                            PAGE

  An Extraordinary Proposition                                     13


                          CHAPTER II.

  The Man for the Work                                             22


                          CHAPTER III.

  The Detective seeks the Haunts of the Mollies                    27


                          CHAPTER IV.

  Stirring up a Wasp’s Nest                                        36


                           CHAPTER V.

  Cold Comfort in the Mountains                                    49


                          CHAPTER VI.

  Pottsville and the Sheridan House                                59


                          CHAPTER VII.

  Bloody Record of the Mollie Maguires                             66


                         CHAPTER VIII.

  The Detective Sings, Fights, and Dances Himself into             73
  Popularity


                          CHAPTER IX.

  Dormer under Investigation                                       82


                           CHAPTER X.

  Father Bridgeman gives Jack Kehoe a Blast                        92


                          CHAPTER XI.

  A Kilkenny Affair at Tamaqua                                    105


                          CHAPTER XII.

  McKenna meets a Morning Adventure                               113


                         CHAPTER XIII.

  Muff Lawler at Home                                             124


                          CHAPTER XIV.

  The Detective achieves a Victory                                134


                          CHAPTER XV.

  More Work of the Mollies                                        145


                          CHAPTER XVI.

  A Rough Journey and a Thrilling Adventure                       156


                         CHAPTER XVII.

  A Peculiar Wedding Ceremony                                     168


                         CHAPTER XVIII.

  A Row, a Removal, and a Raffle                                  179


                          CHAPTER XIX.

  Snared by Kate—Honored by “Mollie.”                             194


                          CHAPTER XX.

  A Fright, a Fight, and a Funeral                                207


                          CHAPTER XXI.

  Contest with a Constable                                        221


                         CHAPTER XXII.

  Horrors upon Horrors                                            231


                         CHAPTER XXIII.

  Good Old Micky Cuff                                             239


                         CHAPTER XXIV.

  Hostilities continued                                           251


  CHAPTER XXV.

  Plot to destroy the Catawissa Bridges                           262


                         CHAPTER XXVI.

  A Calamity Averted                                              271


                         CHAPTER XXVII.

  New Forces in the Field                                         280


                        CHAPTER XXVIII.

  The Detective in Sore Tribulation                               293


                         CHAPTER XXIX.

  The Inquisition of Ten                                          303


                          CHAPTER XXX.

  Another Victim of the Mollies                                   316


                         CHAPTER XXXI.

  Holding the Breaker                                             327


                         CHAPTER XXXII.

  Linden forms an Acquaintance                                    337


                        CHAPTER XXXIII.

  President Gowen and the Legislative Commission                  346


                         CHAPTER XXXIV.

  Murder of B. F. Yost                                            356


                         CHAPTER XXXV.

  McKenna takes up the Trail at Tamaqua                           367


                         CHAPTER XXXVI.

  In the Murderer’s Nest                                          377


                        CHAPTER XXXVII.

  Kerrigan’s Sister-in-law                                        391


                        CHAPTER XXXVIII.

  Slowly gaining Ground                                           401


                         CHAPTER XXXIX.

  Bloody Saturday                                                 411


                          CHAPTER XL.

  More Bosses Doomed                                              423


                          CHAPTER XLI.

  Murder of Sanger and Uren                                       433


                         CHAPTER XLII.

  Arrest of Assassins                                             441


                         CHAPTER XLIII.

  Violence for Violence                                           451


                         CHAPTER XLIV.

  Trials and Confessions                                          462


                          CHAPTER XLV.

  Suspicion Aroused                                               471


                         CHAPTER XLVI.

  McAndrew saves a Life                                           486


                         CHAPTER XLVII.

  The Last of McKenna                                             497


                        CHAPTER XLVIII.

  A Noble Effort                                                  508


                         CHAPTER XLIX.

  Closing the Record                                              542




                                PREFACE.


The governing idea in the mind of the author, while preparing this
volume for the press, has been to give details connected with the MOLLIE
MAGUIRES, and follow strictly the truth concerning the adventures of the
detectives during three years passed in their midst. He is aware that,
in many places, the relation reads much like fiction, and that it will
be accepted as romance by very many who are totally unacquainted with
the country and the people attempted to be described. It has been the
constant endeavor to adhere closely to facts, and if the incidents are,
in a great degree, novel and absorbing, it is due to these facts, and
they were worked out, through arduous labors, in sleepless nights and
undivided attention to the ends to be gained.

The coal regions of Pennsylvania are inhabited by a mixture of races,
the ingredients perhaps more widely differing, in character and origin,
than those of any other portion of the globe. Living within a stone’s
throw of each other will be found the German, Swede, Norwegian, Pole,
Irish, Scotch, English, Bohemian, and Russian. And in moving across the
country, from one colliery to another, representatives of nearly all of
these widely separated nations may be encountered, with here and there
an American and Pennsylvania German. All endeavor to express themselves
in Anglo-Saxon, but their foreign idioms and native eccentricities will,
spite of themselves, occasionally crop out. Hence the life of a person,
who is sensitively alive to diversified phases of human nature and
having a keen sense of the humorous, in the mining districts, cannot
well be devoid of enjoyment. Some extraordinary habits and peculiarities
are found in the coal fields not discovered elsewhere.

To the boundless extent and value of the coal fields, as a portion of
the economy of the whole country, full reference has been made in this
volume.

The only difficulty of importance experienced by the writer of the work
has been to condense within the compass of these pages the very extended
and almost overwhelming mass of matter placed before him—all of which,
he doubts not, would, if given, prove of general interest—and to
exercise due discretion in the rejection of portions not deemed
absolutely necessary to be incorporated.

It has been the constant intent to produce a fair picture of the MOLLIE
MAGUIRE in his native or adopted home, with only such delineations of
the scenery and surroundings as the course of the narrative may seem
naturally to bring in. These, it is to be hoped, will be found apt and
in accordance with nature.

For the sanguinary character of many of the chapters and accompanying
illustrations no excuse is needed. It is the work of the MOLLIE
MAGUIRES, and not of the author or designer. Where scenes of general
interest are depicted the assistance of the photographer and his camera
has been liberally invoked. In the letter-press the relater has merely
traced the journeyings of the detectives with a faithful pen, and sought
to reproduce their words, acts, and results achieved, as well as the
language of the persons, criminals or citizens, with whom they have come
in contact. All of the characters lived, or once have lived, in the
anthracite coal regions. If fault there may be in their description, it
will be found in lack of color, as the brush has not, in any case, been
dipped in too florid hues.

With the ends accomplished in this three years’ warfare with the MOLLIE
MAGUIRES, the public is already well instructed, the great newspapers of
the country having vied with each other in friendly rivalry to first
give the results.

The author has reason to be proud of the work done. The modes in which
the labors were performed, and the routes taken by himself and others to
gain desirable points have found record for the first time, in the
following pages. No attempt has ever before been made to give them. No
task of the kind could succeed without the private papers and documents
on file in my Agency, to which, of course, no person, excepting myself,
would be permitted to have access.

With the purely legal and court portions of the murder cases, the
arguments of the distinguished counsel for both sides, and the
testimony, simply as testimony, I have dealt very sparingly. The
masterly effort of F. B. Gowen, Esq., I have printed almost entire. It
is so to the point, so truthful, and such a vivid and telling exposition
of the theory of the Commonwealth, that any attempt in the way of
curtailment would be damaging. Without the speech I should consider my
book incomplete.

The talent of the entire State of Pennsylvania was hunted over to find
attorneys capable of freeing the unfortunate men brought to trial in
Schuylkill, Columbia, and Carbon counties. But the law was against them.
The defendants had incurred the penalty, by committal of crimes, and
justice has been at least partly vindicated.

                                                    ALLAN PINKERTON.

CHICAGO, ILL., _June, 1877_.




                          THE MOLLIE MAGUIRES

                                AND THE

                              DETECTIVES.




                               CHAPTER I.

                     AN EXTRAORDINARY PROPOSITION.


Early in the month of October, 1873, I was in Philadelphia, and one day
received a note from Mr. F. B. Gowen, President of the Philadelphia and
Reading Railway Company and the Philadelphia and Reading Coal and Iron
Company, saying that he desired to see me at his place of business. I
immediately responded to the invitation, accompanied by Superintendent
Franklin, and met the gentleman in his private apartment, in the
Company’s elegant building on Fourth Street.

“I have sent for you, Mr. Pinkerton,” said the President of the two
great Pennsylvania corporations, after we had exchanged greetings, “upon
business of importance.”

I made known my willingness to hear what it was.

“The coal regions are infested by a most desperate class of men, banded
together for the worst purposes—called, by some, the Buckshots, by
others the Mollie Maguires—and they are making sad havoc with the
country. It is a secret organization, has its meetings in hidden and
out-of the-way places, and its members, I have been convinced ever since
my residence in Pottsville and my connection with the criminal courts as
District Attorney in the county of Schuylkill, are guilty of a majority
of all the murders and other deeds of outrage which, for many years,
have been committed in the neighborhood. I wish you to investigate this
mysterious order, find out its interior workings, expose its evil
transactions, and see if the just laws of the State cannot again be made
effective in bringing criminals to justice. At present, whenever an
assassination is consummated, and, as a consequence, a trial is
instituted, a convenient _alibi_ steps forward and secures for the
prisoner his freedom. Municipal laws are thus incapable of execution;
sheriffs of counties are powerless, and the usual run of detectives are
of as little value as the open, uniformed police of the different
cities. All of these have been tested, and all have failed. Now, if you
cannot disperse the murderous crew, or give us grounds upon which to
base prosecutions, then I shall believe that it never will be effected.”

I considered the proposition for a moment, turning over in my mind the
magnitude of the labor to be performed.

“Let me think of it a little,” I answered; “and, in the meantime, tell
me more about the Mollie Maguires.”

“As far as we can learn, the society is of foreign birth, a noxious weed
which has been transplanted from its native soil—that of Ireland—to the
United States, some time within the last twenty years. It lived and
prospered in the old country considerably earlier. Its supporters there
were known as Ribbonmen, the White Boys, and sometimes as Mollie
Maguires, but their modes of procedure were the same as now pursued in
the coal regions. Men were then, as they are at this time,
killed—sometimes in broad daylight, sometimes at night, and invariably
by strangers—persons at least unknown to chance spectators, or to the
parties violently put out of the way. Suspected individuals would be
apprehended, but in the end nobody could be found able to identify the
criminals. It was only after a protracted struggle in Ireland that the
proper evidence could be elicited to convict the tools doing the bloody
behests of the society. I suppose it will not be easy to do this in
Pennsylvania. The same minds, the same combinations, are to be
encountered here. The Mollies rule our people with a rod of iron. They
do this and make no sign. The voice of the fraternity is unheard, but
the work is performed. Even the political sentiments of the commonwealth
are moulded by them, and in their particular field they elect or defeat
whomsoever they may please. They control, in a measure, the finances of
the State. Their chiefs direct affairs this way, and that way, without
hinderance. Men without an iota of moral principle, they dictate the
principles of otherwise honorable parties. In its ultimate results this
complexion of affairs in Pennsylvania touches, to a considerable degree,
the interests of the citizens of the whole country. Wherever anthracite
is employed is also felt the vise-like grip of this midnight,
dark-lantern, murderous-minded fraternity. Wherever in the United States
iron is wrought, from Maine to Georgia, from ocean to ocean—wherever
hard coal is used for fuel, there the Mollie Maguire leaves his slimy
trail and wields with deadly effect his two powerful levers:
secrecy—combination. Men having their capital locked up in the coal-beds
are as obedient puppets in his hands. They have for some time felt that
they were fast losing sway over that which by right should be their own
to command. They think, with some show of reason, their money would have
profited them as much had it been thrown to the fishes in the sea, or
devoted to the devouring flames. Others, wishing to engage in mining
operations, and who are possessed of the capital and experience
necessary, are driven away. They cannot intrust their hard-earned
property to a venture which will be at the beck and call of a fierce and
sanguinary rabble and its heedless and reckless directors. They wisely
turn aside and seek other and less hazardous uses for their talents and
their means. The entire population of this State feel the shock, and it
is in due season communicated to the most distant parts in which
anthracite is used and ores reduced or smelted.”

I had heard of many assassinations by these Mollie Maguires, and also
about those performed by the Ku-Klux and similar political combinations
in the Southern States. It had always seemed to me that it was a sacred
duty which Pennsylvania owed to herself, to her own citizens, and to the
country at large, to clear her garments of the taint resting upon them
and bring to punishment the persons who, for so many years, habitually
outraged decency, spilt human blood without stint, and converted the
richest section of one of the most wealthy and refined of all the
sisterhood of States into a very golgotha—a locality from which
law-abiding men and women might soon be forced to flee, as from the
threatened cities of the plain, or from a spot stricken with plague and
pestilence.

“I will enter upon the business, but it will require time, sharp work,
and plenty of both!”

“Yes! We duly appreciate this,” responded Mr. Gowen. “What we want, and
everybody wants, is to get within this apparently impenetrable ring;
turn to the light the hidden side of this dark and cruel body, to probe
to its core this festering sore upon the body politic, which is rapidly
gnawing into the vitals and sapping the life of the community. Crime
must be punishable in the mountains of Pennsylvania, as it is in the
agricultural counties, and in all well-regulated countries. We want to
work our mines in peace, to run our passenger and freight trains without
fear of the sudden loss of life and property through the malicious acts
of the Mollie Maguires; we want people to sleep unthreatened,
unmolested, in their beds, undisturbed by horrid dreams of midnight
prowlers and cowardly assassins; we want the laboring-men, of whatever
creeds or nationalities, protected in their right to work to secure
sustenance for their wives and little ones, unawed by outside
influences. We want the miner to go forth cheerfully to the slope, or
the shaft, for labor in the breast or in the gangway, wherever it may
seem to him for the best, void of the fear in his heart when he parts
from his wife at the cottage-gate in the morning, that it may be their
last farewell on earth, and by evening his bullet-riddled corpse may be
taken back to his home the only evidence that he has encountered the
murderer—the agent of those who would compel him to refuse all
employment unless the regulations of the order were complied with. The
State cannot attain these things; she has repeatedly tried, and tried in
vain. You can do it. I have seen you tested on other occasions and in
other matters, and know your ability to conduct the business; we are
willing to supply everything within our power to make your task a
success.”

“I believe that it can be accomplished, but I am also aware that it is a
stupendous undertaking. I accept the responsibility, however, with its
accompanying consequences, which I perceive will prove no small burden
to bear. I also see that I shall encounter no little difficulty in
detailing from the many able and trustworthy men in my force one
perfectly qualified for this very unusual charge. And an error in the
outset would bring irreparable disaster before the end could be reached.
It is no ordinary man that I need in this matter. He must be an
Irishman, and a Catholic, as only this class of persons can find
admission to the Mollie Maguires. My detective should become, to all
intents and purposes, one of the order, and continue so while he remains
in the case before us. He should be hardy, tough, and capable of
laboring, in season and out of season, to accomplish, unknown to those
about him, a single absorbing object. In the meanwhile, I shall have to
exact from you a pledge that, whoever I may dispatch upon this errand,
he shall not, through you, become known to any person as a detective.
This is highly necessary to be strictly attended to. If possible, you
should shut your eyes to the fact that I have an employé of my Agency
working in the mining country. If you can do so consistently, it might
as well be given out to everybody interested that the idea of
investigating the Mollies through the means of detectives, if ever
thought of, has been abandoned as a hopeless job, and that the present
status of affairs in the mines is totally incapable of being changed.
Take the further precaution that my name, and those of my
superintendents and employés, do not appear upon any of your books. Keep
my reports in your own custody, away from all prying eyes. I would also
ask, if my agents are engaged for one week, for one month, or for years,
that these requests still be complied with; and further, whatever may be
the result of the examination, no person in my employ—unless the
circumstances are greatly changed and I demand it—shall ever be required
to appear and give testimony upon the witness stand.”

“To all of this I give willing consent. I see how necessary it is. As I
said before, we will do anything in our power, and within the bounds of
reason, to aid you and protect your detectives.”

I then agreed that the operation should begin as soon as I might make
the proper arrangements, and, after some further conversation,
principally upon the purely financial portion of the engagement, took my
leave.

Immediately after leaving Mr. Gowen’s office I telegraphed for Mr.
Bangs, General Superintendent. He arrived from New York early the
ensuing day, and a consultation was held in my private parlor, over the
business offices of the Agency, at No. 45 South Third Street, Mr. Bangs,
Mr. Franklin and myself forming the parties to the council. The details
of the case were discussed at length and a general plan of operations
decided upon, after which I started for my return trip westward.

It was the ending of a delightfully cool and pleasant Indian summer day,
and as I was being rapidly whirled through the most beautiful portion of
New Jersey, my face toward the open window, inhaling the invigorating
atmosphere, and enjoying a view of the fast-fading, swift-passing
panorama of plain and valley, village and stream, I continually dwelt
upon the service in which I had recently enlisted. Forgetting the
sunset, the agreeable evening, and every immediate surrounding, my mind
was absorbed in contemplating the subject then nearest my heart.
Mentally I brought in review the different devoted attachés of the
Agency, who, through nativity and early training, were eligible to the
place to be filled. All were trustworthy, as far as that went; all were
courageous, faithful and efficient in positions and under circumstances
ordinarily calling for the exercise of these qualities. But the man now
wanted was to meet peculiar dangers. He must be perfectly qualified in
every respect, or he would not do. It was no discredit to my corps of
detectives, that I quickly dismissed many of them as inadequate for the
duty. It was not their fault. Had I one man who would go against his
life-long habits, early impressions, education, and his inherited as
well as acquired prejudices? Was there one who held sufficiently broad
and deeply-grounded notions of the real duty of a true Irishman to his
country and his fellow-countrymen to intrust with this great mission? I
believed that I had, but which one was it in the number thus, in my
mind, competing for the honor? He must be able to distinguish the real
from the ideal moral obligation, and pierce the vail separating a
supposed from an actual state of affairs. He must have the gift of
seeing that the misguided people of the mining districts who had joined
this order were unquestionably working evil, and only evil, to Ireland,
Irishmen, and the church, in lieu of doing their native land and their
kindred at home and in America a service.

While Bishop Wood, of Philadelphia, had early placed his seal of
condemnation upon the Mollie Maguires in the coal regions, and the
clergy had followed, almost to a man, in bringing the individual members
of the clan before them and their congregations, and heaped dread
maledictions upon their heads, calling the persons by name in public,
and even cut them from the church until such time as they should
renounce their membership, still I knew many good Catholics, and honest
men at heart, were remaining in the organization, and that, in some more
peaceable sections of the State, the priesthood, if not tacitly
countenancing the society said little against it. To their credit be it
stated, however, they were unanimous in their abhorrence of the violent
acts of the Mollie Maguires in Schuylkill, Carbon, Columbia, and Luzerne
counties. I had to find a man who, once inside this, as I supposed,
oath-bound brotherhood, would yet remain true to me; who could make
almost a new man of himself, take his life in his hands, and enter upon
a work which was apparently against those bound to him by close ties of
nationality, if not of blood and kindred; and for months, perhaps for
years, place himself in antagonism with and rebellion against the
dictates of his church—the church which from his earliest breath he had
been taught to revere. He would perforce obtain a reputation for evil
conduct, from which it was doubtful that he could ever entirely
extricate himself. Would the common run of men think such a position at
all tenable? Would they consent to ostensibly degrade themselves that
others might be saved? My man must become, really and truly, a Mollie of
the hardest character, attend their meetings, and possibly be charged
with direct participation in certain of their crimes. He must face the
priest, and endure the bad opinion of his countrymen even until the end.
For an indefinite period he was to be as one dead and buried in the
grave—dead to his family and friends—sinking his individuality—and be
published abroad as the companion and associate of assassins, murderers,
incendiaries, thieves, and gamblers. In no other way could I hope to
secure admission to the inner circle of this labyrinth of iniquity. By
no other plan could the clan be exposed and its volume of crime clasped
forever. Another thing: The Mollie Maguires were working in opposition
to the Welsh, English, and German miners. Their hatred of the English,
especially, they had imbibed with their mothers’ milk. I was, if
possible, to destroy the Mollie Maguires. Therefore, my operatives must
be the instruments of that destruction. Then how difficult for any
Irishman to enter upon the warfare? If he had the ability to see far
enough, however, it would be understood that the leaders of the
obnoxious society were simply apostates—men disloyal to the land of
their birth—engaged in an unholy effort, and one which, successful or
not, reflected discredit upon all of their countrymen. Beholding and
understanding this, the detective would not be working merely to right
the wrongs of this man or that man, but to wipe off a dark blot which
had fallen upon the escutcheon of Ireland, and which clouded the fair
fame of every Irishman in America. Then he would meet the cry, in the
mines and elsewhere, of “persecution for opinion’s sake,” and the danger
of “a conflict between capital on the one side and labor on the other.”
Would he be shrewd enough to detect the untruthfulness of one and the
insincerity of the other? Surely here was a task for me, in the very
outset, the fellow of which I had not encountered since the war of the
rebellion.


                               ————●————

                              CHAPTER II.

                         THE MAN FOR THE WORK.


By the time I had reached headquarters, in Chicago, I imagined that I
might need a man for the Mollie Maguire operation, who, among other
acquirements and qualifications, was also a practical miner. My plans
had even partially assumed shape for a flying visit to some of the coal
districts of Southern Illinois and Ohio, where it was possible I might
chance upon a person of the needed character. Then it occurred to me,
even though I could secure an experienced worker in the bituminous
shafts and drifts, he would naturally be almost as much at fault in the
art of delving in the slopes and gangways of the anthracite fields as
one entirely uneducated in mining. He might have the trained muscle and
capacity of bodily endurance, yet possess no available knowledge of the
anthracite branch of the business. Then a party of this sort must
necessarily be a stranger to the intricate duties of my profession, and
have about everything to acquire from the lowest round of the ladder
upward. There was another objection—and it had more weight than
everything before enumerated: I could not rely upon the truthfulness and
faithfulness of a new acquaintance as I might upon that of one who,
after years of training under my own direction, had made himself an
expert in the detection of criminals. Clearly, then, I must select my
operative for this case, as for any other, from my regular force—at
least employ a detective that had been connected with one or all of the
offices in the Chain of Agencies. Who should it be? This was the
all-important question. Several of my best men, who were, in most
emergencies, mentally and physically capable of filling the place, I
took occasion to carefully approach and sound as to their opinions and
acts under certain supposititious and somewhat analogous circumstances
but such as were not too nearly similar to those under consideration,
and soon found that they would never do. One, who was precisely the man
called for in other particulars, had an invalid wife and a family of
small children, and I would not ask him to take the position. There was
a chance that he might be disabled, or even lose his life, and thus
leave his mate and their helpless innocents to the cold charity of an
unfeeling world. Another almost as good was soon to be married to an
estimable young lady. A third had some blemish excluding him from the
list, and I had not yet hit upon the agent to be sent to the land of
mountains and dales and the home of the Mollie Maguires.

One morning, however, as I was riding from home to Fifth
Avenue—standing, as usual, upon the rear platform of a crowded West Side
street car—I recognized in the person of the conductor an operative
previously escaping consideration. He was engaged working his part of a
delicate job connected with the railway interest, and for some months
had not been in a position in which he was called upon to report to me
personally. The thought instantly found lodgment in my mind: “If this
man is mentally correct, and willing, he is just the instrument fitted
for my mining operation.” I was satisfied that he could be spared from
his car and the case he was assisting in, and another detective put in
his place, and immediately upon reaching the office, sent a note to the
young man’s boarding-house, asking him to meet me at my rooms as soon as
his day’s work was ended, as I had something to submit for his
consideration.

James McParlan, the detective alluded to, was born in the province of
Ulster, County Armagh, Parish of Mullabrack, Ireland, in 1844;
consequently, at the date mentioned, was in his twenty-ninth year. His
father and mother were living. He had been a member of my force for
about a year. Coming to America in 1867, having previously seen some
service in chemical works, at Gateshead, County Durham, England, and
subsequently, in the same capacity, at Wallsend, England, the first
place he filled after landing at Castle Garden was that of second clerk
in a small grocery house on Ninth Avenue, city of New York. At a later
period he became salesman for a country dealer in drygoods, named
Cummings at Medina, Orleans County, in the same State. His salary was
exceedingly small, and besides, not easily collectible; and, after a
short apprenticeship to the profession of counter-jumping and measuring
ribbons, laces, and calicoes, he resigned, and adopted Greeley’s advice
to young men, with a course of travel due westward. Reaching Buffalo, he
tarried there but a few days and then came to Chicago. After filling
different situations, he applied for and secured employment in my
establishment.

Of medium height, a slim but wiry figure, well knit together; a clear
hazel eye; hair of an auburn color, and bordering upon the style
denominated as “sandy;” a forehead high, full, and well rounded forward;
florid complexion, regular features, with beard and mustache a little
darker than his hair, there was no mistaking McParlan’s place of
nativity, even had not his slight accent betrayed his Celtic origin. He
was in fact a fine specimen of the better class of immigrants to this
country from the poet’s

         “First flower of the earth and first gem of the sea.”

He was passably educated, had beheld and brushed against the people of a
considerable portion of the New World during the short time he had been
in it, and earned a reputation for honesty, a peculiar tact and
shrewdness, skill and perseverance in performing his numerous and
difficult duties, and worked himself into the position of a firm
favorite with those of my employés intimately associated with him. Thus
far I certainly found no particular fault with McParlan.

The same day McParlan, clad in his ordinary but cleanly citizen’s
attire, entered my private office, and I invited him to take a seat. The
conference which immediately followed was long, confidential, and
interesting to the two taking part in it; but particulars need not be
given here, as results achieved will exhibit the nature of the
conversation, which has also been foreshadowed in the preceding pages.
More light will be thrown upon the subject during the progress and
development of events. Suffice it that in James McParlan I recognized
the very person to whom I could safely and confidently intrust my plans
for the campaign in Pennsylvania. While he was not left in the dark as
to the dangers to be encountered—and, in fact, these were as fully
explained as it was possible to perceive them at the time—he made known
his desire to assume the part, and said he would experience pleasure in
being sent where he could be of use to me and to his country.

“I will do my utmost to bring the job to a speedy and successful
termination,” he remarked with earnestness.

“Remember, McParlan,” I urged, at the close of this portion of our
interview, “your refusal to accept the responsibility—while I can but
acknowledge it would prove a disappointment—will not injure you in my
estimation, or prevent your employment by me in the future.”

“Mr. Pinkerton,” answered the operative, rising from his chair, “I am
not in your Agency to object to such a thing as this seems to be; on the
contrary, I am anxious to go, and ready to start at the word of
command!”

“That settles it, then,” said I. “Report to me to-morrow forenoon, when
your instructions and credentials will all be prepared and you can take
the night train for Philadelphia.”

Seemingly satisfied, the young man went his way.

It was easy to see, by the expression of his countenance, that
McParlan’s sympathies were earnestly enlisted in the case, only the bare
outlines of which had as yet been committed to his care, and if he
failed it would not be from want of zeal, or lack of earnest desire to
well and truly perform his duty.

“And so Mr. Pinkerton is after sending me to England, as he kindly says,
for the betterment of my health, an’ to look after the King Bee of all
the forgers,” remarked McParlan, in his pleasant way, the next
afternoon, to my cashier, as he received the advance of money for his
expenses. He repeated about the same manner of adieu when handed his
papers by the chief clerk, and it soon spread throughout the apartment,
among the clerical force, that the happy man was “to take the tour of
Europe at my expense.” After bidding all good-by, and the reception of a
warm grasp of the hand and an earnest word of caution from me to “have a
care of himself,” McParlan left the Agency.

The man had been found, and was at last entering upon his
extra-hazardous mission—not bound for England, however. It was well
enough, under the circumstances, that all of the detective’s personal
friends and acquaintances—especially those outside the office—should
believe that he was about to cross the wide Atlantic.

McParlan’s instructions were as complete and comprehensive as they well
could be made at short notice; but of course, after generally counseling
him concerning the true object of his labors, considerable had to be
confided to his own judgment and discretion, at least until fairly
launched upon his undertaking, when all would see what was best, and not
best, to be done. Leaving the detective to perform his difficult _rôle_,
under my directions, I shall now proceed to give, in detail, a
description of his acts, as represented in the reports. It should be
understood, however, though the fact may not appear in this narration of
events, that McParlan was almost daily in communication with me, through
Mr. Franklin, the Philadelphia superintendent, and was required to keep
us aware of his every important movement, by letter. He was particularly
enjoined to use discretion in the sending of messages and documents, and
a plan, not necessary to be divulged, arranged by which all
interruptions through the mails would be prevented. I was to know where
and how to connect with him any day of the week, and all changes of
locality were to be noted as early as might be possible. The detective’s
adventures in the mountains of Pennsylvania are sufficiently romantic
and attractive, if properly related, to satisfy the most exacting
reader, without the author having recourse to the smallest amount of
extraneous matter, employing any of the powers of the imagination, or
the tricks of the professional novel-writer in enchaining attention. As

                                   “Loveliness
               Needs not the foreign art of ornament,
               But is, when unadorned, adorned the most,”

so with the simple truth; in this instance it demands no elaborate
decoration, no enchanting _couleur de rose_, to make it entertaining.


                               ————●————




                              CHAPTER III.

             THE DETECTIVE SEEKS THE HAUNTS OF THE MOLLIES.


After several days very profitably spent among the coal, canal, and dock
hands, in the vicinity of Philadelphia, acquiring some knowledge of
their habits and occupations, and at the same time, in a measure,
habituating himself to the wearing of a rather novel and uncomfortable
costume with which Mr. Franklin had been kind enough to provide him, the
agent, according to orders, returned and reported to the superintendent
that he was fully prepared to commence his work in the mining country.

When the young man glanced at his figure, as reflected in a mirror, he
found it difficult to believe he was really himself and not some wild
vagabond who had usurped his place. The transformation was
satisfactorily complete. He beheld in the glass the shadow of a man of
about his height and proportions, it was true, his head covered by an
old, dilapidated and dirt-colored slouch hat, with plentiful space for
his cutty-pipe in its narrow, faded band; a grayish coat of coarse
materials, which had, from appearances, seen service in a coal bin, and,
while never very fine in make or fashion, was considerably the worse
about the cuffs and skirts, both being frayed out to raveled raggedness,
from rough usage by its former owner. The vest was originally black, but
the years had come and gone in such numbers since, that the dye was
washed away, and with it had fled the surface of the cloth and most of
the worsted binding in the region of the pockets. The pantaloons, of
brown woollen stuff, were whole, but too large for him in the body, and
worn strapped tight at the waist with a leather belt, which, from its
yellowish and broken condition, might have been a former bell-thong off
the neck of some farmer’s cow, appropriated after exposure to all kinds
of wear and weather for a series of years. The bosom of a heavy gray
shirt was seen beneath the waistcoat, and exhibited no visible vestige
of a collar; but a substitute was formed by a red yarn cravat, or
knitted comforter, drawn closely around the wearer’s neck and tied in a
sailor’s knot in front. The under garment had that which ordinary shirts
are seldom supplied with—a pocket, at the left inner side, for tobacco.
His boots were of the stoga, hob-nailed, high-topped style, and in their
capacious legs easily rested the bottoms of the pantaloons. With face
unshaven for a week or ten days, and hair quite dry and straggling, from
want of proper attention, it is probable that McParlan’s mother, had she
been present, would have refused him recognition. He could only be
convinced that he was himself, by reference to his voice, which sounded
familiar to the ear. In his satchels, ready packed, were supplies of
writing paper, envelopes, stamps, etc.; also a suit of clothes a little
better than that upon his person, for occasional Sunday wear. Razor and
strop he had none. Their absence was no loss, however, as he did not
propose shaving his face until circumstances might call for the
resumption of his natural character.

[Illustration: “_Dormer calls his hotel the Sheridan House._”]

Monday, the 27th of October, 1873, was an eventful day at the
Philadelphia Agency, and formed an epoch in the life history of at least
one man, remembrance of which will never fail until his latest breath.
Then it was that James McParlan, attired and accoutred as just
described, his heart hopeful for the future, but in fact unknowing and
unknown, kicked the dust of the city from his heels, at the Callowhill
street depot of the Philadelphia and Reading Railway, and after
purchasing a ticket for Port Clinton, depositing his two valises—which
bore every outward evidence of having seen much tough usage and extended
travel in domestic and foreign parts—in the seat beside himself, in the
smoking-car of the afternoon train, set out upon his voyage of discovery
in the stronghold of the Mollie Maguires. He was James McParlan no
longer—but James McKenna, as I must hereafter call him—and he looked
backward upon the receding town, and considered whether he would survive
ever again to take his old name and place in the world and see the
broad, teeming streets, handsome structures, and beautiful girls of the
Quaker City. To him it then seemed he was cutting loose from all the
nether world. Those who knew him best would pass him by unheeded in his
transforming disguise and adopted name, and even his intimate
associates—excepting Mr. Franklin and I—in Chicago and elsewhere, fully
believed him to be adrift upon the blue waters, shaping his course to
lands “beyant the seas,” only to return after the lapse of many months.
Would he _ever_ return? That was a question, he soon decided, which, for
a favorable response, rested with himself and the manner in which he
conducted his researches. He was sure that I watched anxiously over him,
and that Mr Franklin was prepared to do everything for his good, but
very largely would he be the worker-out of his own destiny. His life and
success, or his failure and death, reposed in his own strength, guarded
by his own intellect. While these and similar thoughts crowded upon his
brain, the detective was traveling onward. Smoothly and swiftly the cars
glided over the track, past Belmont Glen, and beyond the outskirts of
the city. Then came Fairmount Park, Laurel Hill, seen from the far
distance, and closer at hand the broad, still waters of the Schuylkill,
of which Ireland’s great poet sang and on whose shores he once found
that repose which his weary head had elsewhere sought in vain. It was
not within the heart of a man of McKenna’s temperament, or in one born
on the soil of the beautiful land that gave him birth, to resist the
temptation to search out Tom Moore’s cottage and feast his eyes upon its
walls and roof; and he raised the blind, admitted the sunlight, and his
senses drank in, in reverent silence, the variegated and pleasing
landscape. After a time came Valley Forge, the scene of so much
suffering by the American soldiers under General Washington, in the
memorable winter of 1777-8. Indeed, the country throughout this vicinity
is replete with points bringing to recollection interesting dates and
facts of history. Through the kindness of a fellow-traveler, who sat
smoking in a seat near him, my officer was made familiar with some of
these most eventful localities. And still there appeared to be no end to
the succession of hills and vales, wooded mountain sides and fertile
fields. Yet onward swept the train, bearing its precious living freight.

Passing beyond the populous city of Reading, late in the afternoon, the
agricultural lands began, as the stranger thought, a silent struggle
with rocks and rills and more rugged mountains. As they still proceeded
swiftly on their route, the rough country gained the mastery, and the
fleeting show increased in boldness, culminating in a grand and craggy
beauty when the locomotive whistled “down the brakes” at a point some
distance short of Port Clinton. By this time portentous clouds had
arisen darkly in the west, as the sun sunk to its couch, and there were
other premonitions of an impending storm of wind and rain.

Port Clinton is seventy-eight miles from Philadelphia, at a spot where
the two great forks of the Schuylkill—the Schuylkill proper and the
Little Schuylkill—form a union, both having had their origin, not so far
separated, in the distant northern coal-fields.

[Illustration: “_He entered, resting his burden upon the floor!_”]

It was eight o’clock in the evening when McKenna, with baggage swinging
from his shoulder, stood for the first time upon the floor of the
massive, brown-stone, turret-roofed depot building at Port Clinton and
looked about him for a house which might yield him a night’s lodging and
supper, as he was both sleepy and hungry after his ride and the unusual
excitements of the day. Starting out into the increasing darkness, he
was unable to see and appreciate the tall mountains towering above him
on all sides; but, feeling his way carefully, he crossed the canal
bridge and sought a public house. Seeing a bright light not far away, he
directed his steps toward it, and in a short time came to a structure
which proved to be a village tavern or saloon. Thinking, despite the
sounds of revelry heard within, that it might be a proper stopping-place
for him, he entered, rested his burden on the floor—weary enough with
its carriage, and wishing thus early, he had been content to leave
one-half the baggage at home—and civilly inquired of the presiding
genius—a big, burly fellow, with milky-white eyes, a cherry-red nose and
very stiff, black, straight hair, planted widely apart on his
bullet-shaped head—who had evidently “too much taken” of the liquids he
dispensed to others—when they had funds to pay for them—if he could have
supper and lodging at his hotel. He did not half fancy the crowd he had
come up with. Mostly of the lower class of Germans, the men were in the
midst of a spree that bid fair to last until another day. Liquor had
already gained control of their senses, and their personal appearance
was even more forbidding than that of the person who so suddenly
appeared among them, and for this there was no possible necessity. Those
of the number who labored at all found employment in digging a tunnel,
which was in course of excavation in the neighborhood. These were a few
points which the new arrival gathered from the talk of the occupants of
the small, low, smoke-begrimed bar-room. Cocking up one of his eyes very
fiercely, the landlord looked scowlingly out of his other, from beneath
its black, beetling brow, and insultingly replied:

“No! I geeps no victuals nor shake-downs for peebles like you! Git oud!
You wants der beds and der meats, don’t ye? Git oud der haus! Go makes
your schleeps mit der bigs! Oud of dis blace, or, mein Gott in himmel, I
gicks ye right away oud!”

The stranger, not choosing to move as fast as he thought he should, the
landlord continued, while he advanced upon McKenna:

“Look dis way, poys! Dish is anoder of dose blundering dramps! Pitch him
oud! Teach the skalamag better manners than to pass de country around
schteeling peeble’s horses, cows, and dings! Put him oud quick!”

Protesting that he was no tramp, but seeing there seemed no hope of
securing rest or food under that inhospitable roof, the traveler took up
his baggage and hurriedly retreated from the apartment, just as a
general rush was made for him by the bystanders, the desire being to
seize upon his person with no peaceable intent.

It was not a part of McKenna’s business in those regions to have a
set-to with half a dozen infuriated and intoxicated men, though he would
willingly have risked something to give that inn-keeper a beating;
hence, he slackened not his speed until he had reached the middle of the
street, where he stopped a moment to consider which direction he should
take.

Here was a dilemma! Here was luck for him! To make matters worse, the
rain, which for some hours had threatened, began to pour down in
torrents. Presently a man made his appearance, coming from the bar-room
and approaching the detective. When near him the citizen said:

“Faith, an’ ye jist missed being kilt enthirely by the mane scuts there
within!”

McKenna gathered hope. This man was an immigrant from the ould sod.

“Where do you come from, and what is it ye’d be afther havin’ here?”

“I’m late from New York—later from Colorado—an’ what is it I’m here fur?
Is that it? What should a dacent Irish lad want whose stomach is full of
emptiness and ne’er a morsel of bread or mate in the wallet? What I want
is worruk, and somethin’ to relave my hunger! A place to slape in
wouldn’t be inconvanient, aither!”

This seemed to content the man from the tavern.

“An’ if ye are sakin’ work, you’re no thramp, for little’s the hand’s
turn of that they ever do; an’ I know you’re no thafe, from your accint,
which is like me own, barrin’ the Dublin twang, so I’ll even be better
to ye than the Dutchman—who, by the way, is not as bad as he seems. You
jist came upon him in an unlucky time, an’ the drink at the fore too!
Only yesterday it was that a brace of strollers stole away his only
cow—begging the pardon of the whiskey-barrel, an’ its contints is not
exactly suitable for swatening the coffee, sure,—and they druv her off
to the next neighbor’s beyant, where they sold the baste, fur all the
worruld as if they owned her—the blackguards! As natural as iver can be,
Mr. Staub—that’s the tavern-keeper’s name, an’ mine’s Timmins, be the
same token—has no love left to squander on tramps; an’ takin’ you fur
one—an’ where could have been his two eyes, an’ his ears, meanwhiles?—he
gives you the back of his hand nately, and the hardest words he can lay
his crooked tongue to! He thought you a thramp, and he mistrated you as
one! Still, Staub’s a clever man when the drink’s not in him, an’ many’s
the poor fellow I’ve seen him take in out of the cowld, and give a sup
an’ a bed, who hadn’t the shadow o’ sixpence to bless himself wid!”

“Sure, an’ I’m no tramp!” answered McKenna, “an’ what I wants in the way
of atin’ an’ drinkin’, for the present, at laste, I’m able to pay fur!
I’ve two strong arms, an’ an honest heart, God be thanked! an’ when my
cash is all spent, I can dig, or do something honorable for more,
without help from such rubbish as big Misther Staub!”

Timmins, the soft-hearted, responded:

“I’ll e’en do better by you, me laddy-buck, than the scullions you have
left! Come home wid me fur the night, an’ stay longer if ye likes; you
are as welcome as the birds in spring—an’ tho’ its comin’ late we are,
my old woman will give you somewhat for your stomach, an’ a bed to rest
your tired bones upon, at all events!”

As an argument in favor of his acceptance of the offer, just at that
moment the rain poured down heavier than before, and the wind beat the
large drops into the faces of the men with a force which was
uncomfortable.

“I’ll go wid you, Mr. Timmins—an’ many thanks for your kind offer!”

And, taking one valise in his left hand, keeping the right free for
whatever might occur, the operative committed the remainder of his
portable property to Timmins’ care. Permitting that personage to lead
the way, they started.

“I wonder if I’m about to be robbed and murdered, thus early in my
career in these mountains,” was the thought that flitted through the
detective’s mind as he followed the form of his retreating host, with
his right hand resting on his repeater, which he had convenient in his
coat pocket. But nothing to further excite his fears occurred. Timmins
only appeared anxious to keep the traveling bag from the rain, by
tucking it carefully under his arm, and covering it with the folds of
the cape of his heavy cloak. They advanced rapidly, and Timmins, in
default of a lantern, exerted himself to illuminate their devious way
with sharp sallies of genuine humor, elicited in original comments upon
the state of the weather and “illigant condition of the highway.” The
stranger laughed heartily, which was compensation sufficient for the
jester, who was merely trying to make himself agreeable.

“An’ here we are, betimes, hard by the home of Mr. and Mrs. Timmins—and
that’s me an’ my good wife—but divil a glimmer of a light is there in
the windy, which is something uncommon with Mrs. Timmins!”

The conclusion of these remarks brought the pedestrians, soaking wet,
and desirous of putting themselves beyond the reach of the rain, by the
side of a large wooden structure, which might be tenantless, from all
that any outsider could hear, or see, for that matter, in the darkness
of the night.

“Phat’s up now, I wonder?” said Timmins, who found his effort to enter
the place stubbornly resisted from within. There was no bolt or bar, he
said, but come open the door would not. A soft, partly yielding but
insurmountable obstacle, resisted the pushing of the two men, who
unitedly tried to shove in the barrier.

Then movements were heard inside, and presently came a woman’s voice:

“Is that you, Tony?”

“Yes! It is _me_! An’ phat the wonder is it that fastens the door? It’s
kaping myself an’ a stranger out here in the drinchin’ rain, ye are!”

“Wait a minute, Tony. An’ glad I am, sure, that ye came as ye did, and I
not cold as a stone, fit fur me grave clothes! Let me light the candle
an’ maybe I can help yez! It’s the body of a man—whether alive or dead,
I can’t say, that so bolts the door agin yez! An’ me an’ the wee childer
here all alone until this minit! God be praised, ye came in the very
nick of time!”

Here was a denouement for the detective’s first day’s work, and one he
was not well pleased with. His companion, Timmins, from the manner in
which he spluttered and tore about the front yard, was either very badly
frightened or very mad, McKenna could not decide which.

“I’ll soon see who the scoundrel is, an’ dead or alive, I wouldn’t stan’
in his boots for any small sum! When I get at him, I’ll——”

A light now appeared within, and the man’s threat was cut short by
hearing the creaking of boards, as if some person carefully crossed the
floor. Then Timmins put his face to the entrance, and a whispered
consultation between himself and his wife took place, the purport of
which the traveler could not comprehend.


                               ————●————

                              CHAPTER IV.

                       STIRRING UP A WASP’S NEST.


They were not long in suspense, as Mrs. Timmins, after closing the
interview with her husband, gathered resolution to grasp the seemingly
inanimate body by the arm, and to drag it away from the entrance.
McKenna and his friend then went into the place—used as kitchen,
washing, and dining-room, in accordance with the prevailing custom of
the locality. Anthony Timmins at once seized upon the pewter
candlestick, held the flame of the taper close to the face of the
supposed dead man, almost scorching the eyebrows in his eagerness to
discover who it might be; then, breaking out into loud laughter, he
returned the light to Mrs. Timmins, raised his two hands above his head,
slightly bending his knees as if about to sit down on the floor, his hat
falling off sidewise meantime, and fairly shouted, between the rapidly
following explosions of uncontrollable mirth which had quickly taken the
place of his former anger:

“By the hill o’ Howth! An’ its only poor ould man Fox, of the wee patch
beyant the mountains, as harmless as a suckin’ dove, but, to his own
sorrow, a great drunkard! He’s now what wan might call down, dead
insensible wid the poteen he has taken.”

And Timmins could scarcely postpone more laughter long enough to
introduce his companion to Mrs. Timmins, after which brief ceremony he
said:

“No wonder on earth that we couldn’t open the door, wid all this lump of
fat an’ iniquity braced forninst it! He weighs two hundred poun’ ’f wan
ounce; an’ besides, the heel of his shoe wor caught in the crack under
the door—which by the same token is wider nor will be comfortable next
month—holdin’ it like a wedge, nate and tight against us!”

“Oh, what a dawshy clodhopper I must have been,” said Mrs. Timmins, in
an excellent brogue, “to be scared at ould man Fox! He’s his own worst
inimy, is Paddy Fox, an’ he came here unbeknownst to me—as to who he
wor, at laste—just as it grow’d dark, an’ before I had lighted the
candle, an’ he stumbled into the kitchen, an’ I didn’t know him from the
deil’s own grandfather; an’ I jist ran into the bedroom, the childer wid
me, an’ fastened the door, expectin’ every minute he’d rouse up an’
begin to rob the house! I supposed he wor a tramp, for all the wurruld,
an’ I didn’t dare make a noise, or strike a light, for fear we’d be
murthered outright! An’ how glad I wor when I heard your steps on the
gravel outside!”

So the fright about a dead man barring the door was not much of a scare
after all. At least, there was very small cause for disturbance, as a
drunken person was not such an extraordinary thing to see in that house.
Fox was allowed to remain where he was, Timmins having thrown an old
quilt over him to keep him warm, saying that he would “be all right by
the mornin’!”

Mrs. Timmins, good woman that she was, rekindled a fire and prepared an
excellent supper for the stranger, consisting of bacon and eggs, and
baked potatoes with strong coffee, to which McKenna helped himself with
unwonted relish. After satisfying his appetite, he and Timmins played a
couple of games of euchre, took a few drinks from a keg kept in one
corner, supported on a couple of sticks, and which was under the
exclusive control of Mrs. Timmins—she sold the liquor to her customers
from a tin cup—then the wet, weary, and sleepy traveler retired to his
bed quite in the dark, in a room in the second story of the building,
first having thrown his damp clothes down the staircase to Mr. Timmins,
with a request that they be allowed to dry before the kitchen fire.

Anthony Timmins and his wife kept what was known as a railroad
boarding-house or tavern, for the accommodation of laborers employed on
the adjacent tunnel, and a fair living, and something smart beside, did
they realize from their trouble and toil, Mrs. Timmins being not at all
assisted by the three tow-headed children which followed close to her
heels wherever she went, and called her “mother.”

The slumbers of the detective were sound and unbroken until the hour
that the sunlight of another day fell full on his face and disturbed,
and finally awakened him. Looking about, he discovered there were three
beds in the low room—one, by way of compliment, devoted to his own
particular use, while each of the others held two men, of whose presence
the previous night he had been entirely ignorant. Waiting until his
room-mates had gone out, McKenna went to the door and shouted to Timmins
for his garments, which were soon brought up by that personage, wishing
him at the same time “the top o’ the mornin’, an’ many happy returns of
the same!” The clothing was warm and dry, and the officer felt greatly
refreshed by his season of repose. At the breakfast-table he learned,
not greatly to his surprise, that the company he had to keep was none of
the most select; still it was as good as he had reason to anticipate
under the circumstances. In fact, he thought if he should secure, for
the future, equally decent associates, he might consider himself
fortunate. The men about him asked no questions, but devoured their meal
almost in silence, and then set out for their work on the tunnel.

The long table of unplaned boards—covered with a coarse oil-cloth, which
had once been of a variegated mahogany color, but had faded with much
rubbing and use to a dark dirt hue—was flanked on either side by equally
rough wooden benches of the same length, on which the boarders sat when
they partook of their food. There were no chairs in that house; those
too proud to occupy the benches while at dinner could stand up and
welcome. Furnishing the table were broad tin plates, common horn-handled
iron knives and forks, which the landlady had not for months found time
to give the polishing rub of “brick-dust and a split potato;” pewter
table and tea spoons; a can for vinegar; salt-cellar, and pepper-box of
japanned tinware; pint cups, also of tin, for the coffee; a quart
measure for the milk; another for molasses—sugar was not permitted on
that table. There was fresh bread in plenty, and meat and vegetables,
especially white, mealy potatoes, cooked to a turn, with their jackets
on, in absolute profusion. Butter appeared in bountiful supply, but it
was too vigorous, some of the boarders said, for any other use than to
harness to a carriage to draw grist to mill. In other words, its flavor
was rank and taste abominable. McKenna felt that such food was not good
for him the moment he entered for his breakfast, and, using everything
beside that was nourishing, he quietly gave the butter a deservedly wide
berth.

After the morning meal, and having given some attention to his boots,
which were drawn on with difficulty—first having to soak them well with
melted tallow—McKenna took a short stroll to the railway work, where he
had a talk with the boss, and with some of the hands who were
fellow-boarders. He gleaned from the former that employment for him,
just then and there, must be counted as out of the question. Labor was
to be done, but the price was low, while workingmen were more plentiful
than whortleberries on the mountain. There were too many German miners
and laborers in the vicinity for the prosperity of the Mollie Maguires,
he could easily see, without asking. After making a few other calls, the
traveler returned to Timmins’, where, in his triple-bedded apartment, he
managed to indite a hurried report to Mr. Franklin, informing him of his
whereabouts and movements. This he succeeded in depositing in the
post-office. The address upon the envelope was such as to disarm and
thwart suspicion. It had been prepared for his use before leaving
Philadelphia.

In the afternoon rain fell heavily, and therefore no work could be done
outside the tunnel excavation; even inside it was wet and uncomfortable,
and many of the men remained at home, some drinking, others dancing and
singing, and still others whiling away the time playing various games at
cards. Among these laborers were several members of the Miners’ and
Laborers’ Union, but they were all reticent, after concurring in the
generally expressed opinion that mining and railroading were dull and
money very scarce everywhere in those regions.

The ensuing day the agent settled his bill at Timmins’ tavern, and, as
the weather had cleared up finely during the night, bid adieu to the
landlord, his wife and family, and started for Schuylkillhaven. Arrived
there, he found many men at work, but no possible chance for him to earn
a dollar. The operations carried on were mostly for the railroad. He
encountered a few miners just from the collieries above, and they gave
the visitor nothing in the way of hopefulness as to the condition of
affairs where they had been. Laborers could hardly find engagements
anywhere. And as for his especial subject of pursuit and object of
inquiry, the element predominating was still German; hence, there was
very little to detain him in the neighborhood.

The next point attended to was Auburn, about five miles from Port
Clinton, a small country place, boasting a couple of planing-mills and a
number of business houses. Here nothing transpired of importance, and
McKenna toiled back on foot over the mountain, toward the hour of
sunset, to Schuylkillhaven, where he had deposited his baggage.

A day later the stranger went to Tremont, and thence to Sweet Arrow.
Returning to the first-mentioned place about the middle of the
afternoon, he formed the acquaintance of a number of his countrymen; but
they had no hints to volunteer—and he was very far from asking any
foolish questions in this connection—showing that they were even aware
of the existence of such an organization as the Mollie Maguires.

A day later McKenna encountered Nicholas Brennan, a coal-miner from the
vicinity of Mt. Pleasant, near Minersville. Brennan gave out that he was
also a traveler, engaged in going from one place to another for the
purpose of securing work at his calling for the winter. Their pursuits
being ostensibly similar, McKenna and Brennan soon struck up an
intimacy. After the latter had more than once tasted liquor at McKenna’s
expense, he thawed out considerably, became pliable and talkative, and
soon had much to remark about “the power that made English landlords
quake.” But he gave it as his opinion that such a force could accomplish
very little, if anything, in the anthracite country of Pennsylvania, and
pretended to believe the Miners’ and Laborers’ Union, which had recently
been formed, would prove of no benefit to working-men. Brennan prided
himself upon his discerning shrewdness, and said, early in his
conversation with the operative, he knew, at once, upon first fixing his
eye on him, that he, McKenna, was a boatman, or canal hand, the
correctness of which allegation, for his own purposes, that gentleman
felt constrained to acknowledge. Brennan recommended his new-found
associate to go to Tamaqua, or Mahanoy City, where he thought mining was
moving more briskly than in any other portion of the State—especially
was it more lively than in the neighborhood of Pottsville. He concluded
his lengthy harangue by remarking, in a significant way—referring to the
localities named:

“There’s the ground where the boys are true!”

“Then they are the very places I want to get work in,” responded
McKenna, and, watching the countenance of Brennan, he was sure he
discovered in it an expression of disappointment, as though the reply
made to “the ground where the boys were true” was not exactly the one he
had anticipated receiving. Pretending, however, not to notice it, the
detective proposed a game at cards, “jist for the fun of the thing,”
and, after that ended, Brennan was so much under the influence of
spirits, his companion was forced to cut loose from him. Nothing more
could be elicited, but McKenna was well satisfied that, if not a
simon-pure Mollie Maguire, his late opponent in euchre knew more about
the society than he cared to impart to a stranger. He made mental note
of the words: “There’s the ground where the boys are true!” and could
not help thinking they were in some way connected with the mysterious
order. Brennan was kind enough to give him the names of some of his
friends in the mines; these he also treasured in his memory, to be made
use of as occasion presented.

The next day Brennan was perfectly sober, and, it being the first of
November and a Catholic holiday, he accompanied McKenna to church, and,
after service, introduced him to everybody he knew as “a young man from
Colorado, in quest of work,” the stranger soon becoming quite popular
with a certain class. In the afternoon all adjourned to a convenient
saloon, where McKenna kept up a continuous round of amusements for
several hours, relating wonderful stories of his adventures in the
United States Navy during the late war, all drawn from his own fertile
fancy, but certainly very interesting to his listeners, and by singing,
in good style, some genuine Irish melodies. Brennan and his companions
started, the same afternoon, for Pottsville, only three miles distant,
and urged McKenna to accompany them. He excused himself, on the score of
being compelled to await money, due him for work, which had been
promised by post at that place, and the young fellows reluctantly
departed without him.

Sunday, the second of November, passed without the occurrence of any
incident worthy of note. On the succeeding Monday our detective rode by
rail twenty-four miles, stopping at Pine Grove, where he found the
shafts still some seven miles distant, over a rough and hilly path, and
did not visit them. Small was the loss by this, however, as no work was
being prosecuted, and the employés were scattering to various localities
until such time as operations should be again commenced. After an
examination of the tanneries there, with a few small machine-shops,
without learning anything of value, he returned to Tremont, at which
place he met a man named John Delaney, a miner, who was seemingly on a
regular lark, disbursing his money lavishly, and imbibing drinks
industriously. Delaney was of Brennan’s opinion, thinking work would be
difficult to obtain in the mines, so few were being operated, and railed
loudly against the Philadelphia and Reading Coal and Iron Company,
charging all the existing troubles to that corporation. He boasted that
they—the miners—once kept the Company and their mines idle for eight
long months, and could do so again if goaded to it. He was equally
severe in his denunciations of German, Welsh and English miners, and
their “butties,” alleging that they—especially the Germans—had
everything their own way about the vicinity of Tremont, but it was
different in Shenandoah, Tamaqua, and other towns. Delaney was anxious
to introduce McKenna to all of his personal friends, and, in that
regard, was allowed to have his way, the detective properly considering
it well that he should know as many men of the right character as
possible. They might be useful as references at other localities. He
therefore expressed his hearty thanks to Delaney for his exertions in
this direction. The following day, having eschewed liquor for a season,
Delaney went with his new-discovered friend to Donaldson, where he made
him acquainted with the outside boss of the mines, going even as far as
to ask for work for the “young man,” who, he said, “was jist stharvin’
for somewhat to lay his honest, hard-workin’ hands to!” The boss could
do nothing, however; and, after examining the slopes and walking through
some of the gangways, talking with a miner here and there, they
revisited the upper air. Again it was discovered the Germans held the
ascendency in numbers and power, and managed to keep it; hence, there
was no opportunity for securing employment. He must seek elsewhere for a
body of the Mollie Maguires—the Donaldson mines were not their
abiding-place.

The next point on the list for examination was Middle Creek, two miles
distant, over the mountain, from Tremont, where the men were equally
unlucky, finding no work. A walk back, through rough roads, over
brambles and stones, and dodging laurel and alder bushes, gave the
pedestrians appetites for their suppers when they reached Tremont.
Delaney here separated from McKenna, after a few farewell glasses, and
started for Pottsville, at which place he said he was due, and had
friends and relatives.

During the succeeding Wednesday the detective remained in Tremont, and,
after dinner, enjoyed a walk on the railway track, the weather being
fine, continuing an intimacy previously begun between himself and the
switch-tender, an aged Emerald Islander, who was found sitting nigh the
entrance to his little box, or cabin—short, stumpy, gray-haired,
brown-faced, roughly clad, but honest and sturdy-looking withal—smoking
his pipe contentedly, and receiving pleasurably the cool breeze sweeping
up the valley. Mike Fitzgibbons, the switchman, was a genuine specimen
of the hard-working, steady, reliable Irish peasantry, and he was never
known to neglect a duty.

“An’ how is business wid ye the day?” asked McKenna, as he came up to
the old man’s station, preparing his tobacco meantime, and signaling by
a significant motion, easily understood by smokers, for a light for his
cutty-pipe, which was old and black, as well as fashionably short in the
stem. The switchman tendered his doodeen, which, having been employed,
the stranger returned to its owner, with thanks.

“Arrah! an’ about all days are the same to the likes o’ me! I am to the
fore all the time when I’m not slapin’ an’ atin’ wid Betty and the
childer. I jist mind the trains, to prevint misadventure. Sure, the
Company gives me fair wages, promptly paid, for that same!”

“Thrue for ye,” answered McKenna; “an’ hev ye any objection to me takin’
a seat by ye, on the settle forninst the wall, while I have a puff at me
pipe?”

“Not the laste in the worruld!” responded Fitzgibbons, making space for
the stranger on the bench. After resting and drawing away industriously
at his pipe for a few moments, McKenna remembered a Philadelphia
_Inquirer_ which he had obtained that forenoon and not yet examined,
and, taking it from his pocket, commenced reading. He knew this would
excite his companion’s curiosity. Soon Fitzgibbons remarked:

“Would ye be plazed to rade to me a bit? Me eyes are none of the best,
an’ the little I has I save fur the good of the Company. What do the
paper say about the State elections?”

“I’ll rade to ye wid pleasure,” said the agent, and he proceeded to give
all that he found of interest. After commenting at some length upon the
contents of the sheet, and having his pipe freshly filled with McKenna’s
fragrant tobacco, the switchman was more chatty. In a little while he
entered his box, and returned bearing in his hand a copy of the
well-known Boston _Pilot_, which he proffered to his comrade. After
skimming hastily over the Irish news and some telegraphic intelligence,
he came to an article headed, “The Mobocrats of Pennsylvania.” This he
read carefully aloud to the old man. It was a scathing blow at the
Mollie Maguires, giving them deserved condemnation, and appeared in the
shape of correspondence. After finishing it, McKenna asked:

“What is this all about?”

Evidently much excited, Fitzgibbons answered:

“But isn’t it a sarching piece, though? It slathers them butcherin’
vagabones widout mercy! O, I would like to know who has writ it!”

McKenna kept down his anxiety to learn more, and said nothing, when the
switchman continued:

“Ye have heard of the society? Av coorse ye have! An’ now they’ve got
across the big say, till America, an’ into the mines! But doesn’t that
article cut them deep, tho’? It has created quite a ruction here—and no
wonder! It was a great thing, the getting up of that piece! It do lay on
the lash to the backs of the Mollie Maguires in splendid style!”

The old man was evidently an opponent of the order, or he was
endeavoring to draw out the opinion of his friend. McKenna determined to
let him know what he was supposed to think, but which was the very
opposite of his real convictions.

“It must be that such writin’s will damage the interests of the Irish
people in the coal regions. Don’t you agree wid me in this?”

Fitzgibbons was touched at a tender spot and flared up in an instant,
moving involuntarily further from the operative, his dark but expressive
face ablaze with honest indignation, saying vehemently:

“No! I disagrees wid ye in that altogether! It is the Mollie Maguires
that’s doin’ the wrong! Such articles in the _Pilot_ will have a good
effect, an’ do somethin’—of which there’s pressin’ want—toward breakin’
up the clan! God knows it nades dispersin’ an’ punishin’ too! Such
bodies is a burnin’ shame an’ disgrace to the men in them, an’ they
befoul all Irishmen and all good Catholics! Ye naden’t be surprised if
ye mate them yoursel’! They’ve had ’em here, even, where there live so
few from our country! But Father McLaughlin druv ’em out wid the hardest
words ye iver heard from the lips of a clergyman! God prosper him for
that same! An’ since they left, we’ve had pace an’ quiet in town, wid no
killin’s and batin’s.”

It would not do for the listener to permit such an opportunity to say a
word in favor of his particular friends, the Mollie Maguires, to pass
unimproved. While the sentiments expressed were his own, to the letter,
he must dissemble and oppose them. Therefore he replied:

“Now, fur the life of me, I can’t see why Irish Catholics cannot have a
dacent, paceable society of their own—if there be the laste touch of
sacracy about it—widout the papers an’ the clergy interloguing and
opposing! Wur any harm done by the Masons and Odd Fellows, shure there
wouldn’t be a word in the public press about it. An’ what’s the raison
that this society should be abused?”

“You are all wrong! My experience goes agin’ the order! I knows some men
who hev bin members, but they come out of it. They saw enough! By my
sowl, I’d as soon go colloguing wid the devil, hoof, horns, tail and
all, as wid the murtherin’ rascals! Harken to this, now! If any wan of
the crew wur discharged from work an’ wanted fur to sake revinge—which
the same is swate the worruld over—he jist went to the headquarters of
the society, or to the president, or whativer they call him, which is
the head official, an’ made out that it wur from religious differences
he lost his place, or because he wur an Irishman; and then lots ud be
cast, sure, an’ two or more of the brothers—bad cess to such a
brotherhood!—must go, whether they would or no, an’ jist shoot down the
boss that had cut him off! O, ye may spake all yer soft words, an’ shake
yer head, an’ not belave me, fur I consider it awfully incredible
myself, that Irishmen will do such things; an’ ye may call me
distraught, an’ all that; but I knows what I says, an’ my advice is not
to be afther defendin’ the murtherin’, thavin’ set, if ye want to be
respected in this region of country! Don’t ye bother wid the Mollie
Maguires!”

Before McKenna had time for a reply, the afternoon passenger train came
shrieking around an abrupt curve, the switchman seized his keys and
flag, and ran off to attend to his duties; and the detective, pocketing
the Boston newspaper, intending to return it, retired to his
boarding-place. The _Pilot_, he thought, would prove a valuable document
to him, from the article he had been discussing.


                               ————●————




                               CHAPTER V.

                     COLD COMFORT IN THE MOUNTAINS.


The succeeding day McKenna returned to the switch-tender’s hut, and,
after obtaining permission to retain the Boston _Pilot_, their suddenly
suspended conversation was resumed. It is unnecessary to detail its
various points, but the detective learned while Fitzgibbons was a
decided and outspoken enemy of the Mollie Maguires, yet he was
thoroughly informed as to their movements throughout the coal regions.
This knowledge was secured by a careful study of the local newspapers,
and talking with his neighbors and friends formerly holding membership
in the organization. It was Fitzgibbons’s idea, judging after several
years’ close consideration of the matter, that the home-nests, the chief
dens, of the Mollies, might be located at Mahanoy City, Shenandoah,
Shamokin, Pittston, and Wilkesbarre, and that nearly all of the smaller
places had lodges of more or less magnitude. In one of these principal
strongholds McKenna must make his headquarters, but in which he could
only decide after personal investigation.

By the time the operative had remained a fortnight or more in the
mountains, much exposure to the weather and considerable out-of-door
exercise had wrought perceptible changes in his personal appearance. His
apparel fitted more to his satisfaction, and a certain awkwardness in
bearing was notably diminished. The cuticle covering his forehead,
cheeks, and hands was toughened. His complexion was darkened, while his
hair was lighter and longer. The unshaven chin had sprouted and grown a
tolerably heavy beard, and no attempt was made, by trimming, to shape it
handsomely or becomingly. His understanding of localities was
improved—and would continue to improve through travel and
examination—and his list of particular associates was rapidly growing
larger and more useful.

At Tower City, McKenna found Donahue’s saloon a popular resort for his
countrymen, and he at once honored it with his presence. Donahue, the
proprietor, was one day entertaining a number of his friends living at
Mahanoy City, when the stranger, “from Denver,” entered the room, and,
assuming a reckless air, with the signs of having indulged in a few
glasses of something more potent than water, soon made himself popular
with those present. This impression was increased by the rich stories he
related and the rare songs he sung. The next day he discovered, in the
same house, a second copy of the Boston newspaper, before alluded to,
containing an answer to the slashing attack upon the Mollie Maguires.
The later communication dated from Locust Gap, about four miles from
Tremont, and the charges of the earlier publication were all completely
negatived. Donahue’s attention was ingeniously called to the subject,
and he unsuspectingly answered that he had read the article, having
borrowed the journal from a neighbor for the purpose. In a short time
thereafter, the two men being alone, the saloon-keeper said:

“You must know that I was a mimber of the order, for two years and
upwards, but gave it up some time since, belaving it is not a good crowd
fur any wan, havin’ proper respect fur his good name, to be connected
wid. Still, a number of excellent friends of mine are holdin’ on, and
will not listen to raison, or be persuaded to cut adrift from the body.
I am sure that, one day, they will learn I’m quite right an’ they far in
the wrong. It wur very well wid us until the fighting begun at Mahanoy
City, betwixt the Burke and Duggan boys, the last showing themselves the
more powerful; but, faith, the effects of the battle can’t aisily be
wiped out, an’ these sharp newspaper writin’s are part of the results of
the contentions. I think the order is losing strength, in being split
up, inter smithereens like, by dissensions an’ broils, widout an’
within.”

Donahue was showing himself a man of more than ordinary intelligence.
After a judicious invitation to drink, at McKenna’s cost, he continued:

“Considerin’ the ladership hev fallen into wake an’ bad hands, an’ the
mimbers at loggerheads, one anent the other, all the time—to say nothing
about the opposition of the Bishop an’ the clargy—it would be just as
well if the counthry wur clane rid of the entire subject!”

“Mayhap you’re more’n half right, Mr. Donahue, but did ye niver think,
fur wan moment, the very order you condemn may be the manes—wid other
naded help—of bringin’ into union all the Irishmen in the coal ragions,
givin’ them protection an’ securin’ them their aqual rights?”

The detective was paving the way for future work, and would say nothing
against the Mollies.

“I’m more’n doubtful of that same,” returned the tavern-keeper, “such
mane men are at the helm! They’ll run the machine for their individual
profit, an’ use the power of the society for evil, an’ only evil,
purposes!”

“Fur that matther, this identical charge would hould good agin almost
any kind of combination, sacret or not sacret! Do ye think, now, spakin’
out honest an’ thrue, we should lay aside a good implement, jist fur the
simple an’ only raison we are in fear of its employment, by accident or
otherwise, fur unlawful ends?”

“Well, I see you are friendly wid the boys,” at last said Donahue, “an’
I’ll urge no further objection to them! Sure, I don’t belave it will be
fur the safety of my life an’ me house an’ property I should, but I
can’t help thinkin’ I have had plenty an’ to spare of ’em! Don’t let on
what I’ve been afther talkin’ to ye! It might do me harum! If you wants
to hear more about the fellows, I’ll refer ye to me paple at Mahanoy
City—I hev father, mother, an’ brothers there—an’ in fact, if ye same to
want it, I can send a letther by ye to the ould gintleman, who’ll recave
ye kindly, widout doubt. I hev an idea ye’ll do much better beyant than
here, an’ perhaps get work right off. Things is mighty dull an’ quare
hereabouts; there, they may not be quite so bad!”

At this time the clergyman of the town entered the saloon—he was a
quaint, little, jolly fat man, with long, fair hair, small, blue eyes,
and wore his gold-bowed spectacles as naturally as though nature had
handily framed his turn-up nose to properly support them. Of course the
remarks on the particular topic, so interesting to McKenna, were at once
suspended. The priest was engaged in disposing of admission checks to a
church fair, to transpire the following Saturday, and hoping the sooner
to get rid of him, and despite the utter impossibility that he would be
present at the diversion, McKenna purchased a ticket. Donahue did the
same, and the reverend gentleman was quite happy when he made his exit.
Then Donahue, unfortunately, had work to perform, but promised to
prepare the letter to his father in season for McKenna’s return from
Tower City, where he knew he had arranged to go that afternoon, and the
detective set out upon the expedition.

At Tower City the operative had his first experience in a coal-shaft of
any great depth. Having previously descended some steep slopes, and
examined the machinery for withdrawing the anthracite at other
collieries, the interior of an extensive mine he had not yet inspected.
While at the Upper Mine of Messrs. Rappalie & Co., in the vicinity, an
outside boss, about looking after some business below, invited McKenna
to descend in his company.

[Illustration: “_They were met on every side by a succession of heavy
supports and gaping caverns._”]

It was midday, with the sun shining brightly, when the two men stepped
upon the movable platform of the elevator, inside the shaft-house. In a
few moments they were settling swiftly, but at a uniform rate of speed,
down, down, as it seemed to the novice in such matters, even to the
foundations of the globe. For a brief period they were in total
darkness, and a sensation, as of seasickness, came over him. Still he
clung to his support and the uncomfortable feeling soon left him. As the
lower regions were reached, the traveler thought he would be far more
content if again breathing the clear ether above. The system experienced
absolute relief when the motion ceased, and the solid bottom of the
shaft was touched. But here it was like entering a new sphere. There was
dark above, below, and all around, only here and there relieved by dim
little stars, which were continually dodging downward, sidewise, and
upward, as though held by an unsteady hand. As his eyes acquired
familiarity with the situation, he saw that to each one of these erratic
satellites was attached the body of a living man—in fact, they were only
diminutive lamps which the miners and their helpers wore above the
visors of their hats to light them in their labors. The general effect
produced in the sombre recesses of the excavation, and the strange and
grotesque, as well as picturesque, shadows reflected back from the men’s
figures upon the walls and buttresses and floors, all defy description,
and must be seen to be understood. As far as the eye was able to
penetrate, in every direction, almost, the nodding demon with the
single, blazing orb, like a star, in the forehead, and bearing
glistening pick and bar, and drill and spade, was industriously working
away at the breast, tearing out the black diamonds, making more pillars,
and piercing further into the lode. Wandering from point to point in
pursuit of his errand, the boss kept on, and McKenna followed. In one
place he was startled and nearly deafened by the, to him, unexpected
explosion of a blast, close to his ear, as he thought, but really at
quite a safe distance. He involuntarily jumped aside, expecting that he
had been hit, but in a moment recovered his equanimity, seeing he was
not injured. They were met on every side by a succession of heavy
supports and gaping caverns, the former serving as props for the rocky
roof, preventing the falling in of the ground resting above, and the
latter leading to still other channels and gangways from which coal was
being brought. The air seemed heavy-laden, damp, and unhealthy, and the
path pursued, in many places, passed through lakelets of black water
reaching sometimes above the ankles. All was bustle and activity with
that army of underground toilers, drilling, blasting, loading,
tunneling, tamping down blasts, laying trains, breaking away coal and
running it down chutes to the floors, heaping it upon small trucks,
which in turn transported it to the base of the entering shaft, whence
it was elevated by steam power to the breaker, high above ground. Over
all were heard the sounds of the pumps, clangor of chains, and rattling
of picks, making harsh and jagged music, to the strains of which the
work advanced. It was no pleasant place to remain in, especially as a
looker-on, and McKenna was not illy pleased when the boss, taking
advantage of the ascent of a loaded elevator, asked him to return to the
region of daylight. The sensation experienced upon again encountering
the sunshine was painfully peculiar, the bright blaze almost blinding
him during the first few moments of the change. But presently the retina
was brought in conformity with the surroundings, and eyesight was fully
restored.

[Illustration: “_‘This will steady your nerves,’ said Kehoe!_”]

The breaker in which the coal is crushed, sorted, and prepared for use,
in its different sizes, is a long, dark, high and sloping-roofed
structure, generally of wood, to the uttermost peak of which, almost,
the anthracite, in lumps weighing ten, one hundred, and three hundred
pounds, is raised by the steam elevator—that is in shaft-mining—and
there emptied, or dumped into a huge hopper, or funnel, leading direct
to the crushing machinery. This consists of two immensely large and
heavy iron cylinders, provided with massive teeth which, when the
rollers revolve, munch the coal into larger and smaller fragments,
producing a crunching, grating sound, and finally casting it into a
channel beneath that conveys it to a succession of screens, through
which it is run, separating the coarser from the finer sizes. Under
these immense sieves come other sluices, still on an incline, and, after
having the slate abstracted by the hands of a gang of boys, engaged for
the purpose, the chestnut, range, stove, little egg, large egg, and
steamboat coal glides to the storehouse by the railway track, or, if
need be, direct to the cars in which it is transported to market.

The culm—or refuse coal, slate, and waste—is carried off and piled in
high embankments, by man and mule power. It is dumped at the outer end
of the temporary track, much after the style of a car-load of dirt in
building a grade for a railway. These residue heaps dot the coal
regions, as dark notes of admiration, showing to the traveler the great
amount of riches from which they have been eliminated and how vast the
aggregate of wealth yet remaining in the bosom of prolific mother earth.

Returning to his boarding-place, the traveler secured Donahue’s letter
to his father, and about the middle of the ensuing day took stage, with
three other gentlemen, for Minersville, some thirteen miles distant,
over the mountain and near Pottsville. Ordinarily but a couple of hours
would be consumed in making the trip, but the occupants of the stage
were no ordinary people and were not fated to make an ordinary journey.
They had not been long out when the sun was obscured by huge,
lead-colored clouds, and across the heavens drifted vapory masses of a
more fleecy character. Then a heavy snow-storm set in, adding to the
prevailing discomfort and making the progress of the mule team more
painfully slow. The passengers, none of whom knew McKenna, and none of
whom were personally known to him, made light of their troubles and gave
jokes plentifully and cheerfully upon the snow, the driver and his rig,
and concerning one another. It was true the conveyance and its
propellers and captain sadly needed repairs, the Jehu being in the sere
and yellow leaf of his age, having but one leg to stand upon—and that
troubled with rheumatism—while the mules were spavined and lame, the
vehicle shattered in cover and framework, and uneasy and creaking in its
running gear, not to speak of the harness, which seemed made of odds and
ends, selected from the refuse of some army collection, idle since the
close of the war. Still, up hill and down grade, the animals managed to
move at a little better than a snail’s pace.

Gradually the hillsides wrapped a winding-sheet of snow around them, as
though taking eternal farewell of earth, and the stunted pine and
hemlock and mountain ash took on a similarly white and beautiful mantle.
The highway, never too clearly marked, was to the eye of a stranger
entirely lost sight of, and nothing but an educated sense or instinct on
the part of driver and beasts could prevent the stage and its freight
from foundering by the wayside, or dashing suddenly and unexpectedly off
the brink of one of the numerous rocky precipices, among and around
which, in many a serpentine coil, wound the road they were trying to
follow. Once, when at its very verge, the driver saw a yawning gulf just
before him. He was barely in time to quickly draw in the reins, thus
saving himself and his passengers from certain destruction. But the
worst was not yet over. The mules would not back, do all their manager
could, and the travelers were forced to alight, put their shoulders to
the wheels, and extricate the vehicle without the aid of the team. This
consumed time, and it was nearly dusk before the wagon was once more in
the road and all mounted and ready to proceed.

“Pat. McCarthy, an old friend of mine down on Long Island, would say,”
remarked McKenna, while pushing at a wheel with all his strength, “that
this was almost aqual to workin’ your passage on the canal—drivin’ the
horse and walkin’ on the tow-path!”

This conceit restored good humor, and the unsteady coach resumed its
journey. Before darkness fully closed in the scene the most dangerous
portion of the route was traversed, and thenceforward, the course
sloping downward, the mules jogged on at a more lively pace, the
travelers reaching Minersville by nine o’clock at night, weary, sleepy,
and as one of the number truly said, “as sharp set for supper as a gang
of ravenous wolves.” When they alighted, the snow still descended, and
the prospect seemed good for fine sleighing on the morrow over all the
level country.

Entering the principal hotel, McKenna judged that his dress and presence
were again a bar to his introduction to respectable society. The
gracious and affable landlord—gracious and affable to all excepting the
roughly clad gentleman from Ireland—was with difficulty persuaded to
allow him to remain in the house. But finally he did consent, and under
its proper heading for the seventeenth of November, 1873, on the hotel
register, the detective inscribed the following:

                “_Jas. McKenna, Denver, Colorado Ter._”

The hotel-keeper was on the lookout for disreputable characters, as he
should be, but his humanity, added to the protests of the detective’s
late traveling companions, would not consent to his turning a person out
in the snow, possibly to freeze to death, even though his clothing were
poor and his face, hair, beard, and general appearance the opposite of
prepossessing. A five dollar note, which the stranger had changed at the
bar, while paying for a hot toddy for himself and the stage
passengers—not forgetting the driver—after the bill had been closely
scrutinized and pronounced not counterfeit, exerted its influence in
determining the matter, and prompted the innkeeper to be generous, even
though there was a remote chance that his business might suffer thereby.
The young man, it was decided, should have food for his stomach and a
place to sleep in. The supper was spread on a barrel-head, in the cold,
dreary slab kitchen, at the rear of the cook-room proper, through the
wide chinks in the walls of which the keen blast whistled mournfully,
and the snow-flakes stole in with a whisk and a whirl, painting delicate
and curiously enameled pictures on the greasy floor. His chair was like
that upon which the late James Gordon Bennett, senior, sat, when writing
his leading editorials for the embryo New York _Herald_—an inverted and
empty nail keg—but the food was warm and palatable, and he ate it in
silence, as he well knew that grumbling would result in no good. He was,
for the occasion, a wandering refugee, and must necessarily put up with
such treatment as those in his condition usually receive from the
world’s people. He could plainly hear the tantalizing clatter of
crockery, inhale the savory odor arising from epicurean dishes, and
listen to the conversation of other and more favored guests, coming from
the comfortable, well-lighted dining-hall, when the door chanced to be
open, and that was all. Later at night he climbed a rough ladder, nearly
at the top of the house, he believed, found his loft, with its straw bed
and blankets, and an old saddle for a pillow. Extinguishing his candle,
he rolled himself, full dressed as he was, in his coverings, and soon
fell asleep. Not all the insects in the place, nor the rats that ran
over him, nor the cats that made night hideous with their wailings and
spittings could, for more than a few moments at a stretch, banish sleep
from McKenna’s eyelids.


                               ————●————




                              CHAPTER VI.

                   POTTSVILLE AND THE SHERIDAN HOUSE.


The detective, after making a casual inspection of the place, during the
following day, was in many respects well suited with it. Usually
carrying on considerable trade, he found all the people of the town
complaining of dull times, even the collieries employing but few hands.
The blast-furnaces were in the same category. Wading through the snow,
during his walks about the streets, he chanced upon some men whose faces
were not new to his sight, having previously encountered them at
Schuylkillhaven, and he naturally resumed the intercourse there begun.
Nothing of particular importance resulted, however, excepting wet feet
and dread of impending rheumatisms and neuralgias.

He at once changed his quarters from the hotel to a private
boarding-house, where the style of living was less pretentious, the
price charged patrons not nearly so exhaustive of his finances—and yet
the accommodations, as far as this particular boarder was concerned,
were considerably more comfortable. Beside, he was quite at home, and in
a better position for work. And here were many acquaintances to form.

While insinuating himself into a new town, or community, McKenna
properly adopted widely differing devices, but an extended experience
instructed him that the best course to pursue, in any given case of the
sort, was the one appearing the most natural. It was a cardinal
principle, impressed upon his mind, never to make open and direct
inquiries regarding people and things of which he was really in search—a
place for permanent employment was, as the reader has all along
understood, merely a cover for his actual purpose in visiting the coal
country. In fact, unless it brought him in close contact with the right
men, and revealed to him hidden things, in no other way attainable, a
chance for himself to dig in the mines might, for the present, be
deferred. It would be well, he believed, after a while, to divert
attention from his real occupation. But to look up a job was a good
excuse for much traveling, over a large field, with the topography of
which he was required to become accurately familiar. Private objects he
left to be worked out in a private way, occasionally giving them a
slight and unremarked start, or direction, as he went from place to
place.

Night was his favorite time for accomplishing progress. Then his friends
were generally relieved from labor and gathered where they could be
reached. He sauntered unconcernedly about, after darkness had set in,
and if he heard a row, or “bit of a shindy” going on in a drinking
place, would enter and make himself in some manner companionable with
the persons within—excepting they chanced to be of the character of Mr.
Staub, the portly landlord at Port Clinton, who proved so inhospitable,
mistaking the agent for a thief—and in that event he usually caused
himself to become invisible as rapidly as possible. With an assumption
of unlimited assurance, and pretending to be more than half way under
the influence of liquor, other conditions being favorable, he broke out
with such a roaring, rollicking ditty as he supposed might please those
about him, or, if he felt in the mood, began a spirited Irish jig,
performed with much agility and many comical contortions of countenance
and body, to the measure of no music at all, excepting he chose to
whistle a tune meanwhile. In the course of a little time, the out-door
training, and the exercise in singing and dancing, made him quite an
expert, and his fame preceded him from Schuylkillhaven to Summit, and,
as he learned from his companions, had journeyed even as far as
Pottsville. At any rate, he never failed, with those in whose company he
cared, for the purposes of his undertaking, to be received, in
immediately placing himself upon a secure and friendly footing. The
climax of miner’s friendship was usually reached by asking the persons
present to come to the bar and indulge in something to drink, if it was
to be had, at his expense; otherwise, the invitation emanated from some
one of the company and included the stranger. Either result was equally
satisfactory.

If he happened, as he sometimes would, to fall in with rogues—indeed his
search was for and among this class—he had prepared a device and history
calculated quickly to attract their sympathies and give him a warm place
in their circle.

When in the presence of sober, civil, and sedate people—which was
occasionally the case—the operative tried another and different scheme,
perhaps relating a cheerful ghost-story, or giving one or more of the
many pathetic, patriotic, or sentimental ballads, of which he had quite
a collection stored away in his brain to be expended upon such
associates. In almost any company of his own countrymen he was certain
of finding hearty welcome, and, as it was among Irishmen he expected to
labor, he scarcely ever essayed entrance to the homes of persons of
other nationalities. The time might come, he supposed, should he succeed
in his labors, when the doors of most respectable families from his
native land, even, would be closed against him—but, at the end, he
believed he would be perfectly justified in the course he was pursuing.

The storm, in the opening of which he entered Minersville, continued,
snow falling almost incessantly during three or four days, and the
operative could not meanwhile accomplish much in the streets. As soon as
the sun came out again, and the paths and roads were broken over the
mountains, he visited Miner’s Hill, two miles away, returned to
Minersville, and then took the horse car for Pottsville. His first work
in that city was to secure a cheap and decently comfortable
boarding-place, which he found at the residence of Mrs. O’Regan, in East
Norwegian Street. The widow kept house neatly, beside a bottle of
poteen, from which, without paying license, she sold an occasional drop.

A visitor’s impressions of Pottsville, when first beholding its spires
of churches and evidences of industry and thrift, from the heights
above, cannot well be other than pleasing. The scenery encompassing the
town is bold and rugged, and the descent by car to the Schuylkill, and
Norwegian Creek, on whose high banks it is lodged, rapid and inspiring;
and once having arrived in its handsomely-built streets, to one
unaccustomed to see cities perched upon steep mountainsides, the sight
is well calculated to evolve surprise. Having some twelve thousand
inhabitants, there is in it much enlightenment and great wealth.
Abundantly provided with handsome and elegant churches and
school-houses, imposing business structures and beautiful residences,
Pottsville enjoys an enviable reputation as a healthful and pleasant
place for summer residence. One especial point of interest is the costly
and artistic monument to Henry Clay. It is of pure white marble, in the
shape of a fluted column, rising from a massive square pedestal, and
surmounted by a full-length statue of the great Defender. The
hotels—among which stand pre-eminent Pennsylvania Hall and the
Exchange—are unsurpassed in the State. There is a large and commodious
court-house, and a county jail rivaling in size and completeness of
officers and appointments some of the larger State penitentiaries. It
also has an Academy of Music, in which operatic and theatrical
entertainments are given by traveling troupes.

Pottsville is the concentrating point for an extended radius of rich
mining country, and the depot of supplies for an equally wide circle.

The surroundings in this part of Schuylkill County are, some of them,
deserving of national celebrity. Among these is Mount Carbon, towering
in height, broad, black, gloomy and stupendous; and, at its base, stand
the Mansion House—a very agreeable place of resort—and a number of
fashionable residences. Further away is a bit of natural landscape,
pronounced one of the most striking in the country. It is “Tumbling Run
Dam,” which has been painted by several master hands, and, in
picturesqueness and sublimity, is worthy the drawing many times more.
Here the waters of the stream, cut across by a heavy obstruction of
sturdy rock, are turned abruptly aside, and rush, in a foaming, misty
torrent, down, down, a steep side descent, torn and divided into
innumerable smaller cascades, again uniting with the still, broad
expanse below. Tall pines, stunted cedars, and noble oaks border the
river on either shore, and, under the shadow of the overhanging barrier,
are piled, in artistic confusion, great heaps of sharp and jagged rocks,
seemingly rent from adjacent peaks by giant hands.

To change the subject from the sublime to the real and practical:

Among the occupants of Mrs. O’Regan’s house was a young man named
Jennings, apparently possessing more than ordinary intelligence, and,
the afternoon of McKenna’s arrival, knowing he was a stranger, this
sociable person proposed to show his new-found friend the sights to be
seen in the city. McKenna accepted the offer, and the two started out,
not intending to be long absent. During the visits made to different
places, of course the saloons were not omitted, and both of the men
drank somewhat, but no more than to them seemed respectable and
companionable. The operative was introduced by Jennings to a number of
his intimate associates and friends, but met none of those with whom he
was anxious to open communication.

As they were on Center Street, passing quietly along, the stranger read
a sign over the door of a liquor store, or tavern, “Pat. Dormer,” and
said

“Let’s go in here!”

“Its no place for us,” answered Jennings. “You are not of ‘the stuff,’ I
guess! At least, I know _I_ am not!”

“‘The stuff!’ Phat is it ye mane by ‘the stuff’?”

“Come away, across the street, and I’ll tell you! Its not the safe or
proper thing to be conversing of such things so near this particular
house!”

So saying, Jennings led the way to another corner, where the young men
stopped, well out of the sweep of the wind, in the lee of a large
building, and the conversation was at once resumed by Jennings:

“Dormer is a _captain_!”

“Captain of a militia company, is it ye mane?”

“No! That’s not it! I believe that you are a good sort of a fellow, and
I think I may venture to warn you—yet I want you to promise me never to
repeat what I say. It might lead to trouble!”

“Av coorse, I’ll be as silent as the catacombs of Agypt! Niver you fear
Jim McKenna fur that, sure!”

“You must understand, then, that Pat Dormer is a captain of the
Sleepers!”

“One of the notorious sivin, we rade about, is he? Indade, an’ I
supposed they were all kilt entirely, more’n thirteen hundred years
ago!”

“No! Not one of that number, but of the great secret order, here called
the Sleepers!’

“An’ phat are the Slapers? Plaze to explain it—or is it another
conundrum you are after axin’ me?”

“The Sleepers are the Mollie Maguires! There’s a heap of them in this
district, and Dormer is, or was, an officer high in authority in the
organization. You’ve certainly heard of the society?”

“Sure, an’ I hev heard much about them in the ould counthry! But nothing
till America! Are you sure they’ve ever crossed the say?”

“They have, and there are thousands of them in this and some adjoining
counties. If you stop here awhile you’ll read about some of their work!
They do not rest long without doing something in the way of murder or
outrage!”

The young man then proceeded, with some particularity, to relate to his
apparently astonished listener many of the stories he had gathered
regarding the Mollie Maguires, with an outline of their known aims and
objects. His words do not call for repetition here, as they allude to
things already within the reader’s knowledge. Jennings, in conclusion,
remarked:

“Of course _I_ do not belong to the order—would not if I could, and
could not if I would—as I am American born and both of my parents not
from Ireland. But there are any number of them in the neighborhood.
Dormer is a sort of King Bee among the brethren, and his house their
rendezvous when in the city. Dormer filled the office of County
Commissioner for some six years in all, but was defeated at the last
election, through the interference of the society, which, for some
reason, during a short time was opposed to him, but I hear it talked
that he is in its good graces again, ready once more to run for office,
should occasion offer. He was once quite a respectable man, but place
and a long lease of power, and bad liquor taken by wholesale, have
brought him to moral and almost physical ruin. One great fault that the
order found with him was that he had affiliated with some other secret
associations popular among Protestants. He was, and is now,
comparatively, a very powerful man. Standing six feet four inches in his
stockings, and pulling the beam at two hundred and thirty pounds, he is
considered a dangerous individual to tamper with!”

“As my countrywomen are often heard to remark, ‘what a handsome corpse
he would make, to be sure!’ What do Dormer look like, in other regards?”

“His hair is gray, eyes light hazel, and he has a countenance, which,
from its mildness of expression, can be taken as no index to his inward
character, for he is cruel and bloodthirsty, especially when in his
cups. He calls his hotel the Sheridan House—you see that it is popular.
There are many people constantly going in and coming out! But such as
you and I do not belong there!”

The young man again cautioned McKenna to say nothing of his revelations,
and, after promising compliance, they entered a saloon, had some
refreshments, and then went home in time for supper.

The detective could not retire to his bed that night without at least
attempting to see the man he had heard so much about. He might prove the
very person he desired to meet. Therefore, excusing himself by saying he
needed to make some purchases up town, he procured a lamp, went to his
bedroom, carefully examined his revolver, placed it convenient in his
hip pocket, and sallied forth. Making sure, after walking some distance,
that Jennings was not in the vicinity, he soon reached Dormer’s saloon.


                               ————●————




                              CHAPTER VII.

                 BLOODY RECORD OF THE MOLLIE MAGUIRES.


For the purpose of properly carrying out the _rôle_ of a truthful
historian of actual occurrences, we will change the scene, for a short
season, and, leaving McKenna to seek adventure with Pat Dormer and his
associates, in Pottsville, take a view of acts performed in the same
portion of the country, several years anterior to the time heretofore
alluded to.

The Mollie Maguires were more than usually active and bloodthirsty in
1865. On the 25th of August of that year, David Muhr, superintendent of
a colliery, was killed in Foster township. He was shot on the public
highway, in the broad light of day, within two hundred yards of the
house he was employed in, and where a large number of men were
congregated, all of whom heard the report of firearms, and many being
involuntary witnesses of the transaction. While this was the fact, no
reliable testimony could be elicited by the Commonwealth, when the
matter was under investigation, fixing the commission of the butchery
upon any suspected party. Nobody knew the men, where they had come from,
or where they had flown to. It was reported that signals had been seen
burning that night on the hills, soon after the occurrence, and it was
surmised they were built by confederates, to aid the principals in the
murder to make their way to safety.

Again, on the tenth of January, 1866, Mr. Henry H. Dunne, a well-known
citizen of Pottsville, and superintendent of one of the largest
coal-mining corporations in all that circuit of country, was murdered on
the turnpike, within two miles of the city, while riding home in his
carriage, from a visit to a colliery over which he had control. Even up
to the present date, no arrests have been made, nor has any information
presented itself which promises to lead to the apprehension of the
assassins. That they killed Mr. Dunne through complicity in some labor
troubles was always the prevailing belief.

[Illustration: _“The fatal shots were discharged by the assassins, from
their ambush, near the road.”_]

To continue the barbarous record, on Saturday, the seventeenth of
October, 1868, Alexander Rae, another mining superintendent, was killed
on the wagon road, near Centralia, in the township of Conyngham,
Columbia County. Several persons were distrusted, and a number arrested,
charged with the crime, and a strong chain of circumstantial evidence
made out by the Commonwealth against them. The highway on which the
event occurred was that passing from Centralia to Mt. Carmel, in
Northumberland County, and the exact location of the tragedy at a point
distant about a mile and a half from the latter place, in the
neighborhood of a spring where, for the convenience of travelers, there
had been erected a rude watering-trough, so that men, as well as
animals, might quench their thirst. Mr. Rae was riding in his buggy, at
half-past nine o’clock in the morning, coming from his home, and going
in the direction of the Coal Ridge Improvement Company’s colliery. He
was a peaceable, inoffensive, but naturally fearless man, entirely
unarmed, and only intent, at the time, on performing his duty to his
employers in the pursuit of his regular calling. The fatal shots once
discharged by the assassins, from their ambush near the road, the actors
in the drama, without waiting to learn the result of their bloody work,
fled precipitately to their refuge in the mountains, and for a long time
entirely avoided capture, or even the shadow of suspicion. The lifeless
remains of Mr. Rae were discovered, Sunday morning, pierced by six
bullets, and resting near the spot where the attack had been made. As a
natural consequence of such an outrage, the utmost indignation pervaded
the community in which the victim had for years been a widely-known and
much-respected resident. The particulars, as far as they were learned,
were repeated from person to person, and the news spread like wildfire
to the most distant parts of the coal country. Mr. Rae left an estimable
widow and six children to mourn his death. John Duffy, of Mahanoy City,
Schuylkill County, Michael Prior, of Branchdale, Thomas Donahue, of
Ashland, both in the same county, and Pat Hester, of Mt. Carmel
township, Northumberland County, _as was then believed_, were the
assassins. Some change in this regard was made by subsequent events. Pat
Hester was a married man, forty-five years of age, and had several young
children. Prior was also married, said to be forty years of age. Donahue
had a wife and one child, and was apparently forty-three. Duffy was a
bachelor, of about twenty-five years. Thomas Dooley, of Palo Alto,
Schuylkill County, standing, by his own confession, in the position of
an accomplice in the wicked assassination, about a month after the
commission of the deed gave out facts which caused the apprehension of
the others just named. The cause came up, was heard on an application
for a writ of _habeas corpus_, before Judge Kline, one of the Associates
of Schuylkill County; and all the defendants were held for and sent to
Columbia County jail to await trial, which begun at Bloomsburg, Tuesday
afternoon, the second of February, 1869. Donahue, Prior, Hester, and
Duffy were brought into court, arraigned by the Prothonotary, and a plea
of “not guilty” entered on the part of each. Upon application of Mr.
Freeze, for the defense, separate trials were granted, and the
Commonwealth elected to proceed against Donahue. Wednesday morning the
prisoner entered court, accompanied by the sheriff, and took a seat by
his counsel, Messrs. John W. Ryon, John G. Freeze, Meyer Strouse, S. P.
Wolverton, and Wm. A. Marr, an array of talent which was well met by
that included in the list of counsel for the Commonwealth, Messrs. Linn
Bartholomew, Robert F. Clark, Edward H. Badly, M. M. L’Veile, and E. R.
Ikler, the last-named the District Attorney. After a patient hearing the
defendant was acquitted by the jury, and the prosecution, thereafter,
thought it advisable to abandon the rest of the indictments. If Donahue
could not be convicted—and that had been demonstrated by the defeat in
his case—it was considered by the District Attorney and his corps of
assistants it would be impossible, at that time, to fasten the murder
upon any of the remaining defendants.

[Illustration: _He fired a pistol shot into the left breast of the
victim._]

So commanding and pervading in the community was the subtle power of the
Mollie Maguires, it was with the utmost difficulty that a jury could be
secured to try the cause, and so abject had become the condition of
terror under which the people submissively bowed their necks, seeing no
possible avenue of escape, that witnesses accredited with knowledge of
important points bearing against the prisoners, dare not, in fear of
their lives, mount the witness stand.

So united were the Mollie Maguires, or whatever at that time they were
called, they swore to _alibis_ without number, and barred all further
immediate proceedings.

The next important outrage of this character, charged to the sanguinary
clique under consideration, was that upon the person of Wm. H.
Littlehales, Superintendent of the Glen Carbon Coal Company, which
occurred March 15, 1869. Mr. Littlehales was also killed on the road, in
Cass township, Schuylkill County, while _en route_ for his home in
Pottsville. The act was witnessed by several persons, but the
perpetrators escaped, and, up to the hour that I sent James McParlan,
otherwise James McKenna, into the coal region, no information had been
obtained concerning the identity of the guilty persons.

Frequent violent outcroppings of the organization also occurred in
Carbon County, which adjoins Schuylkill, extending over a period of
fifteen years, and including the killing of F. W. S. Langdon, Geo. K.
Smith, and Graham Powell, all of whom were either superintendents of
collieries, or in some manner connected with mining operations. Mr.
Smith was assailed by a body of murderers in his own dwelling and
quickly dispatched, almost in the presence of his panic-stricken family.
Although several persons were under the ban of suspicion, and supposed
to have participated in the affair, it was impossible, until after the
lapse of many years, to obtain any information as to the absolute guilt
of the mistrusted parties. Some of these were then arrested, put in jail
at Mauch Chunk, and in a short time thereafter forcibly rescued, at
night, by their associates in the order.

It appeared that superintendents and bosses might continue to be shot
down, and there remained no power in the law for reparation. The
assassins were sure to escape.

The object of many of these dark deeds was doubtless revenge. But the
track of the avenger—or supposed avenger—was covered, as with the
obliterating leaves of autumn, and not to be followed. The
assassinations were all skilfully planned, relentlessly carried out, and
the bleeding bodies and evidences on the ground of a deadly struggle
were all remaining to tell the tale of cruelty. The country was
disgraced, but seemingly there was no help for it.

In 1870 occurred the murder of a man named Burns, near Pottsville, and
nothing was learned regarding his assassins.

But the crowning act of the Mollie Maguires, up to the time of my
engagement in the matter of their investigation, and the one reaching
the culmination of many previous and similar events, which exasperated
the good people of the anthracite region to the pitch where endurance
ceases to be a virtue, was the unprovoked killing, during the early
evening of December 2, 1871, of Morgan Powell, Assistant Superintendent
of the Lehigh and Wilkesbarre Coal and Iron Company, at Summit Hill,
Carbon County. The murder was done at about seven o’clock, on the
street, not more than twenty feet from the store of Henry Williamson,
which place Powell had but a few moments earlier left to go to the
office of Mr. Zehner, the General Superintendent of the Company. It
seems that one of three men, who had been seen by different parties
waiting near the store, approached Mr. Powell from the rear, close
beside a gate leading into the stables, and fired a pistol shot into the
left breast of the victim, leaning toward and reaching over the shoulder
of Powell to accomplish his deadly purpose. The bullet passed nearly
through Powell’s body, lodging in the back near the spinal column,
producing immediate paralysis of the lower limbs, and resulting in death
two days afterward. The wounded man was carried back to the store by
some of his friends and his son, Charles Powell, the latter then but
fourteen years of age, and there remained all night. The next day he was
removed to the residence of Morgan Price, where his death occurred as
stated.

Hardly had the smoke from the murderous pistol melted into and mingled
with the air of that star-lit winter evening, when the assassins were
discovered rapidly making their way from the scene of their savage deed
toward the top of Plane No. 1. They were met by Rev. Allan John Morton
and Lewis Richards, who were hurrying to the spot to learn what had
caused the firing. Mr. Morton asked, as they stopped on the
rigging-stand, what was the trouble, when one of the three strangers
answered: “I guess a man has been shot!” One of this trio was described
as a short person, wearing a soldier’s overcoat, and the second also as
being low in stature, but the third seemed taller, and had on a long,
black coat. Mr. Morton and his friend passed on, and the murderers
started forward, taking the direction in which Mr. Powell had pointed
when asked by Morrison which way the attacking party had gone. They
paused but a moment, when confronted by Morton and Richards, and
appeared to be surprised to see any one in the vicinity. Mr. Morton
thought that he might identify the smaller individual, should he see him
again, as he was only four or five yards from him when he spoke in
response to his inquiry.

“I’m shot to death! My lower limbs have no feeling in them!” was the
exclamation of Mr. Powell when Williamson raised his head. Yet who it
was that had killed him no one could tell. They were strangers, it was
evident, but where they had come from was a dark, impenetrable mystery.
Patrick Kildea, however, who was thought to resemble one of the shorter
men, was arrested and tried, but finally acquitted, from lack of
evidence to convict. This, for the time, was the end of that matter.


                               ————●————




                             CHAPTER VIII.

    THE DETECTIVE SINGS, FIGHTS, AND DANCES HIMSELF INTO POPULARITY.


The Sheridan House, Patrick Dormer, proprietor, situated in Centre
Street, Pottsville, was somewhat celebrated in annals of the town, and
its reputation among the inhabitants by no means doubtful or uncertain.
While in some regards the tavern boasted entire respectability, in
certain others it bore a name far from enviable. Its isolated honors
were due to Mrs. Dormer; its many dishonors to her physically gigantic
but morally erratic lord and master, and the calling he followed. Many
were the drunken brawls and midnight orgies transpiring beneath its
steep roof and within its tawny brick walls; but against the lady of the
house nothing could be truthfully charged—except she was Dormer’s wife.
The edifice was neither private residence nor hotel, but a compound of
the two. Three stories in height, having a long, low extension in its
rear, lighted by a skylight, and in which was located the
well-patronized ten-pin alley; the basement of the main structure was
employed as dining-room, kitchen, and laundry, and the first, or
business floor, front, for saloon purposes. Just back of the latter was
a card-playing and bagatelle division. Entering from the street, the
first place to the southward, or right hand of the visitor, was the bar,
the counter of which extended as far as the partition dividing the
tap-room proper from the small parlor. In the last named apartment were
stands and chairs for card-players, and the bagatelle table. From this
sitting room admission was found to a gallery, or small balcony,
overlooking the ball-alley and from which spectators might watch the
progress of the game going on below. Leaving the same corridor, or
hallway, a staircase led to the sleeping and other apartments of the
second story. There were two approaches to the house from the street,
one at the south and right hand, penetrating to the rooms above-stairs,
without troubling people in the public places, and the other at the
centre, reaching directly to the bar room. The latter was a capacious,
comfortable affair, and the supply of drinkables in cut-glass decanters,
and beer, ale, and porter on draught, always quite large, if not select
as to quality and brand. The patronage extended to the saloon was
miscellaneous, but apparently very profitable to the keeper.

When McKenna paused before the house, from the interior came sounds of
rude music, evidently emanating from some discordant and
faultily-fingered violin. He succeeded, however, in recognizing an air
to which he had tripped many a jig in the old country. Considering for a
moment the course he should take, the detective gave his tangled locks
an extra twist, stuck his hat on one side of his head, rolled unsteadily
up to the door, fumbled awkwardly with the knob, finally turned it, and
stood in the bar room. The picture then presented to his eye was
considered not uncommon to behold in the mining district, yet rather
striking to and never to be forgotten by an uninitiated spectator. The
place exposed to view was about half filled with men, the majority of
whom were clad in rough attire—somewhat different from the miner’s
shifting clothes, however—and, with their companions, stood and sat
around a sprinkling of citizens, mechanics, street laborers, and others.
Pat Dormer, towering high above all, and whose form the detective was
not slow to single out and know, through Jennings’ description, seemed
to be making himself actively useful outside, conversing glibly with his
customers, while his spouse, fresh-faced, short in figure, and matronly
looking, stood behind the counter, dispensing with steady hand, ready
smile, and pleasant word the various stimulants in demand by her
patrons.

In one corner, uneasily perched at the top of an empty whisky
barrel—stolid of eye and face, frowzy-haired, low-browed, stunted in
body, long of arm, and crooked spined—was the spasmodic little fiddler,
drawing away industriously at his bow, his sallow cheek resting
caressingly on the old violin, and producing semi-musical tones not so
easily understood as entering into the composition of that frolicsome
piece, called “The Devil’s Dream.” With one big, boot-clad foot he kept
time irregularly against the staves forming part of his throne.

[Illustration: _“He struck an attitude and without further prelude began
his best Irish break-down.”_]

All in the saloon were perfect strangers to McKenna, but that made no
difference. He staggered about near the threshold for an instant, while
he mentally measured the people in whose company he was, and made a
hurried inventory of the immediate surroundings; then, appearing to
gather inspiration from the lively squeak of the fiddle, he advanced to
the middle of the floor, where remained a few square yards of vacant
space, struck an attitude, and, without further prelude, begun his best
Irish break-down. The steps were nimble, well chosen, emphasized with
heel and toe, and, despite his assumed state of semi-intoxication, the
time was fairly kept with the measure of the tune. Dormer looked upon
the strange intruder, at first, as though undecided whether he should
toss him outside his door, as he would a mangy cur, or applaud his
terpsichorean performance. Then he gradually absorbed the magnetism of
the dance, and the music made by feet and bow and string, and, seating
himself on a convenient chair, held his face between his two brawny
hands, the elbows resting on his knees, and interestedly scanned
McKenna’s movements, keeping the rhythm, meanwhile, by swaying his broad
shoulders from side to side. The agile shuffling evidently gave him
pleasure, and, turning to the sleepy musician he loudly ordered him to
“play fasther!” The request was instantly obeyed, and quicker and
quicker came the inspiriting notes, faster and faster were the manœuvres
of the dance executed, and the more fantastically the dancer turned and
whirled, and threw out leg and arm, in gesticulations more grotesque
than graceful.

              “Nae cotillion brent new frae France,
              But hornpipes, jigs, strathspeys, and reels,
              Put life and mettle in his heels.”

It was not long before every occupant of the place, Mrs. Dormer
inclusive, took up the measure and, while none but the central personage
actually indulged in a reel, beat time to the chords the violinist
touched.

Dormer, as usual, was somewhat overcome by liquor, but arose at the
conclusion of the jig, advanced to McKenna, who stood, for a few
seconds, almost exhausted by his exertions, took the detective by the
hand and warmly welcomed him to the place, saying:

“Very good! Very good! Be the sowl of me great-grandfather! I’ve niver
seen such a jigger since the days of jolly Dan Carey! Walk up, stranger,
an’ have a sup of the best in the house; an’ be the same token, let
everybody else take somethin’ at my cost! I am greatly plazed, that I
am, to recave such iligant company!”

“Av coorse I hev no objection in the worruld,” answered McKenna,
returning Dormer’s strong grasp with interest, “wid the understandin’,
if it be quite convanient, that I’m to give all of yez a bit of a song
afther the wettin’ of me whistle!”

“Sure, an’ a stave or so of a song is jist what we’re afther the
wantin’,” responded a man the operative had heard called Kelly.

The drinks were prepared by Mrs. Dormer with even more than her usual
dexterity. Then the uncanny fiddler vacated his barrel-head, McKenna
assumed his place, hat on head, arms akimbo, and, without any
accompaniment, gave the following ballad:

    “Pat Dolan, it’s my Christian name,
       Yes, an’ my surname too, sir;
    An’ oft you’ve listened to me sthrane,
      I’ll tell you somethin’ new, sir!
    In Cavan-town, where we sat down,
      Our Irish hearts to inspire,
    There’s bould recruits an’ undaunted yout’s,
      An’ they’r led by Mollie Maguire!

                            CHORUS.

    “With my riggadum du, an’ to h—l wid the crew
    Wouldn’t help to free our nation;
    When I look back, I count ’em slack,
    Wouldn’t join our combination!

    “Said Mollie to her darlin’ sons,
      ‘What tyrant shall we tumble?
    That filthy tribe we can’t abide,
      They rob both meek and humble;
    There is one Bell, a child of h—l,
      An’ a Magistrate in station,
    Let lots be drew an’ see which av you
      Will tumble him to damnation!’                           —CHORUS.

    “The lot’s now cast, the sentence passed,
      I scorn to tell a lie, sir!
    I got my chance, it wur no blank;
      I wur glad to win the prize, sir!
    To swate Bill Cooney’s I did repair,
      To meet the parson, Bell, sir!
    At his brain I took me aim,
      Sayin’ ‘Come down, ye fin’ o’ h—l, sir!’                 —CHORUS.

    “Those Orangemen, they gathered then,
      An’ swore they’d kill us all, sir!
    For their frien’ Bell, who lately fell,
      An’ got a terrible fall, sir!
    But Mollie’s sons, wid swords an’ guns,
      Wid pikes—pitchforks—glancin’,
    Those bould recruits an’ undaunted yout’s,
      Stepped into the field just prancin’.                    —CHORUS.

    “Those Orangemen, they all stood then,
      To fight they thought it a folly;
    They’d rather run an’ save their lives,
      An’ leave the field to Mollie!
    Altho’ I’m in a foreign land,
      From the cause I’ll ne’er retire,
    May heaven smile on every chil’
      That belongs to Mollie Maguire!                          —CHORUS.

    “One night as I lay upon me bed,
      I heard a terrible rattle;
    Who wor it but Bell, come back from h—l,
      To fight another battle!
    Then at his brain I took me aim—
      He vanished off in fire—
    An’ as he went the air he rent
      Sayin’, ‘I’m conquered by Mollie Maguire!’               —CHORUS.

    “Now I’m in America,
      An’ that’s a free nation!
    I generally sit an’ take my sip
      Far from a police station!
    Four dollars a day—its not bad pay—
      An’ the boss he likes me well, sir!
    But little he knows that I’m the man
      That shot that fin’ o’ h—l, sir!

                            CHORUS.

    “Wid me riggadum du—an’ to h—l wid the crew
      Wouldn’t fight to free our nation,
    When I look back I count ’em slack
      Wouldn’t join our combination!”

During the progress of the ditty—the air of which no description can do
justice to—the audience, the members of which had gradually drawn nigh
the singer, joined in the refrain with a strength of lung and depth of
voice causing the casements to rattle and the air to resound. The
enthusiasm evolved was so intense and found such loud vent, that some
moments necessarily elapsed before quiet was so far restored as to
permit McKenna to make himself understood, after descending once more to
the floor, as wanting the friends present to “stand furninst the bar an’
have a noggin of poteen wid him!” The request, when fairly heard, was
readily complied with.

It was very soon revealed to the acute senses of the operative that he
had made an impression which could not well fail in being useful to him
in the future. The effect, in the landlord’s case, was not to be
misunderstood, and he, Jennings had said, was a “captain among the
Sleepers,” or Mollies. The overgrown fellow was zealous in his
openly-expressed, newly-awakened regard for the stranger, and after
hearing some sentimental and comical songs, seated himself by McKenna’s
side and entered upon a course of minute inquiry as to the detective’s
nativity, residence, last occupation, business in the mines, etc. Mrs.
Dormer, in the meantime, attended to the drinks, and was not long in
perceiving that their visitor—the lion of the evening, in fact—had some
money with him, and was, sailor-like, dispensing it freely for the
gratification of her guests. Dormer, on his part, was soon in possession
of the fact that McKenna was from Colorado—but latest from New
York—looking for work, after which he proposed a trial at cards in the
back sitting-room, honoring the stranger by choosing him as his partner.
Kelly and a scowling, heavy-set, large-boned man, named Frazer, were to
be pitted against them. It was euchre that they entered upon, the stakes
being refreshments for the four. The game progressed peacefully, Dormer
and his friend at first gaining some advantages, but the landlord soon
losing his little remaining wit, with accession of more whisky, they
began to fall off in the winnings. McKenna was quick to see plentiful
cause for this ill-success. Frazer, when dealing, passed himself six
cards instead of the proper number, and played other tricks generally
classed as among cheats and frauds. The operative seized Frazer’s hand
and exposed the deceit to the gaze of his companions, denouncing the
swindler in no measured terms. The game was broken up; Dormer was raving
furiously, and all hands returned to the bar, where many of its former
occupants still remained. Once there, Frazer threw off his coat, and
challenged his accuser to fight him, saying:

“I’ll maul the sod wid any cowardly bog-trotter in sivin counties that
says I chate at cards!”

[Illustration: _“I’ll bate ye fairly, an’ the coat on me back at
that!”_]

McKenna, in spite of the liquor he had been compelled to imbibe,
still retained his mental faculties and physical strength in
perfection—although, following the scheme he had started, he
pretended to be more deeply intoxicated than when he first made his
appearance at Dormer’s—and he scornfully looked upon his opponent’s
portly form as he defiantly responded:

“Do ye think, fur wan moment, that I’m afraid of the likes of you? Ye
may live to larn better. I’ll bate ye fairly, an’ wid the coat on me
back, at that!”

The detective tossed only his hat aside and squared himself pluckily,
while Dormer volunteered to act as his second, giving the word to his
friends, who cheered lustily for the stranger.

Mrs. Dormer had disappeared at the first signs of a rupture, and the bar
took care of itself.

Kelly seconded Frazer. The ring was formed and the two men entered it,
Frazer confident in his great strength and the detective relying upon
some experience in the manly art of self-defense. The contest commenced.
At the outset McKenna acted purely on the defensive, only seeking to
throw off or evade Frazer’s many unskillful but heavy strokes. He
desired to study his antagonist’s tactics and test his muscle before
using offensive measures. The result was, at the end of a protracted
round, the smaller sparrer was dropped to the floor by a sledge-hammer
blow, fair on the ear. First blood and first knock-down were claimed for
the heavy-weight. But these were all he secured to boast of during the
continuance of the fight—excepting severe punishment—as McKenna carried
off the honors in five consecutive rounds, at the close of all of which
he deftly sent his opponent to the earth, each time with a new wound of
some sort to remember him by. Between the bouts Dormer would take him to
their corner, place spirits to his principal’s lips, sponge off his face
and arms in regular prize-ring fashion, and return him in due season for
more work. The opposing man was equally well served by Kelly, but, after
so many fast-following and disastrous defeats, his right eye being fully
closed and useless, and the other badly damaged, Frazer could not be
coaxed or driven to come forward to the mark again. Then his backers
gave him up, and Kelly took him away, a badly whipped and quite
crest-fallen bully. Victory was proclaimed by Dormer for McKenna, and
the Pottsville Giant was in great glee, stroking the shoulder of his
new-discovered pet and making grimaces that he intended to be pleasing,
but which were more like demoniacal grins than smiles. Dormer shouted as
Frazer went out:

“Good! Good! for me laddy-buck from the West! He’s the true grit from
head to toe! An’, hereafter, if anybody in Schuylkill County jist wants
to bother wid him, they must deal wid Pat Dormer fust! An’ he’s no
dawshy infant!”

“I’ll have the laste taste of gin in mine!” said McKenna, “an’ I belave
all here present will join us in drinkin’ confusion to all mane scuts
and chates!”

The sentiment was applaudingly echoed and the drinks very quickly
absorbed.

Among others, one whom McKenna had heard called Tom Hurley, came up and
congratulated the victor, hoping he had received no serious hurts.

“Oh! nothing but a wee flea-bite on me smeller,” answered McKenna,
“which by the mornin’ will be all correct again! A scrimmage like this
every avenin’ in the wake, would only jist give me jints nadeful
exercise!”

Thus ended the detective’s first experience in the amateur prize-ring.


                               ————●————




                              CHAPTER IX.

                      DORMER UNDER INVESTIGATION.


Kelly soon returned to the saloon, reporting his principal in the late
encounter as well as, under the circumstances, he could expect to be,
and hinting that, as far as he was concerned, he was eager to resume
friendly relations with McKenna, who, he very frankly acknowledged, “wur
quite in the right, an’ Frazer far in the wrong!” This proved enough to
warm the heart of the operative toward the second of his recent
adversary, and the two men, left to themselves, at once inaugurated a
close intimacy.

After another jig, to the lively tune of the “White Cockade”—suggested
by McKenna for a purpose, and which the fiddler, already fast asleep and
unmusically snoring, prone upon a bench, was awakened to execute—the
detective called all hands once more to the bar, and, through the use of
a little legerdemain, filling his tumbler half full of water—but his
friends meanwhile thinking it undiluted gin—he proposed:

“Here’s to ‘the power that makes English landlords tremble!’ Here’s
confusion to all the inimies of ould Ireland!”

Tom Hurley, who had been one of Kelly’s partisans, enthusiastically
thumped him on the shoulder and answered:

“Hurrah! Them’s the sentiments! Let all here drink to ’em!”

Hurley, Dormer, and Kelly, with the detective, and the remainder of the
assemblage, drained their goblets in silence. McKenna, who was on the
alert, thought he noticed a communicative wink passing between Kelly and
Dormer, but not a syllable was uttered to inform him whether he had hit
upon anything of importance in employing his well-remembered toast—first
heard at Tremont. No language having the sound of a legitimate response
to it was he enabled to distinguish. In a short time, however, Kelly
came over to him with a whispered request to repair to the little
sitting-room. He obeyed, and, as he followed to that place, he found
himself discussing in his own mind what might now be in store for
him—what would prove the result of the impending interview. He was not
fearful—but anticipated taking whatever came with as good a grace as
possible. After occupying their seats, his companion remarked:

“Didn’t I see you at Minersville, not long ago, in company with Hugh
Mahan?”

“Sure, an’ may be you did! You might as well as not, at laste, fur I war
wid him, at that place, only the last month sometime!”

Kelly scanned the face of the detective sharply for a second, and then
resumed:

“Do you chance to belong to the Emeralds? The benevolent society of that
name is what I mane!”

“No, I do not!”

“Well, I know Mahan to be a mimber, an’ he’s been makin’ himself very
free wid _lashins_ of people, hereabouts, within the past few wakes,
invitin’ them to join, an’ I didn’t know but you were wan of his sort!”

“Not at all! I niver belonged to any of the nature in this counthry! In
Ireland, once, sure an’ I had a little of what ye might call exparience
in that line!”

Before the conversation could go any farther—as McKenna thought, quite
providentially—Kelly was called out of the apartment, some person
wishing to see him, and Dormer entered and assumed his place at the
table. They both tasted the contents of a black bottle that the landlord
had brought with him, and then Dormer asked:

“How long is it since ye war made a mimber?”

“What do ye mane—mimber of phat?”

“Oh, ye nade not be backward, young man! I hev taken a likin’ to ye, and
all in this house are my _friends_—an’ yours!”

The word friend was peculiarly emphasized.

“Well,” said McKenna, “I never joined wid any body of the sort in
America; I didn’t know it would be any use to me when I left home, so I
jist quit it entirely. Had I stopped long in New York, instead of goin’
to Colorado, to dig in the silver mines, I might have acted in a
different way, kaping up me ould mimbership!”

“Yes! I see what you intend! Bedad, but New York _is_ full of the rale
stuff! Indade, I may say it is rotten wid that same! I have been on the
inside since I was old enough. But recently I have had a slight
misundersthanding, that I nade not mention now, but it’s bein’ settled,
an’ the sooner the better it’ll suit me! When it is once fixed, I mane
to be the best among ’em again! Most of those outside are mimbers. So
you see you’re safe enough!”

“Yes! but you see, Misther Dormer,” said McKenna, sipping the liquor
remaining in his glass, “it’s been such a long time since I heard
anything, or thought anything, of the order, that, as ye might say, I’m
almost as ignorant as if I niver had seen the inside of the affair, an’
I belave, until I am once more initiated, the best thing I can do is to
say as little about it as convanient! Perhaps, after a while, when you
all knows me betther, I may be found worthy of active mimbership. I’m
not the laste bit afraid but I’ll make as good a society man as iver
walked on two fate in all Pennsylvania! I’m not at all frightened—don’t
ye think that of me!”

“Who would belave that ye war, afther the divil’s own basting ye gave
Fightin’ Frazer, an’ he all the while big enough to put ye in his
breeches pocket an’ walk off wid ye, as a boy might wid a pet squirrel?
Oh, nobody hereabouts will long pretind to me that McKenna is at all
timid!”

Here Dormer—led off by expert hints, made by the operative, quite forgot
the object of his interview—which undoubtedly was to fully test the
stranger as to his former knowledge of the Sleepers—and the conversation
became general. Soon it was wholly interrupted by calls from the
bar-room, which the landlord was forced to give attention. McKenna had
fabricated all that he made pretence of having gone through with in
connection with the order in the old country—being as much in the dark,
as to the interior work of the association there as in the United
States—for the purpose of drawing something from Dormer, but he dare not
enter far into particulars, dreading an exposure of his shortcomings. He
thought it extremely fortunate that, thus far, none of his associates
had been able to fathom his assumptions or contradict his assertions.
Both of these had been purposely kept rather indefinite, that he might
safely retreat, assuming to have spoken of some other society, should an
exposure be imminent.

Presently the saloon was vacated and the doors closed. The morning of
another day was nigh at hand, and Dormer, donning his coat, went with
McKenna part of his way homeward, and would not separate from the
new-comer in Pottsville until he secured a promise that he would
frequently visit the Sheridan House and make himself quite at home
there. They parted warm friends, the detective to go to bed, and the
innkeeper to return to his hotel.

The next morning, when, after a few hours of unrefreshing sleep, the
detective arose, he felt very much the worse for his fistic and other
muscular exercises of the preceding twenty-four hours. About every bone
in his body ached fearfully, and his eyes and lips were dry and
inflamed. However, an application of cold water afforded him some
relief, and, having partaken of a late but hearty breakfast, he again
evaded Jennings and went to the Sheridan House, according to agreement.
The landlord greeted him very cordially and joined in something liquid
and inspiring; then informed his visitor that, as he was an “old trump,”
he was just the man to go with him to attend to some business of a
private character in another part of the city. They attended church,
after which their steps took another direction, landing them inside
Capt. Dougherty’s saloon, where several of the men McKenna had
previously encountered at Dormer’s were already convened.

Dougherty kept a real estate office, was a sort of a lawyer, and his son
took general charge of the drinking place. The elder Dougherty was
present on this occasion, and did not seem pleased that Dormer had
brought a stranger along, though he contented himself with scowling upon
him and saying nothing particularly hateful. Following a companionable
dram or two—one proffered all hands by the new arrival—the men repaired
to a back room, McKenna having been previously warned by Dormer to
remain behind, unless sent for. In a moment he was alone in the
bar-room, while, as he supposed, a body of the bloody Mollie Maguires
was in session under the same roof. More than an hour elapsed, and there
was not an order sent in for a drop to drink, which, considering the
character of the party, was, he thought, rather strange. Still the men
remained in council. He was only able occasionally to hear a confused
murmur of voices in the adjoining apartment, and could make out nothing
that was said. What were they deliberating about? He could not guess,
but he seemed to have a certain dread of the result, as though it might
affect his own safety. “Perhaps,” he surmised, “these fellows are even
now considering whether I am an impostor or not, and should they prove
successful in showing me up in my true character my life will pay the
forfeit of my rashness in venturing among them.”

Still he pretended to doze unconcernedly in his chair before the
cheerful fire.

But all similarly uncomfortable thoughts were dispersed and his
attention turned in another and more comfortable direction by the sudden
return of Capt. Dougherty to the bar. And he came not for liquor. He
evidently wished to speak with the stranger, as he advanced toward him,
extending his hand pleasantly, saying:

“Excuse me, friend McKenna, for keeping you so long alone! I must ask
your forgiveness for another thing! When I first saw you here, I made up
a rash opinion that you were against us, and I so charged, as I now see,
acting under a mistaken notion, as I am fully convinced you are all
right, an’ ‘old head’—an’ I desire to see an’ know more of you! Dormer
vouches for you—and his word is not to be questioned!”

“What is it all about, now? What do ye mane?”

“I mean you are all correct! You are an ‘old-timer!’ That’s what I
mean!”

“Af coorse I knew it! Why not? I hev no objections to all that! I’m also
agreeable to your better acquaintance!”

And the detective’s thoughts were lightened considerably. A load seemed
lifted from him. And, the remainder of the company soon coming in, he
was cordially congratulated by many, and quickly responded by another
urgent request to “assist in making the disappearance of some more
noggins of poteen.” That’s the way he fashioned it. All accepted with
alacrity.

In a short time Dormer and McKenna took their leave, after promising to
look in at the saloon again. As soon as outside Dormer began to inform
his friend that a committee had been engaged in investigating his own
case, the charge being that he, Dormer, was a member of an Odd Fellow’s
lodge, but so far they had been unable to fix it upon him, and he did
not believe they ever would. Dormer also explained that Dougherty had
cast doubts upon McKenna’s genuineness, otherwise he would have been
invited to take a seat with the Board. Of course he was not very
friendly with Dougherty for his “impertinence,” as he worded it, and
said he’d whip him, one of these days, if he was shoved out of the
order. As long as he remained in it, he would not dare strike him a
blow. McKenna said he forgave the Captain and wanted nothing farther
done about it.

While making for the Sheridan House, Dormer invited the operative to
enter a saloon, and there introduced him to one Deenan, alias Bushy
Deenan—called so from his plentiful crop of bristling, bushy hair and
beard—where they met a number of old acquaintances and made some new
ones. Deenan’s was another rendezvous for the Mollies in Pottsville. Not
remaining there long, the two once more started for Dormer’s house.
Arriving there, the landlord and McKenna had the bar to themselves; and
sitting in a comfortable chair, and stretching out his huge limbs before
the glowing stove, Dormer commented upon one they had just parted from.

“That man, Deenan, is a miserable hypocrite! I hev my own opinion of the
likes of him! They hev little good in them—barrin’ the big talk—an’ that
puts no whisky in the can. He’s all smooth and straight while forninst
ye, but when out of sight he’s worse nor a rattlesnake. More nor that,
he has no backbone in him! When the trying time comes you don’t find him
there! He’ll wag his jaw till all’s blue, but divil a bit of fight is
there in him! For instance: Last fall, early, when there was
considerable excitement among the miners, a fellow was to be beaten, for
some reason known to the byes who axed it to be done, in a township not
far from this, beyant the mountain, an’ the job fell on my nephew, Jim
O’Reilly, an’ Bushy Deenan. Well, I furnished all the money needful, and
O’Reilly, tho’ but a broth of a boy, was all ready, cocked and primed,
to start for the place, when what should Deenan do but crawl squarely
out, like a cur, an’ say he’d have nothing to do with it! Faith, he flew
the track enthirely! Phat sort of a fellow would ye be afther callin’
that in the ould counthry?”

“Nothin’ more nor less than a craven coward! An’ they’d expel him
forever! I’d sooner be a rat nor such a man!”

“You’re perfectly right!” said Dormer, grinning like the ogre in the
fairy tale. “I know you wouldn’t act that way! The McKennas, in my part
of the country, were always a bould set, an’ honest to the heart’s
core!”

Swallowing this dose of blarney with as good a grace as possible,
McKenna asserted:

“Thanks! I’ll try in the future to show that I’m wan of the rale ould
sthock!”

At a late hour the landlord was much overcome with drink, and when he
bolted the door, after McKenna’s departure, he shouted through the
key-hole: “Come agin, the morrow, ye thafe of the worruld, or I’ll bate
ye within an inch of your life!”

Of course McKenna returned answer to this delicately-conveyed compliment
that he’d “be sure to do that same!”

Light and elastic was the step, and buoyant and hopeful the heart of the
detective, that cloudy morning, when he sought his pillow in widow
O’Regan’s domicile. He had now been for some two months in the
stronghold of the Sleepers, or Mollie Maguires, and labored hard, day as
well as night, to reach his present position of intimacy with men
prominent in the order. Success, he thought, was about to crown his
efforts.

A few days passed, during which McKenna, who had purposely cut the
acquaintance of Jennings and been given up by that young man as
hopelessly in the snare set for him by Dormer, was continually found at
the Sheridan House, gaining fast the reputation of an incorrigibly hard
case, but a good singer and dancer, and jolly companion, nevertheless.
One day, in the presence of one Arthur L’Velle, who was a Mollie,
according to Dormer’s report, when the detective was bemoaning his bad
luck in getting work, the tavern-keeper said:

“I have regard for ye, McKenna, since ye whipped Frazer so handsomely,
fur nuthin’ plazes me more’n to see a yout’ able an’ willin’ to put up
his hands and take care of number one! Now, L’Velle”—turning to that
person—“I’ll tell you what sort of an idea has just been runnin’ through
my brain fur all the world like mice in a potato-bin. I’ve been thinkin’
I’d give McKenna, here, a loud letter to Mike Lawler, of Shenandoah, an’
it’s my private opinion that, if ‘Muff’ can’t get him a job, he may hunt
the mines over all this winter widout findin’ one!”

“An’ why do ye call him ye spake of ‘Muff’ Lawler?” asked the stranger.

L’Velle answered:

“Because of a choice breed of chickens that he raises! Dormer, your
thought is a happy one! Lawler is a leader, up there, an’ I know his
friendship will in that way be secured—an’ it’s valuable to any man!”

“Yes,” said Dormer. “Lawler is the big dog in these parts now; beside he
kapes a good tavern, and will see no old-timer, or young one either, for
that matther, sufferin’ from want while he can relieve him!”

Then L’Velle spoke up:

“If it were not that Dormer and I are, for the present time, under a
little cloud, I, for one, should insist that you be furnished with a
_staff_ to guide your steps over the mountains and through the mines!
But, by going up there and seeing Lawler, you’ll soon be as well
provided for! I know Mike’ll do all he can for you!”

“I think I understand what ye allude to! I shall be greatly obliged fur
the letther! An’ as for the other matter, when I gets to Shenandoah, I
can look to it. But what is it I see in the Boston _Pilot_ about the
Bishop bein’ opposed to us? Wouldn’t it interfere wid me proper duties
at the church?”

“Oh, bother!” answered the landlord, “that’s very aisy! Ye lave the body
a while—resign, ye see—an’ then ye are all right wid the praste. If ye
wants to go back agin, who’s the wiser? Not the clergy, sure! But you
know all about it! You are too old a head not to understand. An’ in
Luzerne, I hear, the prastes are more’n half way favorable to us—be the
same token, more will be afore many months! Oh, I can tell you, it’ll
not do ye the laste harrum in the worruld, an’ it may do ye much good!
Then, as ye are an ‘old one,’ we wants ye in the order, for it nades
some such to put sinse in the fool-heads of the many new and spooney
boys—an’ there’s plinty of them, an’ to spare!”

McKenna promised, after some palaver, to think seriously on the subject.

As the reader is aware—but as the Mollie Maguires were not aware—the
detective was only too anxious to place himself within the pale of the
order; yet, when the matter seemed so nigh accomplishment, he believed
it best that he move slowly, and it would not do to exhibit too much
anxiety. Great haste might spoil all and end in disappointment.

In about a week’s time from the date of this conversation, armed with a
complimentary letter from the landlord of the Sheridan House to Lawler,
the operative started for Shenandoah. At that place, if anywhere in the
mines, he made up his decision he would necessarily locate his
headquarters. There, if at all, he must solve the mystery surrounding
the Mollie Maguires.


                               ————●————




                               CHAPTER X.

               FATHER BRIDGEMAN GIVES JACK KEHOE A BLAST.


The night before the one on which McKenna had determined to take his
departure from Pottsville, while in Dormer’s saloon, some words passed
and a quarrel arose between the detective and a young person named
Philip Nash, and the drunken desperado undertook the task, it seemed, of
teaching the stranger some of the tenets of the Molly Maguires by actual
demonstration. Whipping out his revolver, he made known his intention of
finishing him just then and there, and, had not the operative been on
the alert, and immediately covered Nash with his own weapon, it is more
than probable that at least one career of usefulness in the mining
region would have met with a speedy termination. As it transpired, Nash
appreciated it was life for life, which was far from his sort of game,
and he waited action until Dormer, with his powerful person, arrived and
stood between them, when he quietly lowered and put away his pistol,
McKenna following the example set, but taking especial care to have the
protector within ready reach of his right hand.

“Phil Nash!” exclaimed Dormer, “what is this you’re afther doin’ now?”

“I’ll whip this fellow, or me name’s not Nash!” was the angry response.

“Two can play at that trick!” retorted McKenna.

Then the combatants came together again, despite the presence of the big
pacificator, Nash aiming a swinging blow with his fist upon the
detective, but happily missing him. McKenna was more fortunate. His
stroke, full at the side of the face of Nash, hit the mark, stopping
with force behind his opponent’s left ear, and tumbling him to the floor
as if he had been a felled ox. When able to do so, he regained his feet,
and, for the second time, essayed to draw his revolver; but Dormer,
seizing both the young man’s arms, held him in a vise-like grip, as a
mere child, saying:

“No you don’t, Phil! You’ve tried that once too often already, and I now
recommend ye to drop the matther directly! McKenna, here, is an
old-timer, an’ was inside the ring when you were a wee gossoon! An’
you’re breakin’ the rules in attackin’ him!”

It was strange to see how quickly Dormer’s words wrought a change in the
irate bruiser. He released himself, promising to obey the saloon-keeper,
and, saying he’d make it all right, caught both of the operative’s hands
in his own, and abjectly begged to be forgiven for his violence.

“Sure, an’ I didn’t know ye wur wan of us!” he said.

Of course McKenna, who was unhurt, and had not been knocked down, could
well afford to be generous, and freely forgave the miner. They exchanged
civilities, and drank a noggin with Dormer, to seal peace and
reconciliation.

During the short walk to the depot, the ensuing day, McKenna was
accompanied by Dormer and Kelly, now his warm and inseparable friends.
At the train, the tavern-keeper took the detective aside, and gave him,
beside the letter to Lawler—which he had previously put in his
possession—several separate slips of paper, bearing the names and
addresses of a number of leading Mollies. Among them were John
Gallagher, of Coaldale, and John Mahoney, _alias_ the Cat, of Gilberton.
Each slip contained the information that the bearer was a particular
friend of the writer, looking for a job of work.

“Jist plaze to remember,” said the Pottsville giant, “that you’re not to
brathe a blessed word to any wan, that I tould ye a single point! You
see I’m out, at the present, an’ it wouldn’t be the right thing to be
makin’ myself too forward like, wid even an old head in the business!
So, kape dark! None of ’em will refuse ye help in gettin’ work, depind
on that!”

“I’ll jist mind well what ye say, an’ many thanks for your kindness,
beside!” returned McKenna, as the bell struck thrice, warning passengers
that the cars were about to move.

“Good luck to you, anyhow! An’ be sure ye come to my house for your
Christmas!” were Dormer’s parting words, as he clasped McKenna’s palm
closely. Dan Kelly was equally warm in his requests, and profuse in
regrets connected with their separation. Promising to be back in
Pottsville by the holidays, if he could possibly make it convenient, the
traveler stepped aboard the coach, and sped away on his journey.

The detective, thinking it inexpedient to go direct from Pottsville to
Shenandoah, decided upon visiting some other localities before stopping
there. Perhaps he might secure valuable points which would set him
before the Mollies in a favorable light. He had, early in the week,
directed Superintendent Franklin to forward any letters of his to St.
Clair. Stopping over, therefore, at that town, he received from the
postmaster a missive containing instructions to go to some of the
neighboring places, and then repair to Shenandoah. He answered these,
and also wrote to Dormer, saying (what was not true) that he had met and
agreed with a man to work on a new water basin, in the mountains; hence
should slightly defer his visit to Shenandoah. He also told the
innkeeper that he need not write, as it was impossible to say where he
might remain, but agreeing to give him the proper address as soon as it
could be decided upon.

The next point to honor with his presence was Girardville, where McKenna
knew there were many Mollies. Arriving there, he secured a room at a
second-class hotel, and started out to see the place. At one of the
saloons he encountered a man, who was named to him as Tom Durkin,
_alias_ Lanky, a tall, raw-boned, ugly-looking fellow, who was drinking
very heavily. This party the detective easily attached himself to, and
soon learned that he was about to go to Shenandoah, to see some
relatives and old-time associates.

“Do you chance to know one Muff Lawler?” inquired the detective.

“Know him? Do a child know its mother? Know him? Be the staff of St.
Patrick, that I do! Right well! An’ are you acquainted wid him?”

“Not personally,” answered McKenna, “but I’m on purty good terms wid
Bushy Deenan, Capt. Gallagher, Dan Kelly, and more of his friends in
Pottsville. An’, sure, they’re a jolly crowd!”

“Faith, an’ I’ve been in this country, it war four years last
Michaelmas, an’ never met their equals, nowhere! An’ you knows that set
do ye?”

Lanky shook hands with the detective, making much show of pleasure, and
put his right forefinger to the right side of his face in a peculiar
style, at the same time watching the movements of his companion. Then he
asked:

“Do you know anything about it?”

“Not just at present,” responded McKenna, “but in the old times I was
well posted!”

Of course this was enough for Durkin. They were companionable,
fraternal, convivial, and thus traveled about the town together, Lanky
introducing his new friend to all his associates as “a fine chip of the
old block,” or employing words of a similar significance. Finally, it
was with some difficulty that McKenna shook him off, late in the day,
and, pleading business as an excuse, left him to finish his spree
solitary and alone.

Here was another point gained by McKenna. One of the latest signs of
recognition of the Sleepers, or of some similar society, was in his
possession. But he did not dare to use it, well remembering an
unpleasant episode previously occurring to him at Pottsville. On that
occasion, having encountered Fenton Cooney, a miner from Wadesville, at
Dormer’s, he was spoken of as an ancient Mollie—Cooney being actually
what the detective assumed to be, and a sharp one at that. Cooney at
once proceeded to test the new-comer, who, fortunately, was acting as
though greatly intoxicated. Quickly apprehending that he was no match
for the inquirer, from the direction that his questions took, he imbibed
a stiff glass of grog at the bar, with his interviewer, and shortly
thereafter fell over on a bench and immediately passed into a state of
semi-unconsciousness, from which even Dormer himself, by a powerful
shaking, failed to arouse him. Cooney was very angry, and told the
innkeeper that he had a notion to kick the drunken man—drunk only in
simulation—from the house. Dormer proved a friend, and insisted that it
was all a mistake; there was no doubt in his mind of the man’s former
membership; but he was a victim of liquor—which was his only noticeable
failing—and, if taken when duly sober, he had faith that Cooney would
recognize him as all he represented himself to be. Some things he had
forgotten, it was true, but he remembered enough to satisfy him that he
was all right. Cooney, not so easily deluded, roundly swore that he
could never believe the stranger a true friend until he produced his
clearance card from the body to which he had belonged. Escaping so
narrowly from this impending trap, the detective was more careful
thereafter. Evidently he must see clearer and travel further before
successfully imposing upon well-informed Sleepers. It proved also quite
fortunate that he cut adrift from Lanky, as, before night, that besotted
individual found himself under arrest for an aggravated assault upon a
man who had indiscreetly spoken against the Mollies in his presence.

It was the middle of December, 1873, that the detective made his _début_
in the pleasant little town of Girardville. One of the first persons for
him to meet was Pat Birmingham, a school-teacher, who addressed him:

“Stranger, didn’t I see you, a few days ago, at Dormer’s place, in
Pottsville?”

“Faith,” responded McKenna, “ye did that! I remimber ye perfectly! I wor
just a little under the influence, on that occasion. An’ it’s that way I
am much oftener than is good for me moral char_ac_ter! But I’m jist
reformin’ a bit now—by the same token, will ye have a sup wid me?—I’m
flush, an’ don’t mind tratin’!”

“I don’t care if I do have a taste,” answered the schoolmaster.

During their trip to a saloon where the pedagogue said they kept the
best Irish whiskey in town, McKenna gave out that he was just in receipt
of his pension from the government, granted him on account of wounds he
had suffered from while serving, under Commodore Davis, on the flag-ship
Blackhawk, at the capture of Memphis, in 1862. And it was well taken by
Birmingham, as was the liquor, when they had found it. McKenna managed
to water his portion considerably, so that its effect upon him was not
noticeable.

“I suppose from the company I found you in at Pottsville,” said the
teacher, “that you are an Ancient!”

“An’ phat is that?”

“A Mollie Maguire!”

“Sure, an’ you’re wrong there! That is a thing I’ve heard of, but know
nothin’ about.”

“Just the way with all of them! I believe if I asked Pat Dormer, he’d
deny being a member, point blank! It’s all right, though! Every man to
his faith! But I’ve known some who are Mollies and, at the same time,
quite decent people and honorable citizens. Now there’s Jack Kehoe, for
example, in the tavern over the way. He’s the most staunch man in the
business, but, for all that, a very good neighbor, an’ I never saw him
drunk in my life, or beating anybody, inside or outside his saloon. That
you can’t say of everybody, Mollie or not Mollie!”

“I have heard of Kehoe,” said McKenna, “but I have not the pleasure of
his acquaintance. Before I lave the borough, I mane to give him a call.
Still, I wants ye to understand that, tho’ rough appearin’, an’ given to
rather hard company, I’m not quite a Mollie Maguire!”

This was thrown out as possibly suggestive to the citizen that he invite
him into Kehoe’s; also, by denying all knowledge of the society, to
cause the hearer to more firmly believe in his membership. Birmingham
did not, or would not, take the hint, and neglected to ask the new-found
friend across to see Kehoe, but, as had been intended, he did gain
strength in the idea that McKenna was connected with the mysterious
brotherhood. Some further talk ensued, when the men separated, the
pedagogue to attend to his pupils, and the operative to pursue his
investigations.

[Illustration: “_Kehoe’s Residence._”]

The afternoon of the following day McKenna left his hotel, fully
determined to secure an acquaintance with Jack Kehoe. The weather was
stormy, business dull, and he would probably find a number of men
congregated in the tavern. Kehoe’s residence—the Hibernian House—which
is expected to play an important part in the pages of this work, was and
still is a two-story frame building, situated convenient to business,
not a great distance from the Catholic church in Girardville. Having its
gable to the street, and a single square window at either end, directly
beneath the peak of the roof, the usual supply of casements and doors
for a structure of the size, and painted a dull, red color, on the
ground floor, front, was the bar-room, and in the rear of that the
kitchen. From the latter apartment a staircase gave access to the living
rooms of the family in the story above. There was also a door from the
bar, leading to the cook’s domain. Throughout the interior the
arrangements for occupation were of a comfortable but inexpensive
character, and everything was cared for in a manner evidencing the
capacity of Mrs. Kehoe, in the _rôle_ of housekeeper, as better than
ordinary. It was also reported in the town that she was the sharper
member of the hymeneal firm, and fully in accord with her husband on the
Mollie Maguire question. She probably approved his membership, not
because of any particular bloodthirstiness in her disposition, but
because the affiliation brought money to their family purse and
politically elevated Jack Kehoe.

Kehoe, as the operative had already heard, was a native of the city of
Wicklow, Ireland, some twenty-seven miles from Dublin, and a man of but
common education. His wife had been a Miss O’Donnel, of Mahanoy. Their
family consisted at the time of five children.

When the detective entered the saloon, he found several miners within,
clad in their holiday suits, showing that they had not been working that
day, or were on the night shift. The proprietor of the place, in person,
was behind the counter, evidently in good humor, and everything passing
to his satisfaction. McKenna stepped modestly to the bar, ordered a
drink, swallowed it, paid the reckoning, and then occupied a seat on a
bench while he filled and smoked his short pipe. Some pleasant words,
dropped to a man near him, regarding the weather, were answered
cheerfully, and soon the conversation took a wider range, engineered by
the new arrival, and culminated in that person’s second call at the bar
to inquire of Kehoe as to the prospect for work brightening up, and
asking about the chances for a stranger getting employment. Kehoe
responded quietly, without a very pronounced brogue:

“Well, times are rather hard here at present, but there’s a show of
their soon mendin’. I hear that some collieries now lying idle, are to
begin operations in a short time. If they do, then more hands will be
needed. Perhaps some of the men here may know, better than I, the
opportunities for immediate jobs. They are mostly miners. I say, Mike,”
turning to the man McKenna had previously been speaking to, “is there a
show for work, for a stranger, that you know about?”

“Shure, an’ I don’t mind me of any! But some one else may!”

And Mike, as he was called, with several others, came up to the bar, as
if willing to be consulted. McKenna, thereupon, acting as he seemed to
be called upon, under the circumstances, very promptly set forward
drinks for all, which Kehoe prepared and the company disposed of with
evident relish. The general expression, however, was that the operative
would hardly be able to secure a job until more collieries commenced
active work.

While Kehoe stood concocting the different beverages, the detective
embraced the opportunity, without appearing to do so, of observing the
man more minutely. He was seemingly two or three years past forty, but
time, in his flight, had been lenient, and left few noticeable traces
upon his countenance. There were some impressions of crow’s feet at the
outer corners of his small, sharp, light-blue eyes, occasionally a gray
hair among the plentiful brown ones of his head and in the equally dark,
full whiskers and mustache. The beard was noticeably lighter in color at
the far ends, as though somewhat faded. The eyes were set too close
together to give a square, honest look to the face, as a whole, which
was slightly cadaverous in appearance. The nose, unnaturally sharp, as
though pitted by small-pox, assisted in forming for Kehoe a fox-like and
cunning look, and the forehead was straight and reasonably high. It was
the impression of McKenna that, if Kehoe should ever get others into a
difficulty, he would probably manage to keep out of it himself. He was
athletic, erect, and could hold his own in a crowd, but did not seem
inclined to quarrel, or risk his person too rashly in an encounter from
which ingenuity could extricate him. Not above medium height, or weight,
his shoulders were square and strong, and his limbs muscular and well
proportioned. His hands, which had seen labor, now looked fair and
white. Generally agreeable in manners to strangers as well as
acquaintances, he claimed a number of friends, yet no really warm and
devoted personal followers. Formerly a miner, the tavern proving more
profitable and less laborious, he had of late years done very little
manual labor. Whisky-selling and politics were giving him plentiful
money and power, and he liked both exceedingly well.

McKenna’s proffered treat had touched the feelings of Kehoe in a tender
place, favorably introduced him to a portion of the Girardville
community, and it was not so very long before he was on the best of
terms with all in the house. Finally finding that his reputation in that
line had preceded him, and having been invited to do so, he was
prevailed upon to strike up a song, and gave, without accompaniment,
“Larboard Watch,” followed soon by “Kathleen Mavourneen.” At the request
of a native of Scotia present, he then sung, in fair voice and accent,
the “Collier Laddie,” by Burns, beginning:

                “Where live ye, my bonnie lass?
                An’ tell me what they ca’ ye;
                ‘My name,’ she says, ‘is Mistress Jean,
                And I follow the collier laddie.
                My name,’ she says, ’is Mistress Jean,
                And I follow the collier laddie.’”

This particularly pleased the miners, one of whom felt so merry over the
strain that he called up the crowd and proposed a toast to “Bobby Burns,
Mistress Jean, and the stranger singer.” It was drank with highest
honors, and then the landlord could do no less than follow suit. This
business was kept up until nearly night.

When the hangers-on had dropped off, one by one, to their homes, Kehoe
stepped from the bar, sat down by the stranger’s side, and showed
himself unusually communicative. He ended by calling McKenna to the
counter and drinking a toast, which, from its sound and sentiment, he
was positive must have been a Mollie signal; but the detective knew too
well the result to try a response, and contented himself with drinking
it in silence. Kehoe went further and gave him the identical sign, with
the hand to the face, which he had noticed Lanky using the day before.
To this also McKenna remained blind. He was not to be caught.

“I see that you know nothing at present,” said Kehoe at last.

“Faith, an’ that’s exactly true for ye,” responded the detective. “It’s
a very long time since ever I was within.”

“That makes no difference, for I am also an old-timer, dating back to
’66.”

And Kehoe peered suspiciously at the stranger from his half-shut eyes,
while he awaited some identifying movement or word from McKenna.

Here was more trouble. Another Ancient had been encountered who was not
to be trifled with. It was no longer stolid Pat Dormer who stood before
him.

“Now for it,” thought the bothered detective. “Deil a thing have I to
trate him wid, barrin’ some balderdash that I gave in Pottsville, an’
which I’m positive ’ll not fool Kehoe.”

Once again fortune favored him. At this very opportune moment a man from
Pittsburg, called by the saloon-keeper Tim Gallagher—a traveling liquor
dealer, opened the door, entered, and greeted Kehoe as an old
acquaintance. He was introduced to McKenna, who was treated by Kehoe and
his friend as a true Ancient Order man, and informed that the last
arrival was at the head of the society in Pittsburg. Several other
persons now coming in, Kehoe forgot all about his investigation, and the
operative was very far from giving him any hint to return to it. Just
before supper-time, Gallagher, Kehoe, and McKenna—who that day by chance
wore his Sunday suit of clothes, the weather being too cold for his
first costume—all sallied forth, leaving the tavern to the charge of
Mrs. Kehoe, to make a few informal calls upon city friends and
companions. Gallagher, as they walked, enlightened his co-member upon
the condition of the order in Western Pennsylvania. He said the part of
country named was full of the spirit of the order, and they had
everything their own way, the clergy being with them very cordially, if
not inside the ring. During their round they stopped at the house of the
resident Catholic clergyman, Father Bridgeman, who, despite his many and
violent denunciations of the Mollies, was a personal friend of
Gallagher. After the usual greetings the Pittsburg man asked the priest,
jokingly:

“Have you ceased scolding the Sleepers yet?”

“No, I have not!” said the clergyman, “and never shall while they remain
as they are.”

“Why is it that the Church in this part of the State acts so differently
in this regard from the Catholics in Pittsburg?”

[Illustration: _“A withering curse rest upon it, and upon all in any way
connected with it.”_]

“The cases materially differ,” answered the priest, warming up quickly.
“With you, in the west, the members have something like friendship for
one another, and the order is not managed in the interest of
politicians, tavern-keepers, and other bad men. Here it is in the
control of a few unscrupulous fellows, who care not for God or man, only
for themselves and their own pockets. Yet they call themselves Irishmen!
They can sneak around and whip and kill some unfortunate person—some
mining boss, or superintendent, or destroy property, thus scandalizing
those in the Church of the same nativity—but they do not dare to turn
out in regalia on St. Patrick’s day, with honest Irishmen, for then they
would be known and marked for the murderers and assassins they are. Oh,
it’s a bad, bad society! A withering curse rest upon it, and upon all in
any way connected with it!”

The priest evidently felt every word that he said, and, though one of
the most generous of men, could find no good language to waste upon the
Mollie Maguires.

Kehoe listened to the denunciation, his head slightly bowed, but said
nothing in reply. The color of his face changed a little and his lips
quivered perceptibly, yet no words escaped him. Gallagher spoke
evasively, and the detective remained silent. After some talk over other
and more pleasant matters, the party took leave of the priest. He made
no excuse for his harsh language. He believed that it had been deserved,
and had, therefore, nothing to take back. In the streets Kehoe
maintained a moody silence. His small eyes wandered from object to
object, however, resting on nothing long. He was wounded by the
imprecations of his clergyman, yet could find no means of escaping their
weight. Gallagher and McKenna endeavored to rally his sunken, sullen
spirits, but in vain. Up to the time of their separation he seldom
spoke. Excusing himself, the operative returned to the hotel for supper,
and spent the evening writing in his bedroom. After sealing his report
and preparing for an early start for Shenandoah—where he determined to
go at once and encounter the lion, Lawler, in his native jungle—he
retired to his bed and wooed repose.


                               ————●————




                              CHAPTER XI.

                     A KILKENNY AFFAIR AT TAMAQUA.


Taking cars over the Shamokin branch of the Philadelphia and Reading
road, the ensuing morning, McKenna started for his destination; but,
overhearing a conversation occurring in the seat before his own, between
two rough-looking men who boarded the train at a station not far from
Shenandoah, during the course of which he learned that Muff Lawler had
gone on a short visit to some friends in Pottsville, he concluded it
would be best to shun the locality for the present and proceed at once
to Tamaqua, a city that, thus far, he had devoted very little attention
to. When the train stopped, therefore, at the point named, he took up
his satchel—having left the remainder of his baggage at the hotel in
Girardville—alighted at the depot, and, proceeding at once to the
Columbia House, which he had understood from Dormer was frequented by
the Mollie Maguires when visiting the city, secured a room and made the
acquaintance of the innkeeper, named Marks. Although by this time
somewhat accustomed to rough society and unruly transactions, he soon
acquired the information that, of all the cities, towns, and villages he
had seen in Pennsylvania, to Tamaqua, at that date, must be awarded the
palm for holding prominence in these particular characteristics. It
appeared to be the centre of attraction for a flock of unemployed
stragglers, discharged men from adjacent collieries, tramps, and other
reprobates. Liquor flowed unrestrainedly, and was largely consumed in
the various saloons and taverns. A storm of wind, rain, and sleet
prevailed, and the streets wore a deserted appearance, while the
grog-shops and gambling-rooms were all crowded and in full blast. There
were other disturbing elements at work in the community, one being the
strike of the miners, which had just been inaugurated. A basis for the
settlement of differences existing between the proprietors and the
employés of collieries, had only recently found the miners prepared with
a prompt negative, and, without some agreement—and that seemed far
away—not a man among the laborers would dare begin operations. Hence
idleness prevailed—“an idle brain is the devil’s own workshop,” in the
coal regions as elsewhere—and bad habits, bad deeds, were among the
results accompanying this unsatisfactory state of affairs. While some of
the miners had gone elsewhere, seeking jobs for the winter—a portion to
Luzerne, and others to Columbia County—there were many who, having
families and homes thereabouts demanding attention, yet remained,
waiting for some change to better their condition.

Tamaqua was filled with excited men and exciting whisky.

Not long after reaching the city, who should present himself to
McKenna’s notice but the identical Dan Kelly, left, not so long before,
in Pottsville; the man who became his friend, and who, somewhat earlier,
had backed Fighting Frazer in his contest in Dormer’s house. Of course
they expressed themselves as mutually glad to see each other. The
operative explained to Kelly that the party for whom he was to have
worked in the mountains, on the mythical water basin, was found to be a
first-class deception; and, leaving him in disgust, he had visited the
adjacent country in search of work. All of this Kelly received with
perfect faith in its truth, however untruthful; and that personage told
the detective, in turn, that he was more fortunate, having obtained a
paying job at Boston Run Colliery, less than two miles from the borough
of Tamaqua. In fact, the reason of his visit to town that day was to buy
a suit of shifting clothes.

Kelly at once insisted that the operative should accompany him to a
saloon and partake of something warm and stimulative. This constituted
an invitation not easily refusable under the circumstances. It was
accepted, and the drinkables enjoyed. After this, and following some
talk about mining and acquaintances in Pottsville, the detective went
with Kelly to the train, and saw him safely off for home. Kelly had
remarked that Tamaqua was no place for men like himself and companion,
as there were no friends in the town, the nearest being at Old Mines,
some five miles distant. Occasionally a few straggling brothers
accidentally convened at some tavern in Tamaqua, but no regular
organization had ever commenced or been maintained in the city; several
times, however, the thing had been started, and as often fallen through.

Upon returning to the Columbia House, and while partaking of supper,
McKenna was accosted, in a friendly way, by a man who had been
introduced to him as Gillespie:

“Are you posted as to the standing in the community of the man with whom
I just saw you at the depot—I mean the one carrying the bundle on his
arm?”

“An’ why not?” answered the detective, still maintaining more of the
brogue than was natural for him. “Why not? Do I know Dan Kelly? Sure an’
I lately made meself a companion of his, at Pat Dormer’s place, in the
borough of Pottsville. An’ didn’t he back Fighting Frazer agin me fur
the first bit of a scrimmage I ever enjoyed in Schuylkill County? That
he did! An’ he war gentleman enough not to harbor malice agin me! On the
conthrary, I flatter meself that he an’ I are rather warrum friends at
the prisent moment! What should I be inquarin’ as to his char_ac_ter
for? He’s all correct, isn’t he?”

“Manus has been very unfortunate.”

“Manus who?”

“Manus Kull, sure!”

“Manus Kull? Is that the name ye give the person I saw off on the train,
beyant?”

“Certainly! That’s his name!”

“Well, Mr. Gillespie, I hev regard for ye, but must say that ye labor
under a mistaken idea! It war Dan Kelly, a miner—an’ he has work not so
far from this town—that I saw to the train the day!”

“Oh, I know what I am talking about!” said Gillespie, a little nettled
by McKenna’s unbelief. “He is Manus Kull! I insist upon that, say what
you may! Haven’t I known him since he was knee high to a rabbit? and,
sorry I am to say it, since he came to the age of maturity it is very
little I’ve learned to his credit.”

“Kelly’s the name I’ve always heard him called—Dan Kelly, at that—an’
sure I didn’t take him for wan of those havin’ occasion to dale in
double names an’ deceptions!”

“He is none other than Manus Kull; tho’ since his troubles he may have
adopted some other man’s name, having doubly dishonored his own. And,
what is more to the purpose in my speaking with you, to put you on your
guard, lest you make an intimate associate of him, to my certain
knowledge he has served a term of three years in Luzerne County jail for
biting off a man’s ear, in the course of a rough-and-tumble fight, at
the town of Wilkesbarre. And upon one court-day there were not less than
eight or nine warrants out and in the hands of officers for his arrest,
for offenses ranging all the way from assault and battery to burglary
and highway robbery. He has broken his poor mother’s heart, has Manus
Kull!”

The talk continued in this strain for some moments, during which the
detective learned—as before he had more than half suspected—that Kull,
_alias_ Kelly, was only one among many hard cases usually congregating
at the Sheridan House. Expressing some surprise, however, that he should
be thus misled, he continued his meal in silence.

During the same evening two miners, named Mullhearn and McGinly, arrived
at the hotel from the neighborhood of Mauch Chunk, both in a state of
semi-intoxication and ready for any sort of adventure that might come
within reach. The large bar-room gradually filled with people. Finally
the two strangers, concluding a deal of loud talk plentifully
interspersed with oaths, managed to get up a wrestling match in the
apartment, a ring being cleared for the purpose. Then all was noise and
confusion. Some, not particularly interested in manly sports, were
engaged in drowning sorrow, from lack of work, in deep potations at the
bar. Others sat, nodding stupidly in their chairs. After a protracted
struggle, in which several heavy falls were given and received on either
side, Mullhearn was fairly thrown, his antagonist coming down upon him
with great force, and McGinly declared the victor. The result of this
decision was the formation of two parties in the assemblage, a McGinly
party and a Mullhearn party; this culminated, as might have been
expected, in the usual Kilkenny fight, in which all participated,
battering skulls, blacking eyes, breaking noses, and spoiling
countenances generally. During the prevalence of this hurly-burly, one
Dougherty, who commanded a crowd of roughs like himself, and who was
affected more than those about him by the liquor he had drank, pulled
out a pistol and commenced discharging it into the walls, ceilings,
floors, counters, or whatever eligible objects he chanced to see.
Fortunately, the supply of cartridges was quickly exhausted and nobody
hurt except the ruffian himself. One of the missiles from his weapon,
rebounding from the hard wood of the counter, came back with force,
striking Dougherty in the left hip, inflicting a painful but not deadly
wound. The shooting had been in sport, and, the practical joker, having
received merited reward for his ghastly jest, the disturbance was
quieted, and while his injury was examined almost silence reigned.
McKenna, saying he had some experience in the surgical line volunteered
to dress Dougherty’s hurt. His navy service was again alluded to, and,
as there was no doctor nigh, the duty finally devolved upon him of
staunching the blood and binding up the injury. A little whisky and
water, properly applied, soon performed the first, and a keen pen-knife
quickly laid bare the bullet, which had not penetrated deeply, and it
was deftly extracted by the fingers. Then more whisky and water cleansed
the hurt, while a plaster was procured from a neighboring drug-store,
applied, and, the patient, feeling quite easy, before the borough police
had discovered who had done the shooting, Dougherty resumed his carousal
with his associates.

[Illustration: “_McKenna saying he had some experience in the surgical
line, volunteered to dress Dougherty’s hurt._”]

Marks, the proprietor of the hotel, was able to breathe more freely when
the Dougherty crowd vacated the premises. McKenna earned many plaudits
from Dougherty’s friends for the skill he had exhibited in amateur
surgery, but Dougherty himself said that he had cut him more and deeper
than necessary, and he would never forgive him for it. Unreasonable as
this certainly was, his followers earnestly endeavored to convince the
drunken fellow of his error, but the liquor in him had turned his brain,
and it is presumable that he might have sought to punish the detective,
who had assisted to preserve his worthless life, had not others
prevailed upon him to defer it until the morrow, and finally succeeded
in coaxing and dragging him off to another tavern. In a short time he
was as drunk as ever. Some of the Dougherty crowd said if they ever
wanted a doctor they “would send for that fellow just from the Rocky
Mountains.”

As much to get out of the way of the intoxicated men as from any other
reason, McKenna, the hour still being early, left the bar-room and
hunted up Pat Nolan, to whom he bore a letter from Dormer, finding the
man soberly at his home. Nolan read the epistle and said he was happy to
meet any friend of Dormer, but was sorry to say that work, for the
present at least, was simply out of the question. They had some quiet
games at cards, and passed a couple of hours pleasantly, when the
detective bade all good-night, and, at about eleven o’clock, went back
to the Columbia House. Before midnight, leaving the place well filled on
the ground floor, he retired to his bed—but not to sleep, as fate or
circumstance ordained. Too much noise rang upon his drowsy ear to make
slumber possible. He had been between the sheets, tossing uneasily from
side to side and enjoying such brief intervals of repose as he could
catch betwixt waves of uproar and riot rising from the depths beneath
him, during a couple of hours, perhaps, when there was a resounding
rattle at his chamber door. Without moving, he asked, in no pleasant
tone:

“Who the divil’s there?”

The answer was not particularly reassuring:

“We want to get in!” said somebody in a thick, gruff voice.

McKenna quickly appreciated the fact that Dougherty and his unruly crew
were looking for him.

“Go away, an’ don’t bother me!” shouted the operative. But this had no
other effect than to increase the force that some person was exerting
upon the bolts of the bedroom door. Visions of sanguinary Mollie
Maguires, and an unpleasant feeling that they might possibly have
penetrated his disguise, discovered his deception, flitted through his
weary brain. But instantly dispersing all such thoughts as mere dreams—

                    ——“Interludes, which Fancy weaves
                  When the monarch, Reason, sleeps”—

he leaped from the bed, making considerable stir, lighted a lamp, and
said, in a loud, determined, and unfaltering voice:

“Now, get away out of that, ye spalpeens, or I’ll jist blow the head off
some of yez!”

The shaking of the lock soon ceased, and the steps of several persons
were heard retreating. Once more seeking his pillow, the weary man
endeavored to obtain some repose. But in a little while he again
distinguished the stealthy fall of human feet nigh the entrance of his
apartment. Dougherty, for the second time, was trying to force admission
to his presence.

“We _must_ get in!” exclaimed the drunken man.

Exasperated at this long-continued annoyance, McKenna turned out, struck
a light, donned a portion of his garments, suddenly unlocked and opened
the door, and brought the forbidding, dark muzzle of his heavy
seven-shooter plump in Dougherty’s face, demanding his business with him
at such an hour and such a place. Hesitating somewhat, and dodging his
head from side to side to escape McKenna’s aim, he faltered out:

“I can’t find me partner! Didn’t know but he might be in this room!”

“I don’t know anything about your partner, if you have wan, an’ I give
ye due notice that I’ve had plenty and to spare of you an’ your eternal
racket! So get out of this, quick! An’ don’t ye come banging about here
any more! Sure, an’ if ye do, I’ll make serious trouble wid ye!”

Perfectly quieted down by the pistol, the detective’s undaunted front
and resolute language, Dougherty and his companions took themselves off,
invoking anything but compliments upon the man who had sent them away so
unceremoniously. Again McKenna extinguished his lamp and courted repose.
For a short time he slept fitfully and ill at ease, but, about an hour
before daylight, he was aroused by sounds of a desperate row in progress
below stairs. Pistol-shot after pistol-shot echoed along the corridors
and through the rooms, making the hearer think that a small army of
bushwhackers were attacking the house, and practising to see how many
bullets they could lodge in the weatherboarding. He finally started up,
unable longer to bear the confusion, and, after putting on his clothing,
took the light in his left hand, and with the right resting on the butt
of his revolver, which he held ready for immediate use, in his outside
coat pocket, noiselessly opened the door, made his exit, and moved
toward the supposed scene of conflict. Not much accustomed to the sense
of fear, the detective thought, as he bent his steps in the direction of
the warfare, and as the jar and other evidences of deadly strife smote
more clearly upon his ear, he really experienced a feeling akin to that
of a soldier when receiving the “baptism of fire” upon his initial
battle-ground. At least there was a queer creeping of the flesh, a
chilly blast over his back and shoulders, a novel rising up of the
scalp, as he entered the dark, deserted bar-room, and still heard, as
though in the distance, the rattle of small arms. The fight was
evidently losing none of its intensity. “Perhaps it has been transferred
to the kitchen or dining-room,” he thought. It must be in one or the
other, and in which he could not decide. Upon opening the entrance of
the latter place, however, the mystery was quickly solved, and a strange
spectacle presented itself to his vision.


                               ————●————




                              CHAPTER XII.

                   McKENNA MEETS A MORNING ADVENTURE.


Before him was the long, low, dark dining-room, only a small portion of
which, at one extremity, was illuminated by a single tallow candle,
trussed to the wall with an old, rusty, bone-handled fork, and the
flaring lamp held over his own head. On a line with, and at one end of
the deal table, which extended nearly from one side of the apartment to
the other, and at a place properly described as the head of the board,
were grouped in deep shadow, only broken by fitful flashes from
McKenna’s light, a number of men, all sporting revolvers, rapidly
loading and firing, without regard to order or regularity, at the
target—a rough, white hat, loosely nailed to the partition not far from
the candle. Every member of the reckless gang was more or less
intoxicated. Among them the spectator saw several of Dougherty’s
friends, but the leader himself had been put in bed—otherwise under the
dresser—about an hour earlier, and there he reposed, his uncovered
head—rough, long-haired, and pallid as to face—supported on the bent
right arm, as helpless as an infant and almost as still as a stone model
of the spirit that he evidently worshipped—Bacchus.

[Illustration: “_And there he reposed, his uncovered head,——rough,
long-haired and pallid as to face,——supported on his bent right arm._”]

“Halloo! here’s the docther!” exclaimed a short, ruffianly fellow,
wearing a huge fur cap, thrown backward from his forehead, showing his
front hair, black, short, and stiff, and holding in his hand a revolver
full half a yard long, which he had just discharged a dozen times at the
mark without once coming within the length of his weapon of hitting it.
“Halloo! Give the docther a chance!”

“Yes! Give us a taste of your marksmanship!” said the frightened
publican, who had remained with his gentle and lamb-like patrons to
protect his furniture as well as he could and prevent the wild madcaps
from firing the building in the course of their innocent gambols. As it
was, the thin barrier of plank, separating the dining-room from the
kitchen, was thickly perforated with black apertures, ranging from the
size of a pea to that of a musket bullet. Luckily, at that hour of the
morning, no person was employed, or chanced to be in, the culinary
department of the house, and hence injury to life and limb had not
resulted from the careless use of fire-arms. The wall only was
shattered, and it, while made of wood and neatly covered with light
paper, bore the appearance of having been irregularly pierced with
innumerable circular openings for purposes of ventilation.

Promptly accepting the invitation, as he was certainly in for it by
reason of his appearance on the spot, the detective deliberately raised
his pistol, and, in rapid succession, fired two shots, both of which
struck the target near its centre.

“Bedad! He’s as good at firing bullets as he is cuttin’ them out of
wounds!” shouted the individual with the fur cap, putting away his
pistol. “He’s bate the best shot; an’ now I move that we quit, before
the policeman comes an’ interferes wid our little divarsions!”

The suggestion was taken advantage of by Marks, the guttered candle
extinguished, and, headed by the operative, all made their devious way
to the bar-room, where, from the reason of his close firing, McKenna was
informed he would be expected to stand treat. This he willingly did, and
the men—excepting such as were found physically unable—soon began to
disperse. The few remaining were disposed of as expeditiously as
possible, some in bed-rooms, and others in seats beside the fire, where
they would be in no danger of freezing to death. Then the disgusted
landlord and the worn-out detective retired to their respective
apartments. McKenna gained his bed, prepared for a nap, while the sun
was ushering in another day.

As a natural consequence of passing such a horrible night, the agent
slept late, and it was near dinner-time when he arose greatly refreshed.
The same day he received a line from John Deenan, _alias_ “Bushy,” in
response to one he had previously sent the tavern-keeper. As Deenan’s
epistle forms a portion of this eventful history—although its author has
long since been gathered to his fathers—it is printed in full, as
follows:

                                          POTTSVILLE, JAN. 19, 1874.

  DEAR SIR:—I received your welcome letter, which gave me a great deal
  of pleasure. I was glad to hear from you. I have written to Alex.
  Campbell to inform you of what is going on there, so you can go to him
  and he will tell you all about it. He lives at the upper part of
  Tamaqua. He keeps a tavern. We are all well at present.

                                               Yours truly,
                                                        JOHN DEENAN.

This presented an opportunity for forming the acquaintance of Campbell,
which the sojourner in the land of the Mollies was not slow to embrace,
immediately calling at the locality indicated. He was cordially received
by the landlord, who was a tall, bony, angular-shaped personage, dark of
hair, moustache and imperial, sharp of eye, the forehead being rather
low and straight, the nose long, sharp, high-bridged, and with a curved
indenture either side of the arch. His age might have been forty years.
His wife and several children formed the entire family. All united to
make the honored guest welcome during the remainder of that day.
Campbell was found a sharp, shrewd man, and fully aware of his
consequence in the order. He said that Bushy Deenan had advised him of
McKenna’s intended arrival, but, under the circumstances, he could not
see how he would be able to accomplish his wishes in securing
employment. Should work be resumed, he would gladly do all in his power
to find a place for him, or say or do anything where his influence would
be for his visitor’s advantage. As concerned any other business toward
which Deenan might have hinted, he could only refer him to Muff Lawler,
who had all such matters in charge. After a pleasant season, and
carrying with him rather more liquor than he felt absolute need of,
McKenna returned to the Columbia House in time for supper. There he met,
for the first time, one Christopher Donnelly, fated subsequently to be
associated with some of the chief actors in my narrative, a leading
Mollie, and at the time ostensibly engaged in preparing banners and
regalia for the Brotherhood, to employ in the approaching celebration of
St. Patrick’s day, when the Mollies proposed publicly appearing in the
procession with the Benevolent and other Catholic societies. Donnelly
was a man of ordinary appearance, above thirty in years, having lightish
brown hair, with mustache of the same color, light eyes, and, as he
stood, the detective estimated, about five feet seven inches in height.
His features were thin and small, but not unhandsome, the face having
disfiguring marks of coal and powder, showing that he had followed the
business of mining. He was married, and the father of a family. After
four years’ service in the army, he came out, at the end of the war,
with a fair record for bravery and good conduct. McKenna was of the
opinion that Donnelly was in some way connected with the treasurership
of the society’s funds. He was soon on intimate terms with the stranger,
and the friendly feeling was strengthened when McKenna informed him of
his service in the United States Navy. Not too communicative, crafty,
calculating, and fairly educated in the common English branches,
Donnelly was somewhat above the average, in the way of intelligence,
among miners. He departed by the early train for his home at Mt. Laffee.

The detective now thought it time that he turned toward Shenandoah. He
therefore took his baggage to the depot and procured a ticket for that
place. Bidding the few friends he had made at Tamaqua farewell for the
present, he mounted the smoking-car and soon afterward found himself in
the then hot-bed and grand centre of the Mollies for Schuylkill County.
Framing the usual excuse, that he was looking for a job in some
colliery, he managed to extract the information, without exactly making
inquiries, that Lawler was still absent in Pottsville and not likely to
return for several days. He at once determined to go there and make the
gentleman’s acquaintance, if possible, in Dormer’s saloon, where he knew
he would be surrounded by true and faithful friends. The weather was
freezing cold and he would have a good reason to urge for the short
journey, in that his wardrobe sadly needed replenishing. An overcoat and
some other articles of comfort were in pressing demand. Consequently he
remained in Shenandoah but a few hours, going by the next train to
Pottsville. It was not long before he was again at the Sheridan House,
in company with his former companion and fellow Mollie, big, smiling,
ugly Pat Dormer. The innkeeper was so highly elated to once more behold
McKenna, that he quickly entered upon a grand spree, that bid fair to
last him a week, during which time he would do little more than guzzle
whisky and beer and sound high the praises of the “d——st best Irishman
in the whole of Schuylkill County,” as he frequently designated his
particular friend from Denver. Without appearing too deeply interested,
the detective discovered that Lawler was yet in Pottsville and
habitually frequenting certain bar-rooms more industriously than seemed
exactly incumbent upon a perfectly sober citizen. Hence he waited the
time when he should arrive at Dormer’s house.

It was Wednesday, the twenty-first of January, that the detective
encountered the object of his secret search, Michael Lawler, upon
entering the Sheridan House, after breakfast. Lawler was deeply in his
cups thus early in the day, yet sufficiently sober to walk erect and
know exactly what he was about. It was cloudy, rough, and stormy
outside, and the sort of day well calculated to tempt men to seek
comfortable corners. A number of prominent and active Mollies were in
Dormer’s place, with Lawler, when McKenna made his appearance there. He
recognized, in the man he had been looking for, a rather prepossessing
personage, something past forty in years, above medium height, heavily
but not clumsily built—yet more fleshy than the generality of
miners—with black hair and heavy side whiskers of the same dark color,
the chin being shaven; eyes a deep hazel, and withal, “Muff” was
slightly bald at the crown of the head. His cheeks wore a ruddy and
healthful look, and the skin was fair and clear. As McKenna subsequently
learned, Lawler claimed a wife and six children, the oldest of the
offspring a girl of eighteen, and the youngest a boy past three years of
age. He was quite pleasant in manner, free-spoken, and used a noticeable
shade of Irish accent. He bore the reputation of being a steadfast
friend, as well as a relentless but not subtle enemy. His absorbing
passion was cock-fighting, and a rare breed of game chickens, which he
raised and bet upon, called mufflers, gave him the _sobriquet_, among
his intimates, of “Muff” Lawler. A practiced miner, strong, able-bodied
and industrious, he usually obtained work at some of the collieries if
such a thing was to be had in the vicinity.

Upon the introduction of the detective to Lawler, by Dormer, which
ceremony was performed in the grim giant’s most fascinating style, the
Shenandoah man remarked:

“I’m plazed to meet you, Mr. McKenna! Through your friend, and mine, Pat
Dormer, I’ve heard about you, and begun to wonder where you were taking
yoursel’ to—had expected to see you at my house in Shenandoah!”

“Bad scran to me, but I’m glad that I’ve come up wid ye!” replied
McKenna, “an’ I’m just from your town, where I stopped only a few hours.
As work war dull there an’ I had no frien’s, you bein’ away, I jist rode
over here to take another glass wid Dormer, an’ who should I run right
forninst but the very person I have wanted to see! I shall only buy
myself some warmer clothes an’ then go straight back to Shenandoah,
where, if I can get work, an’ a dacent, comfortable boardin’-place, I
propose stopping most of the winter—that is, providin’ some swate
friends of mine, who are mighty pressin’ in their attentions, but that I
don’t crave to see jist at this present moment, may not come afther me
sooner. Av coorse I shall attind church while I’m here, as it may be me
last chance for some length of time!”

“An’ I can’t do that same!” said Lawler, with some regret in his voice,
“for I am too deeply in somethin’ of which the clergy disapprove! I’m
fixed about as high in that, however as they make them in the county! I
suppose that Dormer has given ye that information already?”

“Yes! I have heard as much!”

“By the same token!” here interrupted Dormer, “I sint a bit o’ letther
to ye, Mike, by McKenna, an’ now that he’s met you, sure, the line will
be of no use!”

“That’s so!” said Lawler. “It’ll be all the same! Any friend of
yours—any old head especially—will be sure to meet a warm welcome at my
house!”

Here one of the men forming the company directed Lawler’s attention to
an article in the daily _Standard_, stating that the Philadelphia and
Reading Coal and Iron Company was about to bring five thousand raw men
into the county to work their mines. Lawler was very much interested in
this, and read the entire extract aloud, commenting upon the same:

“I’m a man of learning, I am, have some small sense, and know a little
of what’s going on in this region of country, and I can tell you all
that, if Mr. Gowen, President of the Philadelphia and Reading Company,
undertakes to do anything like what this piece in the paper sets forth,
in place of having the State Militia here to protect his men in the
mines, and keep his breakers, shafts, and depot buildings from the
torch, it’ll take all that force and all his time and skill to protect
his own life!”

“That’s so! That’s so!” was the hearty response.

“I look a person in the eye, myself, an’ I know in wan single moment
whether I spake to a true man or not!”

“I admire your courage an’ ability, Mr. Lawler,” said McKenna, “an’ I’m
of the opinion that Mr. Gowen—if that be his name—will think over it a
long while afore he’ll trust a force of raw men in his mines! At any
rate, he’ll soon see, if he tries it, that such a thing will not work in
this country.”

This agreement with the boys gave McKenna standing with them at once.

The subject was discussed at length by all hands, and the universal
opinion was, if the Company tried to butt against the society, the
society would soon show the management of the railway, and the coal
organization, of what kind of metal it was composed.

During the ensuing day Lawler was more sober, and, saying that he had
already been too long from home, made preparations for an immediate
return to Shenandoah. Before leaving, however, he very cordially invited
McKenna to call when he reached his locality, saying:

“I’ll make you as safe and secure as you can be anywhere!”

From this significant remark the detective inferred that, as he had all
along intended he should, Dormer had given a hint to Lawler that the
stranger was a hard case generally, and engaged in concealing himself
from certain officials in Western New York, who were in search of him
for having killed a man in Buffalo a year or so before. It was more than
probable that his reputation as a dealer in counterfeit money had also
been discussed by the same worthies.

“I’ll accept your offer wid pleasure,” answered McKenna, “an’ I think
it’ll not be many days before you’ll see me face in Shenandoah! I
believe it’ll be just the place for me!”

The detective and Dormer attended Lawler to the cars and bid him good
luck on his journey.

After Lawler’s departure time hung rather heavily upon the agent’s
hands. He had nothing particular to attend to that was of importance in
his calling, excepting to make the acquaintance of as many Mollies as
possible, impress on the mind of Dormer the necessity of covering his
tracks from the New York detectives, and secure the names of such
persons as would be likely to listen to propositions connected with his
counterfeit currency schemes. He pretended that he might soon have a
supply to be disposed of. Dormer would sit for hours in his chair, when
customers were not plentiful, and drink in, with open eyes and gaping
mouth, the wonderful tales the detective related of his strange
adventures in foreign lands, the different people seen, and the narrow
escapes he had made from capture and drowning while in the naval
service. The little trouble experienced with another man in Buffalo, in
which his antagonist chanced to be killed, was often repeated, with such
embellishments as his inventive genius supplied. Once in a while he
would exhibit a genuine bank-bill and tax Dormer’s acuteness of vision
to the utmost in finding out the difference between it and those he knew
to be genuine issues of the same bank. He was hardly able to distinguish
the peculiar secret mark which, McKenna sagely told him, “spotted the
‘flimsy’ as of the sort called ‘queer.’” That it was spurious, however,
was evident, from the fact that the exhibitor _said_ he could “sell any
needed quantity of similar banknotes at the exceedingly low rate of
forty cents on the dollar.” His word was not to be doubted.

“For the life of me, I can’t see why it is not of the genuine issue!”
Dormer would remark, with a puzzled look on his naturally sardonical
face. “I’m no _bocaun_, as you’re aware, but may I niver die till I see
me own funeral, if the wan bill isn’t every bit as good, to me, as
t’other!”

“Faith, an’ wan is jist as good as the other,” McKenna would reply,
_sotto voce_, “for two thirds of all them bills is as false as Sam’s
masther—the devil—but don’t say a word about it! As long as the paple
don’t know the truth, where’s the difference?”

Of course the detective never kept a dollar of spurious money in his
possession, never intended to, and never permitted himself to be drawn
into any sales of that which he had given out as bad. It was sufficient
for him if he made his companions believe that he was driving a
profitable business selling the stuff, and further, that he was in
regular receipt of a pension from the government, to account for getting
on in the world without much work, and at the same time appearing to
have plenty of funds for his personal wants. This he managed to do, for
Dormer told several cronies, and they spread it among the Mollies.

While McKenna was in Pottsville on this occasion—about the 24th of
January, 1874—transpired news of the murder, at Miner’s Hill Gap, of a
man named Bradley. The information reached him through the columns of a
newspaper. He at once determined to go to Shenandoah, see Lawler, and
find out, if possible, whether the Mollie Maguires were the perpetrators
of the deed. He waited until the close of the Mission in the church, and
then, on the twenty-ninth of the month, prepared to leave. Dormer, who
had recovered from his debauch, with a sober face informed the detective
that, hereafter, he would have nothing to do with secret societies,
intended faithfully to perform all his church duties, and in fact become
a better man than he had ever been before. He advised the trip to
Shenandoah, and said, when once there, Lawler would, if he so desired,
make him all right in the society. It was Saturday, the 31st of January,
that McKenna found himself, for the second time, in the handsome city of
Shenandoah. If he should now prove successful, it would not be so long
before he would see the inside workings of the Mollie Maguires.


                               ————●————




                             CHAPTER XIII.

                          MUFF LAWLER AT HOME.


The day following the one on which he arrived in Shenandoah was the
Sabbath, and, believing Lawler would be unemployed, McKenna put in an
early appearance at that gentleman’s house. The landlord was apparently
much gratified to meet him. After a number of calls to the bar—for only
a portion of which the detective was allowed to disburse his money, the
remainder coming as so many warm expressions of good-will from the
proprietor of the place—McKenna threw out some feelers which brought up
a discussion of the circumstances attending the Bradley homicide. Lawler
spoke of the affair with apparent frankness, but could not, or would
not, make even a guess as to who had prompted or committed the crime.
Not desiring to push the subject, and saying carelessly that “possibly
the man merited all he had received”—to which insinuation the
saloon-keeper made no direct or audible response—the subject was
dropped, and the conversation turned upon other things. Lawler affected
to have known nothing about the case until he saw a statement of it in
the Shenandoah _Herald_, and, as that paper was bitterly opposed to the
Mollie Maguires, of course he was not exactly prepared to credit
everything appearing in its columns.

In a few hours the stranger was invited to partake of dinner with the
family. He accepted, of course, and received an introduction to Mrs.
Lawler and the children. Knowing how to make himself agreeable to the
mother, he praised her child, said he had her eyes, etc., and concluded,
after the meal, by swinging the boy upon his knee, and singing a simple
refrain which amused him greatly. Lawler and his wife were pleased with
the attention paid—even by this apparently rough, uncouth wanderer—to
their youngest, and soon themselves became more communicative. In fact,
Lawler, as far as he was concerned, needed no farther argument than his
record as a jolly, good fellow, the least bit tempered with rascality,
as obtained from Pat Dormer, to induce him to feel kindly toward
McKenna. Mrs. Lawler was accustomed to think much as her husband did in
most matters, and she, true woman that she was, looked with the eye of
friendship upon him. How greatly these first impressions upon both sides
influenced acts and events which followed, the careful reader will be
able to determine. It is sufficient now to say that the traveler had
praised Mrs. Lawler’s progeny, gaining a welcome seat in the family
circle, and was certainly better pleased with the company than with any
he had enjoyed since leaving Philadelphia.

Lawler informed his friend that he would do all he could to secure
employment for him in the mines, but, should he succeed, the wages would
be low, at the highest not above ten dollars a week, and the labor
severe. He must naturally begin at the bottom round of the ladder, and
gradually, if at all, rise in the scale to the rating of a miner. It
required time and hard work to reach that position. The place of
“butty,” or helper, even, was not so very easy of acquirement. McKenna
here put forward the idea that he was accustomed to manual labor—which
was not exactly the truth, though, in the old country, he once worked on
a farm, and had his muscles hardened by considerable out-door exercise.
Some years had elapsed, however, since his hands were employed in real
toil and he had earned his bread by the sweat of his brow. Still, he
expressed his willingness to try, and said that he would accept anything
yielding him a decent compensation, his principal object being—as Lawler
had doubtless been informed by Dormer—to remain _perdu_, out of sight
and quiet like, until certain people should lose all trace of him. He
believed, he told Lawler, in a whisper intended to impress the hearer
that there was a mystery surrounding him, that the depths of a slope and
a miner’s attire, with the grime and dust incident to delving in a
colliery, would about as effectually cover him from the pursuit of those
so anxious to come up with him, as anything in the way of disguise he
could wear, or any calling he could engage in. Muff coincided in this
opinion.

Lawler’s residence, in which the detective was making himself quite at
home, was and is a respectable but unpretentious wooden structure,
painted outside of a brown color, and two stories in height above a low
basement. In the front part of the first floor was the usual bar-room,
the counter extending across the northern side of the apartment. Behind
the counter were exhibited the commonest saloon fixtures, glasses,
decanters, bottles, etc. At one end of the eastern side was a door,
opening into the kitchen, employed also as a dining-room, from which
latter apartment extended a staircase reaching to the upper story. On
the second floor there were but two partitions, forming three
compartments. In the rear of these were two beds, for the elder
children. In the middle room was one double bed. In the front room, much
more spacious and better furnished than the rest, was the couch occupied
by Mr. and Mrs. Lawler. There were also the usual bureaus, tables,
chairs, and other furniture of similar habitations, with a stove, sofa,
rocking-chair, mirrors, and pictures. It was far from a bare and
unsightly place of abode. Rather the contrary, and showing, in the
neatness and order prevailing, that Mrs. Lawler was a good and careful
housekeeper. It was, in fact, the best room in the house.

In other parts of the dwelling, the arrangements for home comfort were
not extensive or expensive, yet all that could well be expected of
people in Mr. and Mrs. Lawler’s sphere in life.

Passing the time very pleasantly at Shenandoah, which is an agreeable
and growing city of some three thousand inhabitants, the detective made
occasional trips—as he informed his new-found friend, with an expressive
wink of the eye, “upon particular business”—to the town of Colorado,
where he encountered and became intimate with one Hugh Mulligan, then to
Rappahannock and other points, in all of which localities he made good
friends among the Sleepers. He eventually took up his abode at Lawler’s
house, occupying the bed in the centre apartment, up stairs, in company
with Mrs. Lawler’s brother, and paying a reasonable compensation for
room and board.

Situated as he now was, in the midst of the hardest characters and most
devoted Mollies of the whole country, living in the house, and on most
intimate terms of friendship, with the leading spirits of the
organization, though not yet a member of the murderous order, it was
plainly incumbent upon the detective, if he cared for preserving his own
life and promoting the success of the Agency, to exercise more than
ordinary prudence and discretion in all of his words and movements, that
he might not be thought other than the wandering vagabond, fleeing from
justice, that he was generally believed to be. It seemed especially
necessary that his correspondence with the Philadelphia office should
not be discovered, or even imagined. The precautions and safeguards
placed about that portion of the business before McKenna started from
the city, would baffle all inquiry, in the end, if once set on foot, but
even the breath of suspicion should not be allowed to arise. Men have
been murdered from the mere supposition that they might be guilty of
acting as detectives, in Ireland, and the same spirit pervaded the ranks
of the Mollie Maguires here—hence matters calculated to excite a surmise
must be deeply buried. The detective’s compulsory letter-writing, if
made public, even though its object and destination were ever so well
disguised, might place him in a dangerous predicament. Thus he was
alert, and continually vigilant. Excepting it might be in inditing a
letter to relatives in the old country, and then only at long intervals,
he seldom wrote anything—that is, as far as his companions were
apprised. His daily reports must, however, be prepared as usual. This
was mandatory upon him, and in no case to be omitted if the duty could
be safely performed. Occasionally a day or two might be unavoidably
missed, and then the consolidated report would go forward in one
envelope. Sometimes he was forced to take a short journey to an adjacent
town, secure a room at a second-class hotel, and there indite his
letters and mail them to the proper address. Thus they would quickly
reach Mr. Franklin. Writing-paper and envelopes he could with safety
keep in his possession. They might rest in his satchel, which he
frequently left unlocked, without danger of causing those to wonder who
might curiously open that receptacle. But any large supply of postage
stamps would hardly seem consistent with the character he assumed. He
must not purchase them at the Shenandoah post-office, but a quantity
were forwarded to him from Philadelphia. These came to him in due
season. With the envelope containing them in his hand, he sat upon the
side of his bed, and the question arose: “What shall I do with these
troublesome little things?” He first thought of hiding them in some of
the many pockets with which his rough clothing was furnished. But the
chances were that some time, when he was enacting the _rôle_ of the
deeply intoxicated man—as he had done, and undoubtedly would again be
called upon to do—he might be searched and the mischievous stamps
discovered. Besides, from exposure to inclement weather, he was
frequently drenched to the skin, and the stamps would in such a case be
reduced to pulp and destroyed. They must be concealed—but where? When
did one of his countrymen ever give over as hopeless any scheme or plan,
when exertion of ingenuity might supply the bridge that would safely
bear him over an obstacle? The instances are rare, and McKenna was not
to be the subject of one of them. “Can’t I put them under my stocking,
next the sole of my boot?” he asked himself. No, that would never do.
Moisture, friction, and his weight would combine soon to deface and ruin
the stamps. An expedient, in this connection, however, now occurred to
him, and, taking out his pocket-knife, he made a small, narrow opening
in the sheepskin lining of the leg of one of the heavy top boots, and
betwixt that and the heavy leather formed a pouch, the mouth of which
was almost invisible, in which, after wrapping them in some strong
paper, he deposited the postage-stamps. In this safe place, as long as
he remained in the vicinity, he continued to carry them. He was
reasonably sure of having them always convenient; and, as he had but one
pair of boots at a time, could hardly forget to take those with him,
however suddenly he might be called to remove from one point to another.

Another thing which troubled him not a little was to obtain a constant
supply of good ink. Several small bottles, which he procured and kept
hidden in his room, froze solid, and the fluid was spoiled. The Lawler
family was not literary. Its members made small use of pens, ink, and
paper, and a fragment of red or white chalk employed upon a portion of
the bar shelving, and well out of sight behind bottles and cigar-boxes,
formed blotter, journal, cash-book, and ledger for Mike. His was a cash
business, calling for no account-books. Ink was a superfluity in his
house, the absence of which could well be pardoned. Both of the heads of
that family believed firmly in meddling with writing as little as
possible. But McKenna must have ink. Fortunately for him, Mrs. Lawler
was an excellent laundress, and employed liquid bluing to give proper
clearness to her husband’s linen. This coloring matter the detective
frequently made use of, and there is abundant evidence in his reports,
sometimes in the shape of blots and patches not necessary to the
adornment of the sheet, that the landlady’s indigo bottle suffered
considerably from the inroads made upon it by his busy steel pen. The
latter instrument, in a common tin case, he easily managed to carry,
with tobacco, keys, cartridges, bits of string and nails, in some of his
convenient pockets. Many a time did he creep down the stairs and across
the bar-room in his stocking feet, bearing his boots in his hand, of a
cold winter night, light a tallow candle, or a miner’s lamp, and sit
shivering by the kitchen table, with a miserably dim and uncertain
flame, writing up his report, and consuming his substitute for ink, at
Mrs. Lawler’s expense. On one or two occasions, in fact, he was reduced
to the strait of commingling soot from the fire-place with water for
writing purposes, when he had no pencil, the indigo vial was absent from
its accustomed place, or the supply of fluid had given out. After
completing the composition there came the enveloping and stamping.
Diving into his corner in the old boot-leg, he would take out the amount
required and carefully replace the remainder. Then, not daring to retain
the dangerous missive over night in his possession, he must don his
overcoat, and, by the illumination granted by the stars alone, wend his
way to the post-office, where he could deposit his parcel in the outside
box and no person be the wiser. Sometimes he had to return from these
short nocturnal journeys completely saturated with falling rain, or
having, in the darkness, stumbled into a ditch or mud-hole, his clothes
would present a terribly soiled appearance when he could see them. To
save himself trouble in answering unpleasant questions, he would, in
such an event, kindle a fire in the cook-stove, dry and cleanse his
garments, and then, before retiring, sit up and watch the embers until
they expired, in order that Mrs. Lawler might find nothing to make
inquiries about. Very luckily for him, his bedfellow was a sound
sleeper, and never once awakened when he left the room or returned. Had
he done so, however, the detective had ready contrived an excuse which
must have silenced suspicion, in any reasonable man, that the absentee
was engaged in work not unnecessary for one in his physical condition.
All in Lawler’s house slept deeply. This greatly favored the detective’s
wanderings at night. But he was not long in discovering that he must
find a place where, however small and inconvenient, he could occupy some
sort of an apartment quite by himself. Otherwise his reports would be
few and scattering, brief and unsatisfactory. He therefore began the
search for another boarding-house, with a valid reason for cutting away
from the Lawler residence.

One day, not long after McKenna had reached this conclusion, Lawler came
home from the colliery some hours earlier than usual, and meeting the
stranger, inquired if he had any clothes suitable for use in the mines.

“Faix, an’ I hev these same that ye see me afther standin’ in,” said
McKenna, “wid my Sunday suit beside!”

“Oh, botheration!” exclaimed Lawler, impatiently. “Those will never suit
the work in the slope, with the smoke, an’ the dirt, an’ the wather!”

“Well, then, I suppose wan can buy others that will do! Just tell me
what’s wantin’, an’, sure, I’ll see about it! Now in the silver mines,
in the West, a man can wear most anything—still, I must acknowledge that
the chaper the cloth the least money thrown away, even there!”

“True for ye!” said Lawler. “And if you can’t raise the funds—of the
right sort, you know—I’ll go security for you till pay day for such
things as you’ll need—my credit’s good at the store—for the boss has
sent me to tell you that in a short time he can put you on a job loadin’
coal in the slope. I’ll inform you, beforehand, that it’ll be hard work,
but I guess you can stand it a while!”

McKenna made known his desire to try it, at all events.

The heavy-soled boots, miner’s lamp for his hat-band, the tin
dinner-pail and canteen, a pair of coarse denim overalls, a loose jacket
tied with a strong string at the waist, or buckled in with his trusty
strap, and an old, nearly worn-out hat, formerly worn by Lawler,
completed McKenna’s shifting suit. The prospect of soon entering the
mine to labor was pleasant. It would give him a better opportunity to
see and know a greater number of Mollies, and at the same time gain more
familiar footing with Lawler. But when the appointed day arrived, the
boss received orders from his employers to discharge old, instead of
hiring new men. Still Lawler did not despair. His time would come, he
confidently declared.

At about this date the whole country was covered with snow, which fell
heavily during several succeeding days, and travel, with teams, or even
on foot, was dangerous. For more than a week communication between
places not connected by railway was almost entirely suspended.

When Sunday came, McKenna, as was his custom, put on his best garments,
combed out his matted hair a little, washed his face, and attended the
church of his faith, where he sat and listened, silently concurring, to
a powerful denunciation of the Mollies by the officiating clergyman,
Father O’Reilley, who, after reading to the congregation a communication
from Bishop Wood, of Philadelphia, on the same subject, launched out
feelingly and bitterly against the Ancient Order of Hibernians, White
Boys, Buckshots, etc., etc., otherwise the Mollie Maguires,
characterizing the men who could belong to such bodies as scarcely less
than damnable. Lawler held a talk with the detective, after Mass, and,
alluding to the anathemas of the priest, said that the Sunday previous
he had himself been in the church and received a scoring of equal
severity. He pretended not to care the snap of his finger for it, and
bade McKenna not to be down-hearted over so trifling a matter. He said:

“For my part, I am a member of and officer in the society, and will
remain so until I see good reason for changing!”

Ed. Lawler, a nephew of the landlord, some months previous, had engaged
in a quarrel with an Englishman, named Brophy. He finally fired upon and
severely wounded his antagonist, and only escaped immediate arrest by
suddenly leaving the vicinity. Brophy recovered, and, the Sabbath spoken
of, came to Muff Lawler with propositions for settlement of the affair.
The arrangement consumed most of the day, and was completed, Lawler
paying Brophy twenty dollars to have the prosecution abandoned. That
same night word was forwarded to the young exile—who was not yet
twenty-one years of age—that he could return to his home and his
relatives. In a short time Ed. made his appearance in Shenandoah, was
introduced to and conceived a wonderful liking for McKenna, and, had the
detective been willing, would have made himself very intimate in his
companionship, but that personage had his own ideas concerning his
associates, and did not care to have many so reckless and juvenile as
the man in question. Ed. was notoriously bad—and there was nothing to
attract McKenna to him, nor could anything be gained by seeking his
society.

The officer felt, from day to day, that, as long as he remained outside
the order of Mollie Maguires, so long would he be in the power of a bad,
reckless and changeable set of men, who might, at almost any moment,
turn from friends to inveterate enemies. Hence, without seeming to press
the subject upon Lawler, he caused him to move a little faster in the
proper direction.


                               ————●————




                              CHAPTER XIV.

                   THE DETECTIVE ACHIEVES A VICTORY.


The operations of the detective as a laborer in the coal mines were
destined to be of brief duration. Commencing nigh the middle of
February, 1874, working a few days loading coal-wagons from the chute in
the slope, to be run to, and then emptied in the breaker, he soon had
all that he cared for in that particular line of industry. A day’s
apportionment was considered to be about eight of these wagon-loads of
the mass coal, comprising pieces varying in weight from a few pounds to
several hundreds of pounds, all of which he was expected to place in the
body of the small truck for removal to the upper regions. He was
supposed to be in the shaft from half-past six in the morning until
about five or half past five o’clock in the afternoon, which was the day
shift, when other workmen took his place. Everything, at first, appeared
very strange to him, and the close air made him sick and giddy. Each
wagon would transport some two and one-half tons of coal, hence the
shoveler’s ten hours’ stint would be equal to handling twenty tons of
anthracite _per diem_, a task that one, accustomed, for mere pastime, to
shovel into a cellar, handily with a scoop, his ton or half ton of grate
or range coal, can hardly appreciate. He may come near it, but the
strength required to lift the larger pieces he cannot properly estimate.
And this wearisome occupation must be steadily pursued, from early
morning until the hour for luncheon, and from one o’clock P.M. until
time to be relieved by the night force. It constituted much heavier work
than McKenna had ever been accustomed to, hence it is not to be wondered
at that his hands were worn quite raw when he left the shaft-house at
the colliery, after his first day’s experience in it. Indeed, had there
not occurred an accident, in which some of the apparatus by which the
loaded trucks were elevated to the hopper of the breaker gave way, it is
more than probable that, before quitting time, he would have found
himself entirely disabled and compelled to vacate his post. As it was,
the condition of his bruised and bleeding fingers, when he returned to
Lawler’s for supper, after a good cleansing in the kitchen, was quite
deplorable, and he employed his knife and fork awkwardly and painfully
enough during the meal. He made no wry faces, however, as this would
have been an admission that he had never before had anything to do with
mining of any sort, but bore the pain in gritty silence, retiring early
to his apartment, not to write or sleep, however, as the tortures he
experienced interfered with the use of the pen, and kept his eyes open,
in spite of his exhaustion and desire to become oblivious to sublunary
affairs. It was almost time to rise and prepare for another laborious
day, before his eyelids closed in broken and fitful slumber.

The second day, the detective was approached by a miner, seemingly at
the head of the society, who demanded a view of his card from the
Miners’ and Laborers’ Union. As he had none, the request could not be
complied with, and the man, named Mullaly, was so informed. The man told
McKenna that, unless he joined the organization, he could not labor in
that calling. Of course the operative was willing to do this as soon as
able, and so expressed himself, when, after some further words, Mullaly
took his departure.

The severe pain in his hands and limbs left the detective after five or
six days, and he felt well enough to roam abroad in the city soon after
supper. But it was very little he cared about sitting up late following
a day’s digging in the shaft and nine or ten o’clock at night generally
found him in bed. But an accident that befell him on the seventeenth of
the month put him upon the shelf for some time. Having his hand severely
injured, by being crushed between two car-wheels, he was unable to
pursue any laborious occupation until it healed. On the succeeding day,
Mrs. Lawler was suddenly attacked with serious illness, and all the
boarders at the tavern, McKenna included, were forced to leave and
secure other accommodations. Mrs. Lawler was not expected to
sufficiently recover to return to her duties very soon, and no proper
substitute for her could be found in Shenandoah. Excepting the bad
health of Mrs. Lawler—for which he really felt sorry—the occurrence
furnished that which the detective had lately been seeking for—an excuse
to change boarding-places—and he soon obtained a room passibly to his
liking at the residence of Fenton Cooney, who had moved to Shenandoah.
The little bedroom that he tenanted was rather cold and cheerless, but
there was one thing about it which fully compensated—he was to be its
only occupant, unless, when the house might be crowded, he chose to
share the bed with some of his friends. There was one slight objection
to the apartment, which, however, he soon obviated. It came in the shape
of a large hole in the wall separating him from another room, just in
the corner, at the head of his bed, caused by uneven settling of the
foundations of the building, through which a man might thrust his arm.
Not that he particularly cared for the draught of air, but when he came
to composing his reports and using a lamp, which was generally late at
night, it would not do to have any chance observer in the hall, or
prying servants, see a gleam of light emanating from his bedroom. This
was prevented by stopping up the large aperture with such old clothes as
he could spare from his satchel—taking the precaution of packing them
away again in the morning before vacating the premises—and hanging his
old shifting hat on the knob of the lock, over the keyhole. After these
preparations, he was enabled to work in safety. A small bottle of ink,
however, which he procured and secreted in the room, froze as solid as a
rock the very first night, and he was reduced, for several days, to the
expedient of trying a lead pencil. Subsequently, he used a
newly-patented copying pencil, but had poor luck with it, as the nearly
undecipherable reports he sent in abundantly testify. By employing a
portable inkstand and filling it frequently out of Mrs. Cooney’s bluing
bottle, which, happily for him, was left near the fire, in the kitchen,
he managed to do better until an event occurred that rendered such a
proceeding unnecessary. Cooney, who was no scholar, chanced to have a
number of letters to send to Pottsville, and, learning that his new
boarder, McKenna, could “use the pen iligantly”—as Lawler expressed
it—he was pressed into the service, first having been sent to the
nearest store for some ink. He took care to buy a middling-sized
bottleful, and, after completing his task for Cooney, put it beside the
bluing in the same place, and all he had to do when he needed to perform
some work in his room, was to take away a quantity in his pocket stand
and throw out what was left when he concluded his labors. Mrs. Cooney
was particularly cautioned to keep the ink-bottle where it was, and,
without asking any questions, complied. Thus was this trouble, for a
time, wiped away. These details may seem trifling, but the emergency
demanded great caution.

It was at this time that McKenna formed the acquaintance of one Frank
McAndrew. A friendship immediately sprung up between these two men that,
nothwithstanding the trials and troubles through which both have
passed—in fact, danger and adventure seemed to strengthen the
feeling—remains, to this day, unimpaired and unshaken. McAndrew held
true to McKenna in his darkest hour, through good and bad repute; and as
he must play a conspicuous part in the course of this relation, some
reference to his _personnel_ may prove of advantage to the reader.

Of Celtic descent, McAndrew was twenty-eight or twenty-nine years of
age, fair to look upon, of medium height, having round and
well-proportioned limbs. His hair was of a lightish auburn, somewhat
wavy, fine in texture and worn rather gracefully. He had a mustache of
sandy hue, good teeth, blue eyes, regular features, and a complexion
sometimes described as florid. His nose was rather long and sharp.
Usually clad in good and decently-fashioned clothing, when out of his
shifting suit, Frank was, if anything, generally more presentable than
the usual run of men brought up to the calling of a miner. He was
married and the father of two children.

It was from McAndrew that McKenna, about the middle of February, heard
that a man named Lanaham had been shot the preceding day at Centralia.
The crime was by some charged upon the sheriff, or his assistants, and
by others upon the chain-gang, but, as McAndrew remarked, “the Mollies
would have to bear the blame, whether guilty or innocent.” The
probability was that they had something to do with it.

About the close of the same month, McKenna, only suffering the loss of
some of his finger-nails, as the result of the mining accident, was
sufficiently recovered to return to coal-shoveling in the shaft of the
West Shenandoah colliery. McAndrew was employed in the same mine, not
far from him, and they had Mike Lawler as a companion almost within
speaking distance. During their dinner hour Mike Lawler suggested that
he wanted McKenna well inside the ring before St. Patrick’s day, so that
he could appear in the procession. It was then the intention to make as
good a show as possible on that occasion. McAndrew readily acceded to
the proposition, and the operative assenting, it was agreed that his
name should be taken in at the ensuing regular meeting. But McKenna did
not march in the procession on the seventeenth. A few members from a
country division came out. The majority of the Mollies, preferring to
remain incog., did not attempt to walk with those belonging to other
societies.

About the beginning of March the times were so hard that a number of men
had to be discharged from the colliery, including McKenna and his
companions. They were promised work when business was more lively. In
the meantime, the detective’s efforts—which could not be very active
without attracting undesirable attention—to gain admission to the
Ancient Order, as it was sometimes called, were unavailing. Lawler
sometimes referred to his promise, but seemed unwilling or afraid to
proceed. McKenna was aware of the fact that he had not been
black-balled, and all now wanting was a fairly attended meeting to call
for his admission. McAndrew and Lawler had lately fallen out. They did
not openly quarrel, but Lawler wanted to be re-elected Bodymaster of the
division, and McAndrew thought it was due to him. Lawler urged that, as
McAndrew could not read or write, he was ineligible, and there were a
few members who sided with him. Others contended that lack of education
made no difference. McAndrew being McKenna’s warm friend, that fact
might have had something to do with the delay by Lawler in having the
applicant initiated.

Matters remained in this condition, McKenna and his friends working part
of the time and then for weeks being unemployed, until about the
thirteenth of the following April. Thinking to accelerate action a
little, the detective, one day, proposed to Lawler, that, in a little
while, he would have to bid him good-by, alleging that work was so dull
he had concluded to go to Luzerne County, and there pass the spring and
summer. He knew he could get work in Wilkesbarre, or find an old friend
who had proposed to set him up in business—that is, give him a supply of
bogus bank bills to be disposed of on commission. “Anything,” he
remarked, “is better than idleness.” This had the desired effect.

McKenna had been instructed to take some such course, but not to push
the matter.

Lawler stirred himself, said he did not want McKenna to leave, informed
him that a meeting would soon be held, and his case should certainly be
acted upon. He had his own reasons for desiring McKenna to remain at
Shenandoah, and for getting him into the division; but he wanted first
to be sure that he would support him (Lawler) for Bodymaster. In default
of this, he wished to be elected County Delegate, a lucrative and high
position then held by one Barney Dolan, of Big Mine Run. A hint of this
was all McKenna needed. While he could not promise to go against
McAndrew, he could, and did, say that he would do his utmost to put
Lawler in Dolan’s position. Thereupon Lawler exclaimed, with a chuckle
of satisfaction: “At the very next meeting we’ll see you made all
right!”

As the division held its sessions at Lawler’s house during these days,
the would-be Mollie made it his business to be present nearly every
evening. But it was not until the night of Tuesday, the fourteenth of
April, that his watchfulness earned its merited reward. He was at
Lawler’s, after supper, as usual, and Mike had been drinking more than
needful, assisted somewhat by McKenna, who wished his friend to be in
good trim for doing something generous, as he had heard it was the date
for the regular monthly gathering of the society. Presently, as nine
o’clock arrived, there dropped in at the tavern several well known
Mollies, among them Ed. Ferguson—called Fergus—Pete Monaghan, Thomas
Hurley, Frank McAndrew and Tom McNulty. In a little while, seeming to
take their cue from Lawler, who left his wife to attend the bar, the
rest of the family having retired, they one by one dropped into the
kitchen and quietly ascended the stairway leading to the second floor.
McAndrew and McKenna were thus alone in the beer room with the landlady.
The former appeared to be acting as a sort of outside guardian of the
division. Very few words were exchanged by the two men.

The thoughts which passed through the brain of the detective at the
moment, as he sat listening to the retreating footsteps of the Mollies,
may possibly be imagined by those who have been in similar positions,
but others can have small conception of their meaning and effect, and to
describe them is quite impracticable. His heart stood almost still
during the following few minutes of suspense, and only beat regularly
and calmly when he heard a quick-descending tread, and then the same
sound approaching him from the kitchen. He breathed more freely when he
saw that the arrival was Pete Monaghan, who made a signal that he should
accompany him upstairs, still leaving only McAndrew below. The decisive
period, for which he had labored, watched, and waited during five long,
weary months, had at last arrived. It was a trying and critical crisis
in the detective’s experience, and he felt within him keener evidence of
mental excitement than he remembered having been the subject of since
entering the State. As he ascended the steep steps he endeavored to take
in, comprehend, and forecast the probable result of the act he was about
to take part in, and mentally asked himself, more than once, if it would
end in failure or success. This cast of thought was turned from its
course by arriving at the door of Mike Lawler’s sleeping apartment,
which, it will be remembered, was reasonably large and decently
furnished. Space left within, on account of the wide bed, the tables and
chairs, was a little circumscribed, yet enough remained to tolerably
accommodate the sparse assemblage of brothers. A large lamp burned
brightly on the bureau, before the oval mirror, at one extremity of the
room, between the two heavily draped windows, and another, giving a
lesser light, rested upon a stand, or table, at the opposite end of the
apartment. Behind the small table Mike Lawler, the Bodymaster of the
Division, stood, holding in his hand a slip of paper, which at the
moment he was intently and earnestly studying. The other men were
ranged, standing erect with arms folded, around the room, leaving a
clear spot of carpet in the centre of the floor. Each Mollie devoutly
made the sign of the cross as Monaghan and McKenna entered. The latter
was instructed to similarly bless himself, and promptly obeyed. He was
then taken to the middle of the room, and, still standing by his side,
Monaghan proclaimed all in readiness to proceed.

“The neophyte will kneel!” said Lawler.

“Now get down on your prayer-bones,” whispered Monaghan; and McKenna
knelt upon the carpet.

[Illustration: _“Each Mollie devoutly made the sign of the cross as
Monaghan and McKenna entered.”_]

Here all the members, at a given signal from Lawler, drew nearer the
initiate, leaving room for the Bodymaster, who came also, still holding
the mysterious paper in his hand.

“I will now proceed,” said the presiding officer, in a pompous and
affected tone of voice, “to explain to you the objects of the Ancient
Order of Hibernians: ‘We are joined together to promote friendship,
unity and true Christian charity among our members, by raising money for
the maintenance of the aged, sick, blind, and infirm. The motto of the
order is, Friendship, Unity, and true Christian Charity; unity, in
uniting for mutual support in sickness and distress; friendship, in
assisting each other to the best of our ability; true Christian charity
by doing to each other and all the world as we would wish they should do
unto us.’ It is the desire to promote friendship among the Irish
Catholics, and especially to assist one another in all trials. You are
expected to keep all matters occurring within the division room a secret
in your own heart. None of the workings of the society are to be
recalled to those not known to be members.”

Here there was a short pause, and the initiate was asked if he
subscribed to all these things, to which he made audible answer in the
affirmative.

“I will then proceed to administer the solemn and binding obligation
with which all present have already pledged themselves. You will repeat
these words after me:”

McKenna, still upon his knees, and guarded by Monaghan, repeated the
oath, or obligation, as Lawler read it from the paper, as near as may
be, as follows:

“I, James McKenna, having heard the objects of the order fully
explained, do solemnly swear that I will, with the help of God, keep
inviolably secret all the acts and things done by this order, and obey
the constitution and by-laws in every respect. Should I hear a member
illy spoken of, I will espouse his cause, and convey the information to
him as soon as possible for me so to do. I will obey my superior
officers in every thing lawful, and not otherwise. All this I do
solemnly swear!”

Then McKenna was told to cross himself once more, the surrounding
brothers doing the same, and the test-paper, as it was called, was
handed to him by Lawler, and, still in a kneeling posture, he reverently
kissed it, and was prompted by Monaghan to rise.

This concluded the brief initiatory ceremony. Afterward, the new-made
member walked to the treasurer’s table, which was the bureau, and there
paid three dollars, the sum assessed as the initiatory fee.

He should have subsequently signed his name in a book containing the
constitution of the body, but this was omitted, as were many other
things which in regular lodges of the order of Ancient Hibernians are
always insisted upon. All present now came forward and warmly shook
hands with McKenna, welcoming him as brother.

The next thing was the instruction of the new member in the passwords
and signs—or secret work—commonly called “the goods” of the society, by
Lawler, as follows:

“The sign of recognition, which is changed every three months, for the
present is made by putting the tip of the little finger of the right
hand to the outer corner of the right eye, thus:” and the Bodymaster
made the sign, which McKenna was requested to imitate. He did so, and
the officer resumed:

“The answer to this is, to catch the right lapel of the vest, or coat,
with the little finger and thumb of the right hand, in this manner;” and
Lawler performed the answering signal which the novitiate imitated as
well as he could.

Lawler continued:

“There are a number of toasts, or hailing signs and responses, by which
members of the order recognize each other. When the signal just
furnished cannot be seen, what is called the drinking toast for the
quarter is employed. It is this:

    “‘The Emperor of France and Don Carlos of Spain.’

“And is answered:

    “‘May unite together and the people’s rights maintain.’

“The password, now used in entering a division, is this:

    “‘_Question_: Will tenant right in Ireland flourish?’

    “‘_Answer_: If the people unite and the landlords subdue.’

“The quarreling word, to be employed when a brother is in doubt if one
with whom he is about to dispute or come to blows is a member of the
order, or not, is as follows:

    “‘_Question_: Your temper is high!’

    “‘_Answer_: I have good reason!’

“The night word, to be used when two men meet in darkness, is:

    “‘_Question_: The nights are very dark!’

    “‘_Answer_: I hope they soon will mend!’”

This concluded the ceremonies, and the meeting, without transacting any
further business of importance, adjourned, all going straight to the
bar, where, as was expected, the newly initiated Mollie spent some money
in treating his comrades. When, at about midnight, McKenna and McAndrew
left for their respective homes, Lawler was on his way to bed, more
decidedly mellow than he had been seen since the detective’s arrival in
the place.

In the cold, silent room at Fenton Cooney’s, very late that night,
before retiring, McKenna indited the most important report he had ever
written, minutely detailing, as here given, every particular of the
ceremony attending his initiation into Shenandoah Division of the Mollie
Maguires, with the signs, toasts, passwords, and other matters of
interest. His concluding sentence was:

“So you see victory is won at last!”

It was not until that report had been sealed, stamped, and deposited in
the post-office box, that the detective sought repose, thinking he would
not immediately leave Shenandoah.


                               ————●————




                              CHAPTER XV.

                       MORE WORK OF THE MOLLIES.


The detective was now competent to encounter modern as well as old-time
Mollie Maguires. He apprehended no more trouble from the questions of
Dormer, Lawler, or even Jack Kehoe himself, and felt that however
imperfect his introductory work with the order in the coal country might
have been, he was then prepared to meet all members of the order, and
enabled, from his late instructions, to suit his companions. The danger
coming from sudden inquiries, made by strangers, he no longer dreaded.
Just as well posted in the mysteries of the society as anybody well
could be—he had already learned that there were no degrees beyond the
initiatory in the Ancient Order—he believed he could work his way into a
division, or into the good graces of the people as well as any man with
whom he had conversed. In fact, his memory, which was retentive to a
degree, treasured every sign and password and toast much better, he
discovered, than did the minds of many of his associates, some of whom
had joined the body many years before, and who would therefore be
presumably far more familiar with its interior workings than a mere tyro
in the business. As a general rule his comrades were wholly uneducated,
and their laborious occupations debarred mental exercise. In this regard
McKenna held an advantage, and was really better qualified for office in
the division than any member he had ever met. He had not been long in
the order when this was apparent to his friends, and they commenced
talking of him in connection with one of the chairs to be vacated at the
next annual election.

Surely, he must not for the present leave Shenandoah.

This was a strangely inconsistent society. Having for the public eye a
motto to all appearances as elevated in tone as that of any secret order
in the land, and professing the noblest moral principles, its members
were, with some exceptions, assassins, murderers, incendiaries, thieves,
midnight marauders, gamblers, and men who did not scruple to perform
almost any act of violence or cowardice that a depraved nature or
abnormal animal instinct might conceive. Having “unity and true
Christian charity” as its ostensible guiding-star, its constituent parts
were at war each with the other—excepting in the perpetration of dark
deeds, in which they stood firmly together—and one member jealous of the
power obtained by another. Professing benignity and the utmost
benevolence, it was a combination of enmity and malice for purposes of
blood and outrage, brutally manufacturing widows and orphans—not caring
for and cherishing them. Its adherents were certainly not particular as
to the moral endowments of their initiates. McKenna was quickly
accepted, yet he had not been at all cautious in concealing from Lawler
and his friends that he was—at least, professedly, an escaped manslayer,
and one who would not hesitate to deal in counterfeit currency, or
pursue any other calling by which money could be made or old grudges
repaid.

Then there was Dormer, who had formerly stood well with the
organization; yet he was by no means angelic in disposition or
reputation. Nor were Lawler, Monaghan, Kehoe, Dolan, and a dozen others,
with whom McKenna had come in contact, at all of the character called
saintly.

It was easy to see how fair the aims and objects of the original fathers
of the society might have been when beginning the movement. It could
even be believed that, in some parts of the country, the primal endeavor
might yet be in force, but, in the mining districts of Pennsylvania,
surely they had long since disappeared from view. Evil had taken up the
reins and obtained undisputed sway. Acts of beneficence and charity had
been succeeded by scenes of violence and carnage. Wicked-minded and
reckless persons were at the helm, and made choice of their kind to fill
the ranks. Good men had no chance. A murderer, an assassin, a violent
party was sought after and coveted by the divisions, while one of known
rectitude of purpose and strict integrity was not wanted, and sure of
being rejected were his name by accident proposed. Hence it was well
that McKenna took the course he did when first arriving in the coal
regions. His jolly, devil-may-care manner, his habit—not really a habit,
but an assumption of one—of being nearly always intoxicated, ready and
willing to sing, shoot, dance, fight, gamble, face a man in a knock-down
or a jig, stay out all night, sleep all day, tell a story, rob a
hen-roost or a traveler—just suited those with whom he daily came in
contact.

Returning to a date preceding McKenna’s induction to Shenandoah
Division, let me bring in some of the acts committed by the Mollies and
their opponents, forming a kind of introduction to others of wider
celebrity, if not of greater magnitude, which it will soon be the
chronicler’s duty to narrate.

It was the middle of March, 1874, that McKenna was invited to witness
one of the milder amusements of the rougher portion of the people of the
mining country—a dog-fight. The canine contest was appointed to occur at
Number Three Breaker, and McAndrew, Ferguson, and Monaghan were the
detective’s companions. The locality was only a mile from town, and the
attendance was large, some two hundred men and overgrown youths having
gathered to see the expected ferocious proceeding. But all were fated to
disappointment. From a failure to come to time on the part of one of the
owners and backers, the ring was just one dog short. The animal on hand
had to be taken home, his pugnacity unsatisfied, and the spectators,
unable to get up a battle between two human beasts, were compelled to
disperse, considerably disgusted with this peaceful result of what
earlier bid fair to be a savage and enjoyable sensation. On the route
homeward, McAndrew said he would stop at a house where he was
acquainted, and see if a dog could not be procured. The attempt did not
succeed, but as the men were standing near the place, Dr. Shultz, who
was known to nearly all the party, came that way. He paused to chat with
McAndrew, and among other matters stated that a man, named Peter
McNellis, had been shot the previous night at Jenkins’ Patch. The deed
transpired at McNellis’ own house, and was the work of one Canfield,
whose father was shot, but not mortally, the preceding Saturday.
McNellis had been attacked while in his dwelling, but the doctor could
not say if he were dead, or would die, but the hurt was pronounced very
serious by the attending surgeon. McNellis’ brother had been three times
notified by the Mollies to quickly leave the neighborhood, or accept the
consequences. The missives conveying this delicate bit of information
all bore the signature of “Mollie.” The McNellis family, it appears,
chose to accept the “consequences.”

When the doctor had ridden away, Ferguson exclaimed, referring to
McNellis:

“May he never rise again, the scoundrel!”

In which wish all his comrades heartily concurred, and McKenna, seeing
that he was expected to express himself regarding a Sheet Iron lad,
complied, saying:

“An’ may the divil fly away wid his sowl!”

On the morning of the twentieth of the same month, one Dougherty was
shot while passing from home to his work. It was reported that the
victim in this case was a Mollie, and the outrage had been brought about
by some of the dreaded Iron Clads.

This made the third or fourth person that had been killed during the
time of the operative’s residence in the vicinity of Shenandoah—and all
before he had become a member of the organization of Mollie Maguires. I
make mention of this, in the present connection, from the reason that
enemies have undertaken to instruct the public that until my detective
was sent to and appeared in the coal region, and was duly constituted a
member of the order of Mollies, the murderous society lay comparatively
dormant. This endeavour to have it seem that McKenna fomented discord
and caused crimes to be perpetrated which led to the arrest and
punishment of his companions and intimates, is so absurd, that only
those who desire to do so, put any faith in it, and for such persons and
their wretched opinions I have supreme contempt. McKenna was constantly
instructed to avoid prompting outrages. He obeyed his orders faithfully.
The truth is, he entered the stronghold of a gang of assassins, and,
despite his presence, they succeeded in doing a few murders. He could
not stop them. Before closing, I shall show some of the troubles that he
did succeed in preventing. Dating from 1868, and from that year down to
1873, murder and other violence ran riot in the coal districts. Since
the authorities have been able, through our exertions, to punish
assassins and conspirators, there has been a noticeable decrease in acts
to be punished. When the Mollies’ ever-convenient _alibi_ was shattered
and scattered to the wind, they had nothing left to fall back upon, and
there was no chance for them. They were forced to flee the country, or
remain and behave like good and orderly citizens.

When McAndrew heard of the last act of blood—the shooting of
Dougherty—(this was not the man of the same name—who was no
Mollie—causing so much trouble at Tamaqua, as related in another and
preceding chapter)—he was very indignant, and passionately exclaimed
that “if such things continued, there would soon be regular war in
Schuylkill county!”

These words must have reached the ears of some of the Chain Gang—or
those who were not Mollies—as, only a few days subsequently, a message
was received by Muff Lawler that a portion of the Modocs (Germans) and
Sheet Irons had made common cause against McAndrew, Monaghan, Garritty,
Ferguson, Lawler, and several others, all of whom would meet the fate of
Dougherty if they did not cease their cruel work, or depart from that
portion of the State. When Monaghan heard about this, he said:

“Some fire will fly and some blood be spilled before _I_ get out of this
neighborhood!”

He evidently did not intend to be frightened away with merely hard
words.

An incident, which may be given in this connection, was related by
Lawler to McKenna, one night, after his return from a meeting of the
Miners’ and Laborers’ Association, to which Muff also belonged. It was
about a Welsh boss in one of the mines, not far from Shenandoah, and had
only recently occurred. According to Lawler, this superintendent, whose
name was not given, had been discharging all the Irishmen operating
under him and putting his country men in their places. The natural
result was, the Mollies notified the boss that he must leave. He
disregarded the injunction, saying that it would “make no difference, if
he obeyed, as the proprietors would run the colliery if he were in h—l!”

A few days after using this language, a man visited the exasperated
Welshman and gave him a warning letter.

“Where are you from?” asked the boss.

“From h—l!” answered the messenger, and quickly disappeared.

This boss did not listen to the warning, and as a consequence, the
Mollies, in a body, demons as they were, went to his house, at the dead
hour of night, broke up his furniture, ill-treated his family, and
taking the stubborn fellow into the yard, in his night garments, beat
him with clubs until he was nearly dead. He was satisfied from this
treatment, which might be called striking evidence, that the colliery
was not exactly a healthy place of residence or refuge for him, and, as
soon as able to do so, removed to Pottsville. In this case, as in many
others, no arrests were made, and no efforts put forth to hunt up the
guilty parties. It could hardly be expected that there would be, when it
is considered that the Mollies controlled the magistrates and other
officials of the city, and partly those of the county.

McKenna, judging from Lawler’s manner while relating the story, more
than from the words he used, suspected that the beating of the Welshman
had been performed by him, or at least by men acting under his orders.
Still, as he was not yet a member of the Mollies, he could not be
expected to have reliable information on the subject. Mike concluded his
story by saying that he never allowed his men to know about his
movements, and ordinarily, when anything was to be done, he preferred
attending to it himself rather than let others into the secret.

“So there’s a ring within a ring!” mentally ejaculated the detective, as
Lawler left him to attend upon a customer at the bar.

The strike of that winter, which has before been alluded to, ended nigh
the first of April, 1874. About this time McKenna heard, from one Foley,
living near Indian Ridge colliery, that at the water station a man named
Keating had been shot and instantly killed. The event occurred about
five o’clock in the afternoon, and, as usual, the murderer made his
escape. It was again charged that the Sheet Iron lads were the guilty
parties. Lawler and the detective were at the colliery looking for work
to do, when they learned about Keating’s death.

Another of the more innocent diversions of the Sleepers was the
indulgence in cock-fighting. In this, from his known intimacy with
Lawler, the operative was naturally expected to take part, and he did
not disappoint his friends. Knowing that whatever he did he must, under
the circumstances, gain fast hold upon the good will of Lawler and the
remainder of the gang, thus exhibiting his qualifications for a good
Mollie, he strained every faculty with that view, and even consented to
take charge of the interests of the tavern keeper in the impending
chicken-fight, acting as trainer, manager, and all hands, in getting
ready the birds for the great occasion. As fortune would have it, in his
boyhood he had received a few lessons in the art, hence was not wholly
unprepared for the position and its duties. Having ten of the game
chickens to commence with, he devoted considerable time and attention to
their breaking-in for the pit.

The opposing birds were bred in the vicinity of Girardville, coming from
the flock of, and to be handled by, one Dennis Murphy.

Here is something of the style in which McKenna trained Lawler’s pets.
In the first place the chickens were clipped and gaffed in scientific
style; that is, their spurs were skilfully amputated and steel gaffs, or
artificial spurs, fitted in their places. The fowl were then physicked
with a soft compound consisting of oil, bread, and milk, and some sugar,
which reduced them somewhat in weight, the process continuing until the
proper shrinkage had been accomplished. Empty barrels were taken, and a
piece of one stave carefully removed, forming a coop, which was properly
ventilated, and each chicken thus given a separate shelter. After their
usual strength had returned, daily exercise of a peculiar kind,
calculated to give them muscle and endurance, was entered upon. McKenna
would get upon his knees, on an old mattress spread on the ground in the
back yard of the tavern, for the purpose, and taking a bird between his
two hands, toss it high in the air, then catch it again and repeat the
process, until he was weary or the rooster was nearly exhausted, when it
would be returned to its coop. Every bird had to take this lesson once
each day, and under it all rapidly gained in fighting qualities. No soft
food was now permitted, but they received plenty of water and corn,
wheat and oats. If one refused to feed he was immediately presented with
a supply of raw apples. Out of the ten thus treated only seven came out
capable of contesting in the pit. Some of them, less than one year of
age, were called stags. Those more than a twelvemonth old assumed the
dignity and cognomen of game-cocks.

On the occasion selected for the match, Lawler’s house and grounds
presented the characteristics of a grand gala day. Murphy was early on
the spot—scarce two hundred yards from the tavern—where were congregated
men, women, and children to the number of two hundred or more, all
interested in seeing and enjoying the exciting sport.

There was at first a great difference in opinion as to who should be the
winner, the bets ranging from five to ten dollars each battle, and being
plentiful for both sides. Of course Mike Lawler was reaping at the same
time a plentiful harvest through the sale of drinkables at the bar. It
employed his own services and those of his wife to keep pace with the
impatient orders of the thirsty ones. Meantime McKenna, dressed for the
occasion in his Sunday clothes, with his hair straightened out and his
beard trimmed, wearing a new, soft hat, which was the envy of all the
men and the wonder of all the women, was attending to his part of the
business.

At first the odds ran heavy in favor of Murphy’s brood,—and they
certainly were very handsome chickens; but when McKenna put aside the
brand-new hat, and, with a red bandanna handkerchief wound in the shape
of a turban round his red head, a strap encircling his waist, coat and
vest off, sleeves rolled up, and game chicken in hand, entered the ring,
the betting changed, and the difference was two to one in favor of the
mufflers. They were certainly ferocious-looking bipeds.

It is needless to attempt a description of the chicken-match.
Appropriate language fails. But it is sufficient to say that Lawler’s
mufflers carried off the honors. As a consequence, McKenna acquired a
wide-spread reputation throughout the mines as a manager of such
affairs.

[Illustration: _“Lawler’s Mufflers carried off the honors.”_]

Murphy accepted defeat all in good part, as everything had been fair and
above-board, and challenged Muff Lawler for a return match, to take
place early the next month, at his house, near Girardville. This was
promptly accepted by the Shenandoah party, and time named, when the
crowd dispersed, leaving the innkeeper to count over his day’s gains,
which were not inconsiderable.

Of course McKenna’s services were once more in requisition to train the
birds, and afterward to fight them. When the morning arrived he had to
carry the chickens on his back, in a bag, a distance of over three miles
to Connor’s Patch, where Murphy lived. The road was rough, his burden
not light; and when he returned, again the winner of the fight, to
Shenandoah, late at night, from Girardville, he was weary enough, and
heartily sick of cock-fighting as a profession, or even for amusement.

There was a great crowd assembled at the Patch—if anything, larger than
the one Lawler had secured—and Murphy, though twice defeated, said he
was “enthirely contint wid the results!” So were most of those in
attendance.

Lawler gave a treat to all the “boys” that night, as he was confidently
expected to do after winning two fights in succession, and everything
passed off smoothly, with a single exception. One Dick Flynn, charged to
the muzzle with bad liquor, and being naturally of a fiery disposition,
was very mad because he had lost five dollars which he ventured on
Murphy’s chickens, and wanted to fight Lawler, to secure his revenge.
The innkeeper having other duties to attend to, besides being in a
sportive humor from the success of the day, only laughed at his big
antagonist, telling him to “call at another time, when he could have all
the fighting he might feel in want of.”

Flynn lived in the town of Colorado, was a known ruffian, capable of
shooting a man from behind a bush, or performing almost any infamous
act, and it is more than probable that Lawler had rather make no attack
upon him. Be this as it may, Flynn left late at night, swearing many
oaths and loudly threatening that he would beat Lawler or kill McKenna,
his “butty,” if he had to wait a dozen years for the opportunity. It
would appear, from an incident transpiring a few weeks later, that Flynn
had a good memory, and did his best to carry this promise into
execution. The event, however, will have to await relation in another
chapter.


                               ————●————




                              CHAPTER XVI.

               A ROUGH JOURNEY AND A THRILLING ADVENTURE.


A few days after McKenna’s initiation into the Mollie Maguires, he was
surprised, upon entering Lawler’s bar-room, to find his friend with one
limb bandaged, sitting by the fire, in an easy chair, while Mrs. Lawler
busied herself behind the counter attending to the spirituous wants of
several acquaintances and patrons, and Mike commenting upon some serious
difficulty which had befallen him. In response to an inquiry by one of
the new arrivals, the landlord, between groans and grimaces, informed
those present that he had received a shot in the leg, the night before,
while attempting to quell a difficulty in front of Cleary’s drinking
place. He was quite seriously wounded; his countenance wore a pale and
anxious appearance, and Mrs. Lawler, only recently recovered from a
protracted and dangerous illness, was nervous and low spirited. McKenna
promptly gave assistance, made himself generally useful about the
premises, and also attended to some outside business for the
tavern-keeper. When the people had all dispersed, Lawler proceeded to
show him his hurt, which the quick eye of the detective was not long in
discovering must have occurred as a result of Mike’s careless handling
of his own revolver, and not through any assault by a second person. The
bullet penetrated the anterior portion of the right thigh, ranged
downward, deflecting a little toward the left, and finally found
lodgment near the skin immediately above the knee-joint, whence the
scalpel of the surgeon had already removed it. There was a long, painful
and dangerous channel ploughed through the muscles, but happily for
Lawler and his family no important vein or artery had been severed. If
properly cared for, there was reason to believe the healing process
might be accomplished by nature without the sloughing away of the coats
of the femoral artery. Should these finally give way, the end would
certainly ensue, as nothing could save the victim from bleeding to
death.

“Tell me, thrue and honest now,” said McKenna, “how this thing happened.
It is plain enough that it wor your own hand that did it.”

“Why the d—l do you say that?”

“Sure, an’ you needn’t take me for a _gomersal_, _cruddy_ from the bogs!
I kin see, wid half an eye, that nobody could iver shoot ye like this,
exceptin’ Mike Lawler himself!”

“Thrue fur ye!” unwillingly answered Lawler, making a comical grimace
and groaning aloud with the pain, as he reached for his staff. “That’s
the raal fact of the matther! But how the d—l you came to know’t, is
more’n I can tell!”

“O, its aisy enough! Men don’t lie down, as a general thing, to get
shot; then there’s no hole in your clothing, so the pistol must have
been in your pocket when it exploded!”

“Well, never mind that now,” whispered Lawler, turning an uneasy glance
toward his wife, who was jingling the glasses as she cleansed them, and
hence heard nothing of the communication. “Will ye kindly act as me
crutch ’till I goes to the docthor? He made me promise to have it
dressed the day; an’ by me sowl, I’d about as soon hev the leg cut off
at wonst!”

“Certainly,” said the agent, “I’ll help ye wid pleasure!”

And he aided the injured man to rise; but he could not stand, and was
eased back into his chair.

“_Mo-vrone!_ But ye can’t walk! Ye must not try it! I’ll go fetch the
docthor right here! So kape quiet, an’ I’ll soon be back. An’ while I’m
gone, I’ll jist step in at the carpenter’s and tell him to make ye a
crutch; fur sure, an’ if ye iver intend for to save yer leg y’ll want a
substitute for a while!”

Muff Lawler was so nigh a dead faint that he could not thank McKenna,
who scampered away to bring the surgeon.

The wound once dressed, and Lawler comfortably reclining on his bed,
upstairs, McKenna volunteered to act as nurse, while the good woman of
the house gave attention to the bar and all below. Then it was that the
operative learned how the injury had been inflicted. As he shrewdly
guessed, Muff had hurt himself while awkwardly returning a revolver to
his pantaloons pocket, where he carelessly carried it, with the lock set
preparatory for sudden use. Lawler closed the revelation with this
unexplained but furtive statement:

“An’ hadn’t it been for the accident, Fergus would have made bloody work
somewhere before the mornin’!”

Of course, McKenna did not press an inquiry as to the job he and Fergus
were attending to, knowing that Lawler would tell it of his own accord,
if left alone. All that day, and until late at night, the operative was
employed as a nurse to the wounded Bodymaster.

A few days later the last meeting in April occurred, at Lawler’s, and a
young man named Dean was duly initiated, McKenna prominently assisting
in the ceremony. Dean subsequently admitted to the agent that he had
been better than a year endeavoring to reach the interior of that
division, but somehow his moral character was either too good or too bad
all the while; but a little serious trouble that he had recently fallen
into made him a desirable applicant, or removed an objection, and he was
at once notified of his acceptance. It seemed to McKenna, under such a
state of affairs, that he was extremely fortunate in gaining for himself
such prompt admission to the order.

McAndrew, it appeared, had not been inside a division room in more than
three months, having, as will be remembered, only acted in an outside
capacity at the detective’s initiation—as he had temporarily
resigned—which was an accepted custom in the society, since the troubles
with the Church—to attend for a season to his neglected religious
duties. Now, having been good during one-quarter of a year, he could
come back and enact the part of a Mollie Maguire for the remaining
three-quarters. This ingenious and handy manner of compromise also
brought home a number of the brothers, lately absenting themselves for
the same purpose, and Lawler’s living room was soon uncomfortably small
for their accommodation.

At the same meeting Lawler gave a rather remarkable address, in the
course of which he said the time had nearly arrived for the annual
meeting of their State Convention at Pittsburg, and he was requested,
through a letter from Barney Dolan, County Delegate, to advise his
division members of the necessity for raising—the amount and the request
to apply to all the bodies in Schuylkill County—the sum of nine dollars
toward paying the Delegate’s expenses to the west, and also to New York.
In the last-named place he would see the National Secretary, on
important business. Without this action it would be impossible for the
Division to secure the “goods”—signs and passwords—for the current
quarter; and Mike eloquently urged that it was always desirable to keep
the body in fair standing with the State and National officials. The
pompous Bodymaster, still suffering considerably from his wound, kept
his chair while he enlarged upon the prospect before the brotherhood. He
believed, if the fraternity would stand by him, he could swell their
ranks to at least one hundred good men and true, before the commencement
of another year. Of course the speech, or talk, was purely
conversational, rough and uncouth, and not particularly coherent, but it
touched its hearers and was received with applause—which, however, was
necessarily suppressed, because of the family being so near. It was not
long, after the close of the harangue, before the needed funds were in
the Bodymaster’s possession. The meeting closed soon afterward, and the
hours following to midnight were passed in carousal, singing, and
card-playing, when the house was deserted, the doors fastened, and the
Lawler family presently dreaming the dreams of the just.

At about this date, appreciating the fact that he would not soon find
remunerative labor, and still desiring to remain in the mountains,
McKenna saw the necessity for a fresh source from which ostensibly to
obtain the amount of money that he must, in due course of events,
disburse in the community. The cash must be spent, and a valid reason
for its expenditure, a natural origin for the fund, must be furnished,
otherwise his associates might begin to suspect there was something
about him they did not fully comprehend. It was then he took Mike Lawler
further into his confidence and told him a new secret, to the effect
that he, McKenna, owned a certain house and lot in the city of Buffalo,
New York, which was leased from year to year, and, through the medium of
an attorney, named Clinton, who was in his interest, and who knew the
address of some of his relatives in Philadelphia, he received
twenty-five dollars a month as rental for the property. This story
served two purposes. It covered up occasional letters that the
postmaster of Shenandoah must know he received, and increased his income
enough, with the alleged pension from the government and the money made
in his pretended disposal of bogus currency, to account for all he spent
in the mining country. His wearing of poor clothes and wishing to stay
in the vicinity was consistent with his mission, which was, outwardly,
to escape the eyes of the officers of the law. It seemed hardly possible
that, under these safeguards, his real purpose would be revealed.

The fourth day of May, Lawler, having so far regained the use of his leg
as to hobble about on a crutch, aided by a blackthorn stick, determined
to visit Barney Dolan, at Big Mine Run, in person, obtain the “goods”
for the quarter and turn over the collection made for the use of the
County Delegate. McKenna was invited to accompany him. His arm was
needed in helping Mike into and out of the buggy—besides, he liked to
have some one about who could listen as well as talk. It was impossible
for the agent to refuse, had he so desired, which he did not. He might
learn something of importance, at small cost, and make the acquaintance
of Dolan, who was then looked up to as the highest Mollie in all the
county. So McKenna started out with his Bodymaster for Big Mine Run.

Riding over the country, although the air seemed chilly, was not really
unpleasant, and the trip among the collieries, enlivened by cheerful
conversation and spicy anecdote, in which both of the men participated,
came to an end before either person expected. The big, good-natured
County Delegate, who kept a small roadside shebeen-shop, patronized by
all travelers and miners, was very much pleased to see his company, and
he came out to the buggy, before they alighted, to greet the men,
personally helping Lawler to perform that, to him, slow and painful act.

Barney Dolan was a large, muscular man, of some forty years, much after
the style of Dormer, of Pottsville, in face and feature, but by no means
so tall or heavy.

After putting Mike in a chair, of course Dolan had to be informed of the
particulars of Lawler’s accident, brief mention of which he had seen in
the Shenandoah _Herald_. The old story, of being fired upon by an unseen
person, who he more than half suspected to be Dick Flynn, of Colorado
Colliery, with whom he once had a difficulty, was related to Barney,
with many adornments. As another matter of course, Dolan was profuse in
sympathetic condolements with the injured man. When the County
Delegate’s back was turned, Muff Lawler sent an audacious wink of
intelligence to McKenna not to spoil his story by letting slip the
truth. The detective, who was contentedly smoking his short pipe, and
sipping some strong poteen, sagely shook his head, as much as to say:
“Don’t fear! I’ll keep your secret!”

Barney—whose name, from his habit of smooth, sweet talk, evidently
should have been Blarney, for he must have kissed the famous stone on
that famous Irish castle more times than once—proceeded to dilate upon
the able manner in which he would represent the county in the State
branch of the order, the great things he was about to do, and how, to
sum up all, he believed it was the bounden duty of the Mollies to
re-elect him Delegate at the ensuing county convention. To all of which
egotistical bombast Mike and his fellow-traveler listened with an
appearance of wrapped attention reflecting credit upon their capacity
for acting that which they could not feel. Both really enjoyed his
self-sufficiency—especially Lawler, who was afflicted with the same
difficulty, as he was well aware, when he got about half-seas-over.
After dinner, which was spread in the rear apartment, and the enjoyment
of parting glass number one, at the invitation of the detective, the
visitors proposed to leave.

Dolan made a little speech over the toast: “The Ancient Order—may it
prosper and be peaceful!” offered by McKenna, and among other things
remarked:

“Be them five crasses, but I’m glad indade to have _coshered_ wid ye,
_mabouchal_! An’ when ye come here again, let it not be for a mere
_kailyee_, but bring your clothes wid ye, and stop as long as ye plaze!
An’, Mike Lawler—bould fellow—you’ll show yourself a _gorsoon-bo_, if ye
let that lad slip away from your town at all! Kape him there! Ye greatly
nade such stuff as he’s made of to bring the body up to the correct
standard! Not to say that ye are a wake Bodymaster, by any manes, fur ye
are not, as I give ye credit for doing hapes of good things! But ye can
have many more powerful members, now that ye have made the proper
commencement! What you do is done nately, an’ if I do say it, you have
some few fellows over there capable of doin’ ‘a clane job,’ an’ what ye
want is more of ’em! Be the same token, I may tell ye, Mike, that
Shenandoah Division is the very first to send in the allowance an’ take
away the ‘goods’! Oh, bad ’cess to me, but I’m gone a _shaughran_, an’
come near forgettin’ to remember that ye have paid yer money, but not
got yer property! Well, never mind! It’s all owin’ to the poteen! Jest
step in the other room—McKenna will excuse us—an’ I’ll instruct ye in
the shortest time possible!”

“Business is business!” said McKenna. “Certainly I’ll excuse ye!”

The succeeding conference between the County Delegate and the Bodymaster
was of short duration, and, after parting glass number two, or three—the
last one through the thoroughly aroused generosity of Barney—the
visitors really bid the host farewell and made their departure.

The “goods,” Lawler had learned from Dolan, were given out in Ireland,
the transatlantic headquarters of the society, and thence transmitted to
this country by a man named Murphy, employed as a steward on one of the
Inman line of steamships plying between Liverpool and New York. From the
latter city the National officers distributed them to the different
divisions in this country.

No incident worthy of mention occurred to the two Mollies until they
reached the vicinity of Colorado Colliery, where they paused to see Hugh
Mulligan, a friend of Lawler’s, who was, and for some time had been,
very ill. Knowing they had reached a dangerous locality, as this was the
stamping-ground of Dick Flynn, an inveterate enemy, yet they had no
apprehension that they would come across him, and indeed were not of the
class of men much reckoning upon serious consequences should they prove
thus unfortunate.

Hugh Mulligan lived in a large frame house, at the top of the hill. When
they stopped, finding that Mulligan was in bed, in the second story of
the building, to his disappointment, Lawler, from his lameness, was
quite unable to see his friend, but unwillingly compelled to remain in
the parlor on the first floor. He had suffered pain enough, he thought,
through alighting from the buggy, without climbing and descending a pair
of stairs immediately thereafter. He sent along his compliments by
McKenna, and made himself easy by the stove, awaiting that person’s
return. Mrs. Mulligan and another lady who had just stepped in to see
the family went up with the detective. They found the sick man seemingly
very low, in the last stages of pulmonary consumption, slowly coughing
his life away. He was wan and attenuated, with features pinched, sharp,
and anxiously drawn up, eyes unnaturally large, dark of color and
suspiciously bright, and the glossy black hair contrasting strangely
with waxlike forehead and cheek. The hands, with which he nervously
picked and clutched at the counterpane, were thin, the fingers
talon-like, and nails long, white, and rounding outward in the middle.
With barely sufficient strength to raise his arms, he lay, a pitiable
object, that once had been a large and powerful man. Just able to
recognize McKenna, Hugh was seen to smile faintly, quite gratified that
two of his comrades had shown their regard by calling to see him. In a
feeble voice he asked his wife to bring some beer to the chamber, and
give Mike Lawler the best the house afforded. Mrs. Mulligan obeyed,
quickly returning with two bottles of Cronk beer, one of which McKenna
opened, presenting a glass of its contents to the lady visitor.

The sick-room was small, with reasonably high walls, lighted by two
windows, fronting the public road and at the side of the invalid’s bed.
Its furniture was poor and scant. There was an old-fashioned chest of
drawers, not as high as a bureau, but taller than a trunk, made of pine,
painted a dark red, on the lid of which stood some medicine bottles and
an empty tumbler and spoon. Near by was a bit of cracker, which the sick
man had nibbled with his teeth when besought to take some nourishment.
The bedstead had high posts, and the bed and coverings were barely
comfortable. Near the foot of the bed stood a high-backed, splint-bottom
rocking-chair, with neat tidy over the top. Two or three other chairs
and a small table completed the furniture of the apartment. No carpet
concealed the floor, the boards of which were scrubbed white and clean.
Plain bleached cotton formed the looped-up window curtains, and along
the wall were nails, on which hung a soldier’s overcoat, a hat, a heavy
teamster’s whip, and then several articles of female costume. At the
head of the couch was a cheap print of St. Patrick, without a frame, and
on the opposite wall a cross, entwined with real shamrock, the emblems
worked with a needle in red worsted upon some gilt paste-board. A door
led into the hall, at the head of the stairs. At one side of the center
of the room was a sheet-iron heater, fed through a pipe from the
apartments below, which came up through the floor by a tin thimble, or
protector, and kept the atmosphere warm and equable. A small hat-stand
supported the bottles of beer and a couple of common flaring beer
tumblers.

Mrs. Mulligan, a motherly, kind-hearted woman, with blue eyes and
plentiful iron-gray hair, a cap, and becomingly clad in black, stood at
the side and partly toward the foot of the bed, knitting work in hand, a
pitying glance resting upon her suffering husband. The lady caller, her
bonnet and cloak unremoved, sat not far away, while McKenna was at that
moment in the act of helping himself to a tumbler of beer, which he had
not yet poured from the bottle. This was the condition of affairs, when
the detective heard a heavy and hasty step upon the staircase, the door
of the chamber was rudely thrust open, and big Dick Flynn, with pistol
presented in one hand and a long knife brandished recklessly in the
other, strode in and paused before the entrance. His aim was directed
upon the sick man in the bed. Mulligan uttered a despairing wail, and,
nervously throwing up the coverings, drew his head beneath them. Mrs.
Mulligan, almost paralyzed with fright, dropped her knitting, raised her
hands and screamed “murder!” at the top of her voice, while the lady
visitor, without pausing to say “good-by,” flew past the intruder and
down the stairs like a frightened deer. McKenna, who had paused in the
work of decanting the contents of the bottle, heard Lawler hobbling,
with crutch and stick, over the floor below, and, looking from the
corner of his eye, soon saw the brave Bodymaster making rather rapid
time, for a lame man, toward the gate, where his horse and buggy were
standing. Then the agent had no doubt he was left to cope,
single-handed, with the savage brute before him. He took in this idea in
much less time than it has consumed to record the fact, and arrived at
the conclusion that only calmness and the exertion of ingenuity could
save his life. Dick did not shoot the sick man, who he was quite sure
was Mike Lawler, but stood ready to fire. McKenna finished pouring out
his beer, took up the second glass and the bottle, and with supreme
impudence advanced a step toward Flynn, saying, not even forgetting his
assumption of the brogue that he had used while in the country:

“Sure, an’ is it yourself, Misther Flynn? An’ its tired indade ye are,
afther your long walk! Tak’ a drap of the beer at Hugh’s expense!”

And he proffered the bottle and glass.

Flynn was, in turn, thunderstruck by the coolness of his enemy, muttered
something between his shut teeth, was undecided what to do, wavered, and
at last, depositing knife and pistol on the little table, took the
tumbler in one hand, the beer bottle in the other, and proceeded to
drink.

No sooner had McKenna released bottle and glass than his right hand
quickly, yet cautiously, sought the side-pocket of his coat, where
rested his trusted seven-shooter. With a sudden twist of the wrist,
holding a firm grasp upon the pistol stock, his thumb brought the hammer
of the lock to full-cock. Still he did not display the repeater.

“By heaven! I’ve got Muff Lawler this time!” said Flynn. “Ye can’t chate
me! Pretendin’ to be sick, or lame, won’t save ye! I’m here to kill ye!”

[Illustration: “_I guess not, my swate Raparee! Not by these lights!_”]

His wild, insane look rested uneasily on the half-concealed figure in
the bed, as he said this, not perceiving the fact that McKenna had
quietly changed position, and now stood somewhat nearer to him than
before.

“Oh, I’m not Muff Lawler!” painfully gasped Mulligan, exposing his
white, almost spectral features. The voice was stronger than usual. He
had summoned all his vital powers to repel that which he might well
believe a hateful vision. “I’m only poor, sick, disabled Hugh Mulligan!”

Turning his eye to the window, Flynn beheld Lawler, driving away in the
buggy, the horse’s head turned toward town. Then he fiercely faced
McKenna, and exclaimed:

“You’ve saved Muff Lawler, but you are his ‘butty,’ and I’m here to kill
one of the two—so it seems you are the one!”

“I guess not, me swate raparee! Not by these lights!”

And the detective drew his weapon, bringing it close to the man’s face,
until the dark muzzle rested, deadly, sullenly cold, in close contact
with the ruffian’s bare cheek. Flynn, drunk and infuriated as he was,
could not resist that forbidding and blood-chilling argument. It was
plain that the lock was set, the man’s finger resting on the trigger. He
began to tremble like a poplar leaf in the wind, his color shifted from
red to white, the features relaxed, the corners of the mouth fell down,
and his whole appearance was fearfully changed.


                               ————●————




                             CHAPTER XVII.

                      A PECULIAR WEDDING CEREMONY.


Flynn obeyed. He could do nothing less, finding himself completely in
the power of the enemy and that menacing revolver. It was far from his
intention to lose his life, when, by merely complying with McKenna’s
simple command, he could insure its immediate or temporary preservation.

At this late moment Mrs. Mulligan recovered her voice, and throwing
herself between Flynn and her husband, cried out:

“Oh, don’t hurt my Hugh! He’s never done anybody any harrum, _sheeling
avourneen_! Sure its dyin’ the poor boy is, the moment! An’ its right
down cruel of yez to come disputin’ about, disturbin’ us an’ makin’ him
the worse! Oh, kill me, if you want to, but don’t hurt a hair o’ him!”

“Faix an’ I don’t see that Flynn is about to shoot anybody jist at the
present moment!” said McKenna, still keeping the weapon nigh his
adversary’s head. “I am in the firm belaif that the boot’s on t’other
foot, this time!”

Meanwhile the detective slowly retreated, still facing his opponent, to
the table on which the drunken man’s weapons rested, and, without
changing aim or lowering the revolver, proceeded to deposit the knife in
his pocket. The second loaded pistol he retained in the left hand, ready
for use should his own miss fire or the cartridges be exhausted.

At this stage of proceedings, Flynn, whose reason seemed partly to have
resumed sway, through fright, thought death was sure to follow and his
legs would no longer support him. Falling prone upon his knees, the tall
hat came off, and he held up both hands, begging abjectly, like the
arrant coward he was, that life might be spared, saying:

“Don’t kill me, McKenna! For my poor childer’s sake, don’t shoot!”

“I don’t intend to shoot, right here, in the presence of Hugh an’ the
good lady—but you had no such hesitation. Do you see that opening the
carpenter left in yonder wall? What I now want is, that you get up from
the floor an’ betake yourself down thim stairs as fast as ye can go!”

“I’ll do anything ye say!” answered Flynn.

And the big, lubberly fellow, completely cowed and almost sobered, moved
slowly toward the door, McKenna following close upon him, his weapon
steadily directed full upon Flynn’s bushy head. Down the staircase in
this order of procession they slowly continued their march.

“Get ye in here!” said the detective, and he opened the door of a sort
of vault, where Mrs. Mulligan stored her bottled ale and other liquors.
“Step quickly,” was added, as the result of an evident hesitation on the
part of the prisoner. The dark muzzle of the pistol emphasized the
language, and made it impossible for him to disobey; so in he went.

“It is well you got in,” said McKenna, “fur I had brought ye to the
place where I intinded fur to kill ye!”

“I’ll niver hesitate agin!” said Flynn, and he looked about the dark
recess. McKenna shut the door with a bang, shot to its place the bolt of
the ponderous lock, withdrew the key, and placed it in his pocket. Then
with a heavy piece of timber, which had been employed as a support for
whisky barrels, he propped the massive oaken panels in their position,
resting the upper end of the brace against the boards and the lower
portion behind a solid brick-and-mortar projection, forming part of the
chimney. Thus was Dick Flynn safely caged. To make sure that he remained
where he had confined him, the detective closed and fastened all the
shutters to the windows, locked and barred every outer entrance to the
lower part of the house, took possession of the keys, and then, only
pausing a few moments to inform Mrs. Mulligan that she was perfectly
safe, and that he would send an officer to her relief, with the frantic
cries and oaths of the imprisoned man ringing in his ears, experiencing
a feeling of gratitude that he had escaped, he started for Shenandoah,
following the track left by the carriage which had borne away his
wounded companion.

McKenna had not gone far when he met Lawler returning to Mulligan’s
accompanied by a deputy sheriff.

“Hurrah!” shouted Lawler, when he saw the young man, apparently
unharmed. “Then ye are not kilt enthirely?”

“An’ phat did ye run off afther?” queried McKenna, appearing greatly
offended. “I think ye might’ev stopped at laste to carry away me dead
body, afther the matin’ wid Dick Flynn, the murtherous thafe of the
worruld!”

“Didn’t I ride away, wid all me power, to get me revolver, which, like a
looney that I am, I had left snug at home? An’ wasn’t I so disabled,
from me wound, that I couldn’t tak’ any part in the pother? Didn’t I
think there’d be nade of an officer, sure—an’ isn’t wan here? Faith, ye
kin now take the boy to jail in a twinklin’! But where is Dick Flynn,
the insanity that he is!”

“Well, a poor excuse suits ye as well as any!” answered the operative.
“But I forgive ye, seein’ as how I wur successful in handlin’ the man!
You’ll find him, all swate an’ cooled down like, in Mrs. Mulligan’s beer
closet, an’ all ye hev to do is to put a revolver close to his head, an’
he’ll walk quieter nor a lamb, wherever ye may wish. I have his knife
and pistol—here they are—an’ the kays to the doors—take thim along,
too—you kin do wid the fellow as ye wish! Right here, I wash me hands of
the business enthirely!”

McKenna handed the weapons and keys to the officer, and, stubbornly
turning on his heel, rapidly journeyed homeward.

Flynn was removed to jail, at Shenandoah, where he remained a few days
and was eventually released, the witness for the State having been
coaxed by Mrs. Mulligan not to appear against him. The poor woman was
afraid that, if punished, Dick would make her home too hot for her.
Thenceforward, however, Flynn bore himself quite decently toward both of
his former enemies, and gave McKenna a wide berth if he chanced to find
himself where he might possibly encounter him.

This may be set down as one of the many adventures of a critical and
dangerous nature which the detective experienced during the course of
his first year’s residence in the anthracite region. He had still
others, but they will receive attention in an appropriate place. With
these tragical rencounters there arose also occasional experiences which
were of a more pleasant sort. Among the latter was his participation in
a Polish marriage ceremony, transpiring in the vicinity of Shenandoah
only a short time subsequent to the sudden meeting with drunken Dick
Flynn, just alluded to.

Pete Monaghan, Ed. Fergus, and Tom McNulty accompanied my representative
on the trip. In view of this fact, and their future relations with our
work, it may be best more particularly to introduce them to the reader’s
attention.

Monaghan seemed about four years past his majority, was of fair
complexion, hair of the color denominated sandy, full, florid face,
light blue eyes, and wore no beard or mustache. In fact, he was a
middle-sized, boyish-looking man, a little above medium height and
weight. He was at that period a miner, but subsequently attended college
about a year and finally settled down in Shenandoah as a staid and sober
green-groceryman, in which place and position he yet remained at last
advices. He is not to be confounded with Ned Monaghan.

Ferguson, _alias_ Fergus, was also a miner, but a personage whose figure
and face were a contrast to those just described. Of dark complexion,
wearing a black, full beard and mustache, of which he was so proud that
he constantly stroked and petted them with his rough hand; a foxy little
face, red nose, that turned ever upward; large, broad, and capacious
mouth, which was seemingly filled with long, wide, shovel-shaped teeth;
staring, hazel eyes, ready to wink comically at the faintest possible
chance; his shoulders tending to form part and portion of a human
interrogation point, he was neither large nor small, heavy nor light,
but about a medium in both; a person to be remarked upon the street, and
as full of genuine wit as he well could be. While Fergus was wild and
frolicsome, Monaghan was quiet and good-natured.

McNulty was a compact fellow, of swarthy complexion, black hair, dark
gray eyes, round face, pug nose, and would steal like a born thief. Work
and he had evidently early fallen out and never become reconciled. A
fearful consumer of drink, he was never trusted by the Mollies, and
there were few who knew him that would leave sixpence in his reach if
they cared ever to see it again.

These were some of the every-day companions of the operative.

The natives of Poland, quite numerous in the vicinity of Shenandoah,
were mostly members of the Catholic Church, affiliating readily with the
miners from England, Ireland, Scotland, and Wales, and, when of the same
religious belief, even with those of Germany and Scandinavia. Still they
were located in particular sections, and tenaciously held to many of the
fatherland social peculiarities. Their habits and customs were mostly
novel to the average American reader, and their nuptial ceremony notable
as among the most curious of those belonging to a queer community. In
the first place, although it was generally known when and where a
wedding was to transpire, yet no persons were especially invited to
participate, and none were asked to stay away. All, as it was generally
understood, would find welcome on the occasion. Preparations were
entered into for great sport, and plenty of it, as an accompaniment to
the act of uniting “two hearts that beat as one.” There was, on these
occasions, almost total absence of restraint, but perfect decorum being
the prevailing rule, and disorder the exception. The Polish women were
as well-behaved, in every respect, as those of other nationalities, and,
in a locality where two-thirds of the inhabitants were Poles, cause for
divorce, and illegitimacy were seldom brought to the light.

But the wedding.

Monaghan, Fergus, McNulty, and McKenna attended the nuptials of Julius
Krozenski with a fair maiden, to whom he had been some years betrothed.
It was rather outside the borough limits and in the edge of the wood
that the girl’s parents resided, and this was the scene of the wedding.
There were many people already gathered when they reached the place,
although the time was only an hour past sunset. The view presented to
the eye of the detective reminded him of pictures he had seen of gypsy
encampments at night.

Two forked sticks had been embedded in the earth, the “y” parts above
ground. Across, and resting in the crotches of these, was placed a heavy
hickory sapling, some five inches in diameter at the butt. Suspended by
iron chains and a hook from the center of this beam was a huge caldron
kettle, made of iron, and under the vessel a hot fire had been kindled,
which, beside serving its culinary purpose, threw out fitful flashes of
red light upon the motley assemblage, giving a garish contrast on one
side of each object to the darkness of night shadowing the other.

As a more voluminous sheet of fire would dart out from among the pine
knots and glowing embers, it illuminated a space for yards around, and
sent the pleasant light far into the budding branches of the highest
trees.

From the great iron kettle a savory incense arose. After some inquiry,
the stranger learned that it came from an admixture of high-wines and
common molasses, in about the proportion of one gallon of the latter to
four of the spirit, which, when once well incorporated by stirring with
a wooden ladle, and brought to the boiling point, was to constitute the
wedding refreshment, in lieu of the breakfast, supper, or dinner. The
number of guests was large and the liquor boiled made, in the aggregate,
several gallons.

There were present miners of all nationalities nearly, with their wives
and sweethearts—all outside the house in which the bride sat, as the
building was much too small to accommodate one-tenth part of the
concourse assembled. Had this been different, the kettle would have
swung from the crane in the wide, open fireplace, after the olden
fashion.

McKenna and his friends were well received by the people. This was
especially the case with the detective, who had dressed himself with
more than ordinary care for the occasion, exhibiting, for about the
first time since the chicken match, an immaculate linen shirt-front,
collar, black necktie and waistcoat, and having entirely eschewed the
old leather belt, with its common iron buckle. He was, therefore, in his
freshly-trimmed hair and whiskers, a rather gentlemanly appearing young
fellow, reputed a fair dancer, and as having an uncommonly fine voice
for an Irish love ditty. He was met by several acquaintances, who were
at some pains to introduce him to the young ladies and gentlemen. With
the former his native modesty was not in the way of his cultivating, to
the full extent, their good graces. In fact, some of the men thought he
devoted more time than necessary to the handsome women. Be that as it
may, despite the rough reputation he had won, he certainly was a prime
favorite with the Polish maidens. The Irish girls, also, thought he was
about right; one especially—a queenly figure, with dark, waving chestnut
curls, and laughing, hazel eyes, whose name, he heard, was Mary, and
resided in, or very nigh to, Tamaqua—was the particular object of his
regard, and Fergus suggested, more than once, that the western chap had
in her met his fate. It is true that McKenna was deeply struck with the
lady’s beauty, vivacity and amiability—seen at a distance. He was now
intent on business, and believed, after that night, would never see her
again.

But the wedding.

The seething blackstrap was pronounced ready for use, and a lady, a
long-handled tin dipper in hand, stood at the kettle dishing out its
smoking contents to the company. It rapidly disappeared, and, as it
diminished and was imbibed, the fun and hilarity proportionately
increased. The fluid was greatly relished by the Poles and their
families.

The young couple having been united by the priest, after the ritual of
the Roman Catholic Church, the clergyman partook of the spirits and
departed for his home. Then the bride was seated at her place in the
best room—which was the kitchen—having a small table near, on which
stood a steaming pitcher of the blackstrap and a tin pot. In the open
fire-place blazed pine knots and light-wood, giving a genial brightness
to the place, which was devoid of lamps or candles. A dresser with its
array of polished tinware, reflected back the flame and made each corner
like open day. By the chimney jamb, on a bit of log, fashioned into a
rude stool, sat the aged grandmother of the bride, gray, wrinkled, and
trembling in limb, but rigged out in a white ruffled cap, and smoking a
brand-new clay pipe. Chairs there were none, excepting that devoted to
the queen of the occasion—fair, comely Mrs. Krozenski, with her hair
done up in a knot behind her head, combed flat at the sides of the face,
and the whole surmounted by a high tortoise-shell comb—who bore her
honors gracefully, and was supplied with a dress pocket, capacious
enough to contain a small fortune in silver.

[Illustration: “_And, before the defenseless man could prevent, she
kissed him once, twice, thrice, on the cheek._”]

This was the style of her reception: Her male friends, one after
another, came in, saluted her kindly, wishing her the usual good luck,
calling her by her new name, and each one helped himself to some of the
liquor, handing the bride a present—always in the shape of money, and
ranging from one dollar to ten dollars, according to the ability or
generosity of the donor—then kissed the lady three times. She, nowise
disconcerted, placed the cash in her purse, and was ready for the next
person. The room was well filled with ladies and gentlemen, the groom,
meanwhile, busying himself with out-door affairs. McKenna watched this
part of the proceedings for a while with interest, rather liked it, and
then walked up, paid his money, enjoyed his small share of the lady’s
lips, and stepped back a little to give others a chance. Following him
happened to be the young woman from Tamaqua. She tripped gaily to the
bride, took her dainty sip of the liquor, tendered a bank-bill, and
then, her roguish Irish eye resting upon the detective, she suddenly
swooped down upon him, rested one little hand for a second lightly as a
snow-flake on his shoulder, and, before the defenseless man could
prevent, kissed him once, twice, thrice, on the cheek, then as swift as
the wind almost, turned, ran away, and disappeared.

The laugh which was raised at the detective’s discomfiture was both long
and loud, and he was forced, after he had recovered from the
astonishment, to take part in it.

It seems that the young lady had done nothing at all indecorous or
uncommon. The rule, as McKenna subsequently saw exemplified, permitted
any of the ladies who saluted and feed the bride to kiss the woman just
married, or if she so chose, any of the gentlemen present. Hence the
agent had unwittingly placed himself in a position to become the subject
of Miss Mary’s little trick. He was not at all sorry for it, and the
sensation of pleasure, caused by the kiss, visited his cheek for weeks
thereafter.

The money thus donated to the bride—and this part of the ceremony might
be continued for some days—was employed in furnishing the house of the
wedded pair. It closed at midnight, after which the lady and her husband
could join their friends and indulge in a polka or waltz.

The dancing of the Poles consisted of redowas, waltzes, polkas,
mazourkas, and schottisches, some of which McKenna was taught; but,
after all these, he liked best the lively jig and the rattling reel.
Following some of this amusement, he was called upon to sing a song and
dance a favorite fling, both of which he did with success. The song he
gave eliciting most commendation was as follows, and called:

                      THE WEDDING OF BALLYPOREEN.

    On a fine summer morning at twelve in the day,
    The birds they did sing and the asses did bray,
    When Patrick, the bridegroom, with Onagh, the bride,
    With their bibs and their tuckers, set out side by side.
        The pipers played first in the rear, sir;
        Maids blushed, and the bridegroom did stare, sir—
        O Lord, how the spalpeens did swear, sir,
          At the wedding of Ballyporeen.

    They were soon tacked togither, and home did return,
    To make merry the day at the sign of the Churn.
    When they sat down together, a frolicsome troop,
    The old Shannon’s bank never held such a group.
        There were turf-cutters, thatchers, and tailors,
        Fiddlers, and pipers, and nailers,
          At the wedding of Ballyporeen.

    There was Bryan McDermott, O’Shaughnessy’s brat,
    There was Terence O’Driscoll and platter-faced Pat;
    There was Norah McCormick, likewise Bryan O’Linn,
    An’ the fat, red-haired cookmaid that lived in the inn;
        There was Shelah, an’ Larry the genius,
        Pat’s uncle, old Darby McGinniss,
        Black Thady an’ crooked McDennis,
          At the wedding of Ballyporeen.

    The groom he got up an’ made an oration;
    He pleased them all with his kind botheration;
    “Since you all have met here”—then he swore and he cursed
    “You can eat till you swell, boys, an’ drink till ye burst;
        The first christening I hev, if I thrive, sirs,
        I hope ye all hither will drive, sirs.
        You’ll be all welcome, dead or alive, sirs,
          To the christening of Ballyporeen.”

    The bride she got up and she made a low bow,
    She twittered—she felt so—she couldn’t tell how—
    She blushed, and she stammered, and a few words let fall,
    But she spoke it so low that she bothered them all.
        Then the mother cried out: “Are you dead, child?
        For shame! Now hold up your head, child;
        Tho’ sixty, I wish I were wed, child,
          I would rattle all Ballyporeen.”

    Well, they sat down to ate—Father Murphy said grace;
    Smokin’ hot were the dishes, an’ eager each face;
    Knives and forks they did rattle, spoons and platters did play;
    They elbowed and jostled an’ walloped away.
        Rumps, shins and fat sirloins did quake, sir;
        Whole mountains of beef down were mown, sir;
        We demolished all, to the bare bone, sir,
          At the wedding of Ballyporeen.

    The whisky went around an’ the songsters did roar;
    Tim sang, “Paddy O’Kelly”—Nell sung, “Moll Asthore;”
    When a motion went around that their songs they forsake
    And each man took his sweetheart, their trotters to shake.
        With the pipers in couples advancin’—
        Pumps, brogans, an’ bare feet fell a prancin’,
        Such pipin’, an’ figurin’, an’ dancin’,
          Was ne’er seen at Ballyporeen.

    Here’s to Patrick, the bridegroom, and Onagh, the bride;
    That the Harp of Old Erin be hung by their side;
    An’ to all the people, whether old, gray, or green,
    Drunk or sober, that jigged it at Ballyporeen.
        Until Dan Cupid does lend you his wherry
        To trip o’er the conjugal ferry,
        I hope you all may be as merry
          As we were at Ballyporeen.

Just as McKenna had concluded this effort, a great screaming and rushing
of the ladies was heard in another part of the house, accompanied by
heavier voices of men, mingling curiously with the music of the fiddle
and the barking of the dogs. The three friends, with almost every person
in the vicinity, quickly started for the field of disorder, which seemed
not far from the residence.


                               ————●————




                             CHAPTER XVIII.

                    A ROW, A REMOVAL, AND A RAFFLE.


The true cause of the disturbance was not at once disclosed, but its
progress and bearings were easily determined by the eye and ear of the
spectator. Such a reign of confusion and roar of voices; such a Babel of
tongues, it had never been the fortune of the operative to see or hear.
In the center of a considerable group of persons stood the young
husband, Julius Krozenski, brandishing a long stiletto and loudly
swearing that he would take somebody’s life. Meanwhile a friend, less
under excitement than the bridegroom, firmly held the angry man back by
the collar. Facing the Pole, somewhat in the shadow of a large tree,
stood an athletic Irish miner and his equally muscular wife, both much
wrought up, but neither exhibiting or employing any more deadly weapon
of offense or defense than their unusually acrimonious tongues, which
they exercised with all their strength. Soon Mrs. Krozenski made her
appearance, and, walking straight to the side of her newly-made liege
lord—but by no means, as the sequel will show, her master—she
scientifically seized him by the left ear, told him to “put away his
knife,” and then, with an affectionate and effective twist of the
imprisoned auricular appendage, hauled the irate man away. The burst of
laughter which followed this evidence of power on the part of a wife was
highly exasperating to Julius, and he slipped his tether, again drew his
knife, and rushed back toward his opponent. Once more Mrs. Krozenski
caught him by the ear, once more he had to replace the weapon in his
belt, and once more the victorious lady led him in the direction of the
house. This escaping and catching process was repeated several times,
and on each occasion, the peacemaker succeeded in capturing and carrying
away her husband. At last he was safely returned to the kitchen and
seated on a log of wood at the wife’s side, where, for some moments, he
remained as mild and quiet as possible.

Now the reception ceremonies were continued, and nothing more occurred
to disturb the usual routine of proceedings until O’Neill and his wife
ventured to enter the apartment. This was too much, and Krozenski burst
out afresh, worked himself into a new frenzy, and quickly rising, again
reached for and produced his long-bladed knife, which, unfortunately,
his spouse had permitted to remain in his possession.

The detective soon learned the cause of the difficulty.

It seems that O’Neill, who was a miner, and an intimate associate of the
bridegroom, had formerly entertained the hope that Julius would marry a
maiden sister of his own—was, in fact, somewhat angered that he did
not—and, in Krozenski’s presence, made the remark, while dancing, that
Mrs. Krozenski was not as graceful in the polka as that gifted young
lady. This was a very mild criticism for O’Neill to make, but it was
heard by Krozenski, who had imbibed too much of the blackstrap to have
any great amount of sense remaining in his head, and he resented it by
calling the Irishman a liar and following the hard word with a stinging
blow in the face. As was perfectly natural, O’Neill came in to take a
hand, backed by some of his immediate neighbors. In the mêlée the
bridegroom had drawn his knife and been joined by some of his
countrymen. This part of the fracas was ended by the masterly manner of
Mrs. Krozenski, whose principal idea appeared to be to have her
reception continued and prevent her husband from thus early leaving her
a widow.

It was all very well until O’Neill, having armed himself with a
revolver, entered the kitchen, which was crowded with men and women.
This was more than the husband of Mrs. Krozenski could possibly endure,
and as before stated, he rushed once more to the deadly fray. He could
not bear to have O’Neill there to gloat over his abject submission to
Mrs. Krozenski. O’Neill, nothing loth for a further continuance of the
battle, promptly fired upon the bridegroom, narrowly missing a lady
standing near, and not hitting the target by a foot. This was enough to
cause all the Polish, German, Welsh, and English miners in the room to
side with Krozenski, while those from Ireland were not backward in
joining the O’Neill and his plucky little helpmate. McKenna’s friends,
promptly deserting him, or expecting that he would follow, entered the
field. The detective, being duly sober, saw at a glance that the Irish
element was in the minority, and, despite abundant courage and
considerable experience in such matters, would inevitably meet defeat,
and he assumed the _rôle_, for the first time that evening, of
conservator of the peace. There was imminent danger, in view of the
proclivity of the Poles for using sharp knives in such troubles, that
some of his companions might be dangerously injured, if not killed.

Beside, the Mollie Maguires, as a body, were not interested in the
affair.

Krozenski had gone in with the full intention of killing O’Neill; and
O’Neill was equally intent upon performing the same kindly office for
the Polander. Each man was backed by his corps of partisans. The tumult
that developed defies powers of pen and pencil to depict, and, in point
of vocal and physical performances, exceeded all that the agent had ever
heard or read of in the same line at famous Kilkenny, or equally famous
Billingsgate. Bricks and stones were the principal missiles employed;
pistols and knives played their part; heads were broken, and faces and
noses contused; crabsticks crossed; eyes draped in beautiful black and
blue, teeth lost, shins bruised, chops swollen, and shillalahs fell with
telling effect. The shouts and cries that rent the night air were
guttural Teutonic, Gallic, Celtic, Anglo-Saxon, Welsh, Polish, and
sometimes a mixture of all, perfectly unintelligible to any of the
nationalities participating. Dust arose in clouds, and was almost
suffocating in density. The whole affair much resembled the common idea
of a miniature bedlam, and was in truth a small pandemonium let
loose—chaos come again.

[Illustration: “_Jolly noise! Jolly noise!! Jolly noise!!!_”]

When the turbulence was at its highest pitch, while it was difficult to
think of, and utterly impossible to hear anything, excepting the medley
of noises immediately surrounding him, McKenna’s attention was drawn to
the part taken in the fight by the aged grandam of Mrs. Krozenski, who
seemed greatly to enjoy the rumpus going on around her. Jumping hither
and thither, like a veritable witch without her broomstick, the little,
frisky old lady, her broad lace ruffles and straggling gray hair flying
about her withered face, with shrill tone and violent gesture urged on
her countrymen to the contest, and added at least her share to the
general disorder. At last, when the police had arrived, and been driven
away with clubs, when the combat had been resumed, and shouts and shots
and rattling of many sticks again filled the air, the grandmother of the
bride climbed upon the back of a common chair, which had been brought in
by her granddaughter, and standing as erect as possible, she loudly
clapped her bony hands and screamed in her cracked treble voice:

“Oh, jolly noise! _jolly noise!!_ JOLLY NOISE!!!”

This genuine burst of enthusiasm roused the energies of the detective,
thus far held firmly in reserve, and he drew his revolver and fired
three shots, in rapid succession, into the floor, directly under the
crone’s perch, shouting in a double-bass voice, as loudly as he could,
after each explosion:

“Peace!” “_Peace!!_” “PEACE!!!”

The aged dame beheld the flame and smoke issuing from the revolver, and
heard the reports; then, thinking that she was certainly hit, if not
killed, she toppled over backward to the floor and straightened out in a
dead faint. McKenna at once dragged her insensible form out of harm’s
way, and then joined those who were trying their utmost to quell the
disturbance.

The pistol shots, and the loud voices of McKenna and Mrs. Krozenski—the
latter having quit the fray to attend to her relative—soon caused the
belligerents to hesitate. In a few moments their fury evaporated, and
comparative quiet was restored. Shortly thereafter those who were able
limped away to their homes.

“Faith, an’ I’ve had enough an’ to spare of all _such_ weddin’s!” said
Fergus, examining with care an extra curve that he wore in his turned-up
nose, and wiping the gore from his face with the sleeve of his coat.
“When you catch _me_ goin’ to a Polish war again, I give ye good lave to
put me in me coffin first!”

Monaghan had two eyes in preparation for mourning which he was sure they
would assume by another day.

McNulty was the only lucky one, having escaped personal injury—and found
a silver watch, as he explained, “rolling along on the floor, widout any
kaper or owner bein’ around!” He intended merely to retain the timepiece
until the loser should call for it. But McKenna never heard that anybody
ever saw the value of that watch, through having retrieved it from the
thief.

The Polish husband and wife, with O’Neill and his spouse, and a number
of the originators of the riot, were taken to jail by the officers, who
returned with increased numbers for the purpose.

These scenes read like romance, but they are simply the truth.

Nothing here related is intended to reflect upon the Poles, as a portion
of the inhabitants of the coal regions of Pennsylvania. They are, as
miners, industrious and frugal, and, though slow workers, very reliable
and trustworthy. The men are large, robust, muscular, and capable of
great endurance. The women are also far from sylph-like, but many of
them beautiful in form, face, and figure; with dusky olive complexions,
dark eyes and hair. They are excellent wives and mothers.

Let us now return to the Mollie Maguires.

The next meeting of the midnight clan was held on Sunday, the tenth of
May, and his own room being too small, the Bodymaster notified the
members to convene on the mountain-side near the house. All were present
excepting Fergus, who was not fairly recovered from the blows received
at the Polish wedding. Several of his teeth had disappeared, his nose
was badly bruised, and his beauty—of which he had little to part
with—entirely destroyed. He thought it advisable to remain within for a
few days, having, as he remarked, a great respect for the children of
his acquaintances and not wishing to be the means of frightening any of
them to death by his untimely appearance in their midst.

Bushy Deenan, from Pottsville, being in Shenandoah on a visit, was
present at this meeting in the bush. About all done was the giving out
of the “goods,” received from Barney Dolan by Lawler. McKenna was
careful to commit all to memory. They were as follows:

The password:

    “That the troubles of the country may soon be at an end!”

The answer:

    “And likewise the men who will not her defend.”

The quarreling toast was:

    “You should not dispute with a friend.”

The answer was:

    “Not if I am not provoked!”

The night password was:

    _Question_: “Long nights are unpleasant!”

    _Answer_: “I hope they will be at an end!”

The sign of recognition was the front or first finger and thumb of the
right hand touching the necktie, or top button of the shirt.

The answer was given by rubbing the right hand across the forehead, just
touching the hair.

About this time the detective had his first portion of the process of
inuring himself to the mountain region. It came in the form of fever and
ague, and, during a number of days subsequent to the meeting of his
division, he suffered intensely, at times, from chills, with the
succeeding torrid sensations, which confined him to his room and his bed
at Mrs. Cooney’s. Those who have enjoyed the rigors of this unpleasant
complaint need no description of the detective’s symptoms—that, in this
instance, “ignorance is bliss,” let those who have not shaken be content
to believe.

As a matter of necessity, the officer soon settled the slight difficulty
in which he and Muff Lawler were involved. It was foolish, as well as
unnecessary, to keep up a quarrel with a man so bound to him and in
whose movements he was so much interested. Should he separate from
Lawler, at this juncture, the division would look upon him with
coldness, if not suspicion, and it was his idea to remain on the most
intimate terms with his friends, the Mollies. Lawler made a feint of
going over to Colorado Colliery, to fight out the trouble with Dick
Flynn, and borrowed McKenna’s revolver for dueling purposes, having
little confidence in his own weapon, after injuring himself with it, but
the cowardly Flynn would not come to time, ending the interview with
Lawler—as related by that veracious individual in person—by falling upon
his knees and asking the Bodymaster’s pardon. Thus ended the affair,
without having further recourse to weapons, or the law.

It was now the duty of the detective to collect statistics connected
with the order of which he had been made a member. That he might
accomplish this object, he must travel from place to place. Therefore,
saying his health demanded rest from work in the mines—even should labor
present, and of this there were serious doubts—he prevailed upon Lawler
to grant him a traveling card, directed to the officers of all divisions
in the United States, through which—with the “goods”—admission could be
secured in any city, town, or village. This card had to be countersigned
by Barney Dolan, County Delegate, before it was valid. The name was
easily gained, through a short trip to Big Mine Run.

Night and day during the spring, fall, and winter, McKenna had been
exposed to all sorts of weather and late hours, and it told upon his
constitution, which must have been of iron to have held out so long, and
he grew thin, cadaverous, and his strength perceptibly and rapidly
failed. The symptoms were aggravated by a dry cough, which drove off
refreshing sleep.

Although it was not his intention to stay long away from
Shenandoah—which place, from the material in and surrounding it, he
believed to be the grand center of the field of operations of the Mollie
Maguires—and so informed all his friends—the parting between McKenna and
McAndrew was a scene of mutual regrets. All disliked to have him leave.
This was especially the case with Cooney, Lawler, Monaghan, Fergus, and
little McNulty. But, after many good wishes from the men and women, and
promises on his part that he would return as soon as fully recovered,
the detective occupied a car on the Lehigh Valley Road, the evening of
the fifteenth of May, 1874, and reaching Wilkesbarre, Luzerne County,
the same day, took up quarters at the Railroad Hotel, of which Daniel
Shovlin was then proprietor.

Some bitter experiences were in store for McKenna. There must be the
bitter with the sweet.

Bearing letters from Lawler and others to William Kirk, County Delegate
of Luzerne, he encountered no difficulty in forming the acquaintance of
the chief Mollies of the vicinity. He found that there were at that time
only a little less than thirty divisions, or bodies, in the county, all
of which were in a prosperous condition, as many as thirty or forty
persons being added to the lodge in Wilkesbarre alone during a single
night.

County Delegate Kirk was a gentlemanly person, kept a store, and was
kind enough to say that Schuylkill County, from which his visitor came,
“was, from its course, a disgrace to the Ancient Order of Hibernians,
and should be cut off, root and branch, until there could be a complete
remedy for the difficulty in reorganization.”

He received McKenna cordially, however, and said he was not to blame for
the condition of the order outside of Shenandoah, and complimented him
for the manner in which the business and finances of that division, as
far as he had heard, were being managed. He also took especial trouble
to introduce the operative to the chief men of the society in Luzerne.
It was learned that there were about four thousand Mollies in the
county.

After remaining in Wilkesbarre a few days, McKenna visited the division
at Pittston, and saw and talked with the Bodymaster, whose name was
Melvin. He then visited Kingston, Plymouth, and the adjacent towns,
familiarizing himself with the faces and names of the officers and
members, quietly adding to his list, acquiring a better knowledge of the
manners and customs of the people, and the modes of procedure within and
outside the division room. Among others, he encountered Mike Hester, own
cousin of Pat Hester, of Shamokin, who had not the violent reputation of
his kinsman, but appeared to be a decent young man. The detective had
not been long absent when he was the recipient of a letter from Muff
Lawler, inquiring after his health, and particularly cautioning him not
to use the new “goods” in Luzerne, as the members of the society in that
county had not yet been instructed in them. This the operative had
already discovered, but, as his memory was good and he had remembered
those of the previous quarter, he encountered no difficulty in that
respect. He also met Ned Lawler, the degenerate nephew of his uncle, and
found that he had gained no wisdom by the taking on of years, but was
the same rollicking, reckless fellow he had been while in Shenandoah.
Kirk, when McKenna next visited his place, showed him a letter from Mike
Lawler, pompously worded, but inquiring kindly after the health of his
_protégé_, in whom he said he was more than usually interested.

The matter then most canvassed by the Mollies was a conference, held on
the twenty-seventh of the month at Scranton, between Bishop O’Hara and
five clergymen on one side, and a delegation of twenty-five Bodymasters
from all parts of the country, on the other, to discuss certain changes
in the constitution and by-laws, as well as in the secret work of the
order. Mr. County Delegate Kirk, and Peter Duffy, of Hazelton,
represented Luzerne County. The proceedings of the convention were
harmonious, but no conclusion was arrived at, excepting in hearing the
Bishop’s _ultimatum_. The clergy insisted that there must be a thorough
revision of the rules regulating divisions; that they should cease
holding meetings in bar-rooms, and consent to have a priest for
spiritual adviser, before the Church could recognize or affiliate with
them. The sentence, “If I hear a brother illy spoken of I will inform
him of it,” was also to be expunged from the obligation. They did not
seem to interfere with the secrecy, and the signs and pass-words, and
little was said about the murderous acts which had been done by the
Mollies. It was, after much argument, left in about the same condition
as before. No mere county convention could abrogate work done by the
National Board, or the Board of Erin. Indeed it was doubtful if the
Mollies would ever consent to any changes, Church or no Church, and
whether Bishop O’Hara would not, after all, have to follow the example
of Bishop Wood, and proceed to deal in anathemas and excommunications.

Remaining in Luzerne until the fifth of June of the same year, McKenna
then received orders from Superintendent Franklin—under whose immediate
supervision, guided by Mr. Bangs and myself, he had all the time been
acting—to report at once in Philadelphia, and he immediately obeyed.

It should have been mentioned, in its proper connection, that, while
waiting at the Shenandoah depot for the arrival of the train to
Wilkesbarre, on the fourteenth of May, Tom Hurley had cautiously dropped
something heavy into McKenna’s outside coat pocket, whispering at the
same time:

“Jim, don’t you say I never made you a gift of anything! You’ll have a
hard set to deal wid, over in Luzerne, they’re tellin’ me, an’ my
billy’ll come mighty convanient to have at hand for your defense!”

Of course the operative expressed his thanks. When he arrived in
Philadelphia, having no use for such a thing, he in turn presented the
life-preserver to Mr. Franklin, who will ever treasure it as a relic of
the Mollie Maguires. This weapon is composed of a piece of untanned
cowhide, now as hard as horn itself, some six inches in length, twisted
or braided into a sort of handle, and covered from end to end with
woolen cloth. One extremity is loaded with three-quarters of a pound of
lead; to the other is firmly attached a loop, large enough to admit a
man’s hand, formed of strong linen cord, and intended to allow the billy
to hang loose from the wrist and at the same time prevent it being lost
or wrenched from the grasp of its owner. At close quarters, it proves a
very savage and formidable arm of defense, resembling, but being much
more dangerous than the ordinary slung-shot in daily use by policemen
and others. Twelve ounces of solid lead and raw-hide, dashed against the
thickest skull by a strong-armed ruffian, would as effectually silence a
man as an ounce of the same metal discharged from the bore of a
Springfield rifle.

While at the Agency in Philadelphia McKenna prepared a complete list of
all the Mollies whose acquaintance he had formed, as well as a regular
enumeration of the officers and members, so far as he knew, belonging to
the different divisions in Schuylkill and Luzerne Counties, after which
he was instructed to re-enter the field of operations, in Carbon County,
and to particularly investigate the circumstances connected with the
assassination of Morgan Powell, occurring December 2, 1871, and alluded
to in chapter vii. of this volume. It was suspected that the deed had
been perpetrated by men residing in the vicinity, the system of
exchanges between Bodymasters not having on this occasion been observed.
Taking the proper line of railway, the detective was soon in Mauch
Chunk, one of the most romantic and ancient-looking towns in the entire
State. Here, however, for the present, he need spend but little time.
His business was at Summit Hill, and, taking the cars over the
Switch-back, he was soon in that locality. Going at once to the house of
Thos. Fisher, who kept a tavern and acted as County Delegate, he was
well received, after making himself known by throwing the proper sign,
which was promptly responded to by the Mollie. There were several
members present at the moment, and McKenna was introduced to them. Among
these were Daniel Boyle, the Bodymaster, John Gallagher, and Pat
McKenna—of those of the last name given the detective heard there were a
large number in the neighborhood—naturally they must be relatives. Here
he also saw Maguire, the State Secretary of the order, from Pittsburg,
who was canvassing in the interest of his newspaper, the _Hibernian_,
which was the acknowledged organ of the A. O. H. in this country. It was
here he heard that big, blarneying, blundering Barney Dolan was in
disgrace at headquarters and there was a chance that he would be removed
from his office as County Delegate of Schuylkill, and never receive any
more “goods” for the divisions, simply because he had, in a fit of
anger, loudly cursed the Bishop and the holy Church of Rome. All agreed
that Barney should have been more respectful, and in using such language
had richly merited the punishment of expulsion for life.

McKenna, the detective’s namesake, was a young man, above the average in
intelligence, but loved his dram as well as any of his countrymen in
that vicinity.

Fisher had been tax-collector of the county, with other fat positions,
and was considered the big man of the Mollies in Carbon County.

The detective’s kinsman was even at that early day suspected of having
been engaged as a principal in the murder of Morgan Powell, and Pat very
naturally became an object of interest and a person whose company
McKenna wanted to keep. That young man was at first rather shy, but a
few songs and dances, some drinks, and a distant cousinship once having
been discovered, the heart of the real McKenna gradually warmed toward
the party bearing, for the time being, the same name. The companionship
was kept up for some days, and finally the detective was invited to
McKenna’s residence and introduced to all of his relatives, girls and
women, boys and men. There he made himself comfortable for a short time.
He was also quite welcome, because of the stories he told the women, and
the drinks he gave the men, while with the younger crop of McKennas he
was a great favorite from his lessons in dancing and singing.

During the latter portion of June, bidding farewell to Summit Hill and
its inhabitants, and promising to call again some day—an engagement that
he was determined to fulfill—the detective thought to return to Luzerne,
but stopping over at Hazelton, during his stay he was invited to attend
a dance and raffle at Buck Mountain, and accepted. The chances were only
a dollar, and the article to be won by somebody was a brass clock, the
property of a widow woman named Breslin. The lady in question kept a
shebeen-shop on the mountain, and her husband had, some months before,
been killed in the mine by the sudden falling of a pillar near which he
was at work. Tickets were for sale in every saloon in Hazelton, and
having procured one, McKenna started, in company with some thirty or
forty Mollies, to walk to Buck Mountain. At least more than half the
distance, from the steepness of the ascent, had to be made on foot, as
no vehicle could be drawn up by horse or mule.

The party was held upon the grounds surrounding Mrs. Breslin’s
mansion—if mansion it could be called, consisting, as it did, of one
small room—and the company was as miscellaneous as it was numerous,
there being several hundred men, women, and girls in attendance. But all
could be accommodated, as there were plenty of torches, any amount of
level earth, and seven or eight fiddlers to furnish the music.

Mrs. Breslin—a fine figure of a woman, but one somewhat along in
years—was celebrated the country over for her good liquor, which, on
this occasion, had been prepared in a large kettle, and was dealt out
steaming hot—in fact, it was the Polish blackstrap over again, with some
scraps of lemon added, by way of variety, and honored with the name of
punch—hot whisky-punch.

The operative received an introduction to many of the men and all of the
women, among the latter to a handsome lass, of rather uncertain age,
named Kate McIntyre. Con O’Donnel gave him the acquaintance of this
handsome and sprightly lady. She evidently became smitten with the young
man, and despite the image of the Tamaqua queen, Miss Higgins, who still
held a place in his memory, he paid her considerable attention, engaging
her hand in several successive and successful reels and round dances. He
treated Miss McIntyre to some of the prevalent beverage, found that she
liked it, and took sufficient himself to make him feel jolly. In fact, a
little after ten o’clock at night, the whole assemblage was funny, and
after the clock had been raffled for and won—the winner gracefully
making the widow a present of the timepiece—the mirth merged into
hilarity and gradually into boisterousness. Then the time passed until
midnight, when there was a short recess, during which Mrs. Breslin added
to her profits by disposing of a cold collation, consisting of chicken,
sandwiches, and hard-boiled eggs, of which the parties partook with
appetite.

Miss McIntyre and her gallant, after having refreshments, walked around
the grounds, arm in arm. While near the shanty of Mrs. Breslin, they
nearly stumbled over the prostrate form of a man, who had evidently
absorbed too much of the liquor. The drunken fellow slowly opened his
eyes, saw Miss McIntyre, and, rising up on one elbow, with a gesture
called her to him. But she gazed on him in blank astonishment, merely
turning on her heel, with a look of disdain, and they walked away.

“An’ who is your friend?” asked McKenna.

“I don’t know the man at all,” said Miss McIntyre, “and I’m sure he does
not know me! It was the act of an idiot, who could think of nothing
else!”

“Well, but for his helpless state, I’d just go back and bate the brute
for his impertinence!” said McKenna.

Kate looked admiringly upon her companion, out of her large, dark eyes,
and they passed on and once more joined in the dance.


                               ————●————




                              CHAPTER XIX.

                  SNARED BY KATE—HONORED BY “MOLLIE.”


Con O’Donnel, who stood not far off, noted the drunken man’s remark and
was seen to smile significantly as McKenna and the lady moved from the
spot.

The festivities were continued until nearly break of day, when the
detective, learning that his partner had no male attendant, politely
volunteered to accompany her home, which she said was no great distance
away. Miss Kate accepted the proffer, as McKenna afterwards thought,
with slight evidence of embarrassment, and looking furtively about her,
as though in search of some one she had rather expected to see. But if
there was any person present, her roguish eye failed to discern the
fact, and, placing one hand upon the arm of her escort they were soon
lost in the darkness.

[Illustration: “_Placing one hand on the arm of her escort, they were
soon lost in the darkness._”]

Con O’Donnel was still looking after the couple, around the protecting
and shaded corner of the widow’s shanty, from which, with a sly chuckle,
when the coast was clear, he quickly emerged and walked to the vicinity
of the drunken man. That he was bent upon mischief those who saw the
merry twinkle in his eye were well convinced.

It is unnecessary to enter into a minute description of the pleasant
walk that McKenna enjoyed with Miss McIntyre. Knowing well that his
companions from Hazelton would await his reappearance among them—as the
majority were in no condition, from the poteen they had imbibed, to
undertake the home journey—he and his fair lady did not hurry toward the
protecting paternal roof. On the contrary, as has been the usage since
the days of Adam, they made haste slowly, enlivening the trip with
cheerful conversation, reference to the festive occasion and lucky
chance that brought them together, with such other talk as would
naturally suggest itself to a pair in their exact mental and physical
condition. It was a long story—and a wrong story, too, it appears—that
vivacious Miss McIntyre related to her impromptu beau, about her
parents’ home, the family, and the trouble they had to get along during
the suspension. McKenna was already hinting that, if he were a little
better acquainted, perhaps he might be bold enough to ask the father to
part with his child, press her to change her condition in life and
become Mrs. McKenna, and Miss Kate had started and blushed—but that
could hardly be seen in the dusky gray of the misty morning—when both
distinctly heard sounds of footsteps coming swiftly toward them from the
direction of widow Breslin’s place. Miss McIntyre suddenly withdrew her
arm from that of her chevalier, paused in her tracks and listened
breathlessly for a moment, then, in a faint and trembling voice
ejaculated:

“My God! It is my husband! Our lives are in danger! He will kill us
both! What shall I do?”

“Your husband, is it?” inquired McKenna, realizing the joke that had
been put upon him and fully alive to the awkward predicament in which he
was placed. “Your husband? Sure, didn’t Con O’Donnel introduce ye as a
single lady? Faix, but we are really in a purty kettle of fish! Tell me,
is yer husband of the jealous sort? An’ do ye think that’s him, whose
feet I hear makin’ such a racket over the path?”

“Don’t stand here askin’ questions,” answered Mrs. McIntyre! “Oh, why
did I fall in with Con O’Donnel’s wicked deceit? I might have known he
would bring it about to punish me! He’s just gone and roused Danny, and
I don’t doubt, if he catches me in your company, there’ll be murder done
upon the very spot! My husband’ll shoot us both! Oh, that I should ever
have been so foolish!”

McKenna had more than once heard of Danny McIntyre, but without for a
moment suspecting that he was any kin to the young woman with whom he
had been walking, dancing, and making himself generally agreeable.

“I’m jist of the mind to step out into the road and shoot that husband
of yours before he has a chance to say a word or do wan single thing!”

“For mercy’s sake, don’t talk that way!” whispered the lady, trembling
all over like an aspen leaf.

“We must not be seen! Here—get you behind this tree! The underbrush will
hide me! Keep quiet until he goes beyond!”

And, without a moment to spare, they disappeared from view. When the man
passed their place of concealment they were as still as death. McIntyre
carried a pistol in his hand, and was walking as rapidly as his mellow
condition permitted, surging from one side of the path to the other as
he moved, but finally, without discovering the fugitives, he was lost to
their sight.

When his heavy tread could no longer be heard, the couple stood again in
the road. At least one of the two breathed more freely—and that was
McKenna—when the husband’s form could no longer be seen. He had caught
sufficient, while he was going by, to convince him that he was the
identical personage who had spoken to his lady companion near Mrs.
Breslin’s, and to whom Kate had, in his presence, refused recognition.

The feelings of both had undergone a sudden revulsion. McKenna was very
angry with Con O’Donnel, as well as with the woman who had assisted that
person in playing such a practical joke upon him, and Mrs. McIntyre was
naturally much mortified to be caught in such an embarrassing situation,
being also fearful of the treatment to be expected from her husband
should he reach home before her. With a cold and crusty “good morning,
sir!” for the gentleman to whom she had so recently been saying all
manner of sweet things, she added that she “could take a short-cut, with
which she was acquainted, and, going across lots, make their mutual
place of destination before Danny.” Then Kate took her departure.

It was still too dark, though almost daybreak, for a person with the
sharpest eyes to see very far in any direction, and the probabilities
were that the woman would get to her residence first and succeed in
fooling the half-intoxicated McIntyre with the belief that she had
deserted the dancing place before midnight.

McKenna gave utterance to a long, low whistle, somewhat expressive of
surprise and partly seeming like a sigh of relief, as he returned by the
road over which he had so recently passed.

He walked alone and hurriedly this time.

Arrived at the house of Mrs. Breslin, he went directly in pursuit of Con
O’Donnel, but that individual was not to be found. He had made his exit.
Throwing himself, therefore, upon a bundle of straw, under the branches
of a tree, the detective soon forgot his wrath and his troubles in
sleep. He had not been long in the land of Nod when he was aroused by
the sound of a heavy voice calling loudly from different parts of the
premises for Con O’Donnel. Nearing the operative’s improvised bed,
McIntyre—for it was he—exclaimed:

“Jist tell me where I’ll find that spalpeen, Con O’Donnel, an’ I’ll
tache him to be afther playin’ practical jokes on me! I’ll larn him to
tell me that Kate’s gone off wid that Jim McKenna! Jist let me lay these
two han’s on the mane scut, an’ I’ll mash the life out o’ him! Sure, an’
me wife war slapin’ in her bed, as a dacent woman should be! Oh, tell me
where to find Con O’Donnel!”

But nobody seemed to know where the object of McIntyre’s anger had taken
himself to, and the husband was compelled to satisfy himself with some
more whisky-punch, and then subsided, by the wall of the sweet-smelling
pig-pen, into a drunken stupor, from which, had he appeared, even Con
O’Donnel would have failed to arouse him.

So Mrs. McIntyre had succeeded in duping her husband! This was
sufficient to send the weary operative off again into slumber, and it
was an hour after sunrise when he awoke. As he had expected, only three
or four of the Hazelton Mollies were fit to return. The remainder could
not be made sensible, and were scattered in various grotesque attitudes,
like bodies on a sanguinary battle-field, about the dancing-grounds,
oblivious to all surrounding them, where they were left to take care of
themselves, while the detective and his more sober comrades pursued
their path down Buck Mountain to the village.

Con O’Donnel was not foolish enough to put himself in the way of the
Shenandoah Mollie during his short stay in Carbon County, but the story
being far too good to keep bottled up was related to his boon
companions, with many extraordinary embellishments, not well calculated
to please Mr. and Mrs. McIntyre, or suit the ideas of McKenna, and in
this way soon reached general circulation in a gossiping community.
While the detective was able to laugh it off, and soon get away from the
locality, Danny McIntyre, when he heard what was being said, went on
another extended but still fruitless search after the defamer of his
household. The man who had imposed his wife upon a stranger as a single
lady, having business and employment offered him in another part of the
State, accepted the opportunity and soon removed from the neighborhood.
Still threatening vengeance that he was unable to wreak, McIntyre was
forced to quiet down and endure the result as best he might.
Thenceforward the agent was more than ordinarily on his guard, and
extremely careful how he volunteered to see unprotected maidens to their
homes, without first making diligent inquiry if there chanced to be one
Con O’Donnel thereabouts.

Carbon County having been well gone over, during the early part of July
McKenna returned to Shenandoah.

The few events following, to the first of August, may thus be
summarized:

The detective soon found all his Shenandoah friends about him. Lawler,
Cooney, Hurley, Monaghan, McAndrew, and the rest were very glad to see
their fellow-Mollie.

After the Fourth had passed, during which the members engaged in a
general good time, celebrating the day of national independence, they
commenced talking about securing a new Bodymaster for Shenandoah
division, Lawler not having given satisfaction in several particulars.
He seemed simply doing nothing. The boast that he would rapidly increase
the membership had fallen short. Numbers were leaving, not liking the
style of the presiding officer, instead of flocking in and joining the
order. It was hinted to McKenna by several, that if he would accept, he
might have the place of Bodymaster. He very wisely refused the tempting
bait, but returned answer that, if they must honor him in this style—and
for such an elevation he was by no means anxious—it should be in the
bestowal of some subordinate position.

It was at this date that there arose considerable talk among the Mollies
about one Gomer James, who had not long before shot and killed a member
of the order named Cosgrove, living near Shenandoah. James was arrested,
but secured bail and would soon be at large. Ned Monaghan and several
others were desirous that Lawler should get some men from an adjoining
body and have Gomer James quietly put out of harm’s way, but, somehow,
Muff could not, or would not, comply with their wishes. Therefore,
ex-constable Monaghan—not Ed. Monaghan—expressed himself in favor of
having an officer who would and could perform the job. Barney Dolan was
sent for, and Lawler forced to send in his resignation, so that the
Country Delegate might appoint a successor.

To make matters more unsettled, and the Mollies more lively, a general
suspension of active operations occurred on the sixth of July, all the
collieries belonging to the Philadelphia and Reading Coal and Iron
Company, as well as those the property of, or leased by, individual
operators, closing business and refusing longer to keep on at a loss,
with expected permanent detriment to the mining interest. Labor of
nearly all kinds was at a standstill. Thousands of men were without
employment. The vicious and unprincipled of these being left to
idleness, and naturally ready for anything, it was anticipated that
outrages would quickly follow. Such always had been the case, and
probably always would be, under the prevailing system of managing the
coal regions. But one or two collieries kept at work in all Schuylkill
County. Many of the miners and their helpers sought forgetfulness in
liquor. Among this number were several of McKenna’s associates, Hurley
being notably one of the first to begin and the last to terminate a
spree. He loudly and openly cursed the Modocs, and ended by saying that
Gomer James, and those like him, who were responsible for hard times,
must look out, as some of them would sup sorrow during that summer. How
they could be chargeable with a stoppage of the works he did not pretend
to explain, but put it upon them, without explanation, merely because he
did not know where else to place it.

On one occasion Hurley exhibited a handsome set of brass knuckles, that
he had borrowed of Martin Deane, and which were intended to be used upon
somebody. Shortly thereafter, Deane left for Loss Creek, and he had been
gone only a few days when a man named Reilly was shot and mortally
wounded, by one Anthony Shaw, known to be Deane’s butty. Suspicion
fastened upon the latter as an accomplice in the shooting, but there was
no evidence pointing him out as the accessory.

In the meantime, Frank McAndrew was the prominent candidate for
Bodymaster, and, on the fifteenth of July, the big County Delegate,
Barney Dolan, appeared in Shenandoah, saying something should be done,
and done at once, otherwise their organization in the town should be
disbanded. Dolan sought an early interview with McKenna and came out
plainly with the wish that the detective should accept the
Bodymastership; but he firmly refused, saying his conscience would not
let him take it when there were so many more worthy men in the division;
and he clinched the statement by hinting that he did not know at what
moment the officers from Buffalo might pounce upon him. In such an event
the division would be disgraced. No! he could not fill that office!
Whatever he did must be in a subordinate position, or as a common
member. The same day, Hurley, Monaghan, McAndrew, and the detective met
in Lawler’s house, at once shut Mrs. Lawler in the little, back kitchen,
off the bar, locked and bolted the door against her, and proceeded to
hold a special meeting, one man having been stationed without to give
warning, should any straggling stranger chance to stroll to the
vicinity. After some desultory conversation, Frank McAndrew was duly
appointed Bodymaster for the remainder of the term, and instructed in
the duties of the position. He was informed that he must make all the
members pay up their dues, or be cut off. Dolan said that, hereafter, it
must be a beneficial society. The charge had gained circulation that
charity was not among the virtues practiced by the A. O. H., and it
should be disproved. After some more talk of this sort, the County
Delegate, quite muddled with drink, and well satisfied with himself and
his official acts, left for home.

That very night, at a late hour, as McKenna and Monaghan were passing
the house of Gomer James, the obnoxious young Welshman, on the route
homeward, the ex-constable pulled out his revolver and wanted to fire
into the building, saying, if he “only knew where Gomer James’ head
rested he’d send a bullet there.” He was only prevented from putting his
project into execution by McKenna, who seized the pistol and compelled
its owner to put it away. There was nothing in the programme of the
detective authorizing him to become an accomplice in outrage when it
could be avoided.

At the ensuing regular meeting of the division, held in McHugh’s house,
on the eighteenth of July, an election took place. McAndrew was
confirmed as Bodymaster for the current term, James McHugh elected
Treasurer, James McKenna, Secretary, and all were regularly installed.
It was really a business meeting. James O’Brien, Charles Hayes, and John
Travers were accepted, subsequently initiated, and other persons
proposed as members.

Lawler was not present, having gone into a fit of the sulks, because of
his removal by Barney Dolan, in the first place, and from the failure of
the members to re-elect him Bodymaster, in the second place. He
temporarily resigned membership, but promised, after he had been a
quarter of a year in the Church, that he would resume active
participation in their proceedings. This was perfectly satisfactory to
those concerned.

All things considered, Shenandoah Division succeeded better than before.
Although McAndrew was troubled to read writing, and even perused print
indifferently, he soon made, with McKenna’s assistance, a very fair
presiding officer. The detective had to go to his assistance in the
ceremony of initiation, was called upon to deliver the obligation, or
test, as it was sometimes described, and instruct the novitiates in the
signs, pass-words, and toasts, but otherwise McAndrew managed affairs
exceedingly well. This election to the Secretaryship gave the agent
standing with the members, furnished him a safe place in which to write
his reports, and also an excuse for carrying on considerable
correspondence. Should suspicion thereafter ask a single question, he
could plainly answer: “Am I not the Secretary? And have I not the
writing of the division to attend to?” While instructing the members in
the “goods” his memory would be stored with their salient features and
he be enabled the more correctly to report them to the Agency. The
Mollies being generally uneducated, such a position gave its occupant
high standing in the order.

It was not long after McAndrew’s succession to the Bodymaster’s chair,
that he commenced, spurred on by Monaghan and Hurley, arguing seriously
with the detective, whenever he found an opportunity, about the case of
Gomer James, the murderer of Cosgrove, and to perfect plans for the
Welshman’s sudden taking off. He often referred to the timber of which
Shenandoah Division was composed, and regretted that it had no suitable
men to do a clean job. But he said there was encouragement now, as new
members were fast coming in, and it could not be long before the right
sort would be plentiful. When he found the persons for the deed he would
not be slow in selecting and sending them upon the track of the enemy.
One John Gibbons, who, about this date, came to the town with a letter
from Barney Dolan, he had hopes of. He was looked upon as about the
manner of man needed for any outrageous business, and certainly appeared
bad enough to the eye, and consumed sufficient whisky to constitute a
first-class ruffian.

McAndrew was excessively proud of the eminence to which he had been
conducted, and acted as though not far from parting with his senses when
a delegation of neighboring Bodymasters, comprising “Bucky” Donnelly, of
Raven Run, James Munley, of Rappahannock, and several other prominent
Mollies, called in a crowd at his house, with their congratulations upon
his good luck, and wishing him every success in office. As a natural
consequence of such a shower of compliments, McAndrew treated several
times to the best that could be found in the city, and, after making a
day of it, went to bed late at night as drunk as a lord, when he had bid
his visitors farewell at the train by which they departed.

It was a considerable task for McKenna to teach McAndrew the prayers
with which every meeting of the Mollie Maguires was opened and
closed—for these men of blood did not hesitate to introduce and canvass
their murderous acts and begin and end their councils, at which the
taking of human life was deliberately discussed, with a petition for the
blessing of the Father to rest upon them—therefore, after receiving one
or two lessons at the house, and in the bush, the Bodymaster said if the
operative would reduce the forms to writing he would have his wife
repeat them to him until they were fixed in his memory. When this was
done, and McAndrew had secured some instruction in parliamentary usage,
the new-fledged President considered his education complete.

At each and every conference of the two men, McAndrew now would say to
the detective that Monaghan, or some other party, had once more been
urging the necessity of doing something with Gomer James. McKenna
endeavored to make the Bodymaster believe it useless to pay any
attention to these demands, holding that they would soon cease and their
cause be forgotten. But that official, while he did not wish to assume
any such responsibility, was not able to see the road by which it could
be avoided. And McKenna, on his part, did not dare oppose too
strenuously. Such a course would cause McAndrew to drop his
communications on the subject, and then possibly the work might go on
without his Secretary’s knowledge. One day the head of the division
arrived at the decided stand that, as soon as the number of members
should justify, he would levy an assessment, and collect a fund to pay
for the services of men from some adjoining division to come over to
Shenandoah and “put Gomer James off his legs.”

McKenna saw that McAndrew’s mind was firmly made up in this direction,
hence gave no further check to the business. A contrary plan, he was
well aware, would prove of no avail, and, resolving merely to watch
closely the course of events, he remained silent. Should the Mollies
undertake to murder the young Welshman, as he feared they might, his
duty was plain. He must, while appearing to favor the deed, do all he
could to prevent its consummation, and at the same time keep Mr.
Franklin well informed in every stage of the game, to the end that the
Superintendent might, if he deemed it advisable, capture the criminals
before the act, or notify James of his danger. It did not trouble the
brain of the agent much, as he was fixed in his belief that nobody could
attempt the crime without his knowledge. And he felt sure that, being
fully advised as to what was going on, he would be in good time to
preserve the intended victim’s life.

He quickly found out that there was a general complaint, which neither
Bodymaster nor Secretary could afford to overlook. It was in the shape
of an inquiry, set on foot by Monaghan and Hurley, asking: “Why is not
something done for the removal of Gomer James?” There was but one
response to be made to this question, and that must be: “It shall have
attention.”

Having done all he could to counteract this demand on the part of the
Mollies, McKenna visited Pottsville, where he found his particular
friend, Pat Dormer, of the far-famed Sheridan House, in a terribly
shattered condition of mind and body. After a long debauch, during the
course of which Pat had driven his wife almost insane, and finally out
of doors, he was suffering the consequences of his errors and keeping
house by himself, which was lonely enough to make the giant quite
distracted. In fact, he was about as miserable a piece of six-foot
humanity as ever the detective looked upon. He brightened up a little,
however, when he grasped McKenna’s hand and heard his cheerful voice,
and tried to become more like his former jovial self, but it was a
failure, and ended with subsidence into a deeper fit of despondency than
had before possessed him.

McKenna exerted himself to bring Dormer around to his senses again,
partly because he hated to see him so wretched, partly to learn what he
knew of the Mollies, and finally so far succeeded that Dormer invited
him to enjoy a carriage ride over the mountain. During their journey Pat
begged his companion to visit Mrs. Dormer and try to induce her once
more to return to his and her home, engaging faithfully to go before the
priest and take an oath never to drink another drop of liquor if she
would forgive him. This the detective had to promise. He did, later in
the day, try his hand as family peacemaker with the lady in question,
but without success, as she utterly refused ever to have anything to do
with her husband. She said he thought nothing of an oath, and might
break it within thirty days. Her life would be in constant danger, and
McKenna could hardly blame her for preferring a comfortable and quiet
home, where she was, to the trouble and disorder in which Dormer was
always embroiled.

After wandering over the mines, calling upon the principal Mollies, and
thoroughly sounding the miners on the subject of the suspension, the
Secretary returned, about the first of August, to Shenandoah. There he
was gladly received by the officers and members of his division, and
soon learned that, on the fourth of the month, there was to be a meeting
of County Delegates at Tremont. It now became his special object to lay
his wires in such shape that he would be reasonably sure of discovering,
at an early day, the general purport, if not full particulars, of the
business transacted by the convention.

Could it be that this arrangement foreshadowed evil to Gomer James?


                               ————●————




                              CHAPTER XX.

                   A FRIGHT, A FIGHT, AND A FUNERAL.


Time passed, however, and the murder of Gomer James was not
accomplished. In truth, it was little spoken of. Political excitements
and the occurrence of other absorbing events appeared to cause the
Mollies to bury, if not forget, their enmity to the young Welshman. But,
as facts distinctly indicated, their vengeance was only sleeping, to be
awakened, in the future, with added strength and fury.

Barney Dolan, as my agent at about this time learned, encountered fresh
trials. There was a movement on foot to get entirely rid of him. It
culminated in the meeting of the County Convention, consisting of
Bodymasters of all the principal divisions, at Mahanoy City, upon the
peremptory call of the State Delegate, Captain Gallagher. As a part of
the proceedings, which were promptly reported to the Secretary by Frank
McAndrews, Dolan was cut off for life from all participation in, or
benefit from, the order—in other words, expelled—and fined in the sum of
five hundred dollars, on account of his failure to report and pay over
to the State officials certain collections that he had made for the
current year. While this summary action fell particularly hard upon
Barney, constituting an act for which he appeared wholly unprepared, it
was not unexpected by McKenna, who, it will be remembered, heard the
topic hinted at by the State Secretary, Maguire, while visiting, some
weeks before, at Summit Hill.

The Convention then proceeded to nominate and elect—as it seemed to have
the right to do—Dolan’s successor in office, and John Kehoe, of
Girardville, was declared the unanimous choice. That cunning wire-puller
and artful dodger, it seemed, had his tricks ready prepared, long before
the day set for the Convention, and it was the easiest thing possible
for him to slide his thin feet into Dolan’s big shoes.

The decision of the meeting was also expressed, by vote of a majority of
those present, that something more should be done to make the world look
upon the Ancient Order of Hibernians as purely and simply a benevolent
institution, in the coal regions, as it was supposed to be in other
portions of the United States. It must no longer be accused of murders
and assassinations, and lesser outrages, but, on the contrary, gain
credit, at home and abroad, as the tried support of the widow and
orphan, and the source of relief for the laborer, when unable to work,
or when otherwise thrown out of employment. The real Mollies laughed in
their sleeve, meanwhile, and none more heartily than John Kehoe, the
newly-elected County Delegate. Capt. Gallagher might say and do what he
would, the County Conventions, the State Conventions, and their
officers, might pass resolutions, and issue orders and commands, and,
after all, the small yet potential ring within their circle,
encompassing the counties of Schuylkill, Carbon, and Columbia, would
manage affairs and shape results, through the use of the order, to suit
themselves. If murders and outrages were to be wrought, the Mollies had
the organization, and the society held the men in its midst to perform
them quickly and well. The State Delegate could return to his home in
Pittsburg, if he so pleased, and set forth to the other officials that
he had permanently fixed affairs in the anthracite regions, might even
flatter himself that he really had accomplished something in the proper
direction; still the Mollies knew better, being fully aware that, at the
moment of holding this Convention, the lives of men were being
threatened by themselves and their associates. These menaces were soon
to be consummated. The machinery sometimes moved tardily, but like the
monster engine that propels the largest vessel, it performed its work
remorselessly, almost noiselessly, and effectually.

The Convention passed its resolves and adjourned.

Several violent outrages, of more or less importance and cruelty, were
perpetrated at this date. About one of them McKenna learned from Frank
McAndrew, the night after the Convention, when he had retired to his
room at Cooney’s and prepared to sleep. The Bodymaster came at a late
hour, roused the landlord, and demanded admittance to the Secretary,
which Cooney could not well refuse, went up to the room, and, sitting on
the side of the bed, informed that weary personage that he, McAndrew,
having just left “Bucky” Donnelly, of Raven Run, from that person had
received the particulars of a fight between the Mollies and the Sheet
Irons, at Connor’s Patch, a night or two previously. Phil. Nash, John
Brennan, _alias_ “Spur” Brennan, and Donnelly were engaged in it,
opposed by a large force of German and Welsh miners. From the narrative
of McAndrew it seemed to have been another edition of Donnybrook Fair.
Two of the Sheet Iron lads received wounds from pistol shots—one being
considered as mortally hurt. After McAndrew had taken leave, McKenna
sought slumber, but was once more awakened by Tom Hurley, who desired to
give his version of the affair. He fully corroborated the story McAndrew
told, and added:

“Sure, then, Jack Kehoe went the bail of ivery mother’s son of ’em
yesterday, at the coort!”

“That accounts for the big vote from that part of the county cast for
Jack Kehoe for County Delegate!”

“An’ you’re right, there!” said Hurley.

After thus filling the listener’s brain with subjects for frightful
dreams, Hurley also left the room, and McKenna was not sorry to be
alone.

The operative did not quickly recover from his illness, and, during
several weeks, was constantly under the doctor’s care, yet managing to
be about the city, part of the time. After paying a visit to his
physician, one morning, the report reached his ears, through a friend,
that, as a supposed leader of the Mollie Maguires in the county, his
life was in imminent danger. Father Bridgeman—so ran the story—was
joining hands with the avowed enemies of the order—in fact, standing at
the head of the Iron Clads, everywhere denouncing the Mollies and giving
all perfect freedom to hunt out and shoot them down wherever found. It
was hardly probable, the operative believed, the priest would ever carry
his resentment thus far. But should the tale prove true, bloodshed was
sure to follow. For his own part, he would now have double duty to
perform. One, for the Agency, in following up the work of the society,
and if possible, bringing the perpetrators of crime to punishment, and
another the care of his own life, which was liable to be lost as a
consequence of his complete assumption of the guise of a Mollie Maguire.
The task had been difficult before. Now it was assuming gigantic
proportions. To complicate and retard matters, he was ill, and
necessarily confined much of the time to one place, if not to his
sleeping-room.

After recovering somewhat, McKenna accompanied McAndrew on a visit to
Jack Kehoe, at Girardville, to find out if certain rumors about the
County Delegate threatening to refuse recognition to Shenandoah Division
were true or not. When the question was put to Kehoe, he laughed
hypocritically and replied:

“Far from it! on the conthrary, I am prepared to say to yez, that, upon
the payment of its back dues, Shenandoah Division can not only go on
swimmingly, but, by applying to the County Secretary, Gavin, this very
day, if you wish, you kin recaive the ‘goods’ for the quarther. An’ let
me say, by way of explanation, that whoever started the story I iver
intended differently is a liar, an’ I’ll say it to his face!”

This was satisfactory to his visitors, the matter was soon settled, and
they left to call on Gavin.

They also went to see Barney Dolan, the great deposed, finding him very
despondent. He said his trial before the Convention was a one-sided
farce, and as for fining him five hundred dollars, it was simply
infamous. Thinking that there might be a chance for his case before the
National Board, he had already written to Campbell, the National
Secretary, at New York, but that worthy answered him briefly and to the
point, that he, Dolan, was cut off, root and branch, and could only be
reinstated by vote of the State Convention, upon settlement of all
arrearages and suffering three months’ probation.

“All of which,” said Barney, “shows that I am in the minority now, and
for the present Jack Kehoe is boss! But, by the rod of Aaron, and Moses
too, I’ll be back again, one of these fine days, spite of King Kehoe an’
all who are forninst me! Wait a while and see what’ll happen!”

And Barney winked his dexter eye in a winning way, as he placed the
bottle of whisky on the counter for McAndrew and his Secretary.

Some articles appeared in a Western paper, at this date, charging that
the Mollies determined who should act as assassins by lot, or with dice.
This we knew very well to be untrue, but no attention was given the
report. The truth was, the Bodymaster of a division, having himself
conceived the necessity for an occurrence of the kind—or, upon secret or
open petition of any influential member of the order to have some man
put out of the way—at once called upon the proper men to perform the
deed. Their plain duty was to obey, without questioning as to the why or
wherefore. So blindly did the Mollies follow their officers in this, as
in other matters, that they seldom failed, in the end, to accomplish all
that was required—then the order gave the assassins protection, through
an _alibi_, or aided with money to be employed in flying from the
country. There was no need of a game of chance to decide. It wanted only
the decree or request of the Bodymaster, which was to be complied with
implicitly, and from which there was no appeal. McKenna apprehended
that, in due course of events, he might be called upon by McAndrew—from
his late acquired reputation as a violent character—to perform some work
of this sort. However, by feigning intoxication, and in reality making
way with a great quantity of liquor—when he could not, by exchanging
glasses, or by some hocus-pocus or legerdemain, make those present
believe he imbibed when he did not—he endeavored to create the
impression among the Mollies—and he had already caused the general
public to believe it—that he was quite unreliable, as he was too often
under the control of drink. That he succeeded in this he soon became
satisfied from conversations transpiring in his presence, while
seemingly soaked to the point of stupidity in whisky, sodden and
insensible, on the bar-room floor, or limply resting upon a bench in the
corner.

On one occasion he heard Hurley say:

“Jim’s a splendid fellow, a good scholar, as far as book larnin’ goes,
an’ a fighter not to meddle with—when he’s McKenna. But he’s too often
somebody else! Whisky’s too powerful for his head, an’ a good job might
be spoiled by givin’ it in his charge!”

“That’s so,” said McAndrew, who was standing near.

They little thought their associate’s love for and indulgence in liquor
was all assumed, and that, at the very moment, he was, in reality, as
sober as a judge and taking mental note of every word and act of the
surrounding squad of Mollies. The emergencies of his great work, had he
been otherwise inclined, which he was not, would have kept my emissary
from over-indulgence during a residence in that particular vicinity.

Thus was McKenna made safe for the present. While he could listen, and
learn, without danger of having to participate in troubles, for a
season, yet he knew that such a game would not long serve his purpose,
as he must be dragged in at last, or lose the confidence of those now
placing their trust in him. It was well he adopted the ruse, however, as
he knew not when his time might come.

On the tenth of August, 1874, at the regular meeting of Shenandoah
division, the new “goods” were given out as follows:

The password was:

    “What do you think of the Mayo election?”

    “I think the fair West made a bad selection.”

The answer was:

    “Whom do you think will duly betray?”

The quarreling toast was:

    _Question_—“Don’t get your temper high!”

    _Answer_—“Not with a friend!”

The sign was made by placing the thumb of the right hand into the pocket
of the pantaloons.

The answer, by putting the thumb of the left hand on the lower lip.

McKenna faithfully reported these things to Mr. Franklin the same night,
despite his illness, and mailed the letter before retiring to his
apartment.

The morning of Tuesday, the eleventh of August, the detective was
awakened by his boarding-master, Cooney, with the information that two
men, whose personal appearance he minutely described, and did not like,
had called for and wanted very much to see him. Cooney put them off,
saying McKenna was not at home, but would be by nine o’clock. He thought
it prudent to do so, and also to warn his lodger to have a care for
himself. They were gone, but would soon return. This person could not
remember ever having seen parties of their exact shape and size, and it
struck him that possibly they came from the Sheet Irons to assassinate
him, because of the recent permission granted by the priest. This
impression it was impossible to shake off while he was dressing. Before
going down to breakfast, therefore, he examined the cartridges in his
revolver, tested the condition of the lock, and left the
weapon—carelessly, it must be admitted—at full cock, deposited in his
right-hand outside coat pocket, convenient for use, in case of an
emergency. He ate the morning meal in no pleasant frame of mind. But all
was made clear, and his preparations for active hostilities shown to be
unnecessary, by the coming in of his callers, who were only Peter Duffy
and Manus O’Donnell, of Hazelton, with whom he had fraternized during
the eventful dance and raffle at Buck Mountain. He suspected they were
absent on some murderous errand, but had no fear that he was their
supposed victim. The Secretary received his friends cordially, and after
an invitation to Cleary’s saloon, and laughing over a few jokes upon his
escapade with the fascinating Mrs. McIntyre, McKenna endeavored to find
out the business the men had in Schuylkill County, but they continued
stubbornly reticent, saying they were only going to see some relatives,
at Locust Gap, which possibly was the cause of their trip, work being
dull at their homes. The new-comers were introduced to the principal men
of Shenandoah Division, and, after a pleasant time in the city, in the
afternoon took cars for their point of destination.

The operative slept soundly through another night. But his dreams were
not blissful.

About this date, or perhaps a little earlier, a schoolmaster, named
O’Hare, living near Tuscarora, was severely beaten by four men, who
might have killed him had not some stout German girls, his pupils,
driven them off and held the door against their return, thus allowing
the victim to make his escape to the high-road—O’Hare’s crime consisting
in being inimical to the Mollies and refusing to obey their notice to
leave the region. He had in some way offended one John J. Slattery, a
Bodymaster. A few nights after the day assault at the school-house, a
band of the same order, headed, as was reported, by “Yellow Jack”
Donahue, Bodymaster, went to O’Hare’s residence, while he slept, set
fire to the building and barn, burning both to the ground, O’Hare barely
escaping with his life. He was left penniless, excepting the small sum
due him as salary from the school board. This was another straw, showing
the direction of the wind. Evidently disorder was on the increase in the
neighborhood.

A little later, one O’Brien, a Mollie, beat his butty, an Englishman
named Clements, in so cruel a style that his life was put in jeopardy.

To strengthen the organization, and make it, if possible, more
malignant, Muff Lawler had his nephew, Ed. Lawler, come home from
Luzerne County, the old trouble with Brophy having been amicably
arranged.

At the same time, to gain outward color of reformation, another meeting
of the Bodymasters of the county was convened at Girardville. Muff
Lawler, Tom Hurley, and John Gibbons were brought to trial, and, after
discussion, cut off from the order during life; Lawler, for allowing a
man to be robbed in his house, Hurley, for committing the crime, and
Gibbons upon general principles, his particular offense not having been
recorded. Dennis, _alias_ “Bucky” Donnelly, was also expelled for
exhibiting cowardice at the Connor’s Patch affray, the second of the
month, with the Sheet Irons, and for another offense—showing outside the
division a letter which should only have been seen within the confines
of the order. No other business of importance was transacted, the
convocation dissolved, and the day terminated in a free fight, lasting
twenty minutes, during which pistols and knives were resorted to, but
without deadly effect. The reformatory measures of the Mollie Maguires,
as it appeared, met strenuous opposition from certain quarters.

Later still, the month saw a row at Raven Run, when a Mollie by the name
of Barnett received two bullets in his body, and Phil. Nash one through
the left wrist, as he informed the detective, laying bare the wound. He
said he took the pistol from a man in the opposing crowd of Sheet Irons,
broke the weapon, and played havoc generally. After being shot, he
employed his own pocket-knife to cut out the ball, which job he
successfully accomplished. Barnett was dangerously injured, and it was
doubtful if he would survive.

On the seventh of September, 1874, the resumption of the collieries had,
for a time, a pacifying effect upon the irrepressibles of the coal
country, and quiet seemed about restored. But Shenandoah Division grew
in strength and numbers meanwhile. At a meeting held on the fifth of the
month, Andrew Murphy, of Loss Creek, John Dean, John Carey, and John
Walsh were accepted and duly initiated. A brother of the Bodymaster was
rejected, at the suggestion of McAndrew in person, as he urged that the
man proposed was continually in trouble and would surely bring disgrace
upon the honorable brotherhood.

During the latter part of September occurred the decease of old Mr.
Raines, a crippled miner, who for several years, through rheumatism and
hurts received under a falling pillar, had been unable to perform any
labor. From the same causes his body and limbs were bent forward into
the shape of an irregular crescent. There was to be a loud wake, and
McKenna having nearly recovered his health and good spirits—but being
not yet cured of his adopted habit of drinking—received an invitation to
be present. He was ready for a spree, or anything else, and went. The
Raines place was near the Rappahannock works, on the road from Loss
Creek to Girardville, where were situated a number of “patches”
belonging to different collieries. The family was large, its range of
acquaintance extended, and over a hundred men and women gathered to do
honor, in their usual way, to the departed. The corpse was laid out in
the largest and best room of the house, with candles at its head and
feet. There was a dilapidated table in the center of the apartment,
which for many seasons had seen service in parlor, dining-room, and
kitchen, and now supported pipes, tobacco, and two bottles of liquor,
with a generous supply of lucifer matches. At one end of the room was a
cookstove, but as the weather was yet genial, no fire shone through its
door. Benches and blocks of wood served as seats for the men and women,
who were ranged about the walls and table, the majority of the men
wearing their hats, and the ladies, with lace caps or without them, as
accorded with their respective ages and circumstances in life. An
old-fashioned pendulum clock, with weights, and a face as smoky as the
surrounding walls, hung against the plastering at the other side of the
place; there were a few pictures; and the last almanac issued by Dr.
Jayne swung from a nail under an ancient square-framed looking-glass,
which was inclining forward just above. But the principal thing to
attract the eye of the detective, when he and his companions—Hurley and
Monaghan—entered, was the corpse, to honor which all the people had
assembled. The coffin could not yet be used—and for a good reason—the
body would not fit into it, but the plain, walnut case rested in another
room. Stretched out on a sheet spread over a rough board, which was
supported at either end by a common chair, reposed all that was mortal
of old Mr. Raines, clad in shroud and grave-clothes, and the head
resting on a pillow. In order to overcome the difficulty accruing from
the bent and contorted condition of the body and limbs of the deceased,
which would not assume a straight position, even in death, a light panel
door, taken from an unoccupied room, had been put on top of the defunct
and loaded down with rocks and a heavy piece of iron, the latter being,
apparently, part of a cylinder to a disabled coal-breaker. This, it was
hoped, would relax the contracted muscles, and the curved spine and
limbs, so that, on the morrow, there would be no trouble in placing the
corpse in its casket.

The remainder of the scene was peculiarly striking only to those who had
never beheld its counterpart.

The men from Shenandoah, though just as welcome as others, were left, as
is the custom, to look out for themselves. They did not uncover their
heads, but, squatting on their heels, or any other convenient seat by
the wall, proceeded to smoke a pipe with the rest. It was not, and is
not to this day, the etiquette of the miners of this nationality to get
up from their chairs and offer them to strangers, nor for visitors to
remove their caps, or hats, upon entering a neighbor’s house, no more
than it is to knock at the door—excepting it be at night—before opening
it.

McKenna looked on in silence, while the mourners proceeded with their
wailing, crooning hymns to the dead, and the men helping themselves to
_lashins_ of poteen, while the _bonneens_ stuck their faces in at the
door and joined in the _keene_, or _caoina-song_. The eldest lady of the
party raised her hands and cried out:

        “_Foreer! Foreer! Mo-vrone! Mo-vrone! Ochone! Ochone!_”

Then the _keene_ would be raised to a higher pitch, and the wail for the
dead resumed, louder and more piercingly mournful than before.

This was kept up until midnight, when an incident occurred which bid
fair to terminate this portion of the funeral ceremonies with a fight.
One young lad, named Flaherty, a slouchy, shock-headed fellow, as full
of mirth and rascality as he well could be, growing weary of the
ordinary solemnities, fired by having taken more of the liquor than was
needful—and many more were by that time in a similar predicament, from
the same cause—determined to vary the monotony somewhat and have some
sport, and made his arrangements accordingly, as it turned out, only
perceived by the agent, who placed no obstacle in his way. All at once,
when the attention of those present was centered upon the drink and the
table for tobacco, etc., there was heard an unearthly yell, as of
horror, the weights rolled, with the thin, little door, off the corpse,
and the vital flame seemed to have returned to the dead, as old Mr.
Raines started up, whirled quickly and mechanically about, and fell
headlong to the floor.

[Illustration: “_There was heard an unearthly yell, as of horror._”]

Such a mixture of swearing, groaning, shrieking, praying, screaming, and
screeching was never before heard in that neighborhood, and in the space
of a minute the room was nearly vacated, McKenna, the corpse, the
candles, and furniture being left sole possessors of the field. Some of
the demoralized friends of the deceased did not pause before reaching
their own homes, and many not until well outside the house, while a few
of the more courageous rallied in the kitchen. Flaherty, whose actions
the operative had watched attentively, was among the first to stick his
freckled face in at the door and inquire if “anybody were kilt.” He
found McKenna trying to lift up the corpse, rearrange its disturbed
funereal costume, and replace it on the board.

“Come here, ye _gorsoon-bo_, an’ lend a hand to hoist the old man back
to his restin’-place!”

The lad at first refusing, the detective had but to hint that the piece
of cord, with which Flaherty had cunningly pulled away the door, still
remained attached to a hinge, and if he did not carry it off, his trick
would be exposed, to bring the young man in to his assistance.

“Lay holt wid me, and I’ll say nothing about the string! Refuse, and
you’ll suffer! D’ye think I didn’t hear ye scrame like a young
locomotive?”

“Sure, an’ I only meant to have a bit of fun!” explained Flaherty; but
he entered and helped to replace things. When all was as before—and it
took but a few minutes—Flaherty called out to the crowd:

“Come back! Come back! Daddy Raines is all right!”

Then the men and women who had not gone home returned, their eyes
sticking out, and each person treading on tip-toe, perhaps expecting to
see a _banshee_, the gentleman in black—or his counterpart in hoof,
tail, and horns, with nostrils breathing fire and smoke—and were much
amazed to behold everything exactly as arranged before the sudden rising
of the dead; the candles burning, the table undisturbed, and old Mr.
Raines just as quiet and decent a corpse as any of them had ever helped
to wake; while McKenna sat silent on his billet, at the side, smoking
his pipe as calmly as if nothing out of the ordinary course had
transpired.

Young Flaherty kept the secret, through fear of the consequences should
he reveal his share in the ghastly joke, and the agent did not care to
undeceive the people. Hence the strange occurrence was spoken of for
some weeks thereafter, in the vicinity, as about the eighth wonder of
the world. McKenna was highly complimented for his nerve by men and
women, and Monaghan himself said he “believed that nothing would ever
scare that fellow—excepting it might be Auld Nick in person!”


                               ————●————




                              CHAPTER XXI.

                       CONTEST WITH A CONSTABLE.


Not long after the wake, it was made evident to some of the members of
Shenandoah Division that Frank McAndrew was not fitted by nature or
education for the important office of Bodymaster, being far too
generous, too much inclined to leniency—in fact, not half bloodthirsty
enough. Among those who saw this more plainly than others were McHugh,
at whose house, in those days, the Mollies held their meetings, Tom
Hurley, John Gibbons, and Fergus, _alias_ Ferguson. McKenna said little
on the subject, but while lying, apparently tippled to a state of
insensibility, in Cleary’s, late one night, he heard sufficient to
convince him of the existence of a plot, at the bottom of which stood
Jack Kehoe, to replace McAndrew with a person that they were pleased to
denominate as of “better material.” The officer in question, when spoken
to upon the subject, the ensuing day, said he knew full well why so much
dissatisfaction was growing up around him. It had its roots deep planted
in his own unwillingness to engage in the schemes of murder and outrage
that his opponents evidently desired should be immediately executed.
McHugh was especially loud in denouncing him for failing to have Gomer
James killed, as he also had been of similar inaction under the
leadership of Mike Lawler, when that party was equally opposed to the
same job under like circumstances. So far had McHugh committed himself
in this direction, that he made no secret of demanding McAndrew’s
expulsion from the organization. McAndrew’s argument, beyond its claim
to compatibility with the impulses of humanity, was perfectly sensible,
as well as unanswerable, and when brought out in the course of
conversation, caused most of the decent and orderly persons in the
division to coincide with him. His logic was that, when Cosgrove had
been murdered by Gomer James, Mike Lawler, then Bodymaster, acted
promptly—but without choosing to trumpet it over the county, keeping the
thing to himself—and, among others, appointed an own cousin of Cosgrove
as one of the avengers. That nigh relative of the man for whose death
retaliation was to be sought refused to act, and Lawler at once, and
very properly, excused all the rest. McAndrew thought it rather late in
the day for utter strangers to dig up the hatchet, unless there was a
money reward offered by some one for the knocking of Gomer James into
eternity. Of that he was not so sure. If something of the sort was not
in the wind, why were such men as Hurley, Gibbons, and McHugh so
exceedingly anxious?

To this query my agent in the coal regions could return no response.
Nevertheless, nothing was done, though much was said, regarding the
taking off of the young Welshman. How quickly action might be taken he
possessed no means of judging. But that Hurley and his backers would,
sooner or later, seek to kill Gomer James, if he continued to live in
the vicinity. he harbored no reasonable doubt. Upon the reception of
this suggestive conclusion Mr. Franklin searched for and obtained means
of warning Gomer James, advising him to get speedily out of the country.
This, at first, James firmly refused to do, but, subsequently, securing
paying work in another county, he did temporarily remove. He remained
away only a little while, being quite convinced that, if the Mollie
Maguires were after and wanted his life, they would come up with him,
wherever he might be. At the date of the latest talk by McHugh, James
was engaged as a night watchman in one of the collieries, and, as far as
could be learned, performed his duty honorably and faithfully.

McAndrew maintained his ground, saying that he knew he would be
sustained by the State and National Boards, whatever the new County
Delegate might say or do in the premises. This pleased McKenna, who
wisely refrained from joining either party engaged in the controversy,
merely putting in a word, to one or the other, when compelled to do so,
to the effect that everybody knew him as a bad man, and it was best that
he keep his mouth closed on subjects which might, in time, come to him,
whether guilty or not. For his part, he said: “I am willing to do my
duty by the division, for the protection it affords me from those that I
fear in an adjoining State, but it is not for such as I to do much
talking.”

So the business of the division was still intrusted to McAndrew, and the
detective managed to be sober long enough, each month—somewhat to the
surprise of his intimates—to write up the books and carry on such
correspondence as his office demanded. At about all other times he was
engaged in some game, attending a fair or chicken-fight, or training
some dog, which was to “whip out all creation” when ready for the ring.
He followed other occupations. If a man was needed to doctor a sick
horse, mule, or cow, in the borough—or out of it—who should be sent for
but handy Jim McKenna? Should a man have his hand hurt in the mines, who
bound up his wound and nursed him tenderly until recovered? Why, the
self-same vagabond, red-headed Jim McKenna. If a henroost was to be
robbed by Mollies, ducks or geese stolen, and thereafter surreptitiously
roasted, Jim McKenna was invited to take a hand. And sometimes he was
found sober enough to give the latter freaks attention, but not often.

If a young lady wanted to send a _billet-doux_ to her sweet-heart in a
far-off country, she knew that, by the simple calling, she might have
the help of “the handiest man at the pen in all Schuylkill County,” and
that, in the general opinion, was Jim McKenna. As a matter of natural
consequence “Jim” was, with maids and mothers, boys and girls, fathers
and sons—of the rougher sort—a great favorite. There was nothing under
the sun to be done, scientific or culinary, agricultural, surgical,
artistic, or mechanical, that “Jim,” in the opinion of his countrymen,
could not do—certainly very little he would not attempt, merely to
oblige those who needed him. To a certain class his name was synonymous
with fun, frolic, dance, and song, and his face indicative of good
nature and genuine Irish humor. To others, he was terror personified.
Some of his best friends said that he might comb out his hair somewhat
oftener, and drink less whisky, but very generally these slight and
prevalent defects were overlooked in the benefits McKenna conferred upon
those with whom he associated.

As before stated, there were also those who seriously believed that the
agent was really an assassin, had murdered a man in Buffalo, and was in
constant communication with counterfeiters and black-legs. Those who
knew these things—or supposed they knew them—did not often speak of them
outside the Mollie ring. One fact could not be gainsaid: if there was a
ball, a charity, a dance, a picnic, or a man or woman in real want, Jim
McKenna always had a dollar to give. If there was a treat where he
chanced to be, none put up glasses more liberally than that same
McKenna. These contradictory opinions rather surprised the good people
of Shenandoah who canvassed the subject. How he could be such a favorite
with the miners was more than they could fathom.

During the latter portion of September, 1874, there was a grand fair at
Ringtown, and, as it was stated that the Sheet Irons were to be present
in great force, with the express intention of whipping out their
enemies, the Mollies, several of the latter determined to go, armed and
equipped for the purpose of defending themselves and seeing how much
their adversaries would really accomplish.

This fair was similar to those called county agricultural shows in the
Western and Southern States, and sometimes from one thousand to fifteen
hundred persons, men, women, and children, would congregate daily, for
five or six days, on these occasions.

At Ringtown there were found people from Shenandoah, and other parts of
Schuylkill, and from many towns in Columbia County. There were the usual
attractions, side-shows, ugly dwarfs, scrawny giants, slimy anacondas,
and a fine display of fat bullocks, sleek cows and sheep, thoroughbred
horses and mules, improved pigs, geese, ducks, and chickens, and the
ordinary collection of ingenious and useful machines for manufacturing
and home uses. There were foot-races; races in sacks; games of catching
the greased pig; climbing the greased pole; lady equestrianisms, and all
the gayeties that attend exhibitions of the sort. All were taken in by
the Mollies from Shenandoah, as well as by those from Catawissa,
Centralia, and the entire Mahanoy Valley. There was music and dancing
and drink _galore_ at night; and a full brass band, hailing from an
adjacent city, discoursed “concord of sweet sounds” at the grand stand
during each day’s regular performances. And the song seemed to be:

                    “The butcher, the baker,
                    The candle-stick maker,
                    All, all are gone to the fair.”

McKenna’s friends flattered him by saying that he was the wickedest and
toughest, as well as the roughest-looking vagabond seen at the county
fair. But the crowd in his company was not by any means conspicuous for
good behavior or lamb-like undertakings.

After one day’s experience at Ringtown, finding that no Sheet Irons made
their appearance, the greater portion of the Shenandoah collection of
Mollies were disgusted and went home. The detective thought he saw
business, and remained. He had to sleep in the fair enclosure, however,
as, at the hotels, he was invariably, from his bad name and appearance,
refused admission. One tavern-keeper named Fencermacher, showed him out,
saying:

“I keeps no dramps and such-like caddle in mine blace! _Geh zu hause!_”

He may here learn, for the first time, who it was that he turned away.
But the German was perfectly excusable. The applicant for lodgings
seemed rough enough to prompt any respectable landlord to pursue the
same course. It was sufficient to know that “Jim McKenna” was the
inquirer for accommodations to cause any well-regulated hotel door to
close with a bang against his face, almost of its own accord.

During his recent sickness the operative lost his hair—a little
circumstance that has not been alluded to—and had been supplied with a
wig of about the color of his former natural growth, which, as he was
not a barber, seldom received proper dressing, and gave its wearer a
very uncouth and shabby appearance. But it seemed not quite as bad as
going around completely bareheaded, especially in chilly weather. His
beard and mustache were also very long and bushy, and scarcely ever cut
away; his face was red and sunburnt, but somewhat thinner than when
first reaching Pennsylvania. He wore the clothes he had bought the year
before—saying to the Mollies that ill success was making him a little
careful of his expenses—and a white shirt was rarely seen upon his back.
A coat of many colors, badly patched and darned, soft hat—new when he
first fought Muff Lawler’s chickens for him—and a pair of heavy miner’s
boots, completed an inventory of his visible personal effects—excepting
the two loaded revolvers which he constantly wore at his back. He could
hardly be deemed a likely customer to take into a decent tavern; but he
was not as bad as he looked. His deeds were not criminal, however
unseemly he appeared, and his duty was ever uppermost in his thoughts.

McKenna was constrained to sleep the little he did sleep, when first in
attendance at the fair, upon the bare ground. During part of one day,
however, he superintended the bar for a respectable Irish lady, Mrs.
Corcoran by name, and that night she left him to occupy the booth, while
she went home, showing that this woman, at least, reposed confidence in
him, despite his generally accepted bad character.

He participated in only two fights while at Ringtown. The first of these
occurred on the third day of the fair, when a Dutch constable, from Dark
Corner, had trouble with a man named McBain, and the operative entered
the row in the interest of peace. The official gazed at McKenna with
astonishment and said:

“Look here! you seem like what you are—a d——d thief!”

This was too much to be taken quietly, and the detective quickly knocked
the representative of public justice down with a blow from the fist, and
then administered to his body a good kicking with his rough boots, which
settled the prevailing question in his favor. The constable cried
“enough,” and was allowed to escape without further punishment.

[Illustration: _“They came up, exhibiting knives and other weapons,
swearing they would kill the man who had beaten their friend.”_]

The second affray came very near resulting seriously, and was a
consequence of the first. At about nine A.M. of the last day of the
show, the defeated constable returned to the fair grounds, in company
with six or seven other men, of about the same ugly appearance. McKenna
was at that time attending a booth for one Whalen, who was absent. They
came up exhibiting knives and other weapons, and swearing they would
kill the man who had beaten their friend. The detective had been
deserted by the Mollies, knew not which way to turn for support, and so
determined to help himself. Rushing out of the stand, he seized a small
wooden bench, which was kept for the convenience of customers, and
swinging it wildly about his head, hit the first Dutchman, who fell; he
struck the rest in rapid succession, and soon four were knocked over
before they could use their weapons. The others fled, leaving him, for
the moment, master of the situation. Then, knowing that they would still
make good their threats, if he waited for their courage to muster, he
ran, jumped into a passing wagon loaded with country people and was
driven rapidly away.

After that, whenever McKenna wanted anything in Ringtown, there were
plenty who would run to his assistance.

In this way he added to his reputation—or kept it up—as the wildest
Irishman of the mountains, and the most unprincipled Mollie in the whole
country.

When he got back to Shenandoah and visited the post-office for letters,
McKenna found, to his extreme satisfaction and relief, that he had a
missive from the Philadelphia Agency. As he handed it to him, the clerk
remarked, exhibiting a second missive enclosed in the same kind of an
envelope, apparently superscribed by the same hand, but addressed to
“James McParlan, Shenandoah.”

“Here is a letter I hardly know what to do with; but it is not for you!
It has been here several days, and is still uncalled for. Perhaps you
know something about it, as I see it seems, from the hand-writing and
post-mark, to have come from the party that has been writing you!”

The clerk looked at the uncouth young man very critically, and, as he
imagined, very suspiciously.

The operative “thought of ten thousand things at once,” as he described
his sensations to me afterward, but Irish wit and readiness for reply
did not desert him in the emergency.

“Yes,” said McKenna, with all the assurance imaginable, and without a
second’s hesitation. “I _do_ remember, now you spake of it, but the
thing had before gone clane out of me head! Jim McParlan? Why, sure, an’
he’s a crony of mine, over at Wilkesbarre, beyant, an’ faith, when I wor
there last month, he said that I should inquire here for a letther for
him, as he expected at wan time to come over an’ work wid Frank McAndrew
as his butty, but got a better chance in Luzerne! Bad ’cess to me
memory! I think there’s somethin’ in the whisky they hev in Shenandoah
that sinds me wits all a wool-gatherin’! But never mind! Wid your
permission, I’ll jist forward the letther to Jim, and write an’ tell him
how it have been so delayed!”

The suspicions of the clerk were dissipated in a moment, and he readily
gave the document into McKenna’s hand. Had the recipient exhibited the
least confusion or embarrassment, the probabilities were that his
letter—unhappily misdirected by a new clerk in Philadelphia—must have
gone to the Dead Letter Office, in Washington, where it would have been
opened and returned to Philadelphia. In the meantime both Mr. Franklin
and McKenna would have felt much disturbed by its loss. The operative
realized the mistake in its full extent, and sat down and wrote a line
asking that, so long as he remained in the coal country, such accidents
might be carefully guarded against; and his wishes were obeyed.

The strike of the miners against the rates paid for labor, for 1874,
began in October, with the usual result, the first to kick being the men
in Luzerne County. This was not a Mollie movement, and its ringleaders
were promptly arrested by Sheriff Whittaker. But the end was not yet.

At about the same date Kehoe received a scorching letter from Capt.
Gallagher, the State Secretary, saying the chances were that, at the
next meeting of the State organization, the Mollies of Schuylkill County
might be severed from the body, as a punishment for their past
misdemeanors, and Bishop Wood, of Philadelphia, would also officially
excommunicate them by name from the Church. He suggested that a meeting
of Bodymasters might be held at Pottsville, at an early day, and the bad
men of the order, who were probably known, all summarily expelled, when
possibly the remainder could be saved. If the body was purified the good
members might not lose caste. Here was a muddle for the emissary. He was
sure to be among the first men cut off, and, should the movement
succeed, his career of usefulness in the neighborhood would be very
short thereafter. It should not be! Whatever was done, he must retain
his position. Happily for him, Jack Kehoe simply laughed at the
recommendation, and remarked that Mr. Gallagher might attend to his own
business, as he would call no such meeting. So no convention was held,
and the Mollies were still triumphant. It was not for Kehoe’s interest
that they should be as mild as lambs. In reality, the worse they were
the better King Jack would be suited.


                               ————●————




                             CHAPTER XXII.

                         HORRORS UPON HORRORS.


The strike was yet in progress, in November, 1874, and the consequent
want of work produced the very result anticipated—the Mollies were as
active as a community of hornets whose nest a schoolboy has invaded with
a club. There followed a number of sanguinary encounters, some of which
terminated fatally. One of these, the shooting and subsequent death of
Mr. George Major, Chief Burgess of Mahanoy City, transpired on Saturday,
the 31st of October, in the year mentioned. McKenna was in Shenandoah at
the time, but received early intelligence of the event. McAndrew,
feeling very anxious to learn the full particulars, it was an easy
matter to induce him to detail the operative and Chas. Hayes to go to
the scene of the encounter and gather them. This they were willing to
undertake, starting out from Shenandoah on the second of November.

The request of the Bodymaster formed a good excuse for McKenna, who had
early been directed by Mr. Franklin to investigate the murder, to go to
Mahanoy City. Without McAndrew’s order, suspicion as to his calling
might have been created among the Mollies of his division. It was all
very proper, when the Secretary was known to have plenty of money, and
little else to do, for him to chance around at localities where murders
and other crimes had been perpetrated, but at this particular time he
was putting on a sorry face, declaring that his income from rents had
run several months behind, the county officers suspecting him of
leaguing with counterfeiters—hence he could not safely get rid of his
bogus currency—and, in fact, dressing very badly so that he would not be
expected to have funds to expend in too many treats for his guzzling and
expensive companions. Furnished with a safe cover, from which to carry
on his observations, he at once commenced hunting up the facts connected
with the shooting of Major.

The Chief Burgess, as that official—usually the Mayor of a town—is
called in the State of Pennsylvania, was not yet dead, but could hardly
be expected to live more than a day or two with a bullet resting in a
vital part. Major had been shot through the left breast, two inches
above the heart.

McKenna went to Clark’s house, the known rendezvous of the Mollies, of
which I shall have more to say hereafter, and, finding the proprietor
alone, started a conversation with him. Clark was an old man, and not a
member of the order, but his two sons were Mollies.

“An’ how is it about the bit o’ scrimmage ye had over here last
Saturday?” commenced the operative.

“Oh! it’s a bad affair altogether!” answered the landlord of the Emerald
House.

“Who fired the shot that brought the Chief Burgess down?”

“That I can’t, fur the life of me, tell! There’s two stories about it;
wan of them puts it on Dan Dougherty—but I belave him jist as innocent
as the babe unborn—an’ the other charges it on Major’s own brother,
William, hittin’ him be mischance, when firing afther the Hibernian
company’s boys—for ye must know that the whole trouble came about thro’
a quarrel between the Hibernian an’ the Citizen fire companies. Wan is
wholly made up of our countrymen, an’ the other of Modocs—English,
German, Welsh an’ what not! I suppose ye know that?”

“Yes! But who started the row?”

“I am sure, from what I can learn, that Dougherty didn’t! He never has a
pistol about him! There was a bit o’ fire, on the night, as ye must
know, an’ both companies was out, an we had considerable excitement, an’
not a little whisky. Afther the fire, in comin’ home, over the strate,
the firemen got in a jangle, an’ blows were being passed, when the Chief
Burgess, Geo. Major, came out, flourished his revolver, and, during the
confusion, shot a dog that was barkin’ near by. This led to more
shootin’, an’ some one in the crowd took off the Chief Burgess, an’
Major’s brother shot Dougherty, who has a bullet in the neck, below the
left ear! Oh! it’s a bad business! A bad business! Do you know, I am
thinkin’ no good can iver come of it?”

“Yes, a shockin’ bad thing!” assented McKenna.

Finding that Clark really knew very little about the minutiæ, the
operative, who had purposely separated from Hayes, went to see other
friends, hoping to find some one who might be able to give him
information.

Meeting Clark’s brother, who was a Mollie, he accompanied him to
Dougherty’s house, which was only guarded by an old constable, named
Litchenberger, who was too tipsy to do either good or harm. Several men
were standing around, but the excitement seemed quietly subsiding, and
there was little trouble in gaining permission to see the wounded man.
They ascended to his room. The injured Mollie was slightly touched in
the brain, and barely recognized his friends, but, turning over in bed,
exhibited his hurt, which appeared to have been produced by a heavy,
large-sized bullet. His left cheek and eye were greatly discolored and
puffed up, the side of the neck being quite black. The ball still rested
in the muscle, the surgeons thinking it unsafe, at that time, to probe
for or attempt its removal. The visitors remained with Dougherty but a
few moments, and then repaired to McCann’s boarding-house, the landlady
of which, at first, said the man inquired for had gone out, she did not
know where; but, when the operative and Clark made themselves known by
name, she changed her tune and cordially invited them upstairs. The
person visited they found in bed, but not at all averse to conversation.
This was satisfactory to the detective. McCann said these had been no
disturbance whatever in the street when Chief Burgess, Major, fired the
shot at him, and, before he, McCann, could catch the revolver and take
it from him, he discharged three shots.

Hayes, who had joined the others, was anxious that James McCann should
swear out a warrant for the arrest of Major, before he would die,
charging him with an assault with a deadly weapon. That, he contended,
would place McCann on the witness-stand and prevent him from being
brought to the bar as a defendant. Others who were present desired
McCann to make his escape. McKenna did not venture any suggestion. The
general belief was that Major would die, and this was all in the case
that gave the Mollies any satisfaction. They were united in protesting
that Dougherty must remain where he was, saying that a removal to
Pottsville, in his precarious condition, would be sure death for him.

The Chief Burgess succumbed to his wounds Tuesday, November 3, and
received burial, with suitable honors, the ensuing day. Dougherty was
still unable to be removed, when the operative, having obtained all the
information possible, returned with Hayes to Shenandoah, and reported to
the division the issue of his trip. He had previously sent Mr. Franklin
daily bulletins of his inquiries and their results.

Dougherty was subsequently moved to Pottsville, where he recovered, had
his trial, and was acquitted.

Mike Lawler now managed to attach himself once more to the order, having
been received by Wm. Callaghan, Bodymaster, into his division at Mahanoy
Plane. Lawler still maintained friendly relations with McKenna, despite
his aversion to the Shenandoah Mollies, as a body, and one day visited
the Secretary in company with Callaghan, who chanced to be in the city
on personal business. While the three were together, walking leisurely
over the mountain, Muff related, with much particularity, a circumstance
occurring some eighteen months before. Two Mollies named Doyle,
brothers, residing at Jackson’s Patch, had recently been attacked and
beaten by Sheet Irons. The Mollies had a meeting among themselves and
deliberately prepared a scheme to wreak terrible vengeance upon the
whole community at the Patch in question. The idea was to burn down
every building, after midnight, when all the inhabitants were sleeping,
having the torch applied almost simultaneously over the entire place.
Afterward the Mollies, well armed with guns and revolvers, were to stand
closely guarding the blazing houses, and whenever any—man, woman, or
child—attempted to escape, deliberately shoot him or her down. Not one
was to be spared to tell the tale. The division went so far, even, as to
appoint the night on which this dastardly outrage was to be perpetrated.
They convened in Shenandoah for the business, but Lawler—so he
claimed—assisted by Callaghan, managed to get up a discussion on another
subject, thus diverting the attention of the ringleaders, and they
forgot what they had gathered for, adjourning at too late an hour for
their purpose, thus postponing operations until a future time. Finally
the job was abandoned. Lawler and Callaghan accorded great credit to
themselves in having, at the risk of their own lives, saved the
unsuspecting inhabitants of Jackson Patch, thus averting one of the most
sickening wholesale assassinations that the heart of savage ever
conceived. Through inquiries in the proper quarters, which the operative
made, he was satisfied that the story he had listened to was not drawn
from imagination. Previously aware of the fact that there were men in
his division who, to secure revenge, or when under the excitement of
enmity or drink, would perform deeds that might make angels weep, and
throw the acts of the Indians in the shade, still he was shocked by this
recital. He must perforce maintain friendly relations with these
persons, drink of their liquor, share their orgies and listen to their
blood-thirsty plans. It was no pleasant duty to perform.

The strike continued. It was not alone Luzerne County that was
interested, but disaffection and desertion of works spread over the
anthracite region. It was the intention of the Mollies and the Miners’
and Laborers’ Association that work should entirely cease. To this end
those men who desired to labor for the support of their families were
notified. If they failed to stop, they were beaten, or assassinated, and
the hand that consummated the deed was hidden in the secret recesses of
the hearts of the Mollie Maguires.

On the eighteenth of November McKenna obtained information that a number
of outrages had occurred the preceding Saturday—denominated by the
_Miners’ Journal_, of Pottsville, as “a horrible day.”

In the first instance, a man named Pat Padden was discovered in the
streets of Carbondale, dead, with two bullet holes in his skull.

Secondly, Michael McNally was mysteriously murdered in the same
locality, and found with his throat cut from ear to ear, and body
otherwise mutilated.

[Illustration: “_There the inhuman wretches prepared to leave him to
die._”]

In another part of the county, a man, whose name was not learned, had
been come upon by some farmers, nearly dead, in a most novel but painful
predicament. It seems he had refused to give heed to the notices the
Mollies gave him; was one night taken from his home, carried to the
mountains, and thence to a deep morass, where there was nothing
surrounding them but water, high trees with branches closely
interlocked, and fallen timber. There the inhuman monsters prepared to
leave him to die a slow death by starvation. Iron spikes were driven
through his coat sleeves, tight to the wrist, the man lying upon his
back lengthwise of a solid pine log, the arms bent backward so as to
form the shape of a cross; then his feet were similarly pinned to the
log with the strongest nails. Making sure, as they supposed, that there
was no possibility he would escape, the Mollies deserted the place,
first having put a gag in his mouth, which they thought he would be
unable to remove. For nearly three days, and two horrid, long nights,
their victim remained thus secured, praying, at last, for death to
relieve him from tortures of hunger and thirst and the dreaded attacks
of stinging insects and fierce wild animals. Happily he at last
succeeded in releasing the fastenings of the gag, the block of wood fell
out, and he made the air resound, about noon of the third day, with his
loud and repeated shouts for aid, which were heard by two German
woodmen, who at once sought out the cause of the noise. They soon found
the man, at once relieved him, and gave him, sparingly at first, food
from their well-stored lunch pails. Water was also procured, and in a
few hours the victim of the Mollies found himself strong enough to be
removed. For some weeks he was a raving maniac and could not tell who he
was, where he came from, or the cause of his punishment. When his senses
returned he possessed no knowledge of the parties who had perpetrated
the outrage. He emigrated from the coal mines, as soon as well enough,
and said he “would rather starve in a civilized community than fare
sumptuously in a place inhabited by brutes in human form.”

Still another. A mining boss, name not heard, but connected with the
Erie Breaker, was set upon, beaten, and left for dead, with one of his
arms broken.

And another. One Michael Kenny, not a Mollie Maguire, was murdered at
Scranton, Luzerne County, and his mangled remains thrown down a steep
embankment, where it was supposed they would forever remain
undiscovered, but accident revealed their hiding-place. They were
encoffined and given burial. The assassins were not known.

The men at Carbon were nearly all Irish and Welsh, the former mostly
Mollies, and there were no members of the Sheet Irons supposed to be in
the neighborhood.

The miners still refused any reduction from the basis on which they were
laboring when the strike was inaugurated. Some were working, but all
expected to suspend by the beginning of the New Year.

An event which made the detective’s very blood boil, and still one in
which he could not interfere, furnishes the cap sheaf of this array of
horrors. It transpired at Fowler’s Patch, east of Shenandoah, a little
later in the month, and the actors in it were Chas. Hayes, Dan
Kelly—called also Manus Kull and “the Bum”—and Ed. Lawler, members of
McKenna’s own division. They were out on a spree until four in the
morning, when they went to the house of a poor old woman, named Downey,
who kept a she-been-shop, roused her from her sleep, and, after
drinking, robbed her of her money—which was but a small sum—and then
forced her to join them in finishing their orgies. They were finally all
very drunk, and Kelly took a pail and proceeded to fill it from the
landlady’s whisky barrel, which sat in a corner, across two large rocks,
and the woman interfered. Kelly, at this, had his fiercest passions
aroused, and, fired by the liquor, was ready for anything. The woman
still resisting, he raised her in his arms, being a muscular and
powerful man, carried her bodily to the almost red-hot stove and threw
her upon it, face downward, and was holding her there, despite her
frantic struggles and loud cries, to be roasted and burned to death,
when Hayes came to the rescue, struck Kelly under the ear, knocked him
down, and liberated the badly injured old lady. Her hands and face were
shriveled, broiled in deep, large patches, and there is no doubt that,
had she not been taken off the stove by Hayes, she would have been
killed. As it was, she had to remain in bed, and for weeks was not able
to sit up. Still no arrests were made.

[Illustration: “_He carried her to the almost red-hot cook stove, and
threw her upon it._”]

Kelly challenged Hayes to fight him, for intermeddling with an affair
that, he said, belonged entirely to him, and they walked out in the
highway, just at daybreak, all by themselves, the old woman still
writhing and screaming with pain, and fought ten rounds, Hayes, though a
much lighter man than his antagonist, giving Kelly a severe pummeling
and coming out ahead in almost every contest, until Kelly gave it up.

Before they left, however, Kelly visited his intended victim, and,
striking his fist in her very face, said, with an oath:

“It’s about your time! I’ll burn your accursed body up yet! So look
out!”

He would have set fire to the building and executed the threat, at the
moment, only Hayes insisted that he should leave her, which he did.
Hayes sent a physician to the woman’s house immediately. He found its
sole occupant incapable of answering a single question. The little mind
the woman had was for the time quite distracted, and the floor on fire,
from the upsetting of the stove. Had she been left alone half an hour
longer she and her house would have been reduced to ashes.


                               ————●————




                             CHAPTER XXIII.

                          GOOD OLD MICKY CUFF.


Shenandoah is a handsome little inland town, the center of a productive
coal country and the place of residence of many excellent people. This
volume, however, will not have much to do with that particular portion
of the inhabitants, the Mollies and their associates fully monopolizing
and employing the writer’s attention. Among those who were not members
of the organization, but still wicked enough to be classed with them,
was one Micky Cuff, the proprietor of a small whisky shop in the city.
The building, the basement of which Cuff and his family occupied, was a
two-story tenement, standing nearly flush with the street, and in its
cellar part rather low between floors. One night, about eleven o’clock,
after coming from a wake, McKenna found himself with Fergus and Ned
Monaghan, for the first time inside Micky Cuff’s groggery. Having such a
brace of worthies to introduce him, he made sure of a cordial welcome,
and Cuff shook his hand heartily as he said, in his gruff
voice—something between the noise produced by filing a mill-saw and that
made in the smaller theatres and called sheet-iron thunder:

“I’m plazed to mate ye, lad! Make yerself at home here, an’ when ye’re
thirsty come in an’ taste our liquor! If you misbehave—which I suppose
ye niver do—you’ll be well baten for yer pains!”

The detective had received his cue from Fergus never to dispute Cuff, or
find fault with anything in his house, unless he wanted a stroke over
the head with whatever instrument was most convenient, and therefore
accepted the allusion to a fight without sending back his habitual
rejoinder: “Two can play at that game!” And it was well for him that he
did. Without noticing Cuff’s captiousness, McKenna proposed: “Drinks for
four, or five, if Mrs. Cuff would take somewhat!”

“Af coorse she wull!” said Cuff; and that dumpy woman with the small
face, scanty gray hair, bent shoulders, and meek but deprecatory
smile—she felt compelled to express pleasure when her husband told her,
as plainly by a look as words could speak, that she must do so—came
forward and drank her thimbleful of poteen from the one lonesome, dirty
glass, sole remnant of the half dozen she had commenced housekeeping
with some thirty years before, and said:

“Thanks! This is Jim McKenna, is it? We have heard of you! I am glad to
meet any friend of my husband—and Mr. Ferguson!”

Ferguson acknowledged the compliment intended, and she retired to the
rear of the room, where there was work for her, “doing up” Cuff’s linen.

“Sure, an’ ye are that same bould Jim McKenna, what docthered Pat
Hennessy’s colt! I knew you be sight long ago, but this is the first
time you’ve honored our house with your prisence! Nivermind! Here’s to
your betther health, Mr. McKenna!”

And good old Cuff drained his half tumbler of raw spirits as
unconcernedly as if it had not been one of a dozen odd, similarly large
and strong, he had tasted since dinner. Then the four men sat down to a
greasy table, located in the middle of the apartment, and, by the light
of the single, smoking miners’ lamp, essayed the interesting game of
poker, the ante being the small sum of one dime.

That room and its contents would rejoice the graphic pencil of a
Hogarth, or the facile pen of a Dickens, were these great artists alive
to enter its stifling and tobacco-smoked precincts. Let me attempt
merely to outline the curious picture.

Descending a steep flight of well-worn stone steps, from the sidewalk, a
reasonably tall man would have to stoop considerably to save his head
from coming in violent collision with the arched lintel. Pushing open
the paintless, but by no means colorless, door, the interior premises
were at once disclosed to view. No, not at once, as it consumed some
moments for the best eyes to penetrate to the most distant walls, by
reason of the density and murkiness of the atmosphere, and the
prevalence of smoke from some cookery and several tobacco pipes. But
there could be no delay in the process of smelling the presence of
perspiring humanity in its most filthy forms. It required stomach and
lungs inured by extended habit to confinement in similarly reeking,
social stews, to enable a person to exist for any length of time in the
air of Micky Cuff’s castle. Two low windows at the front gave a dim
light during the day, while at night a flaring flame from a small lamp
was all the illumination the apartment afforded. The room was possibly
thirty feet in length, and eighteen wide. The ceiling, which was once
whitewashed, and then left for years to accumulate smoke, dust, and
moisture, was scant six feet above the dirty floor, and the encompassing
walls were of the same piece—adorned here and there with a rusty nail,
on which hung either a coat, a skirt, a skillet, or a frying-pan—and in
the economy of this particular family it mattered little as to their
rotation. It might be a pan, a dress, and a hat, or perchance a hat, a
pan, and a dress. Across one corner of the further end a string was
drawn, and to it a sheet hung suspended. Behind this temporary screen
slept all the Cuff family—man, wife, and five small children. When the
detective entered, a chicken and two pullets were serenely roosting on
the top of this convenient bed-room partition, and the curtain
evidenced, from its plentiful want of cleanliness, that they were
unaccustomed to make their nightly vigils elsewhere—for sleep they could
not while Cuff was awake, and that was generally the greater portion of
the night. In that triangular recess the Cuff family reposed. In that
dingy apartment the same persons cooked, washed, ate, drank, and sold
whisky to customers—beside keeping two boarders, who occupied a second
and calico curtained corner opposite that of the Cuffs. There were no
means of ventilation, save through the front door, the windows, and the
stove-pipe. The liquor rested in a five-gallon demijohn, which Cuff
denominated his “retail department.”

Good old Micky Cuff, as he heard himself ironically called by his
neighbors, was not generally looked upon as either good or handsome.
Heavy and tall of figure, he had plentiful, long, stiff, iron-gray hair,
and bristling eyebrows. His face was broad and retreating at the base,
and narrow and projecting at the top, preceded, when he walked, by a pug
nose, which seemed always heartily ashamed that it was not large in
proportion to the vast expanse of cheek flanking it on either side, and
hence appeared more insignificant than it really was. But the lack of
size in the nasal appendage was more than compensated by the yawning
chasm beneath, dividing the countenance into two moieties, and commonly
called a mouth. Cuff’s mouth was the crater of a miniature volcano,
continually bursting forth with loud oaths, running streams of tobacco
juice and bursts of fetid breath, causing the face to tremble with the
vehemence of the smouldering fires of the elements within. To make the
thing still more hideous, there were four tusks in the front of the
upper and lower jaw, jutting out slantingly, causing either lip to
protrude and assume a grin, which would have made the fortune of any
actor who affected the line of character professionally dubbed the
“heavy villain.” When Cuff laughed, which was constantly—and never more
diabolically than when incensed to the pitch of working violence upon
something—his little, round, black eyes retreated into their sockets,
the nose wriggled felicitously, like the stump of a dog’s tail when
begging for meat, and his four broad tusks clattered together, causing
his repeated guffaws to assume the tone of an illy played pair of
castanets combined with the before-mentioned stage thunder. In fact, the
big fellow’s face was open, like that of an alligator. Dressed in coarse
miners’ blouse and pantaloons, with boots of the usual weight—Cuff
seldom wore his hat, excepting when in the street or the mine, for he
was an expert miner, and labored when he could by day, selling whisky at
night—he was a perfect wonder to behold.

Cuff was not, and never had been, a Mollie, but was greatly in favor of
the organization, and on intimate terms of friendship with its principal
members. He bore the reputation of being a very rough customer, and
undoubtedly was, but he may be complimented by the addenda: even he “was
not as bad as he looked.” His temper was as peculiar as his _personnel_.
Once disputed in a favorite theory or belief, his anger was quick to
rise, knew no bounds, and the handiest weapon, no matter what it chanced
to be—a rock, an axe, or hammer, a bar of iron, a stick of wood—was
employed upon the person of his opponent, whether it chanced to be man,
woman, or child, and it was a cause of wonder in the neighborhood that
Micky had never yet been guilty of murder. In truth, he had not even
been arrested for an assault, though frequently guilty of those of an
aggravated character. His inner consciousness was as utterly
inexplicable as his outward general appearance. Nondescript is about the
only word in the English language clearly conveying to the mind of the
reader a photograph of the being bearing the name of Micky Cuff, of
Shenandoah. And the same syllables equally well apply to his mental and
moral attributes—for he possessed both of these in a marked and powerful
degree.

Cuff would never refuse a man a quart of whisky, even though he whacked
the applicant roundly before he could get off the premises with it.
During times of suspension, when few miners commanded ready funds, Cuff
is said to have disposed of, without money and without price, barrel
after barrel of liquor, showing that penuriousness was not one of his
many faults. Those who failed in coming up and settling, among the few
to whom he extended credit, when better times arrived and the cash was
attainable, the good old man took occasion to remind just once of their
indebtedness. A continued omission to walk up, soon afterward, and pay
the score, resulted in the closing of the account—wiping away the
chalk-marks from the wall with his huge paw—and the balancing of his
ledger by giving the negligent creditor a broken head the very first
time they came together.

“When I give, I gives,” said Cuff, “an’ when I trusts, I mane to have me
pay, if I have to take it out of somebody’s hide!”

So Cuff’s customers were ordinarily model paymasters. He sold by the
gallon, quart, and drink, mostly for money down. It was most agreeable
this way, all around.

Miners, or their companions, who took sick at or near Micky Cuff’s
house, were considered fortunate. If Cuff could have his way, he was the
softest-handed, gentlest-hearted nurse in the world. When he might not
do as he pleased, the invalid was quickly compelled to seek other
quarters. His usual parting salute in such an event would be:

“Go off now! Git out of me house! I’m not _nagerly_, but ye can’t stand
here an’ dispute the docther—an’ by the same token, that’s Micky Cuff!
_Dher manhim!_ Ye can’t be sick and docther beside! Go away—an’ the
devil go wid ye an’ sixpence! Here’s six eggs to ye an’ half a dozen of
’em rotten!”

With more of the same sort, which would make a stranger tremble; but
those who knew Cuff were aware that, to those in misfortune or suffering
from illness, his heart was that of a baby.

When the sick man wisely kept a silent tongue in his head, and swallowed
the remedies provided without word or grimace, no one could be more
compassionate than Cuff. His principal reliance, in all cases—his
_medicamentum_ and cure-all—was a preparation which he called
“skelkeen,” and it was generally to be gulped down very hot, so that his
patients denominated it—but not in his presence—“scald keen;” for they
said it scalded them sharply in the taking. Cuff made his skelkeen about
in this manner: Taking three fresh-laid eggs, plenty of sugar, or
molasses, he broke the eggs, beat them, with the other ingredients, in a
bowl, then added a generous quantity of whisky; putting all together in
a pot, or tin kettle, he stirred it while it boiled until reduced to the
consistency of cream, when some cayenne pepper was added, and the fiery
medicine was ready for use.

“Here! Take this!” he would say, holding a cupful of the steaming stuff
in his hand. “If ye wor gone, clane dead, the skelkeen would bring ye to
life again!”

Should the patient dare refuse the draught, Cuff would call him vulgar
names, not mentionable here, whip him, and end by kicking him out of
doors and up the stairs, in the goodness of his heart. It was not often
that his friends in this manner incurred his displeasure. Only strangers
dare refuse the skelkeen.

Then Cuff had his “mulled beer,” suitable for ladies, which he declared
cured all the evils flesh is heir to. And many went to his house to
partake of this remedy. The ladies’ cure consisted of malt beer, or ale,
boiled down thick and strong, in some vessel, on the family stove, with
molasses enough added to make it palatable, and drunk as hot as the sick
one could bear.

“Swallow this! It’ll cure you, or I’m a _gaberlunzie_, which by the same
token, I never wor!” was the rough language accompanying the
presentation of the vile concoction. Woe be unto the woman who dared to
turn her head away from the fumes of Cuff’s mulled beer! She would be
sure to hear such language from the impromptu doctor as would make her
repent the act during the remainder of her life. As with the men, very
few had the courage to put the cup from their lips. They generally
recovered their health, however, after taking one dose of the
stimulating compound.

There was an entire absence of spittoons in the place, and as all who
visited there chewed tobacco, or smoked, the sanitary condition of the
floor may be imagined but not portrayed. The scrubbing-brush or mop
never interfered with the supreme sway of abominations. An old broom
occasionally touched the surface of the boards, or the coating above
them, but soap and water were “too dampening for the children”—who, by
its use, might take sudden colds—to be placed upon anything in the
house, where their use could possibly be dispensed with. An old tin
kettle contained the smoking tobacco, and as it generally stood on the
floor, excepting when being passed from smoker to smoker, sundry
discharged and useless quids got mixed with the article to be used in
pipes, and McKenna was about to refuse to fill his doodeen when he
looked at Cuff, who was regarding him carefully over his cards, and
remembering a caution he had received, he choked down his rising gorge,
employed some of the tobacco, and handed the kettle to Fergus.

Mrs. Cuff was in most respects a fitting helpmate for Micky. She was
fully as fine-looking as her husband, but small in figure and
undemonstrative in demeanor, implicitly relying upon the ungainly
partner of her bosom as a wonderfully superior being—in truth, as one of
the greatest and best of men. She performed what he might order, in any
emergency, promptly and uncomplainingly, and so lived that she made not
an enemy in the town. True, her progeny wanted clothing sometimes, and
wallowed in the dust, as dirty as the _bonneens_ in the sty, growing up
as tough as maple knots and as uneducated as Hottentots, but it was not
her fault. She had never been taught any better, and as long as Micky
thought it right, the whole world would be wrong entirely, if found to
differ with his expressed opinion. She worked hard to keep her large
family fed and clothed, but the urchins would climb rocks, and fences,
and slide down cellar doors, and hence their garments would show holes
and rents. They exhibited little evidence in their persons that clean
water ran in streams, or stood in wells, and that soap was cheap at
corner groceries. Rather the contrary. But they and she had always been
accustomed to such a life, and cannot be blamed for believing it their
natural state of existence.

After several games at cards, in which Cuff and his partner came out
ahead, he proposed that McKenna should give them a song.

“I hear you are a wild boy wid the music an’ dance,” said the good old
man, trying to appear companionable; “an’ I have, these many days, been
wantin’ to see yez, an’ hear some of your best!”

“Yes,” chimed in Monaghan. “A song! A song!”

“Do, plaze favor us!” echoed Mrs. Cuff, who was now sitting by the
stove, mending a bifurcated garment intended to cover the body of one of
the younger Cuffs.

[Illustration: “_The others withdrawing somewhat from the table, he
seated himself upon it and began._”]

McKenna had a very sore throat at the time, but endeavored to comply.
The others withdrawing somewhat from the table, he seated himself upon
it and began with “The Miner and the Exciseman,” the tune being
indescribable, the words about as follows:

    “I know that young folks like to hear a song;
    Its something funny—its not very long;
    Its of an exciseman, the story I’ll tell,
    Who thought t’other night he was going to h—ll.

                                 CHORUS.

      “With my fal-al-addy, dol, tol-ol-oddy-dol,” etc.

    “This exciseman went out upon the other day,
    He met plenty of smugglers, as I hear them say,
    All gauging their liquor, just ready to sell,
    This exciseman got drunk, boys, the truth for to tell.     —CHORUS.

    “Well, ’twas nigh to a coal mine this exciseman did lie,
    When four or five miners there chanced to pass by;
    They took him on their shoulders and bore him away,
    Like a peddler’s pack, without any delay.                  —CHORUS.

    “It’s into the bucket they lowered him right down;
    When this jolly exciseman he got underground,
    An’ when he awoke in great horror and fear,
    Up starts a big miner, saying, ‘What brought you here?’    —CHORUS.

    “‘Indade, Mr. Devil, I don’t very well know,
    But I see that I have come to the regions below;
    An’ if ye spare me now, as you’ve oft done before,
    I’ll never kape robbin’ the poor any more!’                —CHORUS.

    “‘It’s what trade did you follow when you were above?’
    ‘I was an exciseman, an’ few did me love.’
    ‘If you’re an exciseman, why, here you’ll remain,
    An’ you’ll never get out of this dark cell again.’         —CHORUS.

    “‘Or you must give us money—now that we demand
    Before you get to one sight of the land!’
    ‘Here is a hundred guineas,’ the exciseman did say,
    ‘For I long to get seeing the light of day!’”              —CHORUS.

“Served the skunk right!” said Cuff, rising from his chair, and giving
the table a thump with his closed hand which made the room ring, and
caused McKenna to get down rather hastily from the perch and look around
to see if anybody were injured. Cuff gave him a reassuring wink and
continued: “I don’t belave there is any one thing, exceptin’ a
rattlesnake, that I hate more than a gauger—or a detective!”

“Them’s my sentiments, precisely!” shouted McKenna. “Come, let’s have
another smile, all around, and then we’ll go home!”

This ended the operative’s first call on good old Micky Cuff, but it was
by no means his last. He visited there, when he could not avoid it,
during that winter, but later an incident occurred that may be related
here, which terminated his companionship with that party. He does not go
to see Micky Cuff any more—and did not, after the event alluded to, for
many months preceding his departure from Shenandoah.

Cuff’s four horrid snags of teeth have been mentioned. They were a
source of continual annoyance to their owner, and the special aversion
of Mrs. Cuff—his one defect, if the word may be permitted. Both
thought—and their friends believed—that if the tusks were once removed
and their place filled with a new and regular artificial set, he would
be an elegant-appearing man. Cuff confessed to his boon companions that
he knew the fangs did slightly detract from his beauty of countenance;
and said if he had money to spare to fee the dentist he certainly might
have them taken out, and a “dacint set put in the mouth!” When Fergus,
on a certain occasion, thought of this, he cast a sly wink at McKenna,
and said: “Now, Cuff, McKenna and I are your friends. We have noticed
your anxiety about those teeth, and, with the assistance of Tom Hurley,
Jack Gibbons, an’ some more, have got up a raffle, to come off two weeks
hence, to raise twenty dollars for you, for the very purpose of getting
a new supply!”

“Yes,” said McKenna, taking the hint; “an’ it’ll not be long before the
money’s all collected. Tom Hurley and I can raise most of it, I do
believe!”

Cuff was very thankful, believed all they said, and promised to have the
four offending incisors extracted. In a short time Fergus informed the
operative that Cuff, taking them at their word, had accordingly had the
fangs taken out.

“What I’m thinking of now,” said Fergus, “is where you an’ I will be
afther hidin’ until Cuff gets over his anger! When he hears he has been
sold, he’ll be as mad as Sam’s master!”

“Then there was no raffle, afther all?” asked McKenna, innocently.

“Sure, an’ you knew that all the time! What’s the use of your playin’
off ye didn’t, at this late hour?”

“Oh, faith! I supposed you had got up a paper for Cuff, an’ I was ready
to pay me share,” answered McKenna; but seeing that Fergus did not care
to shoulder all the blame, he finally assented to an arrangement by
which they were, for a few weeks, at least, to travel always in company,
and never in the vicinities frequented by good old Micky Cuff.

The raffle never came off—but the roof of Cuff’s house was nigh coming
off with the solid imprecations that good but impulsive man indulged in
when a neighbor informed him that McKenna and Ferguson had been playing
a practical joke on him. No one in the place dared even look
suspiciously at the horrid hole left in his jaws, without incurring his
lasting displeasure. He went about his affairs with a more hideous
countenance than he had sported before the doctor took away his tusks.
Two men in Shenandoah never go to drink, play cards, sing and dance with
Micky Cuff. When invited, they invariably decline.


                               ————●————




                             CHAPTER XXIV.

                         HOSTILITIES CONTINUED.


It was maintained by some that the Mollies of the coal regions were not
supported or recognized by the Ancient Order of Hibernians throughout
the United States, but there is abundant evidence of this being utterly
false, the Sleepers, or Mollie Maguires, being substantially part and
portion of the society. That this entire organization, from root to
branch, was rotten and corrupt, has been unmistakably shown to the
people of the country. As early as January, 1875, the State and National
branches of the Hibernians were beginning to feel uneasy regarding their
brethren in the mountain country of Pennsylvania. This is exhibited in
the fact that John Kehoe, County Delegate of Schuylkill, issued an order
to the divisions to send their Bodymasters and officers to Girardville,
on the fourth of the month mentioned, to confer with the National
Delegate, the great head of the organization, known as the Ancient Order
of Hibernians, in the United States. This man was named Campbell, and he
met the leaders of the Mollies as stated, Shenandoah Division having for
its representatives McKenna, Frank McAndrew, and others. Campbell is
described as a medium-sized man, with gray hair and chin whiskers; form
rather lightly built, aged about fifty-five years and countenance
wearing a look of intelligence. The National Secretary, Reilley, was
also present, with a band of Bodymasters, as follows:

    PAT COLLINS, Palo Alto.
    FRANK KEENAN, Forrestville.
    NED KEAN, New Philadelphia.
    LARRY CREAN, Girardville.
    JAMES MURPHY, Loss Creek.

It was found that the object of the meeting at Lafferty’s Hall was
merely to investigate some offending brothers. Barney Dolan was put on
trial for embezzling five hundred dollars of the funds, and, after
hearing the testimony, Reilley and Campbell retired, but in a few
minutes brought in a verdict of “not guilty,” and the big County
Delegate looked well pleased, yet, when the National Delegate and
Secretary announced that Jack Kehoe should retain the position of County
Delegate, Barney’s face elongated, and its owner was not half as well
satisfied as he had appeared just a moment before. The decision was
final, however, and Barney could remain a member of the order, but no
longer act as County Delegate, excepting he should be duly elected at a
State Convention. Of this there was little hope.

When the regular routine of business had been completed Campbell made a
long speech to those assembled, in which he counseled all to behave
well, and so generally conduct themselves as to win the recognition of
good people, and admission to the Church. He hinted that all the Bishops
desired was that the Schuylkill Hibernians should remove the stigma
resting upon them, and thus a return to the fold was attainable. But for
the acts performed there, the obstacle would long since have been
removed. Campbell was given respectful attention, but his words fell on
deaf and unheeding ears.

Then the meeting adjourned and the members returned to their homes.

And this was not all. The era of Conventions seemed to have come. On the
eleventh of January, in the same year, a meeting was held in Pottsville,
again upon Kehoe’s requisition, to prepare for a general celebration of
St. Patrick’s Day. McKenna was in attendance, as Secretary of Shenandoah
Division. The following Bodymasters also put in an appearance:

    PAT DOLAN, Big Mine Run.
    CHRIS DONNELLY, Mt. Laffee.
    FRANK KEENAN, Forrestville.
    JAMES KENNEDY, Mt. Carbon.
    JOHN REGAN, St. Clair.
    PAT COLLINS, Palo Alto.
    WM. CALLAGHAN, Mahanoy Plane.
    DANIEL KELLY, Connor’s and Patches adjoining.
    LAWRENCE CREAN, Girardville.
    MIKE O’BRIEN, Mahanoy City.
    PETER SHERRY, St. Nicholas.
    PETER BURNS, Silver Brook.
    JOHN DONAHUE, Tuscarora.
    JAMES J. GALLAGHER, Coaldale.
    —— BRADLEY, Representing Pat Butler, of Loss Creek.
    FRANK MCANDREW, Shenandoah.
    JAMES KERRIGAN, Coaldale.
    JAMES ROARTY, Tamaqua.

Excepting only Florence Mahanoy Division, of Turkey Run, which was not
represented, almost every lodge had present, on this important occasion,
a full corps of five officers, viz.: President, or Bodymaster,
Vice-President, Secretary and Assistant Secretary, and Treasurer.

After the opening by prayer, Kehoe explained the object of the
gathering, and all the members able to purchase were supplied with
suitable regalia; flags were bought and music engaged, when once more
the meeting of Bodymasters was dissolved.

Jack Kehoe was fast becoming a man of power in Schuylkill County and
gaining supreme control of the dreaded Mollie Maguires. It was policy on
his part to invite these conferences. While the President and officers
of the bodies were together, he could cultivate their acquaintance and
push certain plans, political and otherwise, which, in due season, he
would carry to completion. He desired to see all the leading men _en
masse_, and succeeded. The presence of the national representatives, and
the deference shown to Jack by them, in virtue of his office, at the
first Convention, gave him eminence in the eyes of those possessing an
inferior order of intellect and standing lower in the official scale
than himself. The County Delegate was a scheming, crafty fellow, and
looked far into the future, thinking that he could see for himself and
his family political distinctions and riches in the deft and continued
handling of the Mollies. He did not, however, as the sequel will show,
penetrate quite deep enough into the obscurity of coming events. Had he
pierced the mystic veil a little further, the ghastly spectre that would
have glided before his startled vision might have turned him from his
evil pathway, with terror-stricken face and palsied limbs, to seek the
bloodless and better course.

Kehoe was now the self-crowned king of the Mollies in Schuylkill. They
moved promptly, like so many puppets, at his will, and when he commanded
a halt the mysterious clan paused in its deadly work. Would he order a
cessation of hostilities? Or must the word be “Forward—march”? Nobody
could tell! That the General intended tough work was apparent from the
activity he had inaugurated among the Bodymasters, and they were the men
who acted as the Lieutenants and leaders of corps for the
Commander-in-chief.

At this time one Pat Hester, who had for two months past been in
custody, on a criminal charge, was released and went directly to his
home, not far from Summit Hill. He was a bad and violent man, and
formerly of high standing in the order. More will be heard of him
hereafter.

Immediately following the ball at Pottsville, January 20th, in which
nearly three hundred Mollies and their ladies participated, and a very
brief visit to New Philadelphia and Silver Creek, the operative returned
to Shenandoah.

On the twenty-fifth, the country was visited by a snow-storm of unusual
severity. The same day McKenna learned from a friend that Pat Dormer had
met his wife at a neighbor’s, and they engaged in an animated
conversation that ended in Pat giving the lady a cruel beating, for
which little act of indiscretion he was still suffering in Pottsville
jail, where he would have to remain for three months.

At the end of January the detective had another attack of his old
complaint, chills and fever, and for some days was ordered by the
physicians to remain indoors.

It will be borne in mind that the great strike was still in progress;
work was nearly at an end; some of the stores in the mines were closing
up business and others refusing credit to miners, causing considerable
suffering among those who, during flush times, had improvidently spent
their money, keeping none for this sort of emergency. It was no source
of surprise, then, that the mere announcement, founded upon rumor, that
Col. Cake had been seen at Loss Creek, where he was to sign papers,
agreeing, on the part of the Philadelphia and Reading Coal and Iron
Company, to the basis in vogue preceding the strike, should create wild
excitement over the country. In Shenandoah, nearly all the Mollies
entered upon a prolonged debauch on the strength of the story. Frank
McAndrew, the President, was entirely overcome by liquor, and meeting
the young Welshman, Gomer James, engaged in a fight with him and his
companions, during which knives and pistols were freely used, but no
persons seriously wounded. McHugh and Travers were of McAndrew’s party,
and Gomer James and his confederates finally withdrew from the field.
McKenna, from his keeping the house, through the doctor’s commands, was
not a participant in, or present during the time of this little
disturbance. He heard of it the next day, when McHugh went to see him.
That person was terribly in earnest, swearing big oaths without number
that the time must soon come when Gomer James should be made to suffer
for his acts. He thought it bad policy to insist upon immediate revenge,
but stated, when work was fairly commenced and everything would not be
charged upon the society, he and the rest could never be satisfied until
two men were obtained to make way with the murderer of Cosgrove. McHugh
ended by remarking that “it was a shame and a disgrace to all members of
the order that Gomer’s taking off had been so long delayed!”

The starting, a few days subsequently, of several large collieries, made
the emissary think that, if others were as anxious as McHugh, Gomer
James would have to look out for himself. As James had been previously
warned, through the instrumentality of Mr. Franklin, he did not deem it
necessary to do more in this instance than make due report of McHugh’s
words. This he did at once, and Mr. Franklin again had the information
conveyed to James that he stood in imminent danger of losing his life.

Father McFadden was now visited by a committee of Mollies, asking
permission to take part in the general celebration of St. Patrick’s Day,
for which extended preparations were being made, but he refused, cursing
the Mollies and their committee with the heaviest maledictions. He
charged them with being murderers and assassins, and commanded them to
leave the order. They would do nothing of the kind.

McKenna was one of the committee, by the request of Jack Kehoe, but had
no hope, at the time, of being successful in the mission. Kehoe and
others determined to take part in the celebration if they had to walk
over the priest’s dead body. The detective was apparently as anxious as
the rest, and managed to raise nine dollars—“from where,” he said his
friends “could guess”—with which to purchase himself regalia for the
seventeenth of March. They naturally supposed he had disposed of more
counterfeit money.

The early part of March a riot occurred at Jeddo and Buck Mountain,
during which three men were shot. The Mollies, being largely in force
there, were accused of bringing on hostilities.

At about this date three hundred men gathered in the same vicinity to
prevent the collieries from working, and extinguished the fires under
the pumping boilers, the intention being to drown out the mines and bar
their owners from operating them for a long time. The country was
overspread with snow to the depth of a foot, on the level, and travel
upon the mountains was again greatly impeded, making the work of the
Mollies easy of accomplishment and their escape almost certain.

About the fourth of March a so-called Anti-Monopoly Convention was
appointed to take place at Harrisburg, having for its principal purpose
a movement against the Philadelphia and Reading Coal and Iron Company,
by individual and other large operators. The laboring man, excepting he
might be far removed from, and a great consumer of the product of the
coal fields, could have but small interest in the result of the meeting,
yet many of this class attended as delegates and took part in the
proceedings. Among them was Muff Lawler, who reported, on his return,
that there were nearly three hundred representatives present, and it was
decided to ask the Legislature, by resolution, to cause an investigation
to be made, by committee, of the officers of the company, and say why
their charter should not be abrogated. Lawler further said that the
committee would be appointed and the investigation set on foot. All of
which did not prove that there was anything wrong in the organization to
be investigated.

Had the Mollies been aware of the full extent of Mr. F. B. Gowen’s
proceedings in the coal fields—as President of the Philadelphia and
Reading Railway and of the Philadelphia and Reading Coal and Iron
Company—and the work he had instituted years before, to punish the
guilty, and clear their confederates from the land, wresting from them
by the strong hand of the law the great power they held over the
inhabitants, it is believed that his life would have been taken—at
least, attempts would have been made upon it. But the President calmly
waited his time, which he knew must come, and relaxed no effort,
withdrew no force—on the contrary, kept himself more closely down to his
work—through all these mutterings and threatenings. His head was clear,
his nerves unshaken.

Charles Hayes, who was just from Summit, where he had gone to secure
work and see some relatives, reported that the Laborers’ Union and the
Mollies had made common cause in the fight on Summit Hill, headed by Tom
Fisher, County Delegate, Pat McKenna, Bodymaster, and a prominent Mollie
named Boyle. They were determined that, unless the collieries submitted
to the general demand, they should not have men to do their work.

Sunday, the fourteenth of March, the Mollies of Shenandoah were startled
by the reported finding of the dead body of Edward Coyle, one of their
number, in the slip of Plank Ridge Colliery, belonging to the Coal and
Iron Company. Several weeks before—in fact, some time in January—Coyle
had been on a spree and was heard to say that in a few days he would
leave the locality and go to Pittsburg, where he was promised
employment. He was never seen again alive. When the water had been drawn
off, his remains were discovered, the rats having mutilated his flesh
horribly. Parts of his fingers were entirely eaten away. His hands were
clasped over his head, and there were other evidences that, while going
to his boarding-house at night, he had fallen into the shaft and been
killed. There was a coroner’s inquest, but nothing more than here
related elicited. The Mollies held a meeting and resolved to take no
action in Coyle’s case, not even to reveal that he was a Mollie, as,
should they let the secret out, Father O’Reilly would never allow his
remains burial in a Catholic cemetery. This was the course pursued. It
was also reported, in this connection, that the priest said he was glad
the society was to parade as a body, on the seventeenth, as he would be
the better able to judge who were and who were not Mollies. He already
knew them in the dark, as cut-throats, robbers, and incendiaries, and
concluded his denunciation by observing that the curse of God was sure
to fall upon them. Father Bridgeman, of Girardville, expressed similarly
forcible opinions of the society and all who had anything to do with it.
Still the Mollies would parade, and did parade.

Before the middle of the month arrived a man named Dixon was shot by
another, called Bradley, at Mine Hill Gap. The two had for some time
been on bad terms, and, taking advantage of a spree which he was on at
the time, Dixon went to and fired upon Bradley’s house in the night,
but, fortunately, hurting none of the inmates. Bradley, who was an
engineer and a man of nerve and resolution, arose, seized his revolver,
went out and shot Dixon through the heart, killing him almost instantly.
The engineer at once reported Dixon’s death to the authorities, gave
himself up, had a trial, and was discharged as having acted purely in
self-defense, a verdict which was generally commended, excepting by
Dixon’s intimate relatives and companions. Even the Mollies in
Shenandoah said Bradley was justified by the circumstances.

The great day—the seventeenth of March—came at last, and ended without
any great disturbance. The members of Shenandoah Division combined with
those from Loss Creek, and mustered nearly one hundred men for the
procession. There were four hundred Mollies in line at Mahanoy City.
After organizing at a hall in that place, Jack Kehoe made an extempore
oration, in the course of which he said that the parade was looked upon
by some of the inhabitants of the town as a direct and open threat to
overpower them, or a signal for the resumption of a reign of carnage;
and, if any of the Mollies got drunk while in the neighborhood, he
would, in person, strip off their regalia, then, if necessary, get an
officer, have them arrested and sent to prison.

“Let us show the clergy,” he concluded, “that, although we bear a bad
name, we are very far from deserving it! There is no truth in what they
say, exceptin’ when we meet a party opposed to us—then we do as well as
we can. Let us all act as men—not as boys!”

Kehoe’s remarks were loudly applauded. He was followed by a man named
Love, who spoke in a similar vein, but without the County Delegate’s
vehemence.

As before stated, the day passed off quietly, and the Mollies returned
to their homes in their usual condition.

[Illustration: “_They shot a young girl, named McHale, sending a bullet
through her arm, narrowly missing a vital part._”]

The same remark does not apply to Number Three Hill, where, at 10 P.M.,
there was a savage battle fought between John Thompson and Martin Deane,
on the part of the Mollies, and a crowd of Sheet Irons, headed by a man
named Welch. The Iron Clads, in trying to kill Thompson, shot a young
girl named McHale, sending a bullet through her arm, narrowly missing a
vital part. Some of the Shenandoah men, when they heard this news,
promptly started to find Welch, who wisely kept out of their way. Had
the crowd encountered him, doubtless his blood would have been shed.
McKenna was so ill as to be confined to the house after the procession,
hence did not join in the search.

[Illustration: “_The scene at Number Three Hill._”]

Sunday, the twenty-first of March, Father O’Reilly read out in church,
almost complete, a list of the Mollie Maguires who had attended the
parade, McKenna among the rest, asking the prayers of the congregation
for the salvation of their souls. The Mollies merely laughed at the
proceeding, when outside the church, where some still persisted in
going, and said such exhibitions of spleen would do them no harm.

At the close of the month, a number of strange men arrived at
Frackville, to work in the mines, from Philadelphia, with a few
engineers for the railway company, the railroaders having long before
submitted to a reduction of ten per cent., refusing longer to hold out
with the miners and other laborers, but the imported workmen had to be
sent home, and dare not go to their employment, so hostile were the
demonstrations made against them by the Mollies and members of the
Laborers’ Union.

Then came the news that the telegraph office at Summit Station had been
fired and burnt to the ground. It was supposed to have resulted from the
act of an incendiary. Not long after, a railway train, loaded with coal,
was thrown from the track and the cars badly smashed up. Many Mollies
lived in the neighborhood, and these deeds were probably performed by
members brought from a distance.

In view of the frequency of these occurrences in the mining country,
McKenna now suggested that Mr. Franklin send policemen to different
places, with orders to openly make investigations, and also act as a
preventive of further difficulties. It was impossible for the operative
to do more than he was doing. The magistrates were powerless, and other
county officials in the same predicament.


                               ————●————




                              CHAPTER XXV.

                 PLOT TO DESTROY THE CATAWISSA BRIDGES


Before the opening of spring, McKenna fully recovered his health—at
least was well enough to join his friends in many of their midnight and
other carousals and sprees. It was afterward remembered by his
associates, that as soon as any dark deeds were done, he generally
managed, sick or intoxicated, to make his appearance in the vicinity of
the occurrences. But these slight eccentricities in the behavior of the
wild Irishman of the mountains passed at the time unnoticed by the
Mollies. That he came and went they knew, but questioned not the why or
wherefore. So little were they on the alert for anything Jim McKenna
might do, that, in reality, they seemed to think the very act he
performed the most natural for a man of his supposed character under the
attending circumstances. While looking after the threatened destruction
of the high and costly bridges of the Catawissa Railway—of these more
hereafter—the detective had a queer adventure, in the neighborhood of
Ringtown Mountain, that his reports make no mention of, but a
description of which the writer has verbally received within the past
few months. Chancing to be in Girardville, on a visit to Jack Kehoe, the
operative encountered Frank McAndrew and a miner named Maguire—the
latter being a Mollie by name as well as by nature—both of whom were
perceptibly the worse for much spirits they had imbibed during the day,
and they found it very difficult to guide their own movements, unaided,
over the homeward road, which was still deeply covered with snow. Kehoe
saved the almost helpless men from freezing to death, by taking them
into his house and seating them by the stove; but, through later
absorption of a few more drinks at the bar, they were left, in the
course of a few hours, in as poor condition for locomotion as before
entering the tavern.

“See here, McKenna,” said the County Delegate, “I don’t see whatever I’m
to do wid these fellows! Sure an’ they insist on goin’ home this very
night to Shenandoah, beyant, at all hazards, an’ I know, as well as I
know I’m now spakin’, they’ll be stone dead, if they ever live to get
off the mountain, wid the cold an’ the whisky! You’ll hev to go in their
company, an’ see they don’t fraze up enthirely!”

“Faix an’ I am the lad that kin do that same!” answered the Secretary!
“But how am I to act wid the obstinate bastes if they jist lie down in
the snow an’ refuse to move? That might bother me! The divil can’t match
a drunken man fur obstinacy!”

“Oh, fur that matther,” said King Jack, with a cruel blaze in his eye,
“if they do that, ye’ll hev to build a fire under ’em as we do below a
balky mule, an’ here’s plenty of matches for your use!”

Kehoe handed the operative a box of lucifers and held the light until
the three men were well off the platform in front of his house, when he
wished them plenty of “good luck” and shut the door, leaving them in
darkness.

Kehoe having found out that the men carried a little money with them,
and fearing they might be robbed, even if lucky enough to escape death
by freezing, should they linger by the roadside, was glad to have
McKenna travel in their company.

The path was dimly marked and the obscurity almost impenetrable, as the
young man, with a drunken miner clinging to either arm, attempted to
seek the way over the hills to Shenandoah. First McAndrew stumbled and
fell, and McKenna was forced to relax his hold of Maguire and help his
superior officer to his feet. While this was being accomplished,
Maguire, left unpropped, and unable or unwilling to stand alone,
suddenly slipped and went down headlong through the darkness into a deep
bank of snow, in which he floundered and sputtered like a struggling
novice at a swimming-school. McKenna, at first, tried hard to restrain
his temper, and finally succeeded in starting both of his protégés once
more _en route_ for home. But his patience gave way after three or four
repetitions of the same act, varied only by McAndrew rolling down a
steep declivity, and coming very near going off a ledge of rock to the
bottom, a distance of thirty feet.

“I’ll be shivered!” exclaimed McAndrew, when once more in the road, “if
I walk another step! What’ser use gettin’ all tired out, when its so
warrum and nice slapin’ here? I’m jist goin’ to bed!”

So saying, the Bodymaster threw himself flat in the snowbank, stretched
out his limbs, and prepared to stay where he was during the remainder of
the night.

“Tha’so!” repeated Maguire. “Move ’long, Frank, an’ don’t take up all
the bed!”

And he quickly followed McAndrew’s example. Both continued recumbent,
despite the detective’s exertions to keep them in the observance of a
perpendicular; and before many minutes elapsed, were snoring away in
concert, as though safely under blankets at their respective homes.

“What the divil am I to do now?” soliloquized McKenna. “It’ll never do
to follow Kehoe’s advice, beside the matches are as wet as a dog after a
bath, wid the snow in me pocket! Here’s a raal quandary!” He did not
forget his brogue even when talking to himself.

Presently the agent observed a faint light in the distance, and resolved
to make one more effort. He shouted in McAndrew’s ear:

“Get up now! Faith an’ I see the light in Mike Carey’s shebeen! Sure
they’re awake yet, an’ ye know the sort o’ liquor they sells? Get up,
an’ we’ll rouse that drunken Maguire—not that you’re touched at all
yourself—an’ go on a few steps, an’ I’ll stan’ trate when Mike Casey
puts out the stamin’ whisky-punch!”

“What-yer say about ‘whis-sy-punch?’” drowsily inquired McAndrew,
turning over on his side and filling his mouth with snow, “Was-is—it
bout ‘whissy-punch?’”

“I say old Mike Casey’s place is jist beyant, an’ that I’ll trate!”

“Enough said! Give me a lif’,” begged McAndrew, and he strove to rise.
“I—I—belave I really am gettin’ uncommon thirsty! ’Swonderful how atin’
snow’ll make one take to the drink!”

The drunken fellow blew the snow away from his eyes, nostrils, and
mouth, and truly stood alone, while the sober man turned his attention
to Maguire. That besotted individual at first flatly refused to get up,
but finally made out to rise to his feet, and McKenna, once more taking
an arm of each, marched away in the direction of the light.

The shebeen-shop of Mike Casey and his wife—an elderly couple, living on
the mountain by themselves—was reached after much difficulty, and the
detective, puffing like a porpoise, from over-exertion, released his
protégés and knocked at the unpainted door. When left to themselves
McAndrew and Maguire fell in a limp and confused heap, like so many damp
rags, upon the ground.

Soon there were heard footsteps within and Casey opened the door,
saying:

“Who the divil comes here at this time o’ night?”

“Oh, it’s McKenna an’ two belated travelers,” answered the operative.

“Well, whatever have brought _you_ here? But niver mind! Step in, an’ in
a jiffy the old woman will be out to help you!”

“Its very well to say ‘come in!’ an’ _I_ can do it, but these two
spalpeens here, are too drunk to do anything! Just get on some clothes,
plaze, an’ come help me to house the rascals!”

In a few moments, by dint of hard pulling and much tugging at hands and
feet, McAndrew and Maguire were at last hauled inside the cabin, where
they reposed on the floor, a couple of as wet and uncomfortable bodies
as can well be imagined.

Casey’s shanty consisted of a single room, and a half loft overhead, to
which latter place access was had by a wooden ladder. In the lower
apartment slept the man and wife, on a bed in one corner. In the same
room they also ate, drank, did their washing, cooking, and sold whisky
and tobacco. Only one window, the door, and a big chimney gave light and
ventilation to the shop. It was a rough retreat, but far better and
warmer than out-of-doors, and quite acceptable under the circumstances.
Old Mrs. Casey—blind of one eye, not exactly handsome-looking, and only
partly dressed—was by this time ready to wait on her unexpected but not
unwelcome customers. By again shouting “whisky-punch” in McAndrew’s ear,
the detective managed to put his friend upright, and, after imbibing
more drink, assisted him to ascend the steep ladder, to the only spare
bedroom in the building. Maguire had to be shaken for half an hour, some
matches set off under his nose, and one slightly touched to his cheek,
before he could be sufficiently awakened to drag himself to the same
portion of the cabin. Covering the men with the hay forming their couch,
and all the clothes he could find, McKenna left the drowsy worthies. The
loft would only contain two.

“Now phat are we to do wid you?” inquired old man Casey.

“Oh, I kin sit up! Its not long ’til mornin’!”

“An’ ye shall do no such thing!” said Mrs. Casey. “I knows a trick worth
two o’ that!”

She then went hunting about the room until she found an old shawl and
some bags, the latter suitable for holding corn. These she spread on the
floor before the hearth stone, beyond which was a rosy, red bed of
anthracite, resting upon a novel grate, made of railroad iron and
smaller bars, and which was sending a genial warmth throughout the
apartment.

“Auld man! Get ye to bed!” said Mrs. Casey. He obeyed the command, and
his wife piled upon the recumbent McKenna—who had placed himself,
dressed as he was, on the improvised mattress, in accordance with an
imperious gesture of Mrs. Casey—her husband’s lately vacated coat, and
other garments. Then she said:

[Illustration: “_Now shut your eyes!_”]

“Now, lad, shut your eyes!”

McKenna did so, and presently heard a rustling, as of changing garments,
and felt his coverings greatly augmented in weight. Mrs. Casey retired
to the scant and only bed the place afforded.

“I hope ye’ll slape comfortably!” said Mike, laughing.

The operative knew that the kind-hearted old lady had heaped her own
woolen garments upon him in default of other comforts.

The wind came up so furiously through the crevices in the floor, and the
snow sifted down so plentifully from the roof, that the tired man could
not rest. Excepting on one occasion, however, when he thought he heard
Casey get up, and turned to see that it was not his step but that of his
helpmate, he pretended to slumber, out of regard for and not to hurt the
feelings of the kindly pair who had taken them in.

In the morning, early, McAndrew and Maguire clambered down the ladder
and awakened the rest with demands for beer. They were very thirsty.
McKenna arose, gave the old lady her clothes, and she was soon ready to
wait upon them. The detective noticed that she took her half gallon
measure from beneath the foot of her bed, threw something that it
contained out at the door, and then filled it half full of beer from the
keg. But he said nothing of this to his companions.

“I belave I’ll take a sip o’ gin,” said the Secretary, as the Bodymaster
and Maguire, in turn, drank deeply of the malt liquor. “I always try and
get gin for my morning dram!”

This liquor was in a small bottle and clear and genuine. The beer he
could not relish, considering the use to which the tin vessel in which
it stood had been put during the night.

It was not until they had reached Shenandoah that McKenna informed his
comrades of the sickening circumstance. Their stomachs were in such a
peculiarly sensitive condition at the time, that a few explanatory words
caused them to revolt. As a consequence both men were very sick.
“Sea-sickness was no name for it,” they said.

It chanced well for McKenna that, on this very day, and before Maguire
and McAndrew recovered their appetites and their strength, he was
compelled to go to another part of the county and remain during several
nights. When he returned Maguire was away at his home and McAndrew had
forgiven him.

“Faith, an’ ye know well enough, it would have been both mane an’
uncivil for me to say anythin’ of it before the kind old couple!” was
all the excuse the operative could offer. Not one of the three men drank
ale at Mike Casey’s house after that.

There was little of interest occurring in the region from the dates last
mentioned, until early in the spring of 1875, when the Mollies
determined to destroy the bridges on the Catawissa Railway, then as now
run by the Philadelphia and Reading Company. The reason given by Pat
Brennan, one of the prime movers in the business, for the proposed
outrage, was that considerable coal passed to market over the Catawissa
line, and it would be necessary to stop shipments as well as production
in that portion of country. McAndrew of Shenandoah, and Pat Butler, of
Loss Creek, were expected to furnish the force of Mollies, and Brennan
was to secure an equal number of men from outside sources. The several
high and costly structures were to be set on fire simultaneously, after
all trains had passed over, so that life would not be endangered.
Brennan, found picking coal at Glover’s dirt bank, was not a Mollie, but
bad enough to be one. McKenna went to see him, pretending great anxiety
to have a hand in the matter, at the order of McAndrew. Brennan
implicated two brothers, named Welch, with many others, and said one
meeting had already been held on the subject, by his friends, in the
bush, but nothing had been permanently decided upon. Another gathering
was appointed for the ensuing Tuesday night, to be attended by Mollies
and outsiders, and the detective was invited to be present. He
consented. McHugh was opposed to the project. Gibbons was greatly in
favor of it. In a conversation held with the latter, the detective said:

“It is a big job, ye understand, an’ it will take a good many men to do
the thing. They must be as true as steel, at that.”

“I know it,” answered Gibbons. “An’ are not the Hibernians the men who
can be depended upon? They can do it, if anybody can.”

“I know we’re all right—but we’re not alone. We can’t possibly arrange
everything so as to act before next Wednesday night.”

“That’s the truth!” responded Gibbons.

This was urged in order to gain time in which to notify Mr. Franklin, so
that, if McKenna might not succeed in discouraging the Mollies and
preventing the destructive effort, a force could be sent to capture the
would-be incendiaries before the match had done its duty. It was finally
decided that a second meeting should be held the ensuing Tuesday night,
at nine o’clock, at Number Three Hill, when the details should be
attended to, and quickly following that should come the destruction of
the obnoxious bridges. The following evening—Wednesday—all were expected
to convene at Ringtown Mountain, near the Catholic cemetery, duly
equipped for work, and, after brief consultation, at once proceed to do
the task proposed. Axes and other tools were to be procured and brought
to the second meeting, with plenty of powder and fuses for exploding
some of the heavier abutments.

The detective afterward saw Pat Butler, and informed him of the proposed
affair. Butler was inclined to be cautious. He fully approved the
business, but feared the outsiders might harm the Mollies—in other
words, inform against them—and wanted every one specially sworn to
secrecy. He knew very well that there would be a large reward offered
for the capture of those interested in destroying the bridges, and
believed those not in the society would be the first to sell out. This
was in McAndrew’s presence. The Shenandoah Bodymaster thought it made
little difference whether the men were sworn or not, as they gave away
secrets held under oath about as freely as when not bound by an
obligation. A pledge would not stop them from informing, if they were so
disposed. John Thompson, of Number Three Hill, and John Dean, said they
agreed to the arrangement, would attend the meeting, and provide some
powder. There was no way for the detective except to go in with the
incendiaries. In no other manner could he learn the exact time when the
deed was to be committed; in no other way was the thing to be prevented
and the would-be bridge-burners apprehended. There was danger that he
might be captured with the rest, or killed; but the damage to the
company, in case the game was not frustrated, would be very great,
beside the loss of life to innocent passengers, who would, if the
bridges were destroyed at the time proposed, some of them, be hurled,
without a word of warning, into eternity. These were among the nigh
probabilities. The detective could but run the hazard. Certainly, he
must keep in with the conspirators, and see that his whole duty was
performed.


                               ————●————




                             CHAPTER XXVI.

                          A CALAMITY AVERTED.


Mr. Franklin was, the same evening, duly instructed where the detective
intended to be the next night and informed of the probability that he
would succeed in frustrating the designs of the bridge-burners, at even
the last moment, as he had his own plans, should there come a failure in
creating a disturbance which would result in a disbandment of the two
forces engaged in the matter—the Mollies, as well as non-Mollies. The
agent also suggested and described a medium through which the
Superintendent might communicate with him, by telegraph, before the
arrival of the decisive time, should he find it important to do so. Up
to the hour of leaving Shenandoah, to attend the Tuesday night meeting
in the bush, however, no telegram came, hence McKenna knew that he was
entrusted with the entire management of his side of the transaction, the
Agency being left to take care of the other.

Tuesday, April 6, 1875, came, bright and cloudless, as though dark
desires and hellish passions were not swaying the human breast, and
danger threatening the lives of those who reveled in the clear sunlight
of the present, buoyant and hopeful for the future. Passing the day in
talking with the principal Mollies interested in the bridge enterprise,
the Secretary started, at about eight in the evening, accompanied by Pat
Butler—who still seemed determined to wait and learn what the outsiders
had to say about the thing before he committed himself and his division
to the scheme—for the place on the verge of the mountain. Butler was
more than half inclined, the Shenandoah Secretary was pleased to see, to
let the outsiders have the plot their own way and allow the same parties
to perform the work of destruction by themselves. McAndrew, who soon
joined Butler and McKenna, was also averse to receiving any assistance
from those not within the order. Still all were agreed to attend the
preliminary meeting, hence they gathered, under the starlight, at Number
Three Hill.

McKenna was not afraid of the outside citizens executing the job,
unaided, after having fully disclosed their ideas to the Mollies, and
was equally certain that the brotherhood would refuse to do it under
similar circumstances, hence his obvious labor was to foment division,
and make its performance impossible for either party. This he proceeded
to do, and found it no easy task. Strong words had to be employed with
the Mollies, most of whom were greatly in favor of the undertaking, to
make them willing to abandon it. His principal reliance he found to be
the jealousy of the society regarding the interference of all other
combinations, and its disinclination to join in an overt act with people
not members. Using this as his _piece de resistance_, in the
commencement, he added to it, from time to time, such suggestive
incidents as came to mind.

“I’ll go to the divil, or just anywhere,” he said, “with the right sort
of people, but these strangers I’m not so quick to follow! I’m forninst
colloguin’ wid men not known to be friends.”

“So am I!” said Pat Butler, a hardy little fellow, with black hair, a
keen eye, and a look of resolution on his sharp face.

“And I,” echoed McAndrew.

The scene presented at Number Three Hill was impressive, but almost
shrouded in darkness. Seated on rocks, bits of logs, and heaps of earth,
and leaning against the bodies of stunted trees, the men were grouped,
recognizing each other by their shapes and the sound of their voices.
The stars gave just light enough, at that hour and season of the year,
to make human faces and figures dimly visible.

Brennan, who had been so forward in the inception of the job, hearing,
early in the day, from a voluntary emissary of McKenna, that Shenandoah
Division was greatly opposed to the joint movement, did not make his
appearance at Number Three on that particular evening, nor did any of
the non-Mollies, who had been promised, assemble at the spot. The
following persons were there: John Thompson, John Dean, Pat Butler, John
Gibbons, Frank McAndrew, Fenton Cooney, Mike Doyle, Ed Sweeney, Mike
Casey, Chas. Hayes, Mike Murphy, Pat Whalen, and James McKenna.

Not a pipe was smoked in that silent conclave. Men spoke in whispers,
and moved with stealthy tread, for fear that a spark of fire or loud
word might disclose the whereabouts of the conspirators. McKenna stood
among the rest, leaning against the trunk of a tree, expecting every
moment to hear the sound of approaching footsteps, announcing the
arrival of the allies of the Mollies; but in this way an hour passed and
nobody came; then, as silently as they had come together, the crowd
dispersed, and the enterprise was a pronounced failure.

At McHale’s saloon, in Shenandoah, an hour later, the principal Mollies
reconvened, in a convivial way, when, no others being present, drinks
were procured and all pledged themselves never to have anything to do
with business of a serious character when any outsider was to be
interested. Especially were they to refuse co-operation where they
themselves were not the persons to plan an entire movement.

The same night Gibbons informed McKenna that he had been several days
trying to induce Thompson, of Number Three Hill, to aid him in a plan by
which the company—the Philadelphia and Reading Coal and Iron
Company—would be greatly injured. The idea was to go, in the dark, and
run a loaded truck, then standing at Grover’s Breaker, down the railroad
track, when a train would be coming from an opposite direction. It must
then occur that the train, locomotive and cars, would come in collision
with the coal car and all be smashed in pieces. Thompson had thus far
refused, as he was sure that the engineer, fireman, and brakemen, and
possibly others, would be killed. Beside he thought the engine might
naturally be crowded with workmen, returning to their homes, and he was
not favorable to killing innocent persons merely in order to spite one
corporation. Gibbons argued that the train would not be thrown off, only
the truck smashed, track torn up, and consequent delay in shipping coal
insured.

Here was another thing that the detective must have an eye upon. It
added to the now constant pressure upon his mind. The elements were
around. Violence was in the air. McKenna should have a care for himself,
and for the great purpose of all his thoughts and acts. He knew not what
the morrow might bring forth.

At this time it was calculated by those who had every facility for
knowing, that there were thirty thousand members of the Ancient Order of
Hibernians—otherwise the Mollie Maguires—in the State of Pennsylvania,
and, in the county of Schuylkill alone, where my agents were most
actively operating, some two thousand five hundred. These figures may be
exaggerated, or may not, but it is undoubtedly true that there were
enough in the Commonwealth to carry the elections and to produce
wide-spread terror in the coal regions. So invincible was their power,
that they had but to say the word and a priceless life was thenceforth
worth no more than the powder burnt in its destruction. The County
Delegate, Kehoe, needed only to crook his little finger or call upon the
officers of any adjoining county for help, in any nefarious undertaking,
and it was forthcoming. From the assassination of a man to the burning
of a breaker, or the whipping of a boss who refused to obey an order to
leave the country, he had but to command to be obeyed. The same rule
applied—only not to so wide an extent—with the Bodymasters of the
different divisions. Over their subordinates these officials exercised
complete control. Sometimes, it was true, as in the matter of Gomer
James, at Shenandoah, the members undertook to lead. But in McAndrew the
vengeful McHugh and Hurley found their match. He, when repeatedly urged,
even as late as the first of May, 1875, utterly refused to have anything
done, ending all cavil by once more promising that, when the resumption
came—if ever it did come—and the attention of the people would be
diverted from their society, he would get the men from Northumberland
County and have the Welshman silenced. Finding that they had not
sufficient force at command to put him out, the bloodthirsty trio were
compelled to wait. That is, for a time, they did wait, and McAndrew
still remained at the head of affairs.

Considering the increasing turbulence prevailing in the coal country,
and the rapid accumulation of crime since the dullness in the mining
business had set in, I, at this time, deemed it advisable to visit
Philadelphia, and hold a consultation with Mr. Franklin and McParlan,
_alias_ McKenna. This was, therefore, accomplished on the 28th of April,
1875. After talking the matter over with Mr. Franklin, and fully
exchanging views as to the future, Mr. F. B. Gowen, President of the
Philadelphia and Reading Railway, and of the Coal and Iron Company of
the same name, was sent for. He was ill at the time, but came promptly,
and we held a long and absorbing talk with him in my private parlor. The
work of the past two years was passed in review, supported by copies of
the reports from the Philadelphia Agency, and much said about the task
remaining to be performed, having in sight the early breaking up of the
powerful Mollie organization. From all we had heard, the society was now
more powerful than ever before. Its numbers were rapidly increasing, its
work becoming more desperate. Evidently something must be entered upon
that would have the effect of reducing the latter, and ending the bloody
deeds of the monsters who were deliberately planning to sacrifice human
life and millions of property.

Mr. Gowen was disposed to defer to my judgment in the business, knowing
that, for many months, I had made a study of the society, its rules and
_modus operandi_ in accomplishing its sanguinary purposes. He believed
that I could best suggest the plot for the coming campaign, which
everything portended was to be a bitter one.

“Mr. Gowen,” said I, upon receiving this information, “I wish, in this
connection, to ask you a legal question. Should I bring to the State a
number of my operatives, and have them sworn in as Coal and Iron Police,
under General Pleasants, and if they, in consequence of reports received
through detective McParlan, were to go to a certain locality and there
make the arrest of persons in the act of committing crimes, would they
be compelled subsequently to reveal the source of their knowledge? That
is, can such service be performed without at present uncovering McParlan
to the Mollie Maguires?”

I was anxious that McParlan—otherwise the good Mollie, James
McKenna—should remain _incognito_ for as great a length of time as
possible, and when no longer useful in this way, to be secretly removed
to some safe place, as I was aware of the fact that, without his
voluntary consent, his testimony in convicting the Mollies could not be
used. I had pledged him my word for that, and was not the man to change,
whatever consequences might impend.

Mr. Gowen replied:

“It will not be actually necessary to disclose our source of
information!”

“Very well,” I added. “I am pleased that it is so! This being settled, I
will have a good and trusted _employé_ sent here from Chicago, with
orders to go thoroughly through the country and over the ground, secure
an understanding of the localities in which it is supposed outrages may
be committed, and select a proper rendezvous for such persons as he may
need for his support. At this point, McParlan, _alias_ McKenna, can send
to or give them such information as he may secure, in time for the
prevention of crime or the capture, in the very act, of its
perpetrators. I want five or six of my best and most resolute
_attachés_, with an equal number of the Coal and Iron Police, who have
been duly tried and found fearless and capable, placed under control of
the chief operative who may be sent, thus forming a company of twelve,
to be at all times at command, to prevent murders and act upon such
suggestions as Messrs. Franklin and McParlan may furnish. I think, in
due season, we may succeed in breaking up this body of assassins and
cut-throats, and, in the course of a few months, perform labor which
will strike terror even to the black heart of the organization!”

“Anything and everything that we can legally give, you shall have! I
suggest Capt. Heisler, who has been Chief of the Coal and Iron Police,
as your lieutenant from that force. He is an intelligent and courageous
man, familiar with the topography of the entire locality, and the most
suitable officer I can select for the duty. When you are ready for work,
let us know, and he and a picked six of the police shall be ordered to
report to your local Superintendent. We must also communicate with
General Pleasants, who, as chief engineer, is General Superintendent of
the Coal and Iron Police, and he will see that your agents are sworn in
and made regular members of the corps. As for the details, and the
management, I leave them, as heretofore, wholly in your hands, and will
approve all suggestions made by you!”

I thanked Mr. Gowen for the confidence still reposed in me, and said I
would endeavor to be worthy of it.

“I will at once telegraph to Chicago,” I concluded, “for the men needed,
and proceed to their organization. When prepared, I will consult you
again.”

Mr. Gowen then left, and I summoned McParlan to meet me. I was somewhat
surprised to observe the change that two years had wrought in the
appearance of my operative. While there was no doubt that once more I
grasped McParlan by the hand, yet I could scarcely bring myself to
believe it. The voice was familiar, and the eye, but all beside seemed
different. Much of this transformation was probably owing to out-door
exposure, the hard life he had lived, and the yellow wig, which he had
been constrained to use after the loss of his hair. I was glad to see
that his general health was quite sound again, and the young man still
strong and hopeful for the success of his undertaking. Dressed once
more, for a few hours at least, in his former decent habiliments, and
having taken a bath and enjoyed some manipulations in the barber’s
chair, with a dressing down of the artificial head-covering, he seemed
more like his former self, and we held a long and profitable interview,
during which he related, much more graphically than I can describe, some
of the incidents of his life among the Mollies which I have woven into
the warp and woof of this narration.

A dispatch, purporting to come from McKenna’s sister, saying she was to
be married, and wanting him to come to the wedding, had been sent, as
per arrangement, preparatory to the meeting with me, demanding the
detective’s presence at the Agency.

McParlan’s sister was not married, but I wanted to see him; this he
distinctly understood, but his friends in Shenandoah did not. It rested
with the detective to answer all the questions that McAndrew, Lawler,
and the rest of the Mollies might ask him regarding the nuptials and how
he enjoyed himself. I knew he was capable of inventing stories, when on
detective duty, which would hang together and satisfy all his
acquaintances. That night, with a lighter heart and vigorous
determination to labor for the extinction of the hateful clan, McKenna
bid me adieu and returned to his former headquarters.

He told McAndrew a fine tale about the magnificence of his sister’s
wedding, the name of her husband, the articles comprising the bridal
supper, the brands of champagne and wines they consumed, with other
particulars too minute for use in these pages. He ended by saying that
he had met his old partner in the “queer” business, and made a raise of
enough money to last him for some time—a large balance having been
invested in a speculation in the city, from which he was to hear
regularly by letter. This last item of information, as he expected it
would, reached the post-office within the course of a few days, and at
once relieved the mind of the delivery clerk as to a man of McKenna’s
character keeping up such an extended correspondence. The aforesaid
clerk would have told the public nothing, at any rate, but it was just
as well to have his thoughts at rest on the subject. And, as the
detective might have occasion to spend money more freely, he felt
compelled to make an early exhibit of the source from whence the cash
came.

In the meantime the Annual County Convention had been held, and Kehoe
duly elected County Delegate, having, until the occurrence of that
event, been holding the office under appointment of the State branch of
the order. Now Kehoe was King of the Mollies in Schuylkill, in fact as
well as in name. The wily fellow had accomplished his purpose. We shall
see what he did with his power.


                               ————●————




                             CHAPTER XXVII.

                        NEW FORCES IN THE FIELD.


In casting about me for a chief assistant of Mr. Franklin and co-worker
with McParlan, in the coal country, I was quick in deciding that the
very man, of all others among my large number of operatives, was Robert
J. Linden, then of Chicago, a gentleman who had long been connected with
the Agency, and in whose courage, judgment, and discretion I could place
implicit reliance, and this from the reason that all of these qualities
were united in his mind and body, and had received abundant trial during
the time he had remained in my service. Capt. Linden was eminently
qualified to assume a leading part in such a hazardous undertaking as we
were to enter upon in Pennsylvania. A man of attractive personal
appearance, captivating address, great energy and perseverance, and with
more than ordinary powers of perception, I knew he would make an
excellent open operator, when the time might arrive for that kind of
business. About forty years of age, tall, powerful in frame and physical
organization, with black, close-curling hair, whiskers and mustache of
the same texture and color, blue eyes, which were expressive of
confidence, and just the kind of orbs to win the confidence of others,
Linden was a person who could ably command my coal police. A native of
Pennsylvania; at an early day a ship carpenter by trade; possessed of a
fair education and many qualities of head and heart to entitle him to
esteem and regard, I wished for no better man. He had performed labor
for the Philadelphia office previous to 1871, was then detailed to
Chicago, and engaged in the responsible position of Lieutenant on my
local Preventive Watch. So well did he perform his duty there, that when
my son William, several years since, went to Europe on business of the
Agency, I appointed Linden to temporarily fill his place in the
detective corps. He was yet acting as an Assistant Superintendent, and
permanently located, with his estimable family, in Chicago. The only
cause of hesitation that I felt in returning him to Pennsylvania, was
found in the separation from his wife and children that must necessarily
ensue. Still, no other officer that I could spare from the west would
fill the position so well, and he was therefore directed to report in
Philadelphia at once. His experience in the navy, during the late war,
had given him confidence and coolness under trying circumstances, with
capacity for the training and management of bodies of men, and I was
certain that there would be no needless delay in making his appearance,
ready and willing to perform his task. Nor was I disappointed. Linden
soon reached Philadelphia, accompanied by a detail of six stalwart
men—partly chosen from the Chicago Preventive Watch, and partly from the
Detective Department—and there received his orders and instructions.
Without resting a single day, he entered upon his labors, taking the
cars for Pottsville, Friday, the sixth of May, 1875. Once in that city,
where he arrived a little after noon, he took his men to the Merchant’s
Hotel, directing them to remain and await his return, and then hunted
out General Pleasants, to whom he delivered his letter of introduction.
The General received him cordially and at once sent for Mr. Heisler. A
long consultation between the three men ensued, during which plans were
exhaustively discussed and arrangements carefully made to cover every
conceivable condition of affairs. Then followed the induction of the men
I had sent into the Coal and Iron Police, which ceremony transpired at
the court-house and consisted in taking the usual oath of office. After
this the six officers parted company, according to orders, going in
pairs, in different directions, with strict instructions to make their
headquarters at a certain place, and then survey carefully their field
of operations, gaining, by actual experience, a correct knowledge of the
shape and character of the country, the towns, villages, patches,
collieries, creeks and rivers, mountains and ravines, so that, in the
performance of their work, they might have no trouble in finding their
route, without inquiry, from one place to another, even in the darkness
of night. Two men were sent to Locust Run, two to Boston Colliery, and
two to Tunnel Colliery. Mr. Linden received a commission, showing that
he was given full control of these policemen. Among the arrangements was
a cipher for communicating with General Pleasants, and badges for the
men to wear. Mr. Linden—or Captain Linden, as he was soon to be
called—made a visit to Ashland on the eighth, where he tarried for
several days gaining such information as might prove of value during the
summer. At Ashland, on the fourteenth, he was introduced to his
assistants, chosen from the Coal and Iron Police, by Mr. Heisler, and
found them of the right class, the majority having served with honor as
soldiers during the war.

Soon afterward the Captain was made acquainted with Barney Dolan, of Big
Mine Run, which is not far from Ashland.

In the meantime, McKenna had visited Ashland, and meeting Linden
privately at a hotel, they adjourned to a place where they conversed
over a social glass of beer. It did not consume many minutes to agree
upon a means of communication and a point in the bush where, the proper
signal being given by either party, they might subsequently meet and
hold private discourse. It was so fixed that one could send a letter to
the other without the possibility of any third person suspecting their
correspondence. There was only one thing that seemed impossible to be
provided for and guarded against. This was the necessity existing for
Linden suddenly going from place to place, as the acts of the Mollies
might demand. All they were enabled to do in this regard was to promise
to write each other, as often as it would be prudent, and plainly set
forth the spot removing to, at as early an hour as practicable. McKenna
would hardly know in advance when he might need Linden, and Linden would
probably be unable to say, should violence and outrage continue to
increase, where he might be most in demand. Still, every precaution was
taken to have their whereabouts known one to the other. After their
meeting, McKenna returned to his friends and Linden to his headquarters.

To go back a few days: On the third of May, and subsequent to McKenna’s
first council with Linden, the former took the train for Pottsville,
where he was under promise to meet County Delegate Kehoe. Court was in
session, and their business, connected with the trial of Dan Dougherty,
for killing the Chief Burgess of Mahanoy City, resulted, as before
stated, in the defendant’s acquittal. Among those that the detective
encountered during this visit were Alex. Campbell, of Summit Hill, and
John Gallagher, with many other Mollie Maguires, all of whom were deeply
interested in the result of Dougherty’s case. There was great rejoicing
indulged in, and much drink consumed, when their friend secured release.
He was quickly taken possession of by his brother Mollies, and in their
company made a night of it. Schuylkill County Jail was voted a good
place for most people, but for a Mollie past endurance.

The return of Dougherty to Mahanoy City, an event occurring about the
ninth of May, was made remarkable by a prompt renewal of hostilities
between the lately liberated man and Jesse Major, a brother of
Dougherty’s former victim. Major was at the time accompanied by Wm. M.
Thomas, _alias_ “Bully Bill,” a notorious desperado, who was known to be
opposed to the Mollies and always ready to pull a revolver and shoot,
upon the slightest possible provocation. Dougherty was fired upon and
narrowly escaped death. Instead of calming the strife between the Welsh
and Irish miners, this encounter added fury to the fire, and it raged
more fiercely. The detective heard of the circumstance on the following
day, and made up his mind that, if the feud was kept up, it could be but
a very short time before Mahanoy City would become a modern Gehenna.

In the meantime John Gibbons brought the startling information to the
Mollies of Shenandoah, one morning, that preparations were going on,
looking to the early resumption of work by the surrounding collieries,
and, this time, the Coal and Iron Company seemed determined to protect
their laborers with arms. He suggested that such a course must be
properly met by the Hibernians, force with force. The rumor was, that
the company had already stationed seven heavily armed policemen at Plank
Ridge Colliery, fourteen at West Shenandoah Colliery, and eleven at
Indian Ridge Colliery.

“And,” said Gibbons, with an oath, “the next thing to be done is for the
boys on our side to get their guns; for I hear that these new police are
all armed wid repeating rifles. If Irish miners are to be forced into
open war, we will at least have suitable arms!”

Gibbons was loudly applauded by the surrounding Mollies, and by none
more vociferously than by Jim McKenna, whose enthusiasm over the
prospect of a fight was unreasonable and knew no bounds.

The scene of warlike operations, judging by the number of outrages
committed, appeared just then to be transferred to parts of Columbia and
Northumberland Counties; hence, in accordance with Mr. Franklin’s
orders, as well as to give Linden a free course until he should be quite
familiar with his future field of campaign, McKenna resolved to pay a
visit to Canning, County Delegate, and resume the acquaintance of the
Mollies thereabouts, with whom he had previously made himself popular.
As an excuse for the trip, one day, after this idea was fully formed in
his mind, he gave out to Tom Donahue, brother of “Yellow Jack” Donahue,
that he had, when in the vicinity, not long before, formed a great
liking for the youngest daughter of the celebrated Pat Hester. The
latter was known to be at the head of the clan, as far as deviltry was
concerned, in that region. Donahue he knew to be an intimate friend of
Hester, quite at home at his house, and, McKenna had reason to believe,
knew more of the late troubles in that vicinity than some living in more
close neighborhood. Therefore, assuming a sober air, the operative made
known his wish to go to see Miss Hester, but he was rather bashful, and
did not exactly know how to accomplish a fair beginning of his proposed
courtship. He told his friend Tom, that “everything depended upon a good
commencement.” This was assented to by Donahue, who was on a protracted
spree, at Girardville, where this conversation occurred, in Jack Kehoe’s
hotel.

The idea of the devil-may-care Jim McKenna having experienced a qualm of
the tender passion caused Donahue to smile, but the confession of
embarrassment made him nearly go into convulsions of merriment. Such a
thing as bashfulness connected with McKenna—proverbial, the country
over, for the brassiness of his entire composition—was altogether too
much for Donahue. He roared with laughter, but soon found voice to
exclaim:

“An’ is it yourself that ye are, or some _cruddy gorsoon_, right from
the auld sod? Be me sowl, I niver entertained a thought that ye had a
shadow of bashfulness in your whole body until this minit!”

“Sure,” answered McKenna, blushing all over his face, like a verdant boy
being interrogated by a handsome school-mistress, “an’ I can’t be brass
through and through! There must be some tenderness in a fellow—an’ mine
is Pat Hester’s younger daughter. I’m free to confess it’s a new thing
for me, but there must be a starting, and I want to see her! I’m not
much acquainted with Pat, her father, an’ what I’m axin’ of you is to go
wid me to his house an’ give me an introduction to the whole family.
I’ll trate ye well if ye’ll do it!”

“I’ve only been away from there, this day’s but wan wake,” responded
Donahue; “beside, I’m out of money, an’ can’t get enough for me whisky,
let alone gallavantin’ around like a country parson. It costs cash to
ride on the cars, an’ I have none of the commodity, good, bad, or
indifferent!”

“That nade make no difference,” returned McKenna, “fur I’ll stand the
expense! You see I’ve had good luck in a ‘quare’ way, lately, an’ can
afford a bit of a lark! Jist join in wid me, we’ll go to Hester’s, have
a good time, an’ be back here in a few days!”

“I promised Jack Kehoe I’d help him wid his garden fence; but I’ll see!
If he’ll let me off, I’m yer man, an I’ll introduce ye to Pat Hester and
all the young Hesters wid pleasure!”

Kehoe was glad enough to get rid of Donahue, for a while—though he might
have particular use for such as he in a little time—as Tom drank more
whisky, by half, than would hire a man who could perform twice as much
work. So the two men started.

While _en route_, after having swallowed a few drinks, Donahue proved
very loquacious, and wanted to tell the detective all about the recent
destruction of Empire Colliery near Excelsior, but McKenna gently
stopped him, saying: “It is a courtin’ we are goin’, an’ not to a match
at telling long yarns!” This, as the officer had expected, only aroused
the pugnacity of his companion, and prompted him, from pure obstinacy,
to keep up the conversation. Once more recurring to the subject, he went
on—the hearer apparently absorbed in contemplation of the happiness in
store, through sparking Hester’s daughter, but, in reality, noting in
his mind the most trivial incident Donahue alluded to—and was telling,
not only of burnings in which he had been engaged, but in pointing out
those yet to be consummated in the locality. In this way the fellow was
literally pumped dry. Occasionally McKenna would interrupt the flow of
criminal talk with:

“But phat about Pat Hester’s daughter?”

“To h—l wid Pat Hester’s daughter!” would be the impatient reply of the
drunken Mollie, and then he would proceed, with much volubility and
extravagance of gesture, to unfold a new rascality, tell of late
outrages, and who had performed them, with a detail of fact and incident
convincing the detective that, with Donahue at least, the old saying,
_in vino veritas_, was as correct in modern times as in the days of
Imperial Rome, for the more whisky Donahue drank the more recklessly he
spoke the truth, and the more McKenna opposed his thus talking, the more
he would insist upon dwelling on the very topics that the operative
desired to hear about. In this way, out came the fact of the recent
burning of a bridge at the junction, when the watchman had run after and
fired upon the incendiaries. Donahue confessed to having burnt the
telegraph office in the neighborhood, himself, and said he was not yet
through. In several of the deeds he was not a participant, but he knew
something concerning all of them and who were the real perpetrators.

When the cars reached Locust Gap, McKenna and his, by this time, maudlin
companion, alighted, and went directly to the residence of Dennis F.
Canning, the County Delegate of Northumberland, but learned from Mrs.
Canning that her husband was absent, in Philadelphia, on business. They
could not remain there, so adjourned to Scott’s tavern, where Donahue
soon made himself ridiculous by quarreling with everybody, and the agent
was pleased to lead him away on the road to Locust Gap Junction, near
which place Hester resided. After a fatiguing walk, the drunken man
rallied a little and was sufficiently himself to point out certain
bridges that they had tried hard to burn. Donahue concluded, from their
ill success, that kerosene oil was not sufficient for setting fire to
heavy timbers. It might do with small trash, but utterly failed when
applied to large beams and girders. The watchman at this bridge was a
brother of Mrs. Hester, and Donahue said the structure would yet have to
go. Had not the powder been mismanaged it must have met destruction some
weeks before.

At this period another well-timed query about Miss Hester set Donahue’s
tongue running regarding the attack on Helfenstein’s, or Ben Franklin
Breaker, which he pointed out.

“It made a devilish fine blaze!” the Mollie said, in a tone of
exultation, “an’ the cowardly watchmen made no show of resistance!”

This breaker, after repeated notifications to its owners that it was in
danger, had been left to the care of one or two useless and cowardly
attendants, and was leveled to the ground. Donahue said that Enterprise
would have been left standing, had not the bosses continued to put good
miners out and blacklegs in, after notification to stop it. Then that
structure had to go the way of the others.

[Illustration: “_Here we are, at Pat. Hester’s, at last._”]

“Here we are at Pat Hester’s at last,” said Donahue, as they gained the
locality.

They entered the house and McKenna was placed on friendly terms with
Mrs. Hester and the boys—for Hester had a large family, several lads,
and two blooming daughters. Presently Donahue retired to the
sitting-room to visit the girls, leaving the operative to be entertained
by the old lady. This was a joke that McKenna appreciated, but the
tables were quickly turned upon Donahue, who was surprised, a moment
later, to see his former companion walk into the parlor with Mrs.
Hester, who gave him a favorable introduction to her daughters. They
were both handsome misses, as McKenna had previously been informed, and
received him very graciously. The conversation soon assumed a kindly and
interesting phase, despite Donahue’s condition. Even that tough customer
was somewhat sobered by his long walk on the railroad track.

Hester came home to dinner. In the meantime, McKenna had talked his best
to the fair one of his choice, whose name was Maria, and she seemed to
take his blarney with a good grace, but really giving him, in joke, as
good as he sent.

Pat Hester was a rather large, heavy man, with dark eyes and hair, the
latter worn long and turned under at the ends, with massive and stolid,
but by no means evil-looking features. He had a slightly wicked
expression in the eye, arching eyebrows, thin lips and a narrow
chin-whisker, the beard in hue a little lighter than the hair. In all,
he was not a man to fall in love with at first sight, yet wearing a
decent outward appearance, seemingly smart, and not ill-natured unless
provoked. When Hester reached home, after overseeing a gang of laborers
working on a railroad bridge, he met and was presented to McKenna.
Taking a natural fancy for him, Pat immediately suspected his object,
and gave the young man encouragement, that, if the lady was entirely
willing, the father had no sort of objection to the courtship. But after
dinner, and the departure of Hester to his labor, the arrival of Pat
McCool and Ned Skivington, the latter ex-County Delegate, interfered
considerably with the enjoyment of the ladies’ society, and the greater
part of the afternoon was passed by the Mollies in the bar-room. McCool
was an old acquaintance of McKenna’s, as he had many a time tasted his
liquor in Shenandoah. Of course he spoke favorably of the Secretary and
made much of him. Skivington was also very friendly. Toward night the
men walked out upon the track and met Hester returning. While passing a
bridge, just before, Donahue had whispered to McKenna:

“See that bridge! Now, for two hundred dollars from Pat Hester, I’d see
it well down wid the ground, but I’ll be hanged if I’d do it for
nothing!”

This was as good as a hint to the hearer that Donahue had been speaking
to Hester about destroying the bridge and disagreed with him as to the
amount to be received for the undertaking.

McKenna accepted the information with many nods, winks, and grimaces,
expressive of rapt attention and interest, without hazarding an opinion
on the subject for or against burning the bridge. But he thought that
here was another warning to be sent to Mr. Franklin.

[Illustration: “_That night there was an interesting group gathered in
Pat. Hester’s parlor._c]

That night there was an interesting group gathered in Pat Hester’s
parlor. The center lamp shone on the principal characters, bringing them
out in bold relief. Donahue sat in a big arm-chair, asleep. Whisky had
at last overpowered the redoubtable relative of “Yellow Jack,” and he
slept, his head hanging to one side, and occasionally starting up to
show that he still lived, and to save his neck from entire dislocation.
Pat Hester and his wife—the latter somewhat advanced in years, yet
spruce as a sunflower and as lively as a cricket—were opponents in a
game of euchre; the lady having McKenna as a partner, while Pat played
with his oldest son. One of the Misses Hester was busy sewing, and the
other—the younger, and McKenna’s particular affinity—sat at his elbow,
telling him how to marshal his cards in order to defeat her respected
father and brother at the game. She was bright and interesting, and no
fault can be found with the detective if he permitted his eyes to wander
occasionally from his hand to gaze into the blue depths of those of the
lady at his side. Knowing Pat Hester, as he did, there was no danger
that he would allow himself to go too far in his wooing. Indeed, there
chanced to be a charming girl living over at Tamaqua, that he had met at
the Polish wedding, and on whom much of his thoughts in that direction
were lavished. He could not forget the touch of those light hands, and
the velvet kisses he had received on the cheek so many weeks before. Yet
he had never met Miss Higgins the second time. He believed he would see
her some day, however, and determined to remain heart-whole until that
moment. Miss Hester’s case was a hopeless one. Still her assistance in
euchre was very convenient, and he could not help admiring the grace and
vivacity of the girl, notwithstanding her connections. When two games
had been finished, and success was about equal on either side, the house
was closed, and all, excepting McKenna and the young ladies, retired. It
was not quite morning when this trio separated, mutually pleased with
each other and the manner in which they had passed their time.

The next day McKenna left, receiving a warm and pressing invitation to
repeat his visit, which he was not slow in promising.

On the way home, Donahue, who had nearly recovered from his spree, only
to engage in another, gave the detective, in confidence, the
circumstances attending the cutting of the wire cable at Gordon
Plane—thus dropping down the cars and entailing much loss and delay for
the company—upon the space below, but fortunately taking no lives. He
also told him of the cruel beating of a boss, on the fourteenth of the
month, at Mt. Laffee, both outrages perpetrated by the Mollies. But he
was not so communicative in giving the authors of those deeds, if he
knew them, which might be suspected, as he was in the locality at the
time.

When McKenna returned to Shenandoah, he found more trouble awaiting him.
McAndrew, the Bodymaster, having for a long time been out of work, was
determined to go to Luzerne County, where somebody offered him
employment in the mines, near Wilkesbarre, and, on the night of the
seventeenth of May, gave notice, in open division, that he would have to
resign, or leave the books, papers, and business in McKenna’s hands
while he should be absent. All expressed regret that he must go, and
none more sincerely than the Secretary, in whose care the division would
be, in such an event, as there was no Vice-President and no other person
considered capable of occupying the managing position. After the close
of the meeting, McKenna tried his best to make McAndrew believe it his
duty to remain, whatever might happen, and even went as far as to
promise to use his own best efforts, and the entire influence of the
Mollies, in obtaining work for him if he would stay; but McAndrew’s mind
was fully made up. Go he would, and on the eighteenth he started, the
operative regretfully accompanying him to the train and wishing him “a
safe journey, good luck, and a quick return.” Here was a trial for the
detective. Here was that under which he well might tremble. The Mollies
all aroused—the wicked element in power—work hard to get—murder and
assassination riding rampant over the country, and he, the officer sent
to ferret out and report their operations and their misdeeds, acting as
the head of one of the most sanguinary divisions in Schuylkill County.
What if the order might chance to agree upon the killing of Jesse Major,
or Gomer James, or Wm. M. Thomas, or any one of the number who had been
secretly threatened with death? What if Jack Kehoe were to call upon him
for men to assassinate somebody? Evidently it would require his finest
ability to prevent himself from being drawn into the execution of crime,
which was foreign to his duty. What should he do? In which direction
should he turn?


                               ————●————




                            CHAPTER XXVIII.

                   THE DETECTIVE IN SORE TRIBULATION.


McKenna’s fears were not without foundation, as was shown from the
action taken by members of his division the very day succeeding the one
on which McAndrew, the Bodymaster, shook the dust of Shenandoah from his
shoes and sought work near Wilkesbarre. On the morning of the eighteenth
of May, the troubled Secretary was met at the street corner by Doyle and
Garvey, who said they were on the way to his boarding-house, as Gibbons
desired to see him immediately, down in the bush. The three men set out
for the place of meeting, and meantime the mind of the detective was
sorely agitated. What were these men about to do with him? Had they
penetrated his disguise, now many months worn, and, as he thought, quite
thick enough to defy the sharpest scrutiny? Were they taking him out to
meet the fate he well knew must follow quick upon discovery of his real
mission in the mines? But, despite dark reflections, keeping up a firm
outward appearance and passing merry jokes, upon the usual subjects,
without as much as a quaver in the tone of his voice, or a perceptible
tremor in his nerves, he walked along; whether to his own death, or a
conference to end in the murder of another, he could only guess.

In the bush, not far from Muff Lawler’s house, a little later, were
congregated Gibbons, Doyle, Garvey, Fenton Cooney, and James McKenna.
Gibbons was the spokesman, and gruffly informed the Secretary that, now
McAndrew was gone, Gomer James must be made away with.

“I propose,” said he, “that two men be obtained from Mahanoy Plane, and
two from Mahanoy City, to go with me an’ Doyle, here, an’ we’ll soon end
the cursed Welshman!”

“How is it to be done?” asked McKenna, and he did earnestly wish
McAndrew was safe home again.

“I’ll jist tell ye!” roughly responded Gibbons, while he smoked his pipe
composedly, knocking off the burnt tobacco with the tip of his little
finger, showing as much coolness as if sitting in his own chimney
corner, talking to a friend about the weather. There was a cold,
malevolent glitter in his restless eye which told those who knew him
that he was wholly in earnest. “I’ll tell ye! All Doyle an’ I wants is
fur the four men to kape a good watch, part on one side, an’ part on the
other side of the road that Gomer James passes over, an’ we two’ll
attend to the rest! Gomer is now watchman at the Little Drift, an’ we
can catch him aisy like, early in the mornin’, when he’s goin’ home from
work. The patch is not so very far from here, but far enough, an’ before
anybody’ll be up an’ around, we can be back home, an’ the Mahanoy men
well on their road for the Plane!”

“Av coorse,” said McKenna, appreciating that, to show cowardice or
hesitation, under the circumstances, would prove sure if not immediate
death, “if the majority’s raally in favor of the thing, we’ll certainly
have it done! I consent to whativer the division may ask!”

The men present were united in the demand, and so expressed themselves.
All wanted Gomer James killed. The detective, much against his will, was
forced to appear as bloodthirsty as his companions. He must not only
agree to, but assume a part in, the dreadful act. Thoughts flashed
through his quickened brain with lightning-like rapidity. Ideas were
plenty—in fact, too plentiful—but which way he should turn, and how
escape this terrible business, at first he did not clearly see. Finally
a suggestion came, like a reflected gleam of sunlight to the prisoner in
his rayless cell, and he said:

“You are just right, Gibbons! That’s exactly the way to manage; an’ I’ll
go, this very day, to Mahanoy Plane, see Callaghan, an’ get two of the
men. I’ll take Garvey wid me, an’ Cooney is appointed to go wid you, to
Mahanoy City, to mate the Bodymasther and get the others. Then we’ll
return here, the morrow, an’ have everything ready for business the next
day mornin’!”

“All right,” answered Gibbons.

Cooney consented to his part in the programme, and the little meeting
broke up, its members scattering in various paths, and entering
Shenandoah from different directions, to avoid any remarks of the
people.

This horrid mission the operative was loth to perform. It came of
McAndrew stubbornly refusing to stop in Shenandoah without work, and
leaving the burden of the division to devolve upon him. He well knew
there would be no chance that day to communicate with Mr. Franklin, who
alone could notify Gomer James of this new danger, as Garvey was sure to
remain close by him, and what he was to do he was quite unable to
determine. The assassination must be prevented, at the risk of his own
life, if need be; but how he was to reach the much-desired result
remained among the problems that he could not explain. Trusting to
chance, and an Irishman’s ready wit, he took the cars in Garvey’s
company, and went to Mahanoy Plane, as both told inquirers, “to look for
employment.”

At Mahanoy Plane, in the afternoon, the two Mollies presented themselves
before Callaghan, and in Garvey’s hearing, the operative made demand of
that Bodymaster’s division for two men who were “capable of doin’ a
clane job.” Callaghan said he was quite willing, but the members of his
body were nearly all young and inexperienced, and he doubted if he could
find two who would serve the purpose. Still, he promised to make the
effort.

The detective and his friend then left, saying they would call at an
early hour in the afternoon, prepared to return to Shenandoah with the
persons appointed. Before leaving Callaghan, the Secretary treated
twice, and he and Garvey sallied out to find what was to be seen at the
Plane. They first visited Joe Murphy’s house, where they had more
liquor, and, after taking the rounds of all the saloons, both begun to
feel they had swallowed something more powerful than water—McKenna,
especially, finding himself so badly under the influence that he
exhibited it in his walk and conversation, the former fast becoming
vibratory, and the latter boisterous. When they reappeared at
Callaghan’s, it was nearly dark, and the Bodymaster informed them he had
not found the needed men. He said he did not despair, however, and,
after treating once or twice, went out to continue the search. In his
absence McKenna was entirely overcome, fell sprawling over on a long
bench, and soon relapsed into a drunken stupor, from which neither
Garvey nor Callaghan, with use of every known appliance, could succeed
in awakening him. It was fully nine o’clock at night, and Garvey had
taken the train for Shenandoah, before the drunken Secretary was made
sufficiently sensible to understand that he must get up. So sottish was
his condition that Callaghan found himself forced to secure a bed for
him for the night, and assist in putting him under its cover.

The detective had, at least, postponed his own participation in the
James matter, and was almost certain Gibbons would delay any attempt to
kill the Welshman until he returned. Still there was a remote chance of
his pursuing an opposite course. But McKenna was perfectly helpless. No
dispatch could be sent to Philadelphia from that small place without
creating suspicion. The best he could do was to sit up in bed, write a
few lines in pencil, setting forth the danger James was in, seal it,
stamp it, having recourse to the improvised stamp depository in his
boot-leg, and after midnight, when all in the house were supposed to be
asleep, steal softly down-stairs, in his stockings, with _brogues_ in
hand, and go to the post-office. All of this he succeeded in doing, and
in safely mailing his letter, and got back to his couch without
discovery. There was the risk that Gibbons had obtained his men from
Mahanoy City, and might be even then waiting for Gomer James, ready to
take his life. He found enough in this thought to banish refreshing
sleep. But McKenna remained in his room until people were stirring for
another day, and then rising, walked about in the cool air until
Callaghan made his appearance in the bar-room.

“Did ye get the men?” inquired McKenna, after greeting the tavern
keeper.

“Divil a man!” answered Callaghan.

“An’ do ye mane to?”

“Sure, an’ I do!”

“An’ phatever was’t that ye gave me for whisky, last night? I’m half in
the belafe that, to get out of sendin’ the men to do me biddin’, ye
tried to poison me!”—adding: “I niver felt so quare in my head in all me
life!”

“Deil a bit of poison was there in it! The whisky was the very best! You
must have mixed your drinks after comin’ to the Plane!”

It was of no avail for the operative to be angry with Callaghan, as he
would make nothing by it. Therefore, leaving word with the Bodymaster to
send his men over when they were ready, McKenna proceeded to Shenandoah.
There he found a great excitement prevailing over two fires that had
occurred the previous night, one at Excelsior Colliery, already spoken
of, the other being the burning of the railway signal tower at Mahanoy
Plane. Not much was said about the Secretary’s failure to secure the two
men from Callaghan, as Garvey had returned the night before, very much
under the influence of liquor, reporting McKenna as on the road drunk,
without the Mollies sent for, and as Gibbons had been no more
successful, having failed entirely. Thus the Secretary was once more
excused for being intoxicated when intrusted with urgent business.

Hurley, Doyle, Monaghan, and Gibbons had lain in wait for Gomer James,
however, the second morning, and he had not made his appearance as
expected.

The operative was more easy in his mind, as he knew that, through Capt.
Linden, or some other person, James must surely have received warning to
keep himself continually under protection, out of harm’s way.

A few days later, Hurley related how he and the others had, on one
occasion, gone out to fix Gomer James, and he, Hurley, was armed with a
rifle. They lay out nearly all night, hoping to see and catch him, and
had Monaghan done the right thing, they would have killed the Welshman,
as he actually passed their ambush, the ex-constable failing to inform
them who he was until too late. As it chanced, Doyle had his pistol
leveled at him, but was prevented from shooting by Garvey, who said he
might be hitting an innocent man.

[Illustration: “_When ready, the lucky man was concealed from view._”]

At another time, the young Welshman arrived when Gibbons, Hurley,
Cooney, Garvey, Doyle, Monaghan, Finnell, and Thompson, all armed, were
waiting for him. Still he traversed the road in safety. Hurley would
have dropped him at a venture, only he was just loading the rifle at the
time. When ready, the lucky man was concealed from view.

“Well, what are you going to do now?” inquired the operative.

“We are sure to get him yet!” answered Hurley. “But first let us go and
see some cousins of the man, Cosgrove. If they will come down with more
money, then we can return here, and if the rest all back out, I’ll do
the job on my own private account! I suppose you’ll lend a hand?”

This to McKenna.

“Oh, yes! That’s all right!” responded the Secretary, approvingly.

So money _was_ at the bottom of it.

The life of the young Welshman hung upon an attenuated thread. Still he
remained a watchman, only having himself changed from a night to a day
hand. Gibbons and Hurley everywhere sought his life, but McKenna managed
to keep clear of it. At last Gibbons boldly said he would go to Jack
Kehoe in person, and demand for Hurley and himself a commission to kill
Gomer James. They wanted no help and could easily perform the task by
themselves.

The ensuing Sunday morning, Mike Doyle was at Cooney’s, where McKenna
boarded. He said everything had been arranged for Gomer James, and three
men were to arrive from Girardville the next day, when the Secretary
must be ready to do his share. The time set for the act was Monday
night, May 24, 1875. Again were the thoughts of the officer turned to
saving the intrepid but foolhardy young man. It was not possible that
the Mollies suspected him of having warned James, causing him to cease
traveling his former path at night, but Doyle seemed to be placed with
the Secretary and clung industriously to him through the entire day, and
he had no chance to write or telegraph a line to Mr. Franklin. Doyle,
contrary to his usual custom, refused to drink, and his apparent task
was to keep McKenna duly sober for the expected meeting with Kehoe’s
promised assassins. That was undoubtedly his object in remaining nigh
the detective. He must have been instructed by some one to do so, as it
was not characteristic of Mike Doyle to refuse good liquor, or restrain
himself from a debauch, when acting wholly from his own impulses.

The detective began heartily to curse the day that he ever allowed
himself to sit in the Secretary’s chair, and exercised his wits thinking
up some way of shirking official responsibilities, which, considering
the condition the country was in, he found to clash with his duty to the
Agency and to the public. He wished McAndrew might return, and even
thought of sending him word that Mrs. McAndrew was very ill—but learned,
upon visiting her, she was never better in her life—and that would not
succeed. It subsequently occurred to him that he intended going away to
Wilkesbarre, after more counterfeit money. But this pretence fell
through, as Hurley and Gibbons both said he could send a letter. Then he
called a meeting of the division, brought before it and read aloud the
printed constitution and by-laws of the order, which provided for the
election, each year, of a Vice-President and an Assistant Secretary,
neither of which chairs had ever been filled. The suggestion was that
Thomas Hurley be elected Vice-President until the annual day for
choosing officers came around, and Gibbons to have the position of
Assistant Secretary. Both of these men absolutely refused to serve—both
were illiterate, both had characters too well known in the community—and
a majority of the members present at the meeting unanimously supported a
resolution to the effect that Bodymaster, Secretary, and Treasurer were
officers enough for that lodge. Here McKenna’s work came to naught. He
was unable to find anything satisfactory which would take the
responsibility off his shoulders and permit him to go to Luzerne County,
as he desired, and had to let it rest, fearing that any very marked
pertinacity might call the attention of the brotherhood to his efforts
to avoid a duty assumed when he took the position he held.

The occurrence of a great fire in the wood, which spread from patch to
patch, and from mountain to mountain, carrying destruction and
consternation along its track, in the extinguishment of which everybody
about the vicinity was engaged, prevented the present execution of the
James assassination. The employment of every available man in fighting
fire made it impossible the Mollies should then seek the young man’s
life. Still, it was only a short time that this work kept them from
bloody thoughts and bloodier deeds.

James must have received a notice of what was going on, as once more he
resigned his position and left the vicinity. The men who, upon this
occasion, were selected to do for Gomer James were James Bradley, of
Loss Creek, Tom Connory, _alias_ “Derrick,” of Connor’s Patch, and
Anthony Monaghan, _alias_ “Rappa Jack,” of Rappahannock. They were duly
notified of James’ disappearance. But Gibbons was not the man to give up
a thing upon which his heart was set, as it was on the murder of the
Welshman, and the detective knew that he must keep an earnest and close
watch of both Hurley and Gibbons, or they would yet accomplish the deed.
Hence McKenna greatly affected Gibbons’ company, night and day.

In a little while Gibbons hatched a plan to get James back as watchman
at the old breaker. It was to gather half a dozen men, and fire a volley
in the air, at night, to frighten the men who had taken Gomer James’
place, when some one could report it to the boss, who would very
naturally say: “When James was night-watchman, such things did not
happen; if they did, somebody got hurt, for Gomer was no coward!”

This plan, it was thought by some, would cause Gomer James to be
reinstated.

Cooney was of the opinion that it must fail, as James had proceeded
deliberately to get drunk, when he knew that such conduct would surely
end in his discharge. It appeared to him that the Welshman wanted a
chance to leave, and had in some way discovered that the Mollies were
once more in search of him.

To quiet the matter more effectually, McKenna promised Gibbons that he
would try and make a trade with some Division-master for men to follow
James, wherever he might be, and kill him. But he never did anything of
the sort, nor had he so intended when making the proposition.

McKenna was supported in his acts by Jack Kehoe, who, a little later,
swore that he would not be dictated to, and that if McKenna, who was, in
his sight, acting Bodymaster of Shenandoah Division, allowed Hurley and
Gibbons to tell him what he should and should not do, he would consider
it his duty, as County Delegate, to look after him, the Secretary, and
have him cut off.

The detective at the same time learned that Kehoe had just returned from
Mahanoy City, where he found the English and Welsh all assembled about
the public square, and no Irishman, or woman, could pass without being
insulted. Even the Celts who were not, and never had been Mollies, he
said, begged him to do something to end this unendurable state of
suffering. They did not care what was done if it only quieted the
Modocs, who were acting worse than their namesakes of the lava-beds in
the far west.

“I have sent Tom Donahue,” said the County Delegate, “up to Locust Gap,
to see Dennis Canning, County Delegate of Northumberland, but learned
that he had gone to Pittsburg and was at work there; an’ I now intend
getting Chris Donnelly, of Mt. Laffee, County Treasurer; Wm. Gavin, of
Big Mine Run, County Secretary; Mike O’Brien, Bodymaster at Mahanoy
City—and I invite you, McKenna, to be present—to hold a convention, on
the first of June, at Clark’s, in Mahanoy, an’ we will see what is to be
done wid the whelps, now barkin’ so lustily. Perhaps it might be the
thing to just bouldly an’ publicly challenge the whole pack to come out
an’ fight us. Some think we had best attack ’em in the night an’ shoot
down every one we meet, sparin’ only women and children! I hate shedding
of human blood, but these are mighty hot times, an’ something will have
to be put to work to give us our rights!”

“Sure, an’ I can’t but applaud your acts, Kehoe!” responded McKenna.
“Fur wan that ye have invited, ye may count on my bein’ at Clark’s
promptly on the day.”

The County Delegate expressed his pleasure, and said, if all the
gentlemen were like the Shenandoah Secretary the Modocs would soon be
silenced. The men then parted, Kehoe to attend to home measures, and
deal out whisky for his customers, and the detective to report to Mr.
Franklin and prepare for the great convention.


                               ————●————




                             CHAPTER XXIX.

                        THE INQUISITION OF TEN.


Other events crowding upon their attention seemed for a time to guard
the threatened Gomer James from the bullets of his sworn assassins. The
Welshman still lived and pursued his usual avocations, wherever he might
be, unharmed and unmolested.

At the annual borough election Jack Kehoe was unanimously chosen High
Constable of Girardville. He was not only King of the Mollies of
Schuylkill, but had the power of arrest and charge of the municipal
prisoners. If the latter chanced to be of the order, they were handled
tenderly and fared sumptuously. If of the Chain Gang, the Modoc, or
Sheet Iron sort, he bundled them into jail without gloves, and fed them
upon whatever might be cheap and unsavory. Surely, Jack Kehoe was a
rising luminary in the heavens—or on the earth—and his luck fast
improving.

A few days before the date appointed for the convention at Mahanoy City,
McKenna went to see Michael O’Brien and had a talk with him about the
troubles in his vicinity. O’Brien was anxious to have three or four men,
who could be depended upon, come over to Mahanoy, and he would appoint
persons from his own division to show the strangers their work, which
was to “fetch” Wm. M. Thomas and Jesse Major. He was of the opinion
that, if these parties, and two or three others, were well out of the
way, there might ensue a reign of peace in the community; but just as
long as they lived, trouble would surely come. O’Brien said he had given
Kehoe the situation of affairs.

While in Mahanoy one McDonell reported to the Shenandoah Secretary that
he had recently conversed with Thomas, who seemed reckless and stubborn,
remarking to the effect that it made little difference to him, since the
Dan Dougherty shooting, how he carried himself, the Mollies were sure to
get him, wherever he might hide. Some one had lately informed Thomas
that, the next time he was assaulted, it would be in open daylight, by a
man on horseback. McDonell learned that Bill carried arms on his person,
and boasted his readiness to receive the Mollies whenever and in
whatever manner they chose to meet him. Of the truth of this the members
of the society had all the proof needed. What they wanted was to find
somebody, unknown to the citizens and to Bill, that Thomas might be
murdered and no trace be left of the murderers.

The next day, while McKenna was present, Hurley came to Cooney’s, in
Shenandoah, and asked the master of the house to pass out to him,
through a window, his rifle, which had, during several days, been left
there for safe-keeping. Some visitors were in the building at the time,
with Mrs. Cooney, and Hurley did not care to have them see him receive
the gun. This looked like business to the detective, but he was unable
to stop in Shenandoah to find out what might be in preparation, as the
approaching meeting in Mahanoy City demanded immediate attention.

McAndrew, who was yet working at Port Griffith, could not go to the
convention, and McKenna was the man to fill his place. Before the day
arrived, the operative saw Kehoe at Girardville. There he met Jack
Donahue, John Reagan, the latter Bodymaster at St. Clair, and some other
Mollies. Mrs. Kehoe’s child was sick, and Dr. Carr visited it, bringing
Reagan up with him in his carriage. Dr. Sherman, of Girardville, was
also there in consultation. Kehoe, after a little time, called McKenna,
Donahue, and Reagan into the kitchen, at the rear of his bar, and some
private conversation ensued upon the lately appointed meeting at Mahanoy
City. Kehoe was anxious that Reagan and McKenna should be there, ending
his introduction of the subject with a request that the latter should
go, that afternoon, and inform O’Brien, Bodymaster of Mahanoy City
Division, to be ready to receive them. This he promised to do.
Subsequently Kehoe asked:

“Do either of you know any good _old_ men, who are sharp on the shoot? I
want some capable of doing a very particular work, an’ doing it swiftly
and surely!”

“Well, ye are posted as to Shenandoah Division,” returned McKenna, “an’
know that we are nearly all young men, an’ of no great experience. I
don’t think any could be depended upon in a case of importance!”

“As for me,” here broke in Reagan, “I belave I have one man that’ll jist
fill the bill an’ put in good work whenever ye make the call on me!”

Further conference on this topic, at the time, was broken off by the
coming down the stairs of Drs. Sherman and Carr. With the latter, after
a treat from the disciple of Esculapius, Reagan rode away homeward.

It was on this occasion that Kehoe developed a plan through which a
constable by the name of Lamison should be killed. It seems that the
officer alluded to, in arresting a Mollie named Rusk, at Kingston, not
long before, had shot the Irishman, who violently resisted. Beside, the
same official had fired upon and wounded a lad, named Leville, who was
saucy while on his way home from a foot-race. For these offenses the
High Constable and King of the Mollies wanted Lamison assassinated. He
desired that a warrant should be sworn out for his victim’s arrest, to
be served by himself, and while on the road to Girardville, a masked mob
of Mollies might pounce upon and easily overpower Kehoe, and in the
mêlée, shoot down and kill his prisoner. Tom Donahue, who was
participating in the conversation, sagely suggested that Lamison would
possibly have a hearing at Kingston and secure bail, thus knocking
Kehoe’s fine scheme into atoms. He was in favor of having Lamison
planted under the daisies, on the general principle, as he coarsely put
it, that “dead dogs wag no tails,” but wanted the job done
scientifically and without a chance of failure.

Sunday, the first of June, 1875, came, one of the balmiest of spring
days. The snow had long since dissolved, swelling the mountain streams,
the verdure brightened up, and winter no longer lingered in the lap of
spring. The life-giving sap rose from the warm earth, coursed along and
filled the bloodless veins, and brought bud and blossom to the forest
trees.

But all this harmony in nature found no counterpart in the minds of the
residents of the country cursed by the Mollie Maguires. On the contrary,
the storm of passion and hate in human hearts was unassuaged, and swept
forward, seeming to gather strength and fury as it desolated
hearth-stones and filled graves with gory victims.

[Illustration: “_The Emerald House. Michael Clark, proprietor_”]

The detective was early at Mahanoy City, and in joining his brethren at
the Emerald House, Michael Clark proprietor. This man Clark, as before
stated, was not a Mollie Maguire, but his two sons belonged to the
order. The hotel was a two-story, basement and attic affair, the outside
painted brown, with the eaves and two dormer-windows facing the main
street of the city. The first floor front was lighted by large show
windows, for which there were no shades or screens to veil the array of
bottles and decanters behind the bar, or the men there congregating to
enjoy their liquor. There was a door at the center, giving entrance to
the saloon and bar, and another at the side by which the upper
apartments were reached without troubling other inmates.

In the rear of the public room was, first, a long dining-hall common to
such places, and then the kitchen. All were very plainly furnished. At
the end of the lot was the bank of the river. Upstairs, in the front
part of the house, was one spacious, well-lighted apartment, carpeted
and decently stocked with furniture, in which meetings were held, and it
was lighted, by day, with four windows. Back of this were bedrooms. On
the garret floor were also a number of sleeping apartments. The business
of the writer is with the assembly room, where the conspirators
congregated. There, at half-past ten in the forenoon, seated around a
large table, were John Kehoe, County Delegate of Schuylkill; Chris
Donnelly, of Mt. Laffee, County Treasurer; Wm. Gavin, of Big Mine Run,
County Secretary; John Donahue, _alias_ “Yellow Jack,” Bodymaster of
Tuscarora; Dennis F. Canning, County Delegate of Northumberland,
residing at Locust Gap; Wm. Gomerly, Bodymaster of St. Nicholas; James
Roarty, Bodymaster at Coaldale; Mike O’Brien, Bodymaster at Mahanoy
City, with his Secretary, Francis McHugh, and James McKenna,
representing Shenandoah Division, and also acting as my detective. In
the bar below there were other Mollies, and with them James Kerrigan,
Bodymaster of Tamaqua Division. Kehoe sat in the place of authority,
made the opening prayer, and organized the meeting. He then delivered a
brief speech, saying that he supposed all were acquainted with the
object of the convention, and without further explanation, appointed a
committee of two to bring Dan Dougherty before the meeting. This was
done, and Dan came in. He was a well-favored young Irishman, with dark
hair and mustache, eyes of the same color, nose straight, face rather
full, and cheeks red and healthful, despite the wounds he had received
from Major, and the dread he appeared to be in of the relatives of the
deceased Chief Burgess, and of Bully Bill. Dougherty was a miner by
occupation, dressed well, and had the reputation of being ordinarily a
sober man. Of about medium height and weight, his physical status did
honor to his twenty-four years.

[Illustration: “Dan., show us your coat,” said Kehoe.]

“Dan, show us your coat,” said Kehoe.

Dougherty obeyed, and, removing the garment, exhibited bullet-holes
perforating the cloth in two or three places.

“Who do ye think did it?” queried the County Delegate.

“I belave it was Jesse Major, but I couldn’t swear to him on the book!”

“Didn’t the police try to catch him?”

“No! An’ there was an officer not four yards from the man at the time! I
axed him why. ‘Sure, and I’d be shot down in me tracks if I raised a
hand,’ said he, an’ he went off about his business as if nothin’ had
happened!”

This caused a buzz, evidently of anger, to pass around the table.

“What men do ye think are at the head of all the late troubles in this
city?” asked Kehoe, who had remained standing from the time that
Dougherty entered the apartment.

“The which? Who is it? Faith, an’ I can think of no one exceptin’ Jesse
and James Major, an’ Bully Bill! If the toes of these three were turned
up, ther’d be peaceable times in Mahanoy!”

“That’ll do,” said Kehoe. “You may retire.”

Dougherty cast a searching glance around the board, seemed satisfied,
put on his coat, and left the chamber.

For a moment after the closing of the door, silence reigned in the
inquisition-room, and the inquisitors said not a word.

Chris Donnelly was the first to speak:

“These things are getting altogether too bad! Last night the train
coming from Pottsville, by way of Tamaqua, was searched by Jesse and Wm.
Major, and a number of others, all armed, and the company allowed it
without a word! I suppose it is because the Majors hire a big vein. I
think we must put a stop to such goings on!”

Kehoe resumed his seat, placed his elbows on the table, rested his
hatchet-face on his two hands, and awaited developments.

“For one,” resumed Donnelly, who had not left his chair while speaking,
“I’ll get two good men, an’ go myself, and have the Majors’ business at
once attended to!”

Here Jack Donahue—“Yellow Jack”—stood on his feet, and remarked:

“We, of this side the mountain, are thankful to ye of the part beyant
the mountain; but we can attend to the affair, at present. You,
Donnelly, nade not move just yet! Afther Sunday, if we need you, I’ll
send word by a man to Pottsville, an’ tell you what’s to be done.”

Kehoe, after some more talk, appointed Mike O’Brien and James McKenna a
committee to see what should be done with Wm. M. Thomas.

The detective brazened it out, and expressed a willingness to attend to
his duty, at the same time suggesting that counsel from older heads
would be in order. O’Brien tacitly deferred management of this portion
of the business to McKenna, which was satisfactory to the agent, as it
ran through his mind that, if permitted to hold the helm all through,
Bill Thomas would not be in any especial danger of losing his life.

“I’m in favor of shootin’ Bully Bill, bowldly right on the strate, in
open daylight!” exclaimed Kehoe.

O’Brien hinted that such a course would be sure to get the boys in a
scrape, and added:

“Bill can best be taken on the road home to Shoemaker’s Patch. Then he
can be dropped, an’ the men make sure their escape!”

“Yes, that is the best plan,” here put in Dennis Canning, the
Northumberland delegate, who had previously said little. He was a
gentlemanly-appearing person, showing nothing in his face to indicate a
sanguinary disposition. Yet he took part in the cold-blooded proceedings
of the convention, without a chill passing over him, and seemed as much
concerned regarding the murder of Thomas as the others.

“Let it be so, then,” resumed the King of all the Mollies, in
Schuylkill, and he lifted his bearded chin from his thin hands, and
looked sharply over at McKenna.

“To you, an’ your division, Jim McKenna, I lave the picking out of four
or five good men, safe to be intrusted with such a difficult matther!
Jist notify the division to come together an’ select ’em, an’ have ’em
come over an’ report to Mike O’Brien, here, who will find them a
boardin’-place, payin’ for their kapin’ out of the county fund. Let them
not be later than Saturday afternoon. If they can’t make their point on
Bully Bill in three days, you relave them and sind over fresh fellows,
an’ kape it up until the work be done. O’Brien will appoint those to
lead the Shenandoah boys up to Bill, an’ ingineer the business through!
Fail they must not! If they do, let them beware the power of the order!
If Shenandoah can’t succeed, Roarty must sind men, an’ all the rest in
turn, until the Modocs cry enough!”

The Shenandoah Secretary made known his acceptance of the charge, and
said he would see the division notified and convened.

Canning inquired if any men were wanted from his part of the State, but
Donnelly replied:

“No! the job is a small one, and we can attend to it ourselves!”

At first, and before the convention was called to order, the presence of
the young man, Frank McHugh, had been objected to, but O’Brien said he
was his Secretary, and insisted he should remain. Subsequently McHugh, a
tall, very juvenile personage, with sandy hair and blue eyes—a mere boy,
in point of fact—was directed to act as Secretary, and fabricate a
record of proceedings which would show to outsiders, should chance
reveal the fact of a meeting being held, transaction of business on some
entirely different matter than the murder of Thomas and the Majors.

Then, all having been arranged, the Mollies adjourned to dinner, of
which they partook in Clark’s dining-room below.

Kehoe enjoyed his food, and remarked to McKenna, in a low voice: “I
think the reign of the Modocs is comin’ to an end, and Irishmen will
soon have law in Mahanoy City, as in other parts of the State!”

The King of the Mollies was elate and jubilant, and the operative was
compelled to appear so, but he was far from feeling content with the
share Kehoe had put upon him. It would not do to refuse, nor was it safe
to exhibit reluctance.

When my agent reached home, he found the Mollies experiencing most
intense excitement, caused by a report of Ned Monaghan, that the Coal
and Iron Company had sent for and secured policemen, from a distance,
all heavily armed, and stationed them at their different collieries. To
this was added the story of Gibbons, that the Governor had ordered out
the Militia, to support the Coal and Iron Police, and see that
resumption of work in the region was not interfered with on the part of
the members of the Laborers’ Union, or others. Even then forty or fifty
men, loaded down with repeating rifles and ammunition, were alighting at
the depot. Heisler, they said, was in command of the police, in person.
One who has not seen the locality and known its people will hardly be
able to appreciate the uproar in the different patches, and in the
taverns and strongholds of the Mollies under such a condition of
affairs. Men were quite wild, and flew from place to place, with
reddened faces and determined looks, telling the news to their brethren,
and eagerly asking what was to be done.

Mike Doyle met McKenna, that night, at his boarding-house, and at once
proposed to be one of the men to go to Mahanoy City.

Tom Hurley was anxious to take a part, and wanted to deposit his card,
formerly obtained for traveling purposes, and receive the “goods,” so
that he might be eligible.

The detective, before he retired, the night of the first of June, sent
Monaghan to summon Thomas Munley, of Gilberton, a member of his lodge,
with orders for Munley to notify others in the vicinity to meet at the
hall, in Shenandoah, the evening of the third, at seven o’clock. The
Secretary personally gave notice to Gibbons and the others mentioned
that their presence was needed on the occasion.

Leaving the proceedings connected with the strike of the Mollies and the
members of the Laborers’ Union to be related in another chapter, I must
now continue the incidents bearing upon the attempt to murder Wm. M.
Thomas, and carry the recital to completion.

Monaghan returned from Gilberton, Wednesday, saying he had notified
Thomas Munley, who promised to inform the others of what was wanted.

The night of the third of June came, and, from the turmoil prevalent in
the city, the Secretary deemed it imprudent to hold the division meeting
at the usual hall, hence the members were notified to gather in the
wood, on the side of Ringtown Mountain, north of the city. When McKenna
reached the rendezvous he found present John Gibbons, Thomas Munley,
Darcey, Monaghan, Garvey, and Mike Doyle, all members of Shenandoah
Division, and soon after the opening Tom Hurley came along and joined
the clan. Garvey said:

“I suppose ye all know what’s called us together, an’ it only rests with
ye to make a choice, an’ as McKenna does not care to do it, let us talk
among ourselves, an’ agree who is to go and make away with Thomas.”

After canvassing the subject, it was decided that Gibbons, Doyle,
Hurley, and James McKenna should go to Mahanoy City on the business. At
least the three mentioned were selected, and they desired the
Secretary’s company, which he could not refuse to give. The date fixed
for departure was the evening of the fifth of the month. When this
proceeding was ended the body adjourned, at nigh eleven o’clock, the
conspirators going into town, one by one, as on former occasions, in
order that the citizens might not see too many Mollies together.

The next morning the streets were filled with soldiers and Coal and Iron
Police, among the latter being Capt. Heisler, but that made no
difference. The arrangement to shoot Thomas must be carried out. Gibbons
came along about four in the afternoon, armed with two navy revolvers,
secured from Thompson and McCormick, and, at about half-past four, the
same day, the Mollies set out on foot over the mountain for Mahanoy
City. They could not have selected a more congenial and yet more
unpleasant night for the journey. The rain was falling in torrents and
there were heavy shocks of thunder and sharp bolts of lightning in the
sky. But, after walking more than three hours, the men reached Clark’s
hotel, in Mahanoy, where they found O’Brien prepared to receive them.

While trudging over the wet earth and slippery rocks the operative had
concocted a scheme, which he believed would surely save the life of the
man, Thomas, and relieve his mind of an oppressive weight. As soon as
all were well seated in Clark’s kitchen, beyond the bar, he called
O’Brien away for a short stroll. They went around the corner, and
McKenna said to the leader of the clan in Mahanoy City:

“Do you mind the soldiers in the strates, an’ the Coal Polace?”

“Yes, I do!” answered the Bodymaster, “an’ I don’t half like the
appearance of aither! Its all owin’ to the mob, I suppose!”

“Now, O’Brien, I’m as willin’ to sell my life for the good of the order
as you are, or as any man can be, but it looks the height of folly for
us to undertake this job on Thomas while the soldiers are around! If we
kill him, as we may, an’ make the laste noise over it, we’ll be pounced
upon at once by the Militia or old Heisler—or both, perhaps—an’ then
we’ll be caught and hanged! Isn’t the life of any wan of us worth that
of a dozen like Bully Bill? To spake truth, I’m in favor of all of us
goin’ quietly home, an’ trying for Thomas on another occasion. The odds
are too many against us this time!”

O’Brien cogitated over the change suggested for a moment and then
responded:

“You’re right, McKenna, as you always are! Troth! as you say, my life is
better nor those of a dozen like Bill Thomas, an’ I quite agree wid you
that the very best thing to be done is to do nothing—at laste for this
night!”

The two men soon went back to the Emerald House, and to the kitchen.
Frank McHugh, the Secretary of Mahanoy City Division, had just arrived,
and O’Brien made the proposition to Hurley, Gibbons, and Doyle in
precisely the words previously employed by the detective. He explained
the difficulties before them in so forcible a manner that even Hurley,
always the first to enter a fight and the last to give it up, agreed it
was for the best to retrace their steps to Shenandoah and not be seen by
any one in Mahanoy.

McKenna said he was firmly of the opinion that the work should be
deferred, but did not like to assume the responsibility of ordering it
without a previous conference with O’Brien. Now that O’Brien was good
enough to be the first to put forward the idea he felt willing to make
known that he held the same view of the subject. This was peculiarly
flattering to O’Brien, and forever sealed his lips as to the real
originator of the plan, and was a clincher of the proposed settlement.
It was thus decided. After a few calls at Clark’s bar for refreshments,
the weary men set out in the darkness for the return to Shenandoah.

While going home the four Mollies were halted by the police at Foundry
Colliery, but after a short parley were permitted to resume their
tedious journey. To avoid similar annoyances the party struck into a
narrow path over the mountain. On the way they overtook a stranger,
carrying a small paper parcel. At first he was shy of them, probably
thinking they might want to murder him, but McKenna assured the stranger
they were harmless fellows, lost in the darkness, and if he had no
objection, as they seemed going in the same direction, they would keep
in company. The man said but little. He “knew every foot of the ground,”
however, and demonstrated the fact, when in the vicinity of Lanigan’s
Patch, by missing his bearings and finally bringing himself and
companions into a marsh, where they stuck fast in the mire to the
imminent danger of their boots and damage to their clothing and tempers.
After wandering about in the swamp, running against trees and snags, and
occasionally falling down in the mud and water, they escaped from the
place and met no further accident. It was about midnight when McKenna
turned in at Cooney’s, in Shenandoah, and sought his bed-chamber and
much-needed sleep.


                               ————●————




                              CHAPTER XXX.

                     ANOTHER VICTIM OF THE MOLLIES.


For a few days after the return of the unsuccessful delegation engaged
in the work of killing Wm. M. Thomas, in accordance with the order of
the Mahanoy City Convention, quiet reigned and nothing further was done
in that direction. It will be remembered that the date fixed for the
assassination was Saturday, the fifth of June. From the fact that
McKenna judged it foolhardy, on account of the presence of Militia, to
make the trial, it had been temporarily abandoned. In truth, the
assassination was just as practicable then as it ever would be, from the
isolated position in which the proposed victim was working. It served
the detective’s purpose to have the matter rest, at least until his
reports could reach the Agency in Philadelphia, when he hoped, should
the efforts be renewed, there would come officers on the ground to
capture the would-be murderers, or at least save Thomas’ life. But
McKenna had no means of knowing how extremely busy Capt. Linden and his
Coal and Iron force were at that particular moment. The detective was
only inside the Mollie ring, and his friends were kept as much as
possible in the dark as to police movements. In reality, he had about
all that he could attend to—and so did the members of the open force.
None found much leisure for amusement.

The Mollie Maguires, having passed sentence of death upon Thomas, it was
not to be forgotten. Die he must. Some delay might occur, but the end in
view was never relinquished. Meanwhile, Hurley, Gibbons, and Doyle were
taken over to Mahanoy City and boarded, at the expense of the murderous
society, in the house of a Mrs. Cosgrove until such time as O’Brien, the
Bodymaster, might have everything prepared for them. At the end of three
days’ stay, according to Kehoe’s order, O’Brien having signally failed
in leading them up to their prey, the trio went back to Shenandoah.
There they tarried for a time, doing absolutely nothing.

In the interim McKenna experienced a return of disease, for several days
was confined to his room, and much longer to his house. He suffered
intensely, and was under the doctor’s care, part of the time being
delirious. That journey over the mountains, exposure to wet and cold
air, with the accompanying excitement and mental pressure, all had their
share in inducing a relapse of the intermittent fever, with which he had
formerly been attacked, and for a time it threatened to assume a typhoid
and very dangerous phase.

About the first day that the detective was strong enough to sit up in
his chair, take an occasional walk to the door, and enjoy the warm
sunshine, his heart was gladdened with the news that McAndrew had come
home, his job in Luzerne County having terminated. McKenna was never
more pleased in his life than when he grasped the hand of his superior
officer, and McAndrew seemed equally joyful to see the face of his
friend and division Secretary. Their interview, which occurred at
Cooney’s, was long and confidential. McKenna informed the President of
nearly everything that had happened during his absence, including the
orders the members were under from the Mahanoy Convention to kill
Thomas, and at once gave into his possession all the lodge books and
papers. It appeared to him, when this was accomplished, that health had
been restored as through the working of a miracle, and the blood coursed
more calmly in his veins. At least a very heavy load was lifted from his
overburdened mind, and he breathed more freely than for weeks before,
counting from the day of McAndrew’s departure for Wilkes-barre. He held
no longer the place of acting Bodymaster and thanked his lucky stars
that he did not.

Time passed until the 27th of June. McAndrew had resumed active
leadership of the Mollies in Shenandoah, and the detective yet continued
ill, but was apparently fast convalescing. He had been sitting at the
door of his boarding-house, enjoying the beautiful sunset, and wishing
that his strength were once fully restored, when he heard footsteps, and
soon McAndrew made his appearance and took a seat near him. They had
only just begun talking of the weather and other matters, when Tom
Hurley came up and joined the party. Shortly afterward John Morris, a
very young, but solid man, with plenty of yellow hair, blue eyes, and
heavy features, formed one of the group. Then Mike Doyle arrived, as he
said, “jist from Number Three Hill.” Mike Carey was already inside
Cooney’s, and emerged from the house, adding one more to the company.
Following quickly a few words on comparatively trivial subjects,
McAndrew inquired:

“Are any of yez going to Mahanoy City?”

“I am!” exclaimed Hurley.

These words were echoed by Doyle and Morris.

“Well, that’s jist as it should be; for I have orders from Kehoe, if any
man hesitates to obey me commands, to have him cut off for life at the
very next meeting!” Then he added, turning to Carey:

“You must go to Number Three, and tell John Gibbons, who is now at home,
that I want to see him here directly!”

“All right!” answered Carey, and he withdrew.

The men left with the detective to await the arrival of Gibbons did not
say much to each other. They were more reticent than usual. The
operative did not feel at all like talking. His active thoughts were
trying to work out a difficult problem, something like this: In what
manner could he forward news to Thomas that the assassins were again on
his track? How should he telegraph Mr. Franklin, that he might advise
Linden to protect Bully Bill at the hazard of his own life? The only
hope left was, that Carey, who had been his constant nurse and
attendant, might be needed to go to Mahanoy with the rest, in case
Gibbons were to refuse. He looked upon the golden sun, as it went down
behind the somber hills, and just the last glimpse he caught of the orb,
it appeared to him that its color had changed to a blood red. Would it
rise on murder and violence? His heart misgave him that it might, unless
something could be thought of to reverse the present order of things.
The detective was sure that no suspicion yet attached to him. He was
known to be sick and incapable of physical exertion, and McAndrew was
there, at the head of the division. His orders must be listened to and
obeyed. In his soul McKenna wished Gibbons might be absent, or unable,
from some cause, to carry out his part of the arrangement. But his
spirits sunk and his form trembled, so that he had to complain of a
returning chill, caused by the night air, when he saw Carey, side by
side with Gibbons, making his way up the path in the direction of the
house. In a few minutes Gibbons reported. After the usual greetings, he
took off his hat, wiped the perspiration from his forehead, and
inquired:

“Well, McAndrew, what’s the matther now?”

The Bodymaster cast his eyes around, to see that all within hearing were
Mollies, was evidently satisfied, and answered:

“These men here—Morris, Doyle, and Hurley—are going, by order of the
County Delegate and our division, to Mahanoy City, to shoot Bill Thomas,
in the morning, as he goes to his work! I want to know if you are to be
along?”

“I’m agreed,” said Gibbons, “as I don’t want to stop around this
neighborhood, anyhow, for I think I may be arrested for a few words I
hev had with one of the bosses of Hecksher’s Colliery—the fool thinks I
mane to shoot him! I don’t care if I take part in the matter! Jist put a
man in my place in the breast an’ I’m wid yez!”

“Carey can take a hand at that; so there’s nothin’ to prevent the four
of ye lavin’ at once!” said McAndrew. “An’ Dan Sweeney shall work for
Morris, that he may miss no time—an’ Hurley is not at work—so he’ll lose
nothing. Are ye well prepared for the business? Have ye all got proper
weapons?”

The responses were in the affirmative, though no pistols were exhibited,
and it only remained for Gibbons, who was in his shirt sleeves, to get a
coat.

“I say, McKenna! You can lend me the old gray coat? You’ll have no use
for it until to morrow, when I’ll give it back to ye!”

This was said by Gibbons.

“The coat hangs within! Jist rache it, an’ wear it, an’ welcome,” said
the operative. To refuse would have seemed particularly suspicious.

The prevailing twilight deepened into darkness, and still the Mollies
had not started on their errand of bloodshed, but, at about nine
o’clock, the stars then shining out brightly, gave them light enough by
which to see the pathway, and, bidding the Bodymaster, Secretary, and
Mike Carey good-by, they quietly departed.

When their retreating footsteps could no longer be heard, McAndrew
ordered the operative to go to bed, “unless he wanted more chills,” and
took his own route homeward.

“Yes, I’ll retire directly.” answered McKenna, who looked around to find
Carey lightly dozing on the doorstep. He had no thought of going to his
room without at least making an effort, even in his weak condition, to
save Thomas or have the assassins arrested in the act. His plans were
indistinctly formed, but he was determined to make a desperate movement
in some direction. Linden’s whereabouts, since his own recent illness,
the detective knew nothing of. The only plan, therefore, possible of
accomplishment, was to send off a cipher dispatch to Mr. Franklin. In
default of that he must try and deposit a written message in the
post-office, addressed to his Philadelphia correspondent. The latter
must naturally be too late, still it would show that he was trying to do
his duty by the man whose life stood in jeopardy. Waiting until he
thought Carey was soundly asleep, McKenna noiselessly arose from his
bench, walked rather unsteadily to the door, and tried to pass into the
house beyond the slumbering Mollie. As he did so, Carey roused himself,
hurriedly rubbed his eyes, and said:

“That’s right! Let’s get to bed!”

“I’m not slapy, an’ am goin’ to write a letther to me sister before I
retire,” said McKenna.

“Very well!” responded Carey, “an’ as I’m to slape wid ye the night, ye
kin sit up and write, while I’ll jist rest me for the morrow’s work for
Morris!”

Here was a predicament. The man was right. Transient visitors were
monopolizing the spare beds in the house, and Cooney had provided,
before retiring, that Carey would share the detective’s couch. What
should he do?

“Upon the whole,” finally said the operative, “I don’t feel slapy—you
see I’ve had rather more of the bed, the past wake, than wur
pleasant—an’ so I’ll sit in here, an’ rest me eyes, without any light,
for a while. You had better go up, so as to be arley awake fur your
breakfast!”

“Oh, as fur that matther, divil a bit do I care fur slape, aither! The
bedroom is close, this fine avenin’, an’ I’ll kape ye company until it’s
made a little cooler!”

And Carey placed his knees against one door-post and his head and back
to the other, thus completely blocking up the passage-way, and soon
begun to snore like the good sleeper that he was.

Every moment he thus wasted passed like a long hour to the impatient
operative. The obstinacy of his companion was enough to provoke the ire
of a more tranquil mind than he was the possessor of, and he nervously
paced the floor of the small apartment, while his thoughts fairly burnt
in his brain. Why was he ill? Why so weak that he could not thrust the
miserable Carey out of his way, or gag and bind him with cords until he
could fly to the telegraph office and send off that telegram? The idea
of stunning him, as he slept, with a blow on the head from a club, even
suggested itself, but was soon given up as too cruel for the situation.
There were no means of getting out of the room, excepting through a
window, and when he sought an exit in that way, Carey awoke once more
and stared about him.

“Are ye gettin’ luny agin, McKenna, that ye want to wait there by the
windy, wid the cool air blowin’ on ye? You’ll have more of them chills!
Sthand back!”

This was a sensible order for the sick man to obey, and it would cause a
suspicion of insanity to refuse, hence he resumed his walk.

Later he turned to Carey and said:

“I tell ye, agin, ye had best get to bed! If ye don’t, there’ll be one
miner late at the shaft-house in the mornin’! Lave me to myself! I can’t
slape, the night, wid the idea of the work that’s to be done restin’ on
me conscience, so I’ll stay below, where it is comfortable for me! Why
in thunder don’t you go to bed?”

“Faix,” replied Carey, “an’ if the truth must be towld, I’m ordered by
the docther never to lave ye until the mornin’. He says ye are touched
in the head wid the faver an’ the medicin’, an’ more’s the token, I
think he’s quite right, for wasn’t ye within an ace of throwin’ yerself
out at the windy, only jist now? Oh, no! Mike Carey knows how to obey
orders, an’ wont give ye a chance to make away wid yerself until ye have
back yer own siven sinses.”

“The divil take you, an’ the docther too! I’m just as sound and sane
this blessed minute as you are—or he aither—an’ all I want is pace and
quiet, an’ that ye same detarmined I sha’n’t have!”

The detective, now completely angry, began to walk the room with rapid
strides and gaze about him in the darkness, searching for some weapon
with which to demolish his too careful guardian and nurse.

Seeing this, Carey shut the door, locked it, put the key in his pocket,
and, walking up to McKenna, took him gently by the arm, saying:

“Come now, be aisy! Don’t look so fierce, but come wid me to your room
an’ go straight to bed!”

Had Carey known exactly the condition of the detective’s mind, he might
have hesitated. It was well he did not, and he persisted in his cajoling
and pacificatory measures, until the ludicrousness of the situation
striking McKenna’s thoughts, he burst into a fit of loud laughter, and
consented—as that was the only alternative—to go to his room. But
neither of the men slept. One turned and tossed feverishly and uneasily
in the bed, and made such a disturbance that the other was no sooner in
a blissful slumber than he was as suddenly aroused. At last, in sheer
desperation, Carey arose, dressed himself, and the operative was in
hopes he would go elsewhere, but he did not. On the contrary, planting
the back of the only chair in the room against the closed and bolted
door, he leaned backward, resting his head near the latch, and soon
slept soundly.

It was not until nearly sunrise that McKenna, almost crazy with
excitement and suspense, was left to himself. Then Carey had to get his
breakfast and be off to the colliery. It was now too late for McKenna to
act, had he been bodily able, and he sunk down, helpless, on his pillow,
perfectly exhausted; and deep lethargy came to his physical and mental
relief.

After breakfast, the morning of the 28th—a meal that, strange to say,
the operative ate with a better appetite than usual—he went to his room
to prepare a report. Carefully locking the door, and hanging his hat
over the keyhole, which he had a shrewd suspicion the chambermaid was in
the habit of interviewing occasionally, to find out, if possible, the
business in which he was engaged while fastened within, he seated
himself at the table and started to write.

That hat was a terrible eyesore to the aforesaid maid-of-all-work, and
she wondered many a time, as she subsequently confessed, “How it was
that McKenna made his room so dark, exceptin’ he were holding converse
with the devil!”

[Illustration: “_‘We fixed him just as he came into the colliery
stable!_’”]

It was light enough in the room for the detective, however, and the felt
hat sufficed to keep prying eyes from discovering his employment. On
this particular occasion the agent was doomed to disappointment, as he
had hardly begun his highly important correspondence when he beheld Mike
Doyle coming toward the house. Hastily throwing the writing materials
into his valise, and carefully securing that depository, he unlocked his
door and patiently waited, knowing that Doyle would probably wish to see
him alone. In this supposition he was right, as the man soon afterward
climbed wearily up the stairs. Doyle occupied a seat. McKenna once more
shut the door, and, as soon as his visitor was a little rested, asked:

“Well, Mike, I suppose ye have missed him again?”

“No! We fixed him jist as he came into the colliery stable!”

“An’ is that thrue?” inquired the detective, trying to appear cool and
indifferent.

“Yes! But I must not stop here palaverin’ wid you, when the rest of the
boys are on the mountain, jist starvin’ wid hunger and thirst!”

“Well, I’ll get some whisky an’ go up wid ye!”

“You go wid me? Why, you’re sick, lad; an’ last night I said to Gibbons
that ye looked like a passible braze might blow ye away like a flash o’
smoke!”

“But I’m betther this mornin’—have passed the crisis of me disase, the
docther has it—an’ a bit of exercise will do me no harrum in the
worruld!”

“Well, if you can sthand it I ken,” said Doyle, and, after securing a
little extra clothing for himself, the detective started for Ringtown
Mountain. Happily, the spot was no more than three hundred yards distant
from Cooney’s residence, and they were soon in the presence of Hurley,
Gibbons, and Morris, who were found sitting upon logs, rocks, and the
ground, all covered with dust and perspiration, completely exhausted by
their morning’s work and the succeeding rapid journey from the Patch to
Shenandoah.

Tom Hurley was the first to talk of the murder. In answer to McKenna’s
query, he said, in substance:

“Oh, Bully Bill’s safe enough for the coroner by this time! When we got
to Mahanoy City, we went direct to Mike O’Brien’s house, as told by
Frank McAndrew, an’ Mike took us to Mrs. Costello’s, where he got us
some whisky and somethin’ to eat, and a bottle of the raal stuff to take
wid us, an’ about daylight, with his directions, we started for the
Patch, where Thomas lived. We went and sat by the drift-mouth, an’
watched Thomas’ house until he came out and went up to the colliery
stable, the big doors of which were sprung wide open. After he had been
in a while, an’ talked wid the stable boss, an’ the boss had left, we
jist walked slowly up to the place. I stepped into the side door of the
stable, through the blacksmith’s shop, an’ Gibbons in the other, an’
blazed away at him, as he stood, wid one hand on a horse’s mane. The
fellow was game to the last. He had no weapon, but he just threw his
black hat in my face, an’ then, after bein’ hit three or four times, ran
behind the horses. I fired again, an’ he was worse hit, an’ rather
staggered. After that, Gibbons and Doyle sent him three or four, an’ he
fell, so did wan of the horses, an’ then John Morris, he came up, put in
his pistol an’ fired the last shot. Bully Bill never said wan word
afther that, but lay quiet like, partly under the horse that was down. I
have an idea that Bill Thomas won’t shoot any more of us in this world.
He’s surely done for!”

The conversation was continued by the other men. John Morris said that
Doyle put in his shots like a man, but Gibbons turned as pale as a sheet
of paper. In turn Hurley and Doyle asserted that John Morris had shaken
so with fear, when aiming at Thomas, that he shot and severely injured a
second dumb beast. Each one made his statement, but the several
relations were of the same general tenor, that Thomas had been killed,
that morning, at the colliery stable in Shoemaker’s Patch.

The detective, after hearing the story of all the men and listening with
evident interest, putting in a word to the effect that the victim had
been rightly served—while, in his heart, he felt that a dastardly murder
had been committed—returned to Shenandoah, hunted out Frank McAndrew,
gave him news of the condition of their companions and their need of
some kind of refreshment. He concluded:

“You get them some food, an’ I’ll take up some more whisky!”

McAndrew consented, went to his house, procured a supply of cold boiled
ham, bread and butter and cheese, while McKenna bought a second bottle
of good liquor, and they went in company to the mountain. In McAndrew’s
presence, the detective heard another rehearsal of the particulars of
the attack and its termination, not materially differing from the one
already detailed.

Gibbons wanted McAndrew and McKenna to give him a card, and he would
leave at once, stopping at Kehoe’s to secure money for traveling
expenses. Having in view the continuance of the assassin within his
convenient reach, the Secretary said he had no printed blanks, but when
he, Gibbons, had once located, he could send him a letter and he would
by that time be able to forward the card duly attested by the County
Delegate. To this arrangement the man assented, and, in a short time,
after obtaining change of clothing—taking care to return McKenna’s
coat—Gibbons departed and the rest of the assassins separated, each
person taking a different route, for their homes. Hurley, Doyle, and
Morris were to return to the colliery that evening, and resume their
usual avocations, which they did.

The same day, my agent sent to Philadelphia a succinct account of all he
had seen and heard. It was wonderful how McKenna improved in health. The
excitement of the morning and night had seemingly checked his chill, put
a stop to the fever, his appetite increased, and strength and nerve soon
resumed sway. In the afternoon Mr. Linden reached Shenandoah, and,
receiving the signal from McKenna, followed him to their place of
meeting and verbally received the information the detective had already
dispatched to Mr. Franklin.

The next official visit made by Linden was to Shoemaker’s Patch.


                               ————●————




                             CHAPTER XXXI.

                          HOLDING THE BREAKER.


When the troubles of the first of June arose, and the Militia were
ordered out by Governor Hartranft, Gen. Pleasants, called Mr. Linden to
him and said:

“I see by a report of Mr. Pinkerton’s agent in Shenandoah—and we also
have it from other good authority—that the strikers, including the
Mollie Maguires and the members of the Miners’ and Laborers’ Union, are
openly threatening the destruction of some of the company’s more
expensive works in Schuylkill County, among the rest West Shenandoah
Colliery, which is only defended by two private watchmen. Can your men
occupy and hold that breaker?”

“We can, or die in the attempt!” was the characteristic response.

“I admire your courage, Mr. Linden,” said Gen. Pleasant, “but I am
somewhat in doubt as to the result. However, there is no other course to
pursue. Your men, headed by yourself, armed with the Winchester rifles
and navy sixes, must make the trial!”

“We will leave on the next train,” Linden answered.

And they did go to Shenandoah, as was reported to McKenna by Gibbons and
Hurley, arriving there the day following the one on which the first
attack upon Thomas was to have been made. The militia-men were daily
expected, but it was questioned in the minds of some whether its members
were all to be depended upon in an emergency. That there were relatives
of Mollies in the ranks was well known. Capt. Linden and eighteen men
took charge of West Shenandoah Colliery, with the determination to
defend and keep it working, preventing the miners from being driven
away, if among the possibilities to do so.

The second of June the Mollies and other strikers made great
preparations for a dance at Number Three Hill. Word was sent by special
messengers that all who could should assemble on the night of that day
for a monster workingman’s parade, which was appointed for the third.
Early in the morning the crowd began pouring in. There were delegates
from Connor’s Patch, Loss Creek, Number Three, Raven Run, and Griscom’s
Patch, as well as from Shenandoah. In the evening fires blazed from all
the hillsides surrounding the collieries. There was the greatest and
wildest excitement. The labor picnic at Number Three had seven or eight
hundred persons in attendance.

There was plenty of music, and drink, and dancing, but the principal
work seemed to be organizing for the exercises of the next day, and the
evident object of these was to frighten people, who were quietly at
work, away from the mines. The presence of the roughest characters in
the country, armed to the teeth—some having as many as three revolvers
displayed ostentatiously in their belts—and the open talk of the crowd,
was sufficient to tell Linden and his devoted band that the morrow boded
no good for them. Still they stood manfully at their posts, guarding
every point and keeping off the approach of and attacks from all
stragglers. Capt. Heisler, with more men, came to the rescue, and the
Militia were expected by every train. Telegraphic messages kept the
wires busy and messengers hurriedly going and coming.

Among the miners, the Welsh, English, German, and Poles mingled, and
heartily joined hands with the Irish. For once feuds were forgotten, and
nationalities all made common cause. The destruction of the collieries,
or entire submission to the behests of those on the strike, had been
decided upon.

While the music sounded, and dancing was going on at Number Three,
McKenna held a secret conference with Linden. He gave him all the
information regarding the proposed action for the morrow that he had
been able to gather, and assured his friend he would have fierce work to
do if he did not abandon the breaker.

“We can die there, then!” said Linden. “I will never give it up! Rather
than that, may every man in my command—officers and all—be murdered! Let
the strikers come! Some of them will bite the dust! I can tell them, we
will be found well prepared!”

“I’ll do everything in my power, at all events,” responded McKenna, “to
discourage violence! Did any of the Chicago men recognize me, to-day?”

“I think not! If they did, they had sense enough not to speak of it!”

“I trust they may do the same thing to-morrow! If they come to shooting,
I’m sure I’ll get out of the range of those Winchesters on the double
quick!”

Linden advised him to remember to do so, as he could not tell what might
occur.

“They—the police—look upon you as the worst and most desperate character
in the Mollie crowd!”

“I know it!” said McKenna, “but they’ll learn their mistake one of these
days!”

It was noticeable that, when communicating with Linden, the detective
dropped his well-worn brogue, and conversed in his ordinary tone, using
few Celtic terms.

The conference was brief, and with a “good night” the detectives
separated, McKenna returning to the camp-fires, and Linden seeking sleep
upon his bed of hay.

When he reached Number Three, McKenna learned that a portion of his
brother Mollies, fearing to face the consequences of the parade—as it
was called—but, as it really was, a mob, comprising all the elements of
a commune and a riot—had fled to Ringtown Mountain and there organized a
local guard, or reserve force. Among these stay-at-home heroes—who
received loud shouts, hisses of derision, and the appellation of
“craven-hearted cowards”—was Mike, _alias_ Muff Lawler. He would have
nothing to do with the celebration, sneaked away and hid himself at
Ringtown. The operative, having in mind the pusillanimous manner in
which the same man had retreated from Dick Flynn, at Colorado Colliery,
months before, leaving him to face the infuriated fellow alone, was not
much surprised that Lawler had no appetite for the next day’s work, but
said nothing. In fact, if the truth were told, the detective did not
really blame Mike for his later action, and, had not duty called him to
take part in the proceedings, would have adopted a similar course. But
he must stay and see the affair through. It was not his time to run
away.

The night passed without the occurrence of any overt act. The morning of
the third had but fairly opened when new delegations commenced coming
in, and Marshals Walker and Johnson begun the work of forming the line.
Impromptu flags were prepared, the drums beat, and the uncouth
assemblage was soon ready to march.

Fenton Cooney was deputed to take charge of the rear and form the
stragglers. One Fitzpatrick, a boss at Heckler’s, assisted.

Nine o’clock came, and as the crowd was about to move the Sheriff of
Schuylkill County rode up, accompanied by a Superintendent of the Coal
and Iron Company. The former inquired as to the cause of the assemblage.

“Only a bit of a parade,” was the plausible response, and the two men,
apparently satisfied, rode away.

The intention of the men was to have an imposing procession, ending at
Mahanoy City, and, meantime, to force the miners, at every colliery in
their way, to quit work and join, or go to their homes. They were
determined to stop operations, if they had to kill the workmen. But the
Sheriff was not informed of this portion of the programme.

When the mob reached West Shenandoah Colliery it mustered, despite the
disaffection of a few, some seven hundred strong, all firmly resolved
that mining should not proceed in the Mahanoy valley. They marched away
at a brisk pace, and thought themselves invincible. But at the road
skirting the works mentioned was revealed a sight for which they were
all unprepared. The blackened walls of the breaker stood out boldly in
relief against the blue sky; the sun shone upon twenty armed men, ranged
in a compact line, surrounding and cutting off approach to the mouth of
the slope and the engine house, with arms, bright and gleaming, forming
an inclosure of human bodies. Their repeating rifles were threatening.
That obstacle did not seem so easy to surmount, and the mob stood at the
foot of the hill, wavered, and presently the Grand Marshal ordered a
pause. Part of his force had crossed the Reading Railway track, just
before it passes under the Lehigh bridge, and there they waited,
undecided what course to pursue.

It was a trying moment for the police, under Linden, Heisler being
unavoidably absent in the city.

“Are you going to send the men from the slope, and stop the works?”
asked Walker, in a loud voice.

“Go on about your business!” answered Linden, resting one hand on his
piece. “The men in the mine are under the protection of the law! They
will stay where they are, and you must not molest them!”

“Forward!” commanded Walker. But his tone lacked confidence.

[Illustration: “_‘Halt!’ Shouted Linden._”]

“Halt!” shouted Linden.

But few obeyed Walker’s call—and they stepped back hastily, as though
they had blundered, when, at a signal from Linden, a score of Winchester
rifles promptly came to the shoulders of as many hardy and resolute men,
ready for the expected order to “fire.”

McKenna was the most eccentric and savage appearing Mollie Maguire in
the whole seven hundred. His old, soft hat, knocked in at the sides,
yellow hair flying wildly in the breeze, a long, patched, gray coat,
with two revolvers in his belt, beside a big hickory club which he
carried in his hand; even the men from Chicago looked upon him as a
prominent target to receive the contents of their already directed
weapons. By the side of the detective was a sleek bull-terrier, which he
had carefully raised and just brought out, trained ready for the pit,
its tongue protruding, and showing the white teeth appearing fully as
murderous and ugly as his master.

The Mollies knew—if the rest did not—that each one of those bright
gun-barrels could send sixteen deadly messengers into their ranks
without reloading. They also knew that Linden—“Captain Jack,” as he
there received christening—was at the head of the force and would fight
to the last drop of blood in his body. His rifle would be aimed with
those of his followers.

Walker realized the gravity of the situation in a moment, and did not
repeat his order. Soon there was a whisper of consultation. McKenna
suggested that “twenty times sixteen wor three hundred an’ twenty, an’
that was the number that must fall before them Winchesters were
exhausted! An’ wur it all worth even fifty lives?”

The Marshal and other leading men thought not, and, scowling fiercely
back at Linden and his Spartan band, they quietly moved on, in the
direction of the bridge, leaving the breaker undisturbed. The muzzles of
the Winchesters and the faces of the men behind them showed that the
police were not to be trifled with.

The mob had decided—and wisely too—it was not a propitious moment to
compel Linden and his men to retire—that another time might as well be
selected for seizing the colliery and forcing a suspension of work. Jack
Delaney, Peirce Walker, Ben Johnson, Fitzpatrick, and John Gibbons, who
had all been industrious in raising and organizing the rabble, it was
noticed, found themselves among the foremost to recognize the force
there was in Linden’s metallic argument.

The awkward squad surged along toward Mahanoy City, forcing those it
encountered to join the ranks.

At Hazleton a prisoner was rescued, and the law defied.

Fox’s Colliery, which had begun to work, was stopped by force, and the
men driven home.

The owners of Bowman’s Colliery, hearing that the crowd was coming, sent
off their miners and discontinued operations before the advance guard
hove in sight.

The Sheriff made a stand, with a few men, at Jackson’s Hill, but he was
derided, loudly cursed; and the communists marched onward in spite of
the law and its minions.

The Foundry Colliery was stopped, and its men ran away in a fright.

Soon word was brought that three hundred men, from the vicinity of
Hazleton, had already entered Mahanoy City, caused a disturbance, and
some of their number been arrested by the police and placed in the lock
up.

At last Mahanoy City was gained, and its streets found swarming with
demoralized citizens. The mob had accumulated strength until it numbered
over two thousand men, and everything was swept, like chaff in a west
wind, before it. All business was suspended.

The first cry of the communists was, “To the rescue of the Hazleton
boys!” and the Chief Burgess, Eckman by name was hunted up and politely
invited to release the men he had in custody. He carefully examined the
faces of the persons surrounding him and consented. The prisoners soon
formed part of the line of the parade. The principal streets were
marched through. Disorder and lawlessness prevailed, but as there was no
one to oppose the rioters, little, if any, personal violence ensued. The
striking miners had everything their own way. The collieries were all
blocked, and the men sent home unharmed.

One colliery sounded its shrill whistle, adding to the prevailing
confusion and alarm, the engineer having deserted the works, carrying
the cord attached to the mechanism with him. A crowd rushed to the spot.
Gibbons climbed upon the boiler, which it was feared might explode,
opened the valve, the steam escaped, and the danger was over.

McKenna, the drum corps, and those who could pay, had dinner at Clark’s
Emerald House. Those who had no money procured food, wherever possible,
from the citizens. While he was eating, the detective heard firing on
the street. Followed close by Doyle, Thompson, and McCormick, he rushed
out to see what was the trouble. It seems that the mob, when about to
attack Little Drift Colliery, had been met by a deputy sheriff, backed
by a few city policemen. The officer had read the riot act and ordered
the disturbers of the public peace to disperse, but without other effect
than to cause them to go on faster toward the colliery. One, Tim Jolley,
being excited, fired a shot into the mob, hitting nobody. Then a rush
was made on the Sheriff, and shooting became general from and in all
directions. Jolley was quickly knocked down, and his pockets searched.
Some one carried off his watch and chain, another his money, and yet
others secured his hat and outer clothing. Friday O’Donnell, according
to his own story, did some rapid shooting at about that time, but was
not aware whether he hit any one. Jim McAllister received a cut in the
head, while engaged in throwing rocks at the officers. He had no weapon.
McGinnis had a pistol wound in the head, but it was not a fatal one.

Finally, the officers having retreated without severe injury, the
disorderly procession moved for the return march to Shenandoah, and the
parade and the riot ended at the same time. Strange to say, not a person
was killed in the entire day’s transactions.

The Militia arrived that night, and thenceforward there were to be no
more serious riots in the county—at least not as long as the soldiers
remained. But violence and assassination did not cease. On the contrary,
bad blood had been stirred. It would not settle until innocent men were
murdered. A few arrests were made of the leading rioters, but no
particular punishment was ever meted out to them. The Mollies swore
_alibis_, without regard to truth or conscience.

About the sixth of June Tom Hurley, who had a brother a member of the
Girardville company of Militia, tried to accomplish, all by himself, the
butchery of Capt Heisler. James Hurley was on duty with Heisler at West
Shenandoah Colliery, and, late at night, Tom Hurley came up and spoke to
them. In Heisler’s temporary absence the brothers arranged that James
should contrive to leave Heisler alone a few moments, when Tom could
easily pick him off from an ambush. Heisler returned to his post and Tom
bid the two “good night,” saying he must go home. Walking but a short
distance, however, he plunged into the underbrush, took a detour, and
crawled stealthily up again within pistol range of Heisler and James
Hurley. Finally he heard the latter say:

“Captain, it’s coming chilly! I’ll just go to the office and get my
overcoat!”

“No!” answered the Captain. “That will never do! We are put here on
guard, and here must stay!”

Heisler acted as if he suspected Tom, at least Jim had to remain where
he was. Heisler’s life, for a time, was safe.

In about half an hour, during which Tom Hurley, with pistol leveled full
upon the Captain, remained watching in his place of concealment, Jim
Hurley exclaimed:

“Faith, I’ve come out here with no arms on me at all! I’ve left me
revolver! I’ll go and get it!”

“No!” again answered Heisler. “You can take the rifle! The navy six is
enough for me!”

Cursing the stupidity of the man who refused to be left alone, so that
he might kill him, Tom Hurley, after stopping where he was until nearly
overcome by sleep, cautiously arose from the ground, and, without making
a sound to indicate his presence, stooped low and moved skulkingly away.
He told McKenna of his adventure, the next day, and Linden was soon in
possession of the fact. When subsequently consulted about his conduct on
the occasion Capt. Heisler said he had heard considerable about Tom
Hurley, and believed that the brothers might attempt some trap upon him.
Still, when he refused to be left alone, he had not the least suspicion
that in so doing he twice thwarted the would-be assassins.

Jim Hurley was no more placed on guard at Shenandoah Colliery.

The resumption was not again interfered with, and by the sixteenth of
June became quite general in the coal regions. Even the Mollies went to
work, having stood out as long as they deemed it possible, and finding
that, without their aid, the company were able to continue their mining
operations.

Mr. Linden, at about this time, met some adventures, which must be
described.


                               ————●————




                             CHAPTER XXXII.

                     LINDEN FORMS AN ACQUAINTANCE.


Captain Linden made a flying visit to Shoemaker’s Patch, when once
informed of the attempt upon the life of Wm. M. Thomas, where he met the
injured man, frescoed and ornamented with plentiful patches and
plasters, and bolstered up in bed, loudly proclaiming he was quite well
enough to resume his daily work, and that he should do so on the morrow,
despite the advice of an army of surgeons and nurses. Considering that
he had received four serious gunshot wounds, one disabling the fingers
of his right hand, two in the neck, and one penetrating the chest, this
might be thought rather rash talk and conduct. Linden so believed, and
endeavored to soothe and curb him. It was of no use. The madcap bruiser
said he would kill anybody who tried to prevent his going out the next
day. And, in defiance of all the laws of physic, pharmacy, surgery, and
precedent, he did walk to the stables the second morning subsequent to
the shooting. One of the bullets, hitting him in the neck, had plowed a
passage, through muscular fibre and cuticle, missing by only half an
inch the inner jugular vein and adjacent carotid artery, and, should the
coats of any of these large blood-courses slough away, his death would
be certain and speedy. Without awaiting this crisis, and with the first
plasters still on the hurts, the careless and reckless man resumed his
job in the stables. Fortunately the injuries continued healthy, rapidly
healed, and in a few weeks Thomas was just as strong as ever, and as
anxious to kill a Mollie Maguire as before receiving the shots of his
assailants.

Linden sought to learn all the particulars of the assault, concealing
the knowledge he had already received, and therefore interrogated Thomas
closely, generally securing prompt responses to his queries. In answer
to the question:

“Do you know any of your assailants?”

Thomas answered:

“No! But shall know some of them if ever I see them again! A feller
generally recollects the faces of them what pulls a pistol and shoves it
inter his face! Leastways I do!”

“That’s true!” assented Linden.

“There was but four of ’em! I’m sure of that! I saw ’em before they got
nigh the stable, as they were sitting near the drift-mouth, but thought
nothing of it. It was no new thing to find men there, and even
strangers. I had been talkin’ a bit with the stable boss, when I again
saw the fellows, this time coming toward the stable. Still, I had no
suspicion of their purpose. The next thing I recollect was a youngster,
sticking a bright seven-shooter in my face! I went fur him, and seized
the pistol with my hand. It was discharged as I caught it. I let go, and
shied my hat in his face, and just afterward another of the party came
up and fired at me! After that, two more came and followed suit, when I
thought it time to get shelter, so I went behind a horse, and they fired
and hit the horse, and he fell, and I went down with one leg sorter
under him, an’ they looked in, saw me as they thought, dying—but I’ll
let them know I’m good for the lives of some of them bucks yet!—an’ left
the place. It was about half-past six in the morning—just nigh sun-up,
an’ I could see them as plain as I can see you! Of course I’d know the
first one that shot, and I believe I’d recognize the rest if brought
before them. I mean to live to see the scoundrels punished! If the law
will not do it, Bill Thomas will! The sneaking, cowardly curs went up
the hill like a shot, and were out of sight in two minutes, before
anybody could catch them! One walked a little lame. I recollect that,
for I stood up as soon as I could and looked after them. Dr. Bissell, of
Mahanoy City, got here soon afterward and dressed my hurts. He had the
impudence tell me I must keep my bed for the next ten days at least!
I’ll see him and all his plasters, pots, and vials in h—l before I’ll do
that!”

Linden tried hard to convince the wounded man that it was as much as his
life was worth to venture out until the result of his hurts could be
definitely ascertained, but made no impression upon the stubborn fellow.
Seeing that this would not succeed, the officer tried another tack, and
found Bill ready and willing to second his efforts in hunting up and
arresting the would-be assassins. Said the operative:

“Now, Thomas, if you will not obey me, or your friends and physician, I
do hope you will bear in mind what I say in another direction!”

“What is it?” asked the frescoed man, sullenly.

“I want a promise that, if any one asks who shot you, the answer shall
be, ‘I don’t know!’”

“Neither _do I_—so that’ll be no lie!”

“Well, if people inquire what the four men were like, say, for the
present, that there was so much smoke you could not distinguish their
faces or figures!”

“I’ll do it, Captain” responded Bill, with an oath and a groan. “I’ll do
it! But what is it for? That’s what I want to know!”

“I’ll tell you! If these Mollies hear that you, their intended victim,
cannot recall their appearance—in fact, would not know them if they were
to come again before you—they will be emboldened to remain in the
neighborhood. In the meantime, I can be on the lookout, and you may rest
assured, if I once get my hands on them, they’ll be put in a safe place,
where you can come and identify them! I have your description of the
parties, and do not think I will be long in running them down! Do I have
your word?”

“Yes, Captain! I’ll promise to be straight out in the business, if you
think it’ll help in bringing the crowd to jail! I do hope to see the day
when the scoundrels will suffer for the deed!”

“They will be arrested, you may be sure, when found!”

Once more impressing upon Thomas’ mind the necessity for silence and
caution, Linden left the house, and, the same day, returned to
Shenandoah. While Thomas was a desperado, had the reputation of an
amateur pugilist and a rough customer, all this did not palliate the
crime of his enemies. I was very anxious to have them captured, and work
was at once commenced upon that portion of the business.

Wm. M. Thomas was of Welsh descent, and his real name was Willmad Frank,
but he was generally known as Wm. M. Thomas—or “Bully Bill.” Why people
persisted in calling him by the latter coarse title, he told Linden, he
had no knowledge. He did not particularly delight in the _alias_, yet it
was quite appropriate, in slang parlance, being founded upon his daring
and reckless personal character. His father’s name was Frank. That
should have been his own, but he was everywhere denominated Thomas.

When the Mollies heard that Bill was not dead, after all the powder and
ball that had been wasted upon him, they were enraged. It was not policy
for them to emit their wrathful feelings on the public streets and in
the presence of strangers, but in their own secret circle they were loud
in denunciations of Hurley, Gibbons, Doyle, and Morris, as foolish
bunglers, who did not have the nerve to face “Bully Bill!” The four
worthies received little sympathy from those who knew their part in the
tragedy, and those who did not were as likely to speak their feelings to
their very faces as in the presence of others. Gibbons had gone. Morris,
Doyle, and Hurley were at work. The general public merely read the
published accounts of the attempted murder in the newspapers, and gave
little thought to solving the riddle as to who had wrought the deed, or
wherefore it had been done. It was charged upon the Mollie Maguires,
however, as it was known that Thomas had made himself peculiarly
obnoxious to that class, and it was supposed his end would one day come
through use of their pistols. At present Wm. M. Thomas survived and
swore eternal vengeance.

It was not difficult for McKenna and Linden to form a plan by which the
latter should become acquainted with the prominent Mollies in and about
Shenandoah. A time was appointed when Linden should encounter his
brother detective at Cleary’s saloon, where the clan mostly congregated,
after the departure of McHugh, and after the little misunderstanding
McKenna and his companions had had with Micky Cuff about his teeth. They
entered the place separately, one day, finding themselves in the
presence of Muff Lawler, John Delaney, of Number Three, and some others,
when Linden pretended to recognize McKenna as an old acquaintance, from
Buffalo, whose face he had not seen for several years. They shook hands
heartily and were greatly rejoiced at the seemingly accidental
encounter.

“Glad to see you again!” said Linden.

“It plazes me, too, tho’ I can’t say much for the sarvice ye are in,”
answered the detective, scowling upon Linden rather ferociously.

“Oh, that need not part old friends!” responded Linden. “You know I
always perform my duty, and as long as I say nothing about your Buffalo
matter, and do not go out of my way to harm you or your friends, I don’t
see the need for quarreling! Come, let’s have something in remembrance
of old times!”

“I’m agreed!” responded McKenna, and he was prompt in walking up to the
bar, followed by the assembled Mollies, all of whom drank at the
Captain’s expense. Had he not shown himself an old friend of McKenna,
there were few of the Mollies who would have cared to take a glass in
his company. They soon found him a gentleman of his word, and as he had
promised not to hurt McKenna, they felt he would be equally lenient to
that person’s comrades. Lawler was particularly struck with the frank
and manly manner of Linden, and said he was “proud to form his
acquaintance!”

Before Linden left the crowd it increased considerably in numbers and
its members were greatly under the influence of the liquor they had
consumed.

The ice once broken, the Mollies did not wonder, or indulge suspicion,
when they saw Linden and McKenna occasionally in company. It was not
often they were found together, and then there were always others
present, to prevent any private talk; but it was easy enough, when he
wanted to meet the officer alone, for McKenna to write it—as well as the
time and place of conference—on a bit of paper, in his room, in cipher,
and, when occasion gave opportunity, quietly place the communication in
Linden’s hand, or in a side pocket of his coat.

On one occasion, the detective, having something particular to transmit,
made the open boast in Cleary’s that, his revolver being empty, he would
“do” Linden out of a fresh charge. Slipping out of the room, a few
minutes later, he walked to the previously-appointed rendezvous, at the
old bridge, by the side of West Shenandoah Colliery, held the necessary
business talk, secured some cartridges, and, in half an hour, was back
at the saloon, exhibiting his loaded pistol, and chuckling over the sly
manner in which ammunition had been obtained from the enemy.

As a natural consequence of his defense of the Colliery, and similar
employment in other sections of the country, Linden was soon well known
as a policeman who had been placed at the head of a special force; but
his connection with my Agency was carefully guarded until such time as
it might be necessarily or unavoidably revealed.

At another time, Linden saw McKenna in Cleary’s place, and, after a
drink, in the course of conversation asked the Shenandoah Secretary if
he had any objection to talk over old times, and if he should speak out
before the company—nearly all Mollie Maguires.

“Av coorse you can!” said McKenna in a loud voice.

“We are all friends of Jim McKenna,” remarked Muff Lawler, “so see to it
that you don’t say anything amiss of him!”

“No danger of that,” responded Linden. “He’s too good a chum of mine,
and I have known him too long, to do or say anything to harm him!”

In the course of the conversation Linden accidentally let out the
supposed fact that, while McKenna was the best-hearted man alive, and
the truest friend, he would traffic in counterfeit money, if he had a
chance, and when beset, was a very devil in a scuffle, as one fellow in
Buffalo had found out when it was too late. McKenna said very little,
and allowed his friend to freely chaff him to his face, simply
responding that he knew the source whence the stories came and did not
care for them.

After Linden had gone, Muff Lawler took McKenna aside and whispered in
his ear:

“I don’t believe, Jim, that Linden would arrest you for any crime
whatever! He seems a jolly chap, and is too generous an’ true to take in
an old companion!”

“He is mightily changed, if he is not all ye can say that’s good,”
responded the detective; “but let us be wary, even of him! He’s a sworn
peace officer, an’ I know he’ll do his duty, no matther who sthands in
the way! It is my intintion never to throw myself in his road, if I
happen to be wanted for anything in particular!”

“Well,” resumed Muff, “ye may be all correct, but it seems to me that I
could depind upon him and never be decaved!”

Linden had thus built the foundation for what was fated to be a
considerably extended and intimate acquaintance with the Mollie
Maguires.

The shooting of Wm. Thomas, and its failure in a fatal result, caused
extra exertions to be put forth by the members of the Mollie order, in
different localities, to make trouble for the Coal and Iron Company, the
Superintendents of which were determined to continue work in their own
way.

Pat Butler, Bodymaster at Loss Creek, came to McKenna, a few days
subsequent to the incidents just detailed, and said his men were anxious
to put an end to shipping of coal over the Lehigh Valley Road, and
wanted his assistance. The operative demurred, said McAndrew had
returned, was the man to apply to, and finally refused to entertain any
such proposition. A little later, rails were torn up on the road
mentioned, and trains must have been smashed in pieces and people killed
had not the engineer, who was on the alert, discovered the trouble in
season. Butler, it will be remembered, was in favor of the Catawissa
bridge-burning, heretofore alluded to, and which had been given up when
outsiders became interested. He was still solicitous that the job should
be done, by Mollies alone, but McKenna boldly opposed the work, and
after a while forced him to abandon the project.

The next plan was broached by Thompson, of Number Three, who sought aid
in throwing the passenger train off the track of the Shenandoah Branch.
McKenna caused a delay, urging want of men, and then agreed, but finally
backed out, saying it was too dangerous to human life. So this was
effectually stopped, and the men gathered for the purpose of its
execution were sent home.

Determined to do something devilish, Thompson, Doyle, Murphy, and John
Dean, came together and turned loose the brake of a horse car, loaded
with iron, let it fly down, over the steep grade of the main line of the
road, when they knew the passenger train was coming up from an opposite
direction. Had not the flying and deadly missile—for it sped over the
track like an arrow from a bow—been observed at Loss Creek Store, and a
word of warning telegraphed the cars to get on the side track, hundreds
of lives would have been wantonly sacrificed.

A little later, Tom Hurley and Jack Hilbert entered Penitentiary Drift,
then being worked by a Mr. Schwartz, took away all the tools, powder,
and harness, and the property they could not carry destroyed and emptied
into the creek.

Soon after these things occurred the detective was given fresh cause for
uneasiness, in the expressed determination of Frank McAndrew to once
more leave for another mining locality in search of work. Should the
Bodymaster carry out his threat the management of the division would
again be left to McKenna, a consummation not devoutly to be wished. The
detective, therefore, endeavored to show to the perverse McAndrew that
the work already begun would soon result in a general resumption of
mining all over the Mahanoy Valley, in spite of the strikers, when work
would be as plentiful there as anywhere. All he had to do was to counsel
quiet, do his best to put the men in good humor, and he would not be
forced to remove from Shenandoah.

“This is all mighty fine,” answered McAndrew. “Still, it’s nothin’ but
talk, an’, be gorra! it taks cash to buy the childer clothin’ fur their
wearin’ and bread for their atin’! If I don’t get somethin’ to do in a
week or two, I tell you, seriously, that Shenandoah won’t see my face
for a long while! I’ll turn me back upon it wid all the speed
imaginable!”

Would McAndrew desert the place, and once more leave the Secretary in
the toils? McKenna determined that he should not go, if he could find
anything to prevent. But what could he do to keep him at home?


                               ————●————




                            CHAPTER XXXIII.

            PRESIDENT GOWEN AND THE LEGISLATIVE COMMISSION.


The Legislature of Pennsylvania, listening to the repeated demands of
the dissatisfied and the call of the Anti-Monopoly Convention,
heretofore alluded to, in 1875 appointed a committee to investigate the
affairs of the Philadelphia and Reading Company. That commission
convened at Atlantic City, New Jersey, the 29th of July, in the same
year, and heard such testimony as the complainants could bring before
it, as well as the pleadings of the able attorneys representing the
prosecutors of the inquiry. Mr. Gowen, the President of the Philadelphia
and Reading Railway Company, personally appeared before the committee
and made answer to the charges. I have deemed it necessary, in order
that the careful reader may fully comprehend this entire operation and
the extent to which it reached, to give a brief abstract of the
principal points in Mr. Gowen’s exhaustive, comprehensive, and
unanswerable argument, which is hereunto appended:

After furnishing a condensed history of the Reading Railroad Company,
which was chartered in 1833, and opened to the coal regions in
1842—enlarging gradually from a line of fifty-eight miles of single
track, in 1835, to over one thousand miles, in 1870—468 of these being
in the coal fields alone—Mr. Gowen alluded, in fitting terms to the
various trials the Company had had in the Legislature, while he was
counsel, opposing franchises to other companies securing liberty to mine
iron and coal. He succeeded, at one time, by an amendment, in preventing
an act, in favor of an antagonistic corporation, having any operation in
Schuylkill County. Then the Company bought up large quantities of coal
land and had the Franklin Coal Company incorporated. This was followed
by the strike of 1871, after which the Reading management determined to
enter the field as coal and iron miners and obtain a grant from the
Legislature for the formation of an auxiliary coal and iron corporation.
This gave rise to the Laurel Run Improvement Company. They bought one
hundred thousand acres of land, and it was conveyed to the Company.
Forty millions of dollars were thus expended.

Mr. Gowen subsequently traced, in brilliant and striking contrast, the
respective positions of New York and Philadelphia, showing the benefits
to be conferred upon Pennsylvania by preventing the grasping New York
associations from obtaining a monopoly of the southern, as they had of
the northern coal fields.

The Reading Company, now that Mr. Gowen’s plans have succeeded, ships
from the city of Philadelphia, alone, two millions five hundred thousand
tons of coal a year, in vessels, has shipped as much as ninety thousand
tons a week, and the commerce and prosperity of the port of
Philadelphia, as a shipping point, are much more dependent upon the
industry which it brings to it than upon all others put together. It can
now say to the manufacturer: “Here is a Company that owns lines of
railroad in the heart of a rich agricultural region, where labor is
plenty and always will be abundant; we own the coal mines, and you can
come here to locate your works, in the confidence that self-interest
alone, and the worship of the almighty dollar—generally supposed to be
implanted in the breast of a corporation, without regard to any
benevolent or philanthropic ideas in the minds of the gentlemen
connected with the Company—will induce us to let you have this fuel at
less than you can buy it from an individual.”

After giving some pertinent figures regarding the productiveness of the
coal region—alluded to in an opening chapter of this work—the President
went on to state that, at the end of the year, while the Schuylkill had
only increased, in 1870, to four millions eight hundred and fifty-one
thousand eight hundred and fifty-five tons, or twenty-nine per cent., in
the same time the Wyoming region increased from two millions nine
hundred and forty-one thousand eight hundred and seventeen tons, to
seven millions eight hundred and twenty-five thousand one hundred and
twenty-eight tons, or one hundred and sixty per cent. Here was an
increase of one hundred and sixty-six per cent., against twenty-nine,
due to the fact that the Wyoming region was controlled by large
corporations which could expend money in developing the lands, and who
were not liable to be prostrated by a monetary panic.

In the four years, from 1870 to 1874, the tonnage of the Schuylkill
region has increased thirty-three and twenty-three one-hundredths per
cent., and that of the Wyoming only eighteen and one one-hundredth per
cent.

The peculiar business transactions of factors in Philadelphia were then
ably discussed, and received at Mr. Gowen’s hands the exact treatment
they deserved, when he turned his attention to the retail dealers, and
some of the iniquities of their system, after which he examined,
_seriatim_, the four principal charges made against the Company, in the
following order: 1st, of detention of cars; 2d, of short weights, 3d, of
an unfair distribution of cars; and 4th, of a combination, or
conspiracy, to control production, which, if proven, renders it amenable
to the law, and which shows it to have been guilty of an abuse of its
corporate franchises.

As to detention of cars, Mr. Gowen explained the cause to be
unavoidable, at times, but said the Company always endeavored to deal
justly by its patrons. Detentions were principally from accidents to
trains and to cars. They employed a Missing Coal Agent, and did
everything in their power to be prompt.

The speaker made a complete demurrer to the charge of short weight, and
fairly turned the tables upon those fighting his corporation, exhibiting
the result of a test given the retail dealers in Philadelphia, greatly
to the discredit of the latter. In many cases these very honorable
retailers sold from thirteen to sixteen and eighteen hundred pounds of
coal for a ton, annually realizing a handsome percentage from their
villainy.

Unequal distribution of cars was equally well refuted. Then the
opponents of the company said: “Philadelphia is not the place to make
the investigation in. We must ‘beard the lion in his den.’ We must go
right up to Pottsville. The newspapers of Philadelphia are worth
nothing. They are all in the interest of the Company, and as for Mr.
Gowen, he will not venture ten miles out of Philadelphia; if he does, he
will be shot by the miners. We will take the committee where everybody
is opposed to the Company.” It was just where Mr. Gowen wanted to go.
His adversaries had two weeks, and then there was an adjournment of
nearly ten days more, in which to prepare for the Pottsville campaign.
Mr. Bronson moved his headquarters to Pottsville, and examined the
matter carefully. Mr. Gowen was present. Threats did not intimidate him.
What was the result? The allegations were abandoned. Even the discharged
employés of the Reading Company, when put on the witness’ stand, said
nothing to reflect upon its management.

As to the charge of unlawful confederation, the speaker was equally
felicitous. The object in entering into alliance with the New York
Companies was simply this—to announce as the future policy of the
Company that the price of coal should be lowest at the mines, and
increase with every mile of distance over which it was carried; that it
should be just that much higher in the city of New York than it was in
the city of Philadelphia as was due to the increased distance of the
former from the region where the coal was produced. It was so adjusted
that, instead of coal being a dollar a ton cheaper in New York, the
difference between the price of coal in the port of Philadelphia and in
the city of New York was exactly one dollar a ton in favor of
Philadelphia; and coal in Boston was exactly so much higher than coal in
Philadelphia as was due to the cost of carrying it from Philadelphia to
Boston—namely, about one dollar and sixty cents per ton.

After speaking of the loss from deterioration of coal, by exposure to
the atmosphere, the risk of capital invested, and faulty veins, Mr.
Gowen thus alluded to troubles in the coal region: “It will not do to
say that these troubles result from the inadequacy of the price paid for
labor, because, without exception, the rates paid are the highest in the
world. The high rates have had the effect of attracting to the coal
region a surplus of labor, more than sufficient to do the work required;
and it is the effort of this surplus to receive an employment which it
cannot really get that has led to all these disturbances.” He would not
be understood as reflecting in any manner upon the laboring class of the
community. He believed ninety-five out of every one hundred of the men
employed about the mines in the coal region to be decent, orderly,
law-abiding, respectable men; but there is among them a class of
agitators—a few men, trained in the school of the Manchester cotton
spinner—brought here for the purpose of creating confusion and to stir
up dissension between the employer and the employed. Mr. Gowen here grew
earnestly eloquent, and his language is quoted in full:

“I yield to no man living in the respect and admiration that I pay to
the workingman. Let him who will erect an altar to the genius of labor,
and, abject as an eastern devotee, I worship at its shrine,

  “‘Gathering from the pavement crevice, as a floweret from the soil,
    The nobility of labor, the long pedigree of toil.’

“I ask your attention, therefore, for a few moments to my advocacy of
the rights of labor. I stand here as the champion of the rights of
labor—as the advocate of those who desire to work and who have been
prevented from doing so. I stand here to arraign before you a class of
two or three men out of every one hundred, who, by their machinations
and by their agitation, have held in absolute idleness and starvation
thousands and thousands of men for months. Why, gentlemen, look at what
we have undergone. When people object to a profit of twenty-five or
thirty cents upon the ton of coal, I ask them to look at what those who
mine coal have had to submit to during the last six months. I have had
printed for your use a statement, from the daily reports coming to me
during the strike, of the outrages in the coal region. Here I want to
correct an impression that goes out to the public, that these outrages
are intended to injure the property of the employer. They are not. We do
not believe that they are. They are perpetrated for no other purpose
than to intimidate the workingmen themselves and to prevent them from
going to work. I shall not read the list; it is at your service; and you
can look over it and see the position we have occupied for months. But
let me mention a few of the glaring instances of tyranny and oppression.
At a colliery, called the Ben Franklin Colliery, the employés of which
were perfectly satisfied with their wages, had accepted the reduction
early in the season, and were working peacefully and contentedly, the
torch of the incendiary was applied to the breaker at night. These men,
having families to support, working there contentedly and peacefully,
were driven out of employment by a few dangerous men, simply for the
purpose of preventing them from earning their daily bread. I had some
interest in the subject of the amount of their wages, and I asked the
owner of the colliery what his miners were actually earning at the time
when they were prevented from working by the burning of the structure in
which they were employed, and he told me that the lowest miner on his
pay-list earned sixty dollars a month, and the highest one hundred and
thirty dollars; and yet, although these men were peaceful, law-abiding
men, they were driven out of employment by an incendiary fire. At
another colliery, within five or six miles of this, a band of twenty or
thirty men, in the evening—almost in broad daylight—went to the breaker,
and by force drove the men away and burnt the structure down. It
belonged to a poor man. It was a small operation. The savings of his
lifetime were probably gone, and his own employés, who had nothing
against him, and who were perfectly willing to work, were thrown out of
employment, and probably remain out of employment to this day.”

All schemes for causing the miner to provide for himself when sickness
and trouble came, having been found unavailing, from the improvidence of
the men themselves, the Company announced, in January, 1876, a rule
that, whenever a man was killed in its service, a certain sum should be
paid for his funeral expenses; that his widow should receive a fixed
payment each week, in money, for a definite period, or so long as she
remained a widow, and that every minor child of the deceased, unable to
work, should have a designated amount, weekly, all of which was to be
paid out of the treasury of the Company. Even this charitable and
beneficent plan was ridiculed by the people whose business it was to
destroy confidence and create trouble in the coal region.

When Mr. Gowen concluded, the committee made its report, showing that
there was no ground of action, and that was the last heard of
Legislative intermeddling with the Company.

The reader will observe that Mr. Gowen’s address appeals directly to the
workingman, and that his blows are mainly showered upon the Mollie
Maguires and their evil and violent associates. Wishing to show the good
the miner is capable of doing, he speaks plainly, and without
affectation, so that the illiterate can understand as clearly as the
learned. He also desires to point out, and is successful in depicting,
the benefits actually accruing to Philadelphia and the State of
Pennsylvania through action of the two great companies that he so ably
represents.

It was the sixth of July that the committee was in Pottsville, where
they supposed Mr. Gowen would not dare to show himself; but in this the
gentlemen prosecuting the case were entirely in error. Mr. Gowen was
there. Thinking, as excitement ran high, and outrages were being almost
daily and nightly perpetrated in all portions of the coal country, that
the threats of the Mollie Maguires to kill the President of the Company,
might, if unprevented, be carried out, I took precautions to block the
enemies of that gentleman in this regard. Detectives were sent from
Philadelphia, unknown to him, to watch over Mr. Gowen, and McParlan,
_alias_ McKenna, was ordered to Pottsville to see that the Mollies were
not allowed a chance of preparation to strike at the President without
the knowledge was communicated to others. It was during this excitement
that McKenna met with a mishap, which I must briefly describe.

He was, one fine morning, walking about the city, and came upon a
suspicious looking man, who, the detective thought, was throwing himself
more frequently than absolutely necessary in the presence of Mr. Gowen,
and determined to see who he was and what disposition he made of
himself. Informing Linden of this intention, he started. The person
under surveillance first entered Dormer’s Sheridan House, remained there
a short time and, coming out, went to Hughes’ drinking place, in Center
Street. In this way he consumed the time until ten o’clock at night,
McKenna keeping continually on his trail, but entirely unseen and
unsuspected by the visitor. This constituted some twelve hours of
continuous shadowing, and the operative had discovered nothing, except
that his man consumed a large quantity of liquor and walked very fast,
occasionally talking a short time with leading Mollies. He was well
tired of the business, but determined to see where the party made his
headquarters before he left him. It was surprising how many people that
comparative stranger knew in Pottsville, and equally miraculous how fast
he flew over the uneven ground, climbing the hills like a native, and
never stumbling or falling, even after imbibing whisky enough to kill an
ox. McKenna, meanwhile, had been unable to secure anything to appease
either hunger or thirst and was nearly prostrated.

Finally the man traveled, at a late hour, on a hurried walk, up
Mahantongo Street, and, after a long and toilsome pilgrimage, which the
operative thought would never end, paused before a small house in an
eastern suburb of the city, looked cautiously about, to see that nobody
observed him, and then, leaping the garden fence, entered the rear door
of the premises. A light still burned in the kitchen, and the detective,
assuring himself by actual observation that his party did not live in
the dwelling, but was courting the cook in the back apartment, secreted
himself in the shadow of a large tree, on the opposite side of the
street, and awaited results. The stranger stopped more than an hour.
McKenna, his patience and strength quite spent, still persevered in
maintaining his watch.

Presently he heard unsteady footsteps approaching, and, fearing
discovery, the operative sat down on the sidewalk, took off his boot,
and pretended to be very busily engaged in extracting some apocryphal
sand and gravel which had worked into it through an indefinite hole in
the upper-leather. To the surprise of McKenna, he was accosted by a
thick, lubberly, short-set city policeman, evidently a German. Seeing
the _pseudo_ Mollie, he rolled along toward his resting-place, and, in a
decidedly thick and drunken tone, demanded:

“What for you lofe about here, eh?”

McKenna examined his boot more attentively, and answered respectfully:

“Begorra! Me boot hurts me foot! Sure, an’ I am gittin’ some gravel
stones out of it, when I mane to start for home!”

“Py tam! I shows you what for you lounge around in der dark! Get away
from dis! Marsch along on der schtreets!”

Without waiting for McKenna to obey him, which he was preparing to do,
by drawing on his boot—meanwhile keeping a sharp eye upon the door of
the house in which his friend was concealed—the brutal and besotted
wretch struck the detective a savage blow on the head with his heavy
club. Although it was an entirely unprovoked attack, and the stroke
brought blood freely from his forehead and nostrils, the agent gave no
answer, and made no effort to retaliate. A second stroke, intended for
his head, was parried skillfully with his arm, and he walked away, down
the street. The vagabond policeman staggered along a few paces and fell
down upon the walk, in a state of drunken unconsciousness. Continuing
until he reached the shadow of the Catholic church, McKenna stopped,
bound up his head as well as he could, and, then seeing his man emerge
from the kitchen, he once more started in pursuit. It seems that the
fellow had been merely paying a visit to his sweetheart, as he took the
road for the country, and, after following him several miles, the
operative dropped the trail and returned to his boarding-house.

The next day McKenna was a horrible sight to look upon. With eyes clad
in mourning, scalp bound up in plasters, clothing torn and soiled, and
limbs bruised, he thought he had learned quite enough of Pottsville and
its policemen. And Pottsville had had enough of him, in his character of
a Mollie Maguire. It is fair to say that the particular watchman spoken
of did not remain on the force many weeks longer, his place having been
filled by worthier material.


                               ————●————




                             CHAPTER XXXIV.

                         MURDER OF B. F. YOST.


In the interim, while many of the collieries were beginning to work,
making up for lost time, and others putting machinery in order,
preparing to do so, the Mollies kept themselves as active as ever, and
McAndrew found himself so busily employed, attending to the interests of
his division, that he was entirely unable to put his threat, to leave
the neighborhood, into execution, had he continued of that mind. He was
so chagrined by the failure of his comrades to kill Thomas, that, for a
fortnight, he made it his principal daily duty to saunter about the
streets, abusing the unsuccessful men as “blundering idiots” and “arrant
cowards,” drinking much whisky, and everywhere asserting that, if the
job were to be tried again he would trust nobody, but just attend to it
in person. At about this time the Bodymaster obtained employment in one
of the Reading Company’s mines, was well contented, and said no more
about going away. As McKenna had kept his word, and helped him all he
could, and really been instrumental in finding McAndrew something
profitable to do, the Bodymaster was a firmer friend of the operative
than ever. He proclaimed aloud, wherever he went, that there was “no
better man living than Jim McKenna.” Few were bold enough to dispute
this statement. But for poor, unfortunate Mike Doyle, the Bodymaster
chose only hard and insulting words. He was especially severe upon him,
as it secured belief that he might easily have finished Thomas had he
not run off the ground too early in the game.

It was now arranged that Gomer James should be shot, on or about the
fifth of July, when a night picnic was to be held in the neighborhood of
Shenandoah. McAndrew even went to Girardville, to see Kehoe and have him
furnish four men to do the act, but the King of the Mollies said there
were none in that place capable of transacting such delicate business.
McAndrew traveled to Big Mine Run, found Barney Dolan, with a similar
result, and returned to Girardville, where he met Larry Crean,
Bodymaster, and that officer bluntly refused his request. Father
Bridgeman had, only the previous Sabbath, denounced Kehoe and himself
from the altar, and the Mollies were in a state of perturbation from
that reason. Otherwise the County Delegate and the President of
Girardville Division might have been more efficient and prompt in
seconding McAndrew’s proposition. As it was, that person felt
constrained to go home, his aims as far from fulfillment as when he
first departed from Shenandoah. He told McKenna, the same night, that
Jack Kehoe was too mean to be half-way honest, and that he had barely
given John Gibbons a dollar and fifty cents toward defraying expenses to
Luzerne County, which was in contrast with the action of Tom Donahue,
who donated two dollars in money, hired a horse and buggy, and drove
Gibbons over to Rupert Station, where he was to take the train for
Wilkesbarre—Tom Donahue being a poor man, while Kehoe was known to have
plenty of money.

The detective now knew where John Gibbons was.

Finally, Pat Dolan, a brother of Barney, sent word to the troubled
Bodymaster of Shenandoah that he would find some men, and lead them
himself, and see that the James affair was satisfactorily settled. The
party was surely expected to arrive in Shenandoah, at or before the
picnic of the fifth of July.

It was near the same date that Pat Butler, of Loss Creek, made his
advent in Shenandoah, caused McKenna and some others to meet him in the
bush, and then and there gave out that he would, in a day or two, bring
five men over to take the life of a boss named Forsythe, who had, in
some manner, made himself repugnant to a few of the clan.

It was definitely arranged, through a suggestion from the operative,
that a second meeting, to perfect the plan of attack, should convene,
the following night, in a small school-house on Number Three Hill. By
this postponement McKenna gained time in which to notify Superintendent
Franklin, who, in turn, took measures for warning Mr. Forsythe, and this
Mollie scheme of assassination was wholly defeated. Mr. Forsythe had
urgent business elsewhere for a few weeks. Butler held his meeting;
McKenna attended, witnessed the discomfiture of the gentleman from Loss
Creek, when he learned that Forsythe had been suddenly called away, and
was as loud and vehement as the rest in execrating the ill-luck that
dragged a doomed man from their murderous hands. Not a person present
suspected that Forsythe had been informed of the plot to take his life.
This was far from their thoughts. The disappointed gathering in the
dark, at the rustic school-house, dispersed at an early hour, and the
Mollies retired, unaccountably cheated of their prey, to their homes.

The fifth of July arrived, but not the men promised from Big Mine Run.
Certainly they did not show themselves to the committee of Shenandoah
Division, McKenna, John Morris, and Mike Darcy, appointed to receive and
lead them up to their victim. To state the whole truth, this committee
was purposely dispersed by McKenna, who had no desire to see James
killed, and if Dolan’s party came to the picnic there were none present
to show them the least attention. It is more than probable they never
reached the vicinity. The operative sent Morris to the base-ball ground,
on a plea that he should bring home Tom Hurley. Morris at first obeyed
orders, but found Hurley so drunk that he could not be forced away,
hence went in for a spree on his own account and remained absent until
past midnight. Darcy was dispatched in another direction, with a
different excuse, and McKenna then waited alone—waited in the city of
Shenandoah, where he conferred with Linden, informing him of the plans
afloat, and telling him to have his men near the picnic grounds, in case
his own schemes to prevent bloodshed should miscarry. Returning to the
festivities, after it was entirely too late to expect the Big Mine Run
men, the detective continued the watch. Dancing was ended and the lights
nearly all put out when he left—and Gomer James had once more made a
narrow escape. Why the young man would persist in staying in the
neighborhood, after the repeated notifications he had received to leave,
or fail to take precautions against sudden surprises, was more than the
detectives could easily explain.

But the murderous order was more successful in other localities. It
never paused or permitted its purposes to entirely fail. The work was
often slow, while the assassins stayed their hands from week to week,
but in few known instances were attempts, once prepared for, easily
abandoned until the task had met at least partial performance. Wm.
Thomas was a living evidence of the fact. Time was yet to bring forth
many dead and silent witnesses to testify to the same thing.

The city of Tamaqua, in Schuylkill County, is a handsome place of five
thousand inhabitants, located fifteen miles north-northeast of
Pottsville, on the Catawissa Railroad, and connected with the
Philadelphia and Reading Railway by a branch from Port Clinton. Like all
the larger mountain towns of Pennsylvania, Tamaqua has narrow streets,
brick sidewalks, steep ascents and descents, good hotels, fine business
and residence structures, and a mixed population, in a great measure
dependent upon the mining business for support. There are seven or eight
churches, which ring out their musical chimes on the Sabbath day, with
the usual complement of banks, offices, and warehouses. Broad Street is
a principal thoroughfare. The town, or borough, has its municipal
officers, magistrates, and a small city police.

On the night of Monday, the fifth of July, 1875, the ordinarily quiet
city was considerably excited over the conclusion of the observance of
the national anniversary, which had absorbed attention during the day.
There were many people upon the streets, among others a few visitors
from adjoining localities. The police, at the time, consisted of only
two men, Benj. F. Yost and Barney McCarron, the former a German and the
latter of Irish descent, and they were expected, in addition to regular
patrol service, to light and extinguish the gas lamps in the principal
streets. Yost had experienced considerable trouble with the Mollies, at
the head of whom was one James Kerrigan; had arrested the latter for
drunkenness on several occasions, and, as would be natural in his
position, sometimes felt compelled to use his club to enforce obedience
on the part of those apprehended. McCarron came in for his share of
ill-will, but, from his German parentage, Yost was peculiarly disliked.
Several times had he been threatened with violence, but, being a
fearless man, an old soldier, and veteran of many battles, the policeman
laughed at danger and kept on in the performance of his duty. McCarron
was also openly menaced.

Time passed until about midnight of the fifth, or the first small hours
before the dawn of the sixth, when McCarron and Yost, passing Carroll’s
saloon, noted that the place was still open, went into a hotel, where
they saw and drank with Kerrigan—described as a small, round-faced,
short and stubbed little Irishman, and a miner, but then out of
employment. Subsequently they moved to the westward, on Broad Street,
extinguishing the lamps in their way. Soon their task was almost done,
and, before two o’clock in the morning, the policemen turned toward
Yost’s residence, near the corner of Broad and Lehigh Streets, to
partake of a lunch, preparatory to finishing up the night’s work. They
had not put out all the lamps in the locality, but it was customary, on
their part, to have some refreshments before ending the last half of the
patrol, during which the city would be in utter darkness, unless the
moon shone—which it did not—and, on this occasion, opened Yost’s front
gate, passed to a rear door, used a latch key, went into the house, and
found a simple repast ready spread for them, Mrs. Yost having long since
retired to her chamber on the second floor of the building. Having
satisfied their appetites and enjoyed some moments of repose, they
emerged from the same door and went upon the street, prepared to turn
off more lights. Hearing the noise below Mrs. Yost was awakened, arose,
the night being warm, and sat by an open front window, sending a loving
word and look to her husband, as he and his companion advanced to the
performance of their duty. It was a few minutes after two o’clock when
she saw Yost go toward the lamp at the corner, place the ladder against
its iron post, lightly ascend two steps, extending his arm to shut off
the gas. But his hand never reached the base of the lamp. The woman
beheld two rapidly succeeding and alarming flashes of light, instantly
followed by two loud reports, and her husband fell, his face still
turned toward her, lighted up by the rays sent slantingly down from the
still blazing gas jet. That was all her eyes saw. That was enough for
her ears to hear. She ran madly down the stairs, thinly clad as she was,
and into the street, through the front door, beyond the gate, and met
the wounded man, staggering and weak with loss of blood, clinging to the
fence, looking toward his once happy home. Alas! happy home no more!

“My God, Ben, what is it?” asked Mrs. Yost, her face turning ghastly
white.

[Illustration: “_‘Sis., give me a kiss! I’m shot and have to die!’_”]

The wounded policeman threw his arms pleadingly forward to her, and
said, faintly:

“Sis, give me a kiss! I’m shot and I have to die!”

She ran very fast, but before it was possible to reach him, he came down
upon the pavement, blood spurted from his mouth, and he was, for a few
minutes, unconscious.

Meantime where was Barney McCarron?

Having separated from Yost upon the street, he was going slowly
eastward, in the direction of Mr. Lebo’s dwelling, leaving the other
officer to care for the lamp near his own house, and had expected him to
come up in a moment. But that moment was destined never to arrive. Not
hearing Yost’s familiar footsteps, McCarron looked backward over his
shoulder, at the very second of time that Mrs. Yost was gazing tenderly
in the same direction. He heard the two pistol shots, saw the
quick-following flashes, and knew that Yost was hit, as he dropped
heavily to the earth. Two dark figures had left the shadow cast by a
collection of shade trees near the fence, walked to within a few yards
of the policemen, discharged their weapons and started on a brisk run
toward the cemetery. McCarron immediately set out in pursuit. Gaining
somewhat upon the assassins, when near a clump of bushes, he let fly two
shots after them, and the men paused long enough to return the fire,
fortunately without effect, and in a second resumed their precipitate
retreat. He could merely see, in the brief moment they stood in the
lamp-light, that one was a large man and the other somewhat smaller. It
was useless to go further alone. Hastening at once to his wounded
comrade, he aided some neighbors to convey him into the house that they
had so recently left in such joyous mood. There Yost was placed on a
lounge and word sent for a surgeon.

Dr. Solliday lived not far distant, and was soon on the spot, but, after
a brief examination of the injured man, said he could live but a very
short time. The bullet had passed in at the right side, between the
eighth and ninth ribs, and hemorrhage would be sure to carry him off.
There was no human skill that would avail anything. The end must come.

Mrs. Yost heard the sentence, and burst into passionate weeping,
clasping the fast-paling face of her dying husband in her two hands, and
kissing his livid lips as if her caresses might renew his short lease of
life.

“Do you understand?” said the physician. “You are sure to leave us in a
very short time—possibly in one moment! Tell me, before it is too late,
all you know of your murderers!”

The dying man’s fast-glazing eyes slowly opened and stared vacantly in
the face of his friend. But he recognized the necessity for action.

“I know,” he answered, in German, “I know! You want the whole truth!”

“Yes!”

“Well! I was just outening the light when two men made up to me and
fired! They came down from the direction of the cemetery, and, when they
had done their work on me, ran back in the same way. They were two
Irishmen. I truly think they shot me by mistake, meaning to kill
McCarron, there! They had threatened him, and he was afraid he would get
it. They were two strangers. Still, I should not say that, for I have
seen them before. They were both down at Jim Carroll’s—a party of
them—last night, and Barney pointed them out to me, or I showed them to
him—I can’t tell which, now—as we went by Carroll’s!”

This was all that the dying man could say just then. After resting a
space, during which his faithful mate knelt at the side of the sofa and
bathed his brow with her tears, he motioned McCarron, who stood nigh, to
move up closer, and said to him:

“Barney, who were those men that I pointed out to you—or you pointed out
to me—which was it?—as we passed Jim Carroll’s saloon, last night?
Didn’t you remark, ‘They’re fellows from the other side?’”

By “the other side,” Tamaqua people described the country the other side
of, or beyond, the Schuylkill.

McCarron bowed his head and assented. He remembered the time and event,
but did not know the men.

To all his friends, Mr. Shindel, Mr. Lebo, Mr. Shepp—the latter his
brother-in-law—Mr. Houser, and others, the policeman made precisely
similar declarations, knowing that he must die. He did not want to
accuse anybody unjustly. To Dr. Solliday, who questioned him once more,
he said:

“One was a large man, and the other was smaller!”

“Was not one Jimmy Kerrigan?”

“No! He was larger! Kerrigan was not there! If so, I did not see him!
And I had been with Kerrigan just before, at the United States Hotel,
where he drank with me! Oh, no! He didn’t do it!”

“Was it Duffy?”

The doctor was aware that Yost had had trouble with a man by that name.

“I am sure none of our men did it! They were strangers, believe me!”

To his brother-in-law, Daniel Shepp, the prostrate and dying man said,
as he closely held his hands, and the life-blood slowly ebbed from his
side:

“Oh, Dan! To think that I served so long in the army, was in so many
hard-fought battles, and escaped all the bullets, to die now
innocently!”

This was about the last that the brave officer said, excepting the
utterance of some gentle words to his distracted wife. At a little
past-nine o’clock, the morning of the sixth of June, 1875, seven hours
subsequent to receiving his wound, Benj. F. Yost breathed his last
breath on earth, and one of the most cruel murders of all the great
number perpetrated by the Mollie Maguires was consummated. It was even
then implicitly believed to have been the work of the order, as, outside
its blood-stained ring, Yost did not have an enemy. The fact, also
commonly credited, that the assassins were strangers in the borough, or
at least not residents of it, gave color to this supposition.

The carnival of blood had fairly commenced. This deed was speedily to be
followed by others of an equally mysterious nature, and no man could
tell whose turn must come next.

McCarron gave it up, after questioning Yost, that neither Kerrigan nor
Duffy, both of whom were enemies of the dead policeman, from the same
cause, having been arrested by him while they were drunk, and,
resisting, having felt the weight of his baton, had fired the fatal
shot; still it could not be erased from his memory or belief that they
possibly knew something about it. Thinking of the men he had noted at
Carroll’s, and to whom Yost had, on the occasion, made allusion, the
partner of the deceased determined, unknown to any person, to make an
investigation of the locality, and find if the same persons were still
there. The hour was nigh half-past four in the morning. Yost was fast
losing consciousness. McCarron went to Carroll’s, but, after walking
about the house and into the back yard, he saw no lights, heard no
sounds, or anything to indicate that people were astir in the dwelling
or saloon. Evidently all were in bed. Nothing could be discovered of
either citizens or strangers, and he therefore returned to Yost’s
residence and there remained until taking the eternal farewell of his
friend and companion.

B. F. Yost was thirty-three years of age, and universally respected in
Tamaqua, his widow constituting not the only one that shed bitter tears
over his untimely taking off. Hundreds of men and women in the city, who
knew his brave, frank, and honest heart, and remembered the warm, firm
grasp of his strong hand, felt that they could mingle their tears with
those of the one left wholly bereaved and desolate by the murderous
bullet of the cowardly assassin. Some of these thought that crime had
now gone its length, and it was time its course was ended. They had only
seen the beginning, but believed the end was in view. Among this class
were many men of wealth and influence, and those who grieved to see the
fair fame of their home smirched with innocent blood. They then
determined, if they could prevent, violence should no longer reign in
Schuylkill County.


                               ————●————




                             CHAPTER XXXV.

                M^CKENNA TAKES UP THE TRAIL AT TAMAQUA.


The wounding of Thomas, and subsequent murder of Yost, were enough to
assure me that more work of the same character would speedily follow,
unless earnest endeavors were put forth to prevent. Do the best I could,
the Mollie Maguires would cause blood to flow. Their thirst had been
excited by the sight of the crimson tide, and other victims must be
struck down before the appetite was appeased. Maddened by the goadings
of the few turbulent spirits in their midst, I knew they would never
stop until they found the unavoidable avenger on their track and the
outraged law strong enough to punish, blood for blood, life for life,
“eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.” It was my
duty to commence the work, upon the small foundation furnished, in
building up a force which should withstand the efforts of the league and
successfully battle with the midnight foe. My plans were quickly formed,
as quickly transmitted to Philadelphia, and Mr. Franklin gave them, as
far as was thought advisable, to the operatives engaged in the mining
country. Linden, laboring somewhat openly—though not ostensibly for
me—was secretly to co-operate with McParlan, _alias_ McKenna, who was by
no means to be acknowledged by any one as in the most distant manner
connected with the Agency. On the contrary, everything was to be done to
keep down a suspicion, should one arise, ever so faintly foreshadowing
any such relation. McParlan must be depended upon to perform the
principal service, in keeping track and securing the arrest of the men
who had attacked Thomas, as well as those who were guilty of
assassinating policeman Yost. The substantial chain of circumstances,
and the testimony, must be so direct, unequivocal and convincing as to
leave no chance loophole for the escape of the murderers, no scope for
an _alibi_, before a single guilty man could be captured and brought to
the prisoner’s box. Never had a defendant, a member of this thoroughly
organized association for murder and all sorts of crime, received
punishment through the verdict of a jury, and many good men despaired of
ever accomplishing such a work; but I truly considered that, if given
plenty of time and saved from the intermeddling of others, I could
surmount the trouble, and after a while drive the Mollie Maguires from
their strongholds. I would not be spurred on to take precipitate action.
My plans must all be brought to their proper denouement.

Assuming such safeguards as he might think for the best, McParlan was
directed to go to Tamaqua and learn, if possible, who had killed Yost,
and there lay the groundwork of a superstructure upon which the
prosecution of the assassins might be founded. He was to obtain such
information as he could, using his official relation with the order, as
far as it might go, and any other artifice, or detective scheme, which
should appear useful in gaining the desired results.

The command for a change of his base of operations reached McKenna on
the fifteenth of July, and he at once prepared to obey.

Linden also received instructions to second McKenna, but to refrain from
making his appearance in Tamaqua until requested by the other detective
to do so.

The Superintendent’s letter to McKenna did not find him in the enjoyment
of the best of spirits for a most dangerous and difficult undertaking,
from reasons which I will proceed to explain. The previous day, Frank
McAndrew having moved into a house at Indian Ridge Breaker—or Davis’
Breaker, as it was familiarly called—engaged with a number of Mollies in
a great carousal, which lasted until midnight, and, having inveigled
McKenna into the affair, succeeded in keeping him up and employed, there
and elsewhere, all night. This, with a return of a chronic sore throat,
from which he was suffering, made him almost ill again.

Indian Ridge Breaker is situated on the road by Lanagan’s Patch, leading
to Mahanoy City, from Shenandoah, and not far from the shebeen shop of
Mrs. Bridget Monaghan, twice a widow, but far from ancient at that,
although “fat, fair, and forty” was applicable as an imperfect
description of the lady. She occupied the stone basement of a
tumbledown, three-story wooden building, the upper floors of which were
devoted to the midnight gambols of predatory cats and daily incursions
of migratory rats—the hallways filled with webs of spiders that, with
the mice, made nests in the corners of the vacant rooms—and her
subterranean abode was, like that of handsome Micky Cuff, the habitation
of geese, ducks, chickens, goats, and pigs, among which Mrs. Bridget
walked, “monarch of all she surveyed.” This was a favorite and frequent
place of resort for McAndrew and other Mollies, and the stories that
gained circulation concerning the flitting of spirits, clad all in
white, through the upper corridors of the structure, at the dead hour of
night, and the gleams of an occasional flame—burning pale, sickly, blue
and ghastly, as some benighted miner was fain to report to his
superstitious household—all may have been due to the meetings of the
society in the otherwise untenanted place, and the failure of the
impromptu janitor to put up a curtain close enough to prevent a ray of
the single candle, lighting their deliberations, from escaping. It was a
famous place for the telling of ghost stories, and McKenna, who was an
adept at the relation of mysterious events, as well as singing songs and
dancing flings and jigs, frequently held the Mollies spell-bound for
hours, while he chronicled the scenes he had seen and the ghosts and
ghouls he had heard about in the old country. His legends were in great
demand, and sometimes he indulged in the narration of one in the
presence of the widow, who, meanwhile, would draw herself up close to
the story-teller—story-teller in more respects than one, it is to be
feared—and declare that the company positively should not leave her
“hotel” until daylight, if she had to supply the drinks and other
comfortables at her own expense. It was not difficult to win over the
Mollies to remain and “keep off the _banshee_,” if she only put out the
overflowing noggin with a generous hand. And this she did. To the credit
of the widow be it said, the love of drink and indulgence in gossip were
among the worst of her failings. In every other regard she was
considered a respectable and honorable member of her kind of society.

During the repetition of these hair-raising and blood-curdling
fabrications, given in the detective’s best vein, the Mollies habitually
and involuntarily threw off reserve and spoke boastfully of their own
adventures, not forgetting deeds they had recently participated in.
Through this action McKenna received many a hint that he could use and
improve upon when the time came. It was easy, under such circumstances,
to obtain the confidence of the most hardened of the brotherhood.

The night spoken of, McAndrew, Ed Ferguson, and McKenna, with several
more of the gang, were at Wiggan’s Patch, and, returning to Shenandoah,
the proposition was made to wake up the widow and take a drink in her
shop. Accordingly, Ferguson knocked loudly at the rickety door.

“Who’s there?” asked a woman’s voice from within.

“Sure, it’s Ed Ferguson, and some friends! Let us in, Mrs. Monaghan!”

“All right!” said the lady, and in a few moments the fastenings of the
entrance were undone and the party entered, warmly welcomed by the
landlady, who, from the prevalent heat of the night and sudden advent of
her visitors, had not donned any perceptible amount of clothing, but
proceeded to help them to liquor with the grace of a mermaid in its
native element, without even unfastening the strings of her dingy
night-cap.

There was a feebly-burning lamp on the counter, which illuminated the
room, for it was by no means a large place, showing the simple array of
bottles on the shelves, the bed, and other scanty furniture. But there
was more in the apartment than, at first glance, the operative was
willing to believe. Seeing that Ferguson was moving uneasily about, Mrs.
Monaghan said:

“Have a care, Ed Ferguson! Mind where ye put down your two big fate, and
don’t step on me chickens, plaze!”

Having taken their drinks and paid for them, the men were in for a lark,
and Ferguson, knowing some of the peculiarities of the widow, proceeded
to make a search for curiosities—and he found them. At the same time the
detective was nearly dead with the foul and fetid atmosphere filling the
unventilated basement.

“What have we here?” said Ferguson, who, while groping around where
Bridget said “he had no business”—under the bed—had caught somebody by
the naked feet. “A human being, as I live! And a woman at that!”

He first dragged out in this ungraceful way a female—Mollie Williams by
name—who, stopping accidentally with the landlady over night, had been
frightened by the noise the visitors made before entering and secreted
herself beneath the low bedstead with a part of the widow’s portable
property. An inventory of other things discovered in the apartment would
read as follows:

  1 Widow Bridget Monaghan—very angry and flushed as to face and
  scantily clad.

  1 maiden lady, of uncertain age, ditto as to raiment, and badly
  scared.

  5 goats, scattered about the floor very promiscuously.

  37 chickens—including one plucky game-cock.

  1 collection of new-washed female raiment, hanging damp on the line.

  5 ducks and a drake.

  1 goose and a gander.

  1 demijohn—contents, whisky.

  2 tin pots for drinking purposes—of tin.

  1 stove and furniture—badly cracked in places.

  1 section of a log, for a chair—not cushioned.

  1 collection of miscellaneous articles, on the shelves, intended for
  sale.

His comrades drank several times, but McKenna could not stomach the
liquor in that den, and, taking a tin dinner pail, which he found, he
washed it out and milked one of the goats, swallowing the warm fluid
with a relish.

[Illustration: “_He sung, sitting beside the widow, on her bed, with
Mollie Williams nigh, perched on the wooden excuse for a chair._”]

As a natural consequence of the time, place, and opportunity, McKenna
was importuned for songs, which he sung, sitting beside the widow, on
her bed, with Mollie Williams nigh, perched on the wooden excuse for a
chair, and the equally interested men, sitting on their haunches, and in
various extraordinary attitudes, around the room. The few following
hours until morning were consumed in the relation of sundry
soul-harrowing tales of ghosts, haunted houses and church-yards,
hobgoblins and spirits, to which all listened in silence, only excepting
an occasional interruption by the widow when proffering more liquor,
until the young man’s throat and tongue fairly gave out from too much
exercise, and he was constrained to beg for a season of rest. The sun
was rising when the company, very well soaked in bad liquor, oozed out
of Mrs. Monaghan’s cellar and started on a serpentine trail for home. As
a consequence of inhaling so much bad air, and from protracted
confinement in foul gases, the operative was so ill that, when he
received Mr. Franklin’s instructions to leave for Tamaqua, he felt more
like keeping his bed and sending for a physician.

The uninitiated reader may be inclined to think my description of Mrs.
Monaghan’s groggery an exaggeration. The thought is pardonable, but I
assure those who have followed me thus far in this recital, that,
instead of being overcolored, the whole truth, in all its details, has
not been told. It could not well be revealed without giving offense.

Mrs. Monaghan subsequently married a man by the name of Breyer, is yet
living, and can, if she will, substantiate every point I have given in
reference to this night’s adventure in her residence.

To make matters more complicated, a letter came with Mr. Franklin’s,
from Linden, warning McKenna to look out, as he was suspected by one of
the principal bankers of Shenandoah, of being a professional burglar,
hanging about the city for no good purpose. So firmly fixed was the man
of money and bonds in his belief, that he made the journey to
Pottsville, interviewed a city detective, and tried hard to induce the
officer to go to Shenandoah, see McKenna, and keep close watch of his
movements. The capitalist said he could not tell when his vault might be
attacked, and was fearful its valuable contents would fall, easy-made
plunder, into the lap of that dreadful Irishman. Linden informed the
Pottsville policeman that, although McKenna was rogue enough for almost
anything, charged with a brutal murder in Buffalo, where he formerly
knew him, and, as he believed, even then closely leagued with
counterfeiters, yet he did not believe he would, or could, burst a
burglar-proof safe. Linden further promised the banker’s friend that he
would take the matter in hand, go over to Shenandoah, and see what
McKenna really did intend. He “knew _he_ could worm the secret out of
him.” Here the matter dropped.

It was, after all, quite fortunate that this information met the
detective when it did, as through it a plan was suggested to his sick
brain by which he might easily depart from Shenandoah without
engendering suspicion in the minds of the Mollies as to the real object
in view. Dressing himself in his rougher attire, and packing a supply of
better clothing in his valise, ready for starting, McKenna called on
Frank McAndrew, in the afternoon, found a number of his friends present,
and, taking the Bodymaster aside, held a short whispered consultation
with him.

“Faix, I hev very bad news this mornin’,” said the operative, assuming a
solemn air, greatly in contrast with his usually radiant countenance.

“Phat is it?”

“I’ve got a letther from me sisther, an’, would ye belave it? them
beggarly Buffalo detectives hev been to her house, in Philadelphia,
watchin’ an’ spyin’ about, an’ finally axin’ fur me an’ me whereabouts!”

“Indade? But I make sure your sister didn’t tell them?”

“But she did, then!” And McKenna put on an appearance of much anger.
“She just said to them the last they heard of me I was at Shenandoah,
but didn’t belave I wor there now! That was enough, I’m sure, fur
they’re as sharp as the edge of a razor, an’ I expect they’ll quickly be
here afther me. Me sisther sent a letther, warnin’ me, if I had raison
to fear them, jist to make meself scarce! An’ now I must go! I shall
only tell you where I’m really goin’. If ye want me particular like,
I’ll be in Mahanoy City, or Pottsville occasionally, an’ ye may write me
at these places—but holt! perhaps ’twould be betther not to send me
anything until ye hear from me! As soon as I’m settled a bit I’ll let ye
know. In the meanwhile kape dark! If anybody inquires for the address,
say that ye don’t know where I am—but I tould ye I wor goin’ to see some
friends in Canada—that’ll put them on a false trail!”

“I’ll mind all ye say,” answered McAndrew, and he pulled a long face,
when he thought how he would manage the division without his Secretary’s
assistance.

Taking a few drinks of beer with the persons in the room—for McAndrew
kept a liquor supply by this time—the detective left the house, moved
deliberately to his boarding-place, told a similar story to Cooney and
his family, put his satchel in the hands of an Irish lad that he could
trust, to be taken to him at the depot, and then appeared as usual among
the remainder of his companions. A more despondent detective never was
seen. He was sick; his head ached, and his whole system needed rest.
Despite all, however, he managed to keep up a fair external demeanor,
joked with his Mollie friends, and even sung a laughter-provoking ditty.
When the time for the departure of the train arrived, he excused
himself, walked rapidly to the depot, found his satchel and his
messenger, tipped the boy a quarter of a dollar, seized the baggage,
mounted the car, just as it started out, and, in a few moments, was
trundling over the hills in the direction of Tamaqua. He fell
asleep—after half an hour’s uneasiness, fearing he might be recognized
by some one, but discovered he was unknown to all about him—and was in a
sound slumber when he reached the place of his destination. “Tamaqua!”
shouted in a loud voice, by the brakeman, awoke him, and he alighted at
the depot as the locomotive gave a preparatory shriek and glided, with
its serpent-like string of cars, along and around the mountain.

Notwithstanding the fact that McKenna had tasted nothing stronger than
water, coffee, and Cronk beer, throughout the day—in truth during
several days—he was so much overpowered, apparently with liquor, when he
reached the front door of the Columbia House, the same night, that he
fell sprawling across the threshold, his satchel flying in one direction
and his hat in another. His old acquaintance, Marks, the landlord, was
compelled to fly to his assistance, gather up his scattered goods and
chattels, lead him to a seat, and finally escort him safely to a room
and bed, the besotted guest all the while muttering to himself almost
unintelligible Irish jargon, about some “_dawshy-dawshy, allana
machree_, all the way from auld Erin,” that he had been to call upon,
and the “bastely _calliagh_, her mother, had forbidden him the house,
bad cess to her night-cap!” In truth, he was maudlin over some one that
be named his “_colleen bawn_, wid the _rucket_ head!” Marks left him
upstairs, without a lamp, stretched on the bed to find the way under the
covers as best he might.

No sooner had the landlord made an exit than the detective ceased his
mutterings, arose, ran lightly and soberly to the entrance, turned the
key in the lock, and hung his hat cautiously over the knob, as was his
custom. Then, weary and worn, and as sick as a man well could be and
still retain his senses, he undressed himself and retired.

The few of McKenna’s Tamaqua acquaintances who recognized him as he
staggered up the street had no desire to trouble the man in his
evidently advanced state of intoxication, and either turned off into
by-streets and avoided his presence, or failed to look in his direction.
The word was passed about the city, during the evening, that “that wild
Irishman, from Shenandoah, Jim McKenna, was in town again, on a rousing
spree, and would probably make things uncommon lively the ensuing day.”

Meanwhile the overtasked operative was sleeping calmly and peacefully,
and sweetly dreaming that he sat once more in his home, by the western
shore of Lake Michigan, hearkening to the soft sound of the waves as
they broke ripplingly upon the sandy beach, whispering tales of other
days, that in his waking hours were almost effaced from remembrance. The
morning sun shone brightly when the agent awoke, donned his miserable
attire, and prepared to continue the simulated debauch, which, he knew,
would serve as a veil for his real object in visiting Tamaqua, and in
the end, he hoped, bring him in communication with the murderers of
Yost.


                               ————●————




                             CHAPTER XXXVI.

                        IN THE MURDERER’S NEST.


After breakfast, the detective accompanied the landlord to the bar and
swallowed a powerful decoction of spirits, lemon, and sugar, commonly
termed whisky-punch, which had the effect, in a little while, of
tangling up his wits, weakening his joints, and causing his eyes to see
everything in couples, even to the solitary chimney-tops of the houses
in the city. At least, so it appeared. But he retained the sense of
hearing sufficiently unimpaired to receive the full benefit of Marks’
reflection, directed to the hangers-on of the tavern, as he quit the
house, and of which the agent was the subject—to the effect that it was
“a great pity he, McKenna, had no head for resisting the stupefying
influences of strong drink.” This forms the substance of the remark, but
not exactly the language, which was very coarse, and intensified by
sundry adjectives and expletives not mentioned to ears polite.

[Illustration: “_The Saloon and Residence of James Carroll._”]

One of the first places honored with the detective’s presence, after
quitting the Columbia House, was Carroll’s, where, as he had been
informed by Superintendent Franklin, Yost and McCarron saw the
strangers, “from the other side,” suspected of having committed the
murder, the morning of the sixth of that month. The saloon and residence
of James Carroll—all included in one building—was on Broad Street, no
great distance from the United States Hotel. After calling on Patrick
Nolan, another liquor-seller with whom he was familiar, and from whom he
obtained more liquor, thus adding to his appearance of drunkenness, the
operative went direct to Carroll’s Union House. Fortunately, the
proprietor of the place and his wife were the only occupants of the
bar-room. McKenna passed Carroll the sign for the quarter, while the
proprietor stood in the doorway, and Carroll answered correctly, then
warmly greeted him as a brother. The detective introduced himself:

“I am James McKenna, of Shenandoah! I think you know me by report, but
not by sight! Have often heard of you, as Secretary of Tamaqua
Division!”

At this juncture, Mrs. Carroll, who had been standing nigh, discreetly
withdrew, and Carroll said: “Jim McKenna? ‘Heard of you?’ I think I
have! You are right welcome here!”

“I’m jist afther having a bit of a spree, as ye’ll doubtless observe wid
half an eye, an ain’t nigh so steady as I wor yesterday, an’ don’t know
as much by half, but I greet ye kindly! Supposin’, now, you fit yourself
inter the space behint the bar an’ the shelves, an’ pour me out some
gin? I’m particularly partial to pure Holland!”

“Of course I will,” replied Carroll, and he served some liquor, taking a
stiff glass himself.

“I can’t stay but a little time,” said McKenna, seating himself before
the counter and balancing his body unsteadily, “fur I must get to Summit
Hill, beyant, this afternoon, fur to see Aleck Campbell!”

“Campbell is all right!”

“Yes! Campbell is one of the thruest men in the county, an’ one that I
have taken a particular likin’ fur!”

“You know Aleck and I are brothers-in-law?”

“Sure, an’ I hed no sich idea!”

“We are! An’, if you stay in the neighborhood, you must spake of me to
him! It’ll be a good thing for you to do!”

“I’ll remember that, depend upon’t!”

“I suppose you’ve read of the Yost matter?” said Carroll.

“Oh, I saw somethin’ of it in the papers, but hev no knowledge of the
particulars! I belave, however, that the Dutch policeman desarved all he
got!”

“It was a clane trick, an’ well done!”

“Some of the people in town are sayin’ that McCarron—isn’t that his
name?—did the whole thing!” suggested McKenna.

This groundless charge the detective had constructed, from whole cloth,
to draw Carroll out, but the saloon keeper did not choose to say much.
He responded:

“There was mighty little difference in the two—McCarron an’ Yost! I
think Yost was a trifle the manest, but not much!”

This was considerable for Carroll to say, before a comparative stranger,
even though known as a good Mollie, but contained no information; so,
after another glass of gin, which the detective dexterously threw out at
the door, after having changed the glasses and drank the water placed on
the counter with the liquor, McKenna took his leave, perceptibly the
worse for his morning drams, and boarded the cars for Storm Hill,
leaving his satchel at the Columbia House.

Arrived at his destination, the officer continued his appearance of
intoxication, and, after staggering about and entering one or two
saloons, rolled himself into Alex. Campbell’s house, finding the
proprietor at home, surrounded by several other Mollies, all of whom
seemed engaged in doing nothing in particular, excepting the rapid
consumption of the contents of the bottles behind the counter. The
reception accorded McKenna was generous, finding that he had a few
dollars to expend, and Campbell and the rest being eager to assist in
that operation. When they had taken some rounds, of which the detective
was compelled to imbibe fully his share, Campbell put on his coat, and
signaling to McKenna, the two started for a walk. They first made a call
at Pat McKenna’s—whose relative James McKenna, the operative, had
already made himself out to be—where an unusually warm greeting awaited
him. All of his second cousins were happy to resume a companionship
previously begun. This saloon was kept by Pat McKenna, the father of the
Old Mines Bodymaster. Pat, junior, was not at home. The whole country
swarmed with Mollies, and Campbell, Fisher, and Pat McKenna, junior,
were the leading spirits in the division, Fisher being at that date
County Delegate of Carbon County.

As the agent considered the dangerous company he was in, and the
extra-hazardous duty he was performing, at the very stronghold of the
party that he was almost convinced had assassinated the Tamaqua
policeman—although he had not gained any positive proof of their
guilt—his mind was so unduly excited, brain so highly stimulated and
alert that he might make no false step, speak no suspicious word, the
liquor he swallowed produced no more effect upon his organism than so
much water. Under similar circumstances a man will drink, from hour to
hour, all day, and never be really intoxicated until the mental strain
may be removed by the taking away of the cause of danger, when sleep, or
stupor, will promptly supervene. Thus the detective joined with
Campbell, the McKennas, and others, and was not too far gone to swallow
several drams, after the walk in Campbell’s company to the Summit. There
Tom Fisher resided. He was also a tavern-keeper.

As McParlan—I shall call him by his true surname, while describing his
associations with the Carbon County McKennas, to avoid confusion of
titles in the reader’s memory—and Alex. Campbell were tramping over the
hills to Summit, the agent, during a pause in the conversation, inquired
if news of the Bill Thomas affair had reached Storm Hill.

“Indade an’ it has!” returned Campbell; “an’ I hear it wur your men that
did it!”

“I guess ye have it purty straight, then,” said McParlan, not caring to
spoil a story which was working tangibly in his interest, and which
would draw his companion on to say more. “But ye must not let it out on
me! I caution ye, there’s many inquiries goin’ on as to who performed
that job!”

“All right!” responded Campbell. “Although the thing ended in failure,
it was well meant, and you were not to blame!”

“There’s _lashins_ of betther men for such a thing than one can get in
Shenandoah!”

“I belave ye! Your fellows couldn’t do so clane a job as that down in
Tamaqua!”

Here was very delicate ground. The tracer must say exactly the right
thing, if he desired to learn more. He was very drunk, as Campbell truly
believed, yet managed to reply:

“Be the great piper! but that wor a trick to be proud of! Indade, the
best thing of the kind I ever heard about!”

The tavern-keeper looked proudly but searchingly at McParlan for a
second, seemed satisfied that he was trustworthy, and exclaimed:

“Well, it do gain our lads credit! I wouldn’t have bothered my head
about it, only it was on a trade, you know!”

As a natural consequence of the direction of his professional duty,
McParlan ardently desired to learn who was to be killed in exchange for
the shooting of Yost, and the names of the men Campbell was just
confessing he had sent to Tamaqua, but he knew his business too
well—inebriated as he appeared to be—to put a leading inquiry in that
direction. Campbell then closed his mouth, possibly thinking he was
already more communicative than would be pronounced exactly prudent,
even with a man and a brother Mollie who confessed to having secured and
furnished the parties for the shooting of Wm. M. Thomas, and said no
more on the subject.

They found Fisher very much intoxicated and unwilling to do anything but
drink.

By this time it was night, and, although considerably “under the
influence,” Campbell left the detective at Fisher’s and went out to
attend the meeting of a building association, of which he was a member.

McParlan was forced by the proprietor of the place to remain with Fisher
that night. He would listen to none of his alleged reasons for returning
to Campbell’s. It was late when the operative retired, and in a few
moments sleep and weariness overpowered him.

Friday morning, after breakfast and a parting glass with County Delegate
Fisher, who urged him soon to come there again—certainly before leaving
the vicinity—the officer returned to Storm Hill and went directly to the
saloon of the elder McKenna, where he encountered Pat McKenna, the
Bodymaster, who introduced the visitor to his wife, with whom he had not
long before been united. There were a number of Mollies about the place,
and they experienced little trouble in inducing McParlan to give them
some songs and dances. Among the former, “Pat Dolan,” printed in an
early chapter of this work, was a great favorite and several times
_encored_. At the second singing every man in the bar-room joined in the
chorus:

              “Wid my riggadum-du—an’ to h—l wid the crew
              Wouldn’t help to free our nation;
              When I look back, I count ’em slack,
              Wouldn’t join our combination.”

In the jigs and reels there were some who took part, and all beat time
to the dancer’s heel-and-toe refrain. Both performances gave great
satisfaction, and at once seated McParlan firmly in the good graces of
all the Irish people of Storm Hill.

Pat McKenna, during the day, made a statement to the detective
sustaining what Campbell had previously said, and more might have been
gathered from the same source had not the place been so crowded with
patrons. The Bodymaster was a little more cautious than Campbell had
been, and the officer did not press him, however badly he wanted to have
the names of the men who had been sent to put Yost out of the way. That
night McParlan, _alias_ McKenna, remained at the house of his _quasi_
and convenient cousin, Pat McKenna, and enjoyed a good night’s sleep,
which, considering his arduous labors and long-continued excitement of
mind, he greatly needed.

Saturday, the seventeenth of July, was a sunny and rather sultry
summer’s day. In the forenoon, McParlan entered the bar of McKenna,
senior, and was there joined by Mike McKenna, a younger son of the
tavern-keeper, and brother of Pat, the Bodymaster. When all had taken
some drinks together, McParlan found a seat in the shade, not far away,
saying he felt very sick, after such a prolonged debauch, and young Mike
followed. Protected by the spreading branches of a tree, the pretended
cousin indulged his propensity for romancing—in true interest of the
public—to its full extent, rehearsing with additions and embellishments,
the absorbing particulars of the many “clane jobs” in which he had
participated—all purely figments of the brain from commencement to end,
but given in such minuteness of detail, and appearance of candor and
frankness, that the interested hearer took them in without doubt or
distrust of their truthfulness. Mike believed implicitly in Jim McKenna.

When the searcher after knowledge had exhausted his store of material
and talked himself hoarse, Mike thought it his turn to say something,
and while he had little to urge for himself, sung pæans to the prowess
of his elder brother, Pat McKenna, the Bodymaster. He spun many fine
tales of no particular value to his single auditor, but to all of which
the operative affected to give earnest and undivided attention. In a
little while, without in the least appearing to do so, McParlan brought
the young fellow around to the main question, and he plainly stated that
the men who had killed Yost were Hugh McGehan and James Boyle, both then
living at Summit Hill.

“Ye see, sir, it wor a bargain wid the boys around Tamaqua, by Campbell,
who jist wants some of them, wan of these fine days, to do for Jones,
who is a sort of Sub-Superintendent at Old Mines. He is Charlie
Parrish’s tool, an’ but fur this fellow Jones we’d have been at work
long ago! Hugh McGehan is the best man at a clane job in all the county,
an’ it’s a pity fur him to have to lave now, after lyin’ idle so long!”

“I was sure in my own mind, before, who had done the trick! But, be
jabers, it wor a well-laid plan, an’ mighty nice wor it carried out! I
suppose Jones will be taken off directly the excitement of the last
affair blows over!”

McParlan was trying to learn facts by appearing to have them partly in
possession.

“I thought ye knew somethin’ of the matther,” continued Mike, “but don’t
ye brathe divil a word to Pat, me big brother, that I hev been
chatterin’ here wid ye, fur he’d be worse nor a mad dog over it! I don’t
know when Jones is to be shot—an’ possibly the thing has been given
over—but when Aleck Campbell makes up his mind to a thing it generally
has to be done sooner or later, so I rather opine that it will come off
yet!”

“I suppose it was Boyle who fired the shot that brought Yost down?”

“You’re wrong there, then, for it wor McGehan’s pistol what performed
the thing nately! But there’s brother Pat, an’ I must be goin’! Don’t
you say anythin’!”

“Depend upon me!” said McParlan.

They entered the bar-room, the operative hoping he might meet Boyle,
described to him as a low-sized, stoutish man, with dark hair and
mustache. But Boyle was not among the new visitors. McParlan treated to
the best, paid his reckoning, and, with Mike, went to Campbell’s, where
the afternoon was spent at cards. The games ended when Pat McKenna came
in, just from his work at the mine. This person was a fine physical type
of a man, six feet four inches in height, well built and proportioned,
of fair complexion, and apparently twenty-five years of age. He was glad
to see McParlan again and accompanied him to his father’s house, and
they had drinks at Pat’s own expense, who then proceeded home to change
his clothing. Mike, meanwhile, took occasion once more to caution the
operative against saying anything about their talk of the forenoon. He
was reassured when McParlan suggested that he was no _cruddy_ idiot, and
reiterated his promise to observe great care over his lips. “Trust me to
know better than to blather over what is tould me in confidence!” were
his concluding words.

Subsequently, Pat McKenna, when given the opportunity, confirmed his
brother’s revelations, confessing that men from his division had shot
Yost, but he would go no further. The names he kept to himself. The
detective slept, that night, at the residence of young Pat McKenna,
retiring at the early hour of three A.M.

The following Sunday, McParlan, accompanied by Pat McKenna, the
Bodymaster, went to Coaldale, the residence of James Roarty, at the head
of the division there, ostensibly to see what Jack Donahue had done
about the Major business. A man named McNellis went with them. The
weather being very warm, all were glad when they came to a shady spot.
Roarty was easily found and took them to the house of another Mollie,
called Bonner, where they enjoyed refreshments. When questioned, Roarty
said he did not know what Chris Donnelly, of Mt. Laffee, and Yellow Jack
Donahue, of Tuscarora, were doing on or about the fifth, as he, Roarty,
and Kerrigan and two others—names not given—were in Tamaqua, on their
way to Big Vein, when Carroll gave them a letter, telling the three to
wait for further orders. The meeting took place, he heard, and Chris
Donnelly and his armed men were on the ground, but Donahue would not
permit them to act, as he was fearful, from the fact that the Majors had
quit working at their usual place; they might be in receipt of
notification of foul play awaiting them. “They will get a pill yet,”
exclaimed Roarty, “as Bully Bill did! By the way, you acted your part
well in that same, but the rest made asses of themselves by not stoppin’
to see their man’s toes turned up, before leavin’ the stable!”

Roarty also alluded to the Tamaqua “clane job,” but disclosed nothing
more of consequence. That he had personally been interested in the Yost
murder, at its inception, whether he actually assisted in the killing or
not, the detective was fully sensible before the end of Mike McKenna’s
recital. They returned to Pat McKenna’s house in season for dinner,
finding the rooms swarming with Mollies. McParlan counted over thirty
active members about the place, all indulging in a boisterous bacchanal.
During the afternoon he was introduced as “Jim McKenna, Secretary of
Shenandoah Division,” by Alex. Campbell and Pat McKenna, Jr., to Hugh
McGehan. He shook the blood-stained murderer’s hand without flinching,
and immediately invited all hands to present themselves at the bar at
his cost. McGehan I have partly described in giving the dying
declaration of Yost. It may be added that he was of rather light
complexion, had dark eyes, face clean-shaven—at this time—short, or pug
nose, was five feet nine inches in stature, straight and well built,
weighing from one hundred and sixty to one hundred and seventy-five
pounds, and apparently a smart, well-spoken fellow. He dressed, when out
of his shifting clothes, in very good taste. But McGehan did not remain
long in the company saying he “had other fish to fry.”

Monday, without seeing Boyle, as he knew he was working in the shaft,
and not likely to leave very soon, McParlan boarded the train for
Tamaqua, having nearly recovered from what he was pleased to denominate
the “bad effects of the poteen he had taken the week before.” Arriving
at Tamaqua, he entered Carroll’s saloon, with the interior of which he
was by that time quite intimate, and there found Roarty. The people of
the house were glad to see him once more, and Roarty, hearing that
McKenna—the detective may once more be called by his assumed name—was
about to start for Shenandoah, had come to Carroll’s to take leave of
him. Roarty was working a night shift near that place. The operative
employed every known means, without asking the question direct, to make
Roarty say who had done the Yost murder, and which men were to act for
the Tamaqua Division in repaying the job; but the miner either did not
know, or would not venture to say.

The same night McKenna once more appeared on his old stamping ground, at
Shenandoah, but took care not to be seen by any excepting McAndrew and
Cooney. McAndrew informed him quietly, that Linden had been there to
warn the Secretary, as two strange men were not long before inquiring
for him at Pottsville. The Mollies had determined, if they visited
Shenandoah—having no doubt but they were the Buffalo detectives—to give
them a good beating and the advice to go elsewhere as quickly as
possible. Thus far the Buffalo officers had not shown themselves in the
place. Remaining in Shenandoah, _perdu_, for a few days, recovering
strength, and writing on his reports, which had been unavoidably
neglected, McKenna once more bid his friends farewell and returned to
Tamaqua, saying he had business in Luzerne County with an old
acquaintance. The last-mentioned hint was taken as foreshadowing a trip
to meet some counterfeiters and replenish his purse with uncurrent
funds. McAndrew pressed his hand warmly, saying he hoped he’d “kape out
of harm’s way!”

“I’ll do that, if I can, jist depend upon it!” responded the detective.
“If the men I have described to ye come here, look out for ’em, will
ye?”

“They’ll be attended to!” was the promise of McAndrew.

Had any unhappy stranger filling this description: “Tall, long-nosed,
bald-headed, squint-eyed, knock-kneed, pigeon-toed, hump-backed, and
cracked-voiced,” appeared about this date, in Shenandoah, he certainly
would have needed protection. As few persons on earth have the
misfortune to possess all these unfortunate characteristics, it is
presumable that no one was injured. In truth, McAndrew wrote a letter to
the detective, when he found out where he was, saying, among other
things, that the “Buffalo detectives had not yet arrived, though Capt.
Linden reported having seen men looking like them in Ashland.”

At Tamaqua, the operative whispered in the ears of his Mollie
acquaintances that it seemed necessary, from certain reasons—two of the
same being Buffalo detectives—that he should keep dark and well away
from Shenandoah, for a short season. He was free to say he did not
relish being carried back to Buffalo in irons, as he certainly would be
if the officers found him. From the same cause he refused to appear very
often in public, kept his room much during the day—to sleep and write,
in reality—only coming out after nightfall and joining the Mollies in
Carroll’s or at other haunts and meeting places.

At the Columbia House, where he made his temporary home, he met a man
named Miller, an old acquaintance, who told him the city had fairly
swarmed with detectives, representing all parts of the country, dating
from the occurrence of the Yost murder. It was thought that suspicion
pointed to Kerrigan and Duffy as actors in the case. The operative kept
his own counsel, saying he “guessed all the detectives in Pennsylvania
would not be able to fix the crime upon any one in particular!”

Sunday, the twenty-sixth of July—twenty days subsequent to the
murder—McKenna met Carroll in the evening, at his house, and after some
drinks, the saloon-keeper took the agent aside and confided to him that,
while the latter was absent at Storm Hill, detectives had been there to
see him, Carroll—one claiming to be a mechanic in search of employment,
and saying Gus McAffee, a Scotchman, working in a foundry, was an old
friend. His name was Hendrick. Carroll laughed at the gawky acts of the
pretended workman—but, as he believed, actual detective—and reported
that he would appear in his, Carroll’s saloon, every day, treat all
hands, and never drink anything but beer, himself. The fact that he
pretended to be “temperance,” while he gave others strong liquor,
excited the tavern-keeper’s suspicions at once, and, as a natural
result, Hendrick left, with the hint that his calling was known and he
had been looking in the wrong place. The same word was taken to McAffee.
Beside, the detective wore two or three different kinds of hats. Another
followed. He made nothing out of Carroll, but was bluntly informed that
he was a detective. A third fellow came and took Kerrigan to a saloon
and got him very drunk, but made nothing in the way of solving the
mystery.

“I can tell you,” concluded Carroll, warming up and gaining confidence
in McKenna, “the night the Yost job was to be done, I had loaned my
pistol to a man in Tuscarora, an’ the boys brought but one between them,
an’ I was forced to give them an old, single-barrel, breech-loading one
that I had!”

“That wor not much in the way of weapons to undertake such a thing wid!”
suggested McKenna.

“True for ye! But the job was done clanely, as you’ll admit! By the same
token, they fetched my wife on the stand at the coroner’s inquest, an’
before lavin’ home she cried, an’ said she had seen me turn over the
pistol to some men, an’ belaved I, Kerrigan, Roarty, and Duffy knew all
about the affair. Fur all that, my old woman made a fust-rate witness,
an’ let out nothing! There wus somethin’ said about a man that was
aslape on my front steps, the night of the killin’. He wasn’t one of
’em! That wor Jo McGehan, who lives at Coaldale, an’ he was drunk as a
piper, at the same time. He’s a white-haired, heavy fellow, is Jo, an’ a
brother-in-law of big John Gallagher!”

“Isn’t he, at the same time, a brother of my friend, Hugh McGehan!”
inquired the detective, carelessly.

“I don’t know,” was the response; but Carroll immediately added: “When I
saw the two policemen pass my house together—Yost and McCarron—I wanted
the men not to do the job that night, but they swore they had been over
before for the purpose, and they would not be balked—do it they did!”

Mrs. Carroll had sworn, before the coroner, that she knew Tom Duffy had
not been one of the murderers, for he slept at her house, was not
absent, and could not have gone out without her knowledge, and that she
had never heard Duffy or Kerrigan use threats against Yost.

The detective had knowledge, from the bullet which was extracted from
Yost’s side, where it had lodged, that the shooting was done with a
revolver carrying a number thirty or thirty-two cartridge. It was his
duty to find that particular pistol. To aid in the search he was
furnished with a new revolver, from Philadelphia, bearing a thirty-two
cartridge. This he constantly carried, claiming that he had stolen it,
in Tamaqua, and, on one or two special occasions, exhibiting the weapon
with part of the loading abstracted, remarking that it was of little use
to him, as he did not dare, from the circumstance of its illegal
ownership, ask for or purchase any cartridges to fit it. How he employed
the Smith and Wesson to good effect may be related hereafter.


                               ————●————




                            CHAPTER XXXVII.

                       KERRIGAN’S SISTER-IN-LAW.


The following Tuesday, Carroll having accepted employment at the new
depot of the Philadelphia and Reading Company, McKenna would be unable
to see him until after the day’s work was done, and therefore turned his
attention elsewhere. A man named McNellis, with whom he held some talk
at Summit, as before noticed, met him at the Columbia House and in his
company the operative set out to find Kerrigan, hoping to light upon the
pistol with which Yost had been killed. McNellis said he also wanted to
see Kerrigan, but did not, at the time, divulge the particular business
he had in view. As McNellis was a Mollie, and McKenna was another, they
were soon on friendly terms and conversing on various subjects with
considerable familiarity, thus passing the afternoon together, in
Carroll’s saloon; and the man from Summit Hill grew somewhat excited,
through the liquor he had imbibed, while his companion, intoxicated
early in the day—as he had pretended—was in reality a little the worse
for his potations, but by no means as fully overcome as he appeared.
They interchanged opinions upon all topics, excepting the weather, which
was decidedly hot, and ultimately decided that they were two of the
arbiters of the fate of nations—in other words electors—and the decision
of the forthcoming State campaign rested in their hands. The policy of
the Reading Railway and Coal and Iron Company received due attention,
and it was remarkable how nearly their ideas regarding those great
corporations tallied. McNellis reprobated the management. McKenna abused
Mr. Gowen and the entire association, from its lowest to its highest
official. After exhausting their capacity for concealing spirituous
liquors about their persons, and the supply of subjects for argument,
McKenna agreed to accompany the Summit Hill man to Kerrigan’s residence,
known to be a little outside of the borough limits, hoping to find the
Bodymaster at home. On the route, by way of the cemetery, they passed
the house of Yost and the fatal street lamp, seeing which McNellis said
something about a matter then being negotiated, which would exceed that
deed in interest to the order, but, as he made no more definite allusion
to the subject, the agent refrained from comment, merely remarking, for
about the hundredth time: “Be jabers, that wor a nate, clane job!” And
to this McNellis, for the hundredth time, gave earnest assent.

Kerrigan’s house formed a portion of a long row, or block, of tall
buildings, with stone basements and wooden upper stories, standing on a
high embankment, accessible over the cut by a staircase. The little
Tamaqua Mollie, with his big wife and three unruly children, occupied
the basement and floor above, while the third story and garret were
uninhabited. If Jimmy Kerrigan was physically a small fellow, measuring
but two or three inches above five feet in his stockings, he had a
spouse of rather more than average size. She was also something of a
virago, and, as the neighbors said, drove the Bodymaster with a tight
rein—while he lorded it over the Mollies—and had so held him in check
for many years.

It will be remembered that, in 1874, Tamaqua boasted no division of the
order. In 1875 it had one, to which some of the best and worst of the
Irish Catholic inhabitants belonged.

[Illustration: “_‘Who is that lady?’ asked McKenna._”]

Mrs. Kerrigan said, when visited by McKenna and McNellis, that her
husband would be back from his work, at Col. Coke’s Colliery, in a short
time, and they could amuse themselves at the front, while she
entertained a neighbor. They took the hint that, in her enlightened
view, they were a little too far gone in drink to be company for
respectable ladies, and she wished them to remain at a distance, which
they did, and occupied themselves with the children, chickens, and pigs,
until they saw Kerrigan, in his shifting suit, coming along the ravine.
Just as he arrived and they joined him at the house corner, McKenna’s
sight was refreshed by the appearance, coming from Kerrigan’s residence,
of a young woman, fashionably dressed, and carrying her parasol, whose
face and figure seemed wonderfully familiar to him. Who could she be?
Without pausing to look at him, as she came nigh, after once passing,
the lady cast a shy and modest glance in his direction over her
shoulder. Surely, he had seen that face somewhere. “Who is that lady?”
asked McKenna, turning to Kerrigan, who was speaking with McNellis, and
pointing toward Mrs. Kerrigan’s caller.

“Who is she?” said the Bodymaster. “Why, sure an that’s me own
sisther-in-law, Miss Mary Ann Higgins!”

It here burst upon the senses of the bewildered operative that it was
the same lovely girl who made him feel, for a time, so supremely
ridiculous at the Polish wedding, and the soft touch of whose lips
lingered so pleasantly upon his cheek many weeks afterward.

“Then that is your sister-in-law? Bedad, but I must hev an
introduction!”

“That ye surely shall hev!” returned Kerrigan. “She’ll he here to-morrow
avenin’, wid her sisther, which is Mrs. Kerrigan, an’ if you makes it
convaynint to drop in, I’ll get ye well acquainted in jist no time at
all!”

“I’ll be here!” answered McKenna, who could not keep his eyes off the
handsome Miss Higgins, as long as she was within his line of vision.

Entering the house, Jimmy introduced McNellis and McKenna to his better
and greater half, and they received her apology for keeping them so long
outside. It was:

“Since the Yost affair, I have bin so much worritted by polace officers
and their dirty spies, that, unless I know who the new-comers are, all
hev to kape well outside until the man of the house is at home!”

“That’s right!” said Kerrigan.

“Certainly!” echoed the two strangers—strangers to her, but not to her
husband—and McKenna, especially, cursed all detectives and policemen
with such downright earnestness that he completely won the heart of Mrs.
Kerrigan.

“Sure, Misther Kerrigan,” said McNellis, “an’ I am sint to tell ye not
to go beyant, to-night—if ye know what that manes, which I don’t. At any
rate, the word is you’re not to come over the-night!”

“I perfectly understhand!” replied Kerrigan.

“Hugh McGehan an’ Bill Mulhall have just got in from Luzerne County!”

“I’m glad to hear of that!” remarked the Bodymaster. “They are the boys
for a swate thing!”

There was little more conversation until after supper, of which all
partook with keen appetite, when Kerrigan put on his coat, and McNellis
reiterated the remark about “not goin’ over, because the boys were
back.”

“Be the way,” exclaimed Jimmy. “Will ye do me a small favor?”

“Certainly I will!” answered McNellis.

“I want ye to take Roarty over his revolver! It has been here long
enough!”

Kerrigan started to go upstairs, when McKenna brought out his pistol, at
the same time saying:

“Just look at this little beauty! Wasn’t that a raise to make for wan
night’s worruk?”

Kerrigan took the repeater, weighed it carefully in his hand, worked the
lock, pronouncing it a splendid affair, then said:

“Wait here a bit, an’ I’ll show you the one what kilt Yost!”

The detective had evidently struck a vein that bid fair to prove
productive, but he controlled his countenance to the expression of doubt
in unmistakable terms, saying:

“I guess not by these lights!”

“But I will!” reiterated Jimmy. He left the room, ascending the dark
staircase, and soon returned with a black, rather old-fashioned
five-shooter, which he transferred to McKenna, employing the words:

“That’s the gun what brought down the peeler, Yost!”

All present had taken in much whisky, after eating, and McKenna judged
most of Kerrigan’s share was gathering in his head. So delivering
himself, at least, he was again informed he held the weapon that had
“fixed the Dutch policeman!”

The pistol carried a number thirty-two cartridge, and, although he was
convinced of the truth of Kerrigan’s allegation, it served his purpose
to give out disbelief.

“I guess you’re wanderin’ a bit, there!” exclaimed the operative, “fur
isn’t it currently reported that Barney McCarron, Yost’s own partner,
shot him, because of a racent quarrel they’d had?”

“Oh! that’s a swate enough story!” was the quick retort of the
Bodymaster, “but you’ll allow that I know somethin’ of a job that I
planned be myself, an’ wor there on hand, when it wor all done!”

Here was a direct confession of one of the murderers, which was more
than McKenna had expected. But at once dropping his assumption of
disbelief, he acquiesced in the statement that Kerrigan really should be
well informed, and begun to talk of the pistol, which was, in the
operative’s presence, turned over to McNellis for transportation to its
owner, James Roarty, of Storm Hill.

Subsequently the trio went to Carroll’s, and found the saloon-keeper at
home. But McKenna warned Kerrigan that, for his own sake, it was best
they two should not be seen together on the street, and Jimmy walked
alone, while McNellis and the operative traveled in company. While going
toward town, McKenna again handled the old revolver, and found it to be
of rather peculiar construction. In order to take out the cylinder a
screw had to be unloosed in front of said cylinder. The weapon was fully
loaded, and had one rusty screw, evidently not a part of it when leaving
the manufactory. Somebody had given it repairs. But where, and who?
These were questions to be solved in the future.

Before nine o’clock McNellis started for Storm Hill, carrying the
tell-tale pistol with him. Subsequently Kerrigan and Carroll engaged in
games at cards. At ten P.M. the “babe”—a name given the Tamaqua
Bodymaster, but not on account of his known innocence—and McKenna
visited a point on the hill, near the old cemetery, and sat down on a
bank of earth together to have a talk. Kerrigan expressed a feeling of
great bitterness toward Yost and McCarron, saying he had once been
arrested by the policemen for taking the part of Duffy. Warming up a
little, and deftly urged on by the detective, Kerrigan, in the end, made
a revelation, substantially confirming young Mike McKenna’s statements.
He said he got his men in their positions, the night of the fifth, then
went down town, where he drank with the policeman whose life was to be
taken, and saw that Duffy was well in bed at Carroll’s and all was right
for the deed. He assured McKenna that not a man in his division,
excepting Carroll, knew anything about it. He did not want them
informed. Although the act was brought around by the order, it was
enough for him—the President of the division—to be aware of it, and when
the ordinary members came to be called on to do a job for Campbell in
return, they would suspect, but could swear to nothing. Before the
shooting, he went to the spot and remained in the vicinity, in
concealment, until he saw that his men had put in their work. In a few
minutes he retreated, with the rest, through the run and over the hill,
and kept with them until coming out near Breslin’s, at the White Bear
Tavern. There he left the others, they going to their houses at Storm
Hill, where they must have arrived at about five in the morning. The
tale was continued in about this way:

“I got home early, an’ me ould woman wanted to know where I’d been, an’
I told her a lie, an’ so got rid of it. Faith, I wor to go this very
night an’ lay in wait, wid two men, an’ shoot a boss, who richly
deserves it, but, on account of the word McNellis brought, that McGehan
hev come back, it is put off till another day! It wouldn’t do to have
anything occur, ye see, the very time McGehan got here! Let him get to
work at the breast first!”

This was further confirmation of Mike McKenna. McGehan was certainly the
taller man of the two who had murdered Yost. It was more than probable
that Boyle was the other.

“You’d better belave,” concluded the Bodymaster, “I took off me boots
an’ moved aisy enough, that mornin’, fur there’s a German family livin’
next door, an’ I wor afraid I’d be heard by them. But I made up to me
house, begun to scrape wid me nails at the door, an’ Mrs. Kerrigan knew
what it meant, an’ let me softly in. I jist tould her I’d been drunk and
stopped out all night, as I’ve done before, an’ didn’t want the
neighbors to know it! Jist as sure as you’re over there, an’ I’m over
here, I’ve never brathed a single word of it, only wonst to Jack
Donahue! He said it wor a good job an’ I was entitled to credit for me
skill! I tell ye what ’tis, McKenna, ye want to be very careful how ye
talk wid strangers, at the hotel, for the place hev been fairly swarmin’
wid detectives these few days past! Some of ’em may hev stolen the sign,
ye see, an’ still be detectives!”

“I know my business!” replied McKenna, “an’ devil a word will they get
out of me at all!”

At midnight the couple separated, my agent going to his hotel and
Kerrigan staggering awkwardly homeward, as full of self-importance and
spirits as he could be and retain power of locomotion.

The ensuing day McKenna met and conferred with Linden, who was thus
fully informed of his progress. After this, he made up his mind that it
had become his plain and open duty to cultivate the intimate
companionship of Kerrigan, who was proving such a valuable informant. In
order to gain further grace in the Bodymaster’s eyes—also to please
himself, it may well be believed—he resolved to give desperate siege to
the heart of the handsome sister of Mrs. Kerrigan. To resolve was to
act. Visiting the barber, he caused his wig to be properly dressed, face
well cleansed, and beard and mustache nicely trimmed. Then attiring
himself in his best clothing—none too fine at that, but much better than
the garments he usually wore—he thought he was ready to start on the
wooing expedition. It appears McKenna had soon learned to forget Pat
Hester’s daughter. But then, he argued, Miss Higgins was the earlier
claimant for his attention. Had she not commenced the courtship at the
Polish wedding? He was very sure of that. His sympathies could not have
been earnestly enlisted with the other lady. In Miss Higgins he really
believed he might easily be permanently interested. While this was the
case, he felt forced to confess he was not so much paying attention to
Miss Higgins, for Miss Higgins’ own sake, as for the sake of her wicked
little brother-in-law, whose cruel works would yet bring him within
prison walls, if not beneath the gallows tree.

Kerrigan’s little, round face expanded in a broad grin when he saw the
particular pains McKenna was taking to make himself genteel, and he put
on his best manner as he presented the young man to his fair
sister-in-law. Jimmy was somewhat puzzled when Miss Higgins blushed
crimson, as she extended her hand, and remarked that she “believed she
had seen the gentleman once before.”

“Yes!” explained McKenna, the red blood also mantling his forehead and
face. “I remember meeting you at a party, some months ago!” But he
added, for her encouragement, in a low tone of voice: “Never fear, Miss!
I’ll say nothing further about it!”

“Thank you,” said Miss Higgins, below her breath.

They were very commonplace words, as the detective afterward thought,
but they sounded very musical to his ear, that evening, coming from the
handsome young lady’s lips.

In a short time, by using the free-and-airy style now so natural to him,
McKenna succeeded in putting all present completely at their ease, and
Miss Higgins, as well as her sister, Mrs. Kerrigan, begun to think they
had known him since they were children. As for Jimmy Kerrigan, he was
already confidential with his brother Mollie from Shenandoah. But the
whisky toddy soon put the “babe” out of the way, as he was forced to
admit that he had taken several glasses before reaching home, and the
liquor he drank with the family disagreed with it, getting up a reaction
in his system making a recumbent position indispensable. Mrs. Kerrigan
marched her liege lord off to bed. It was a very pleasant evening that
the operative enjoyed with Mrs. Kerrigan and her unmarried sister, after
the exodus of the noisy fellow claiming the house as his home, and when
he bade the ladies good night, at a late hour, they united in cordial
requests that he should visit them often. Miss Higgins, especially, was
pressing, in her modest way, to have the caller not forget their humble
place of residence.

“Sure, an’ I will not!” said McKenna, “an’, all in due sayson, I hope I
may be able to take revinge on the young lady that so surprised me at
the Polish wedding!”

This last remark in a whisper, at the door.

“Hush!” warningly exclaimed the lady, her face the color of a blooming
rose. But Mrs. Kerrigan saw nothing, heard nothing.

“I’m as silent as the churchyard I’m goin’ to walk beside,” said the
operative, with a roguish smile, as he took his final leave.

“She’s a very fine girl,” soliloquized the officer, while walking to the
Columbia House. “What a pity she is of such a family! And to think that
I must get her brother-in-law hanged! Oh, I never can hope to have ‘Miss
Higgins’ transformed into ‘Mrs. McParlan!’ Brother-in-law to a murderer!
No! Never!”

Despite this decision the dreams of the detective, that night, were not
fated to be entirely deserted by the girl by whom he had been victimized
at the Krozenski nuptials.

It was soon whispered over Tamaqua by talkative spinsters and gossips of
more advanced experience, that the wild fellow, Jim McKenna, had fallen
desperately in love with Mary Ann Higgins, Kerrigan’s wife’s sister, was
quitting the drink, fast sobering down, and, if his wooing sped
successfully, bade fair soon to marry the object of his passion, settle
in Tamaqua, and make an honorable and respectable member of society.
Certainly the subjects of these conversations were frequently together,
and just as surely McKenna was more regularly seen dressed in his best,
a lady on his arm, of a Sabbath day, attending church, than ever before,
and it was evident that, as far as he was concerned, it would not be his
fault if the New Year did not look upon him a full-fledged Benedict. As
for Miss Higgins, she kept her own counsel. It is more than probable
that her heart really remained untouched and she accepted the attentions
of McKenna, as any virtuous girl in her station would have done, more
because the man was popular and generally pleasing, than from the reason
of having placed her affections upon him.

It was at or about this time that McKenna received the following letter:

                                          SHENANDOAH, July 30, 1875.

  JAMES MCKENNA:

  DEAR SIR:—Them persons who you heard was around was Inquiring about
  you in Pottsville hall (Pennsylvania Hall probably) Captain Jack (Mr.
  Linden) was telling me, a few nights ago.

                             I remain, as ever,
                                           Yours, in Friendship,
                                                     FRANK MCANDREW.

  P.S. They were asking Captain Jack if he knew any person of the name,
  and they told your weight and height and he said he knew nothing of
  you.

                                                             F. MCA.

This work on the part of the detectives secured the enduring friendship
of the Shenandoah Mollies, and confirmed Muff Lawler in his belief that
Linden could be implicitly trusted. “If he would not give McKenna away
to the officers from Buffalo,” said Lawler, “why should we, who are also
his friends, fear to confide in him?” Muff was right, as far as tangible
results were concerned, but as the reader will easily see, his arguments
rested upon unstable grounds. Linden was seeking, with McKenna, to
obtain the good-will of the Mollies. This letter shows that their mutual
labors were successful.

It was now McKenna’s purpose to cause Kerrigan to repeat his confessions
before Capt. Linden, or some other person who could be safely used as a
witness, and a number of attempts were made to agree upon places of
conference where this could be gone through with, but the recklessness
of Kerrigan, and his carelessness in keeping prearranged appointments,
caused the efforts to come to naught. He met the detective, but not at
the hour fixed, and sometimes at a different locality. Linden was thus
greatly inconvenienced and left to lie on the ground, behind a
protecting fence or wall, for many weary hours, without seeing Kerrigan
or taking down his expected account of the Yost murder. But on these
occasions Kerrigan freely opened his heart to McKenna, giving him the
most explicit delineation of about every fact connected with the crime,
excepting the names of the murderers. These would come all in good time.


                               ————●————




                            CHAPTER XXXVIII.

                         SLOWLY GAINING GROUND.


At the close of the month McKenna met Yellow Jack Donahue, who gave out
that he had nearly given up the Major job, for the present, and feared
his vengeance might fail of accomplishment, from treachery, some person
evidently having warned the Majors, as they no longer worked in their
accustomed places and were shy of going abroad alone at night. He
suspected John Slattery, who knew of the preparations made to kill
Thomas and the Majors, as the one giving them notice. In any event, he
would not wholly throw it up, only hold the matter back until a
favorable opportunity occurred. Donahue was by no means complimentary of
the men composing his division, saying there was not one in the number
to be trusted with an important transaction. He expressed himself freely
regarding the affair Alex. Campbell was trying to accomplish, wisely
concluding that he was quite foolhardy about it, too short a time having
elapsed since the Tamaqua murder. The breeze that stroke had started
should be allowed to subside before entering upon any fresh undertaking.

During this interview, the operative received from Donahue the fact,
confidentially communicated, that it was himself, the redoubtable
“Yellow Jack,” who shot Morgan Powell, the circumstances attending which
assassination have already been related in these pages. The deed was
done at Summit Hill, December the second, 1871, and in it Donahue was
assisted by two men, whose names he did not give. He said their escape,
after the shooting, was very easy, as they did not go ten yards from the
spot where Powell dropped, until the excitement cooled down, when, in
the darkness, they quietly departed for the bush, soon reaching their
homes in safety. The detective made mental note of this disclosure, his
subsequently written report throwing the first true flood of light upon
a dark crime, which had, for four years, baffled the best efforts of the
officers of justice. He wrote all about the conversation to the Agency,
that night. It was not politic to press Donahue for a description of his
accomplices, but from points he had already gathered, McParlan suspected
Campbell and the McKennas were at least interested. Donahue made himself
very friendly with the agent, praised him highly for the part he had
taken, as he supposed, in the Thomas matter; invited him to his house,
and, as he took his departure, swore that “those Majors should yet come
to their graves, even though he had to draw a bead on them, bowldly, in
open daylight!”

In Carroll’s saloon, the same night, my representative chanced upon an
old friend, Dan Kelly, known to be Manus Kull; _alias_ “Kelly the Bum,”
a hard case then as now, and open for almost anything outrageous. About
every crime in the great catalogue had been charged upon him, but he was
not understood as possessing a noticeably bad character previous to
attaching himself to the Mollie organization. In the same company at
Carroll’s were James, or Friday O’Donnell, and Kerrigan. The latter took
early occasion to tell McKenna he should “keep quiet about the Tamaqua
matter, as these fellows were too soft to intrust with anything
connected with so serious a subject.” He promised to obey, and upon that
topic consequently remained silent. The men were engaged in a wild
debauch, and all more or less mellow, but they took good care to have
every outsider away from the room before the Summit affair came up for
discussion. It was the intention to put some boss off his pins, and
Kerrigan volunteered to walk to Mt. Laffee and find some men to
accompany a detail of his own, so that the job might be concluded about
the middle of the week. Who the party was the agent did not then learn.

While escorting Kerrigan to his home, late that night, McKenna noticed
he was being clumsily shadowed by Barney McCarron, who, although very
drunk himself, acted as though he had a half-formed idea in his thick
pate that Kerrigan and McKenna were hatching some mischief, and
therefore sought to throw himself in their way, to learn the particular
business they were engaged upon. But his amateur detective work was done
so awkwardly that Kerrigan quickly saw through it. Then the two Mollies
made up a game to put the policeman to more trouble, and they led him a
wild-goose chase. Late at night, McKenna, still blunderingly traced by
McCarron, came to a halt at the Columbia House. He found the doors all
fastened and no porter up to admit him. Just then McCarron came along.

“What are you trying to do?” asked the hiccoughing and worn-out
policeman.

“Bedad, but I’m sakin’ for an admission to me boardin’-house!” responded
McKenna.

“Yes,” put in Kerrigan, “he’s shut out enthirely, an’ how he’ll get
within, is the question! It wor different wid me, when I wor in the
lock-up! I wanted a way out! He wants a way in!”

McCarron laughed, and suggested that McKenna might try a window.

“Perhaps some of them may be unfastened!”

“No! I prefer you’d do that job for me!” answered the agent, staggering
and leaning against the side of the house. “You know you are an officer,
an’ can safely go in! If I wor to do so, perhaps you’d jist arrest an’
take me to jail for an attempted burglary!”

Notwithstanding McCarron’s repeated assurances that he would do no such
thing, McKenna refused to touch a single shutter, or sash, and finally
prevailed upon the policeman to seek entrance to his hotel through a
casement and then unlock the front door for him. Kerrigan and the
detective enjoyed the fun, beholding the unsteady efforts the drunken
watchman made, raising the window and then ungracefully climbing into
the house. But they soon gained entrance and went upstairs, after
lighting a candle at the office counter, McCarron still following,
Kerrigan noiselessly bringing up the rear. Once in McKenna’s apartment,
the policeman was offered a chair and Kerrigan told that he could go.
The Bodymaster obeyed. And then McCarron set about the task of
extracting information from McKenna regarding the Yost murder. The
detective was acting the part of a drunken man to perfection, while
McCarron was really much intoxicated, but trying to appear very wise and
sober. Taking the flaring candle in his hand, he got down on his knees
and endeavored, with an owlish assumption of superior intelligence,
quite ridiculous in him at any time, to explain to his only auditor
precisely how and where certain acts had been done, the night of the
murder, illustrating his meaning by pointing out with uncertain finger,
on the irregular figures of the carpet, an imaginary map of the locality
and the proceedings. It was as much as the operative could possibly do
to refrain from laughing in McCarron’s face, to see the style in which
he performed this part of his unaccustomed work. Meanwhile McCarron was
trying his best to gain intelligence from his companion. He succeeded
indifferently, as McKenna was, to all appearances, as ignorant as the
man in the moon of everything connected with the Mollies. When the
policeman had nearly spoiled the bedroom carpet with the melted tallow
constantly dropping from his migratory candle, and exhausted himself in
making drawings of the Yost matter, giving the position he occupied, and
the places in which the murderers stood, over and over again, McKenna
put a stop to the proceedings by politely asking the fellow to leave, as
he wanted to obtain a little sleep before morning.

Seeing that he could gain nothing by his extraordinary efforts at
“roping,” the drunken guardian of the peace, after a while, took the
hint and went stumbling down the staircase, muttering to himself about
the “ignorance of some people.” He had been unable to impose upon
McKenna, and flattered himself that it was because of that person’s
stupidity. There was stupidity in the business, but it was in McCarron,
not with McKenna.

The Sunday following, after visiting church, in the forenoon, with Miss
Higgins, and subsequently taking her a pleasant evening’s walk, the
agent met Kerrigan again at Carroll’s, and the pair went to the scene of
the Yost murder together, the Bodymaster designating the vicinities
which McCarron, on a previous occasion, had tried so hard to explain to
the operative. Kerrigan marked the very spot on which McGehan and Boyle
had stood, under the shadow of the trees, where he was waiting, armed
only with a stone, to put in work if found necessary, then to lead the
men away after their job was done, and gave him other information of
great importance. He said that he, Kerrigan, was wearing the same
pantaloons he had on the night of the murder only they were
industriously patched by his wife. He ruptured them badly, running in
the bush, and, the next morning, was asked by Mrs. Kerrigan how the
holes were made. She was satisfied when he told her he fell down the
bank by the house and nearly killed himself.

A little later, Kerrigan took a seat, near the Odd Fellows’ Cemetery, on
some rocks, and proceeded to dwell upon his own fortunes and those of
some of his friends. The “babe,” according to his own story, was born in
Schuylkill County; had received no education, no schooling, in fact,
since he was an infant; had been successively a coal-picker, a miner,
and, during the late war, a soldier, in the cavalry branch of the
service, under gallant Phil Sheridan. As to McGehan, he said he hailed
from Donegal, Ireland, but had been partly reared in America. Alex.
Campbell, reported the same historian, was married, and had a family,
his wife being also a native of Donegal.

It was well toward morning when the two Mollies separated.

A meeting of the agent and Alex. Campbell, transpiring at Carroll’s
saloon, the fourth day of August, was productive of interesting results.
The Summit Hill tavern-keeper and former Bodymaster zealously
recommended McGehan as one of the best men in the country, and was happy
to see that Hugh and Mulhall had found work at Tuscarora. He said,
boastingly, that as soon as he could go to Mauch Chunk, for the
necessary license, he proposed to set McGehan up in a saloon of his own,
McKenna, Kerrigan, and Carroll being warmly pressed to honor the opening
with their presence, which all promised. Then, stepping aside a little,
Campbell let out to the detective more than he had ever before said:

“It was McGehan, himself, who fired the shot that killed Yost! Boyle was
along, it is true, but McGehan’s shot finished the business and the
other did not have to discharge his pistol at all!”

This remark, coupled with the facts he had already obtained from Mike
McKenna, Kerrigan, and Carroll, firmly convinced the inquirer there
could be no mistake about the matter. The murderers of Yost were found.
But where was the testimony with which to convict them, in the face of
the omnipresent _alibi_? He did not despair of even ferreting out that,
before finishing the good work. It was Campbell who had sent McNellis to
Tamaqua, notifying Kerrigan he should stay at home the night fixed for
the killing of some unsuspecting boss, as McGehan and Mulhall had that
day chanced to return to Storm Hill.

Subsequent to the departure of Campbell for his home, McKenna took the
saloon-keeper away from the house a little and said:

“Jim Carroll, you thought I didn’t know who it wor that knocked Yost off
his two feet!”

“I knew d——d well that you did know!” was Carroll’s laconic return.

“Well, I don’t blame ye at all for kapin’ a tight rein on yer tongue!
I’d ha’ done the same, meself, had I been in your pair o’ boots!”

“That’s all right!” continued Carroll. “It was a mighty good thing, an’
McGehan is the fellow for a clane job! Mulhall was in for it, with him,
but some objected because he was a man of family, so Boyle took his
place. I wanted to have it put off, when I saw McCarron and Yost come
past here, in company, an’ told the men to seek a better chance, another
day, but McGehan said he’d been over here three times to do it, and he
would not brook further delay. So they went and did it!”

“An’ did it nately and aisily, too?” suggested McKenna.

Mrs. Carroll had her suspicions aroused, during the visit, that McKenna
was a Mollie, and so informed her husband She thought he could not be so
intimate with Jack Donahue, talking by the hour with him in the back
yard, and with Jimmy Kerrigan, and remain only an outsider. She also
accused Carroll of forming one of the order, but he laughed, and said:
“You know better! What’s the use of charging such a thing on me?” Yet he
was Secretary of the division at the very time. This answer did not
change Mrs. Carroll’s mind. But she was too discreet and true a wife to
disclose her thoughts on the subject to every one.

The same night Kerrigan was more than usually communicative, and related
to the agent all about a trick he and Carroll were to play, in stealing
a lot of hams, and a new copper boiler, out of the Columbia House
cellar. The operative made up his mind the landlord should not be
robbed, but said nothing. The attempt was subsequently made and some
things carried off, but they had to be returned.

While the Bodymaster was in a talking humor, McKenna carelessly
inquired:

“Now what about that Summit job?”

“Oh, that’s put off until the latter part of the month!” And Kerrigan
sighed, and seemed to greatly regret the delay.

“Is it Zehner, or Jones, this time?”

“Jones, av coorse!” was the response. “An’ it has to be done by daylight
too, as he is a workin’ boss! I am not sure, yet, where he will be
caught!”

The sending of this report to Mr. Franklin, the detective very well
knew, would cause the party threatened to receive notification of the
danger he was in. The important missive was written and mailed before he
slept.

Thursday, the fifth, occurred the funeral of John Dowling, one of the
oldest members of the Ancient Order of Hibernians, otherwise the Mollie
Maguires, in the State, and, as many were to come to Tamaqua from
Shenandoah, McKenna suffered a convenient return of rheumatism, so he
said, and kept his room, in consequence, all the day. None of his old
companions sought him out, excepting Frank McAndrew, and he visited the
Columbia House, was shown to his friend’s apartment, and had a long
visit with him. The Shenandoah Bodymaster had heard that McKenna was
suspected of complicity with the Yost murder, and soberly warned him to
have a care for himself, which advice the agent received with a hearty
laugh, saying, as he was innocent, he “didn’t care a snap of his fingers
what people thought!” He expressed himself as heartily tired of hiding
so closely from the Buffalo detectives, and, but for a second letter,
which he had just received from his sister, saying the men were still
hanging around her house, he would emerge from his cover, return to
Shenandoah at once, and resume his old occupations and amusements. As it
was, he hoped soon to hear that the New York officials were starting off
for Canada, on a false scent, when he would certainly hasten homeward.

“Ye can’t be too careful, me boy!” was the admonition with which
McAndrew separated from his Secretary.

It was at the saloon and beer garden of Conrad Iffland, on Broad Street,
Tamaqua, that Linden and McKenna now met to talk over the operation and
arrange all their movements. Mrs. Iffland was a good-natured German
lady, generously patronized by her countrymen and other lovers of
lager-beer, and she gave no particular attention to the
detectives—hearing from her husband that Linden was all correct—as long
as they paid for their refreshments. When McKenna appeared on the
streets with a peculiarly ugly hat, or made a particular gesture with
his hand, Linden knew they were to meet at Iffland’s immediately. A
similar sign with the hand of Linden taught the same lesson to McKenna.
On the seventeenth of August, 1875, the two men held a very important
conversation at Mrs. Iffland’s, and made preparations, subsequently
carried out, to meet Campbell, McGehan, Boyle, and others, if possible,
at Mauch Chunk, where Campbell was to go to make application for
McGehan’s license. Linden then assumed the _rôle_ of the toper to
perfection, and was finally invited by Campbell to join the company,
slightly opposed by McKenna, who claimed Linden was only a stranger who
had accosted him near his hotel, inquiring the way to the Mansion House.
In this manner Linden learned the faces of the men and something of
their habits and conversation. Conrad Iffland had no knowledge of
McKenna’s business, nor had his spouse, but both believed him to be the
wickedest Mollie Maguire in Schuylkill County. As long as he was in
Linden’s society they tolerated him. Alone, or with Kerrigan, they would
have turned him promptly away from their door. Knowing this, the
operative never attempted an entrance, excepting he found that Linden
was in the neighborhood.

It was not until the eighth of August, that McKenna made his
reappearance in Shenandoah, and then remained but a short time. He was
warmly greeted by his old-time associates, Morris, Hurley, and McAndrew,
who said they had heard that the agent and the rest were to be arraigned
for the attack upon Wm. M. Thomas. At least they feared preparations
were being made for their apprehension. He soon quieted their
suspicions, saying there was no testimony, and, if the contrary were
true, they could easily prove an _alibi_.

The monthly meeting of the division was held, McKenna acting as
Secretary, as usual. While in the company of his friends, he thought it
strange he heard nothing more of the Gomer James affair, but concluded
the feud had subsided and the Welshman was to be allowed to live in
peace in the community. How sadly he was deceived the sequel may show.


                               ————●————




                             CHAPTER XXXIX.

                            BLOODY SATURDAY.


Early in August, 1875, symptoms of smouldering disorder in the coal
regions began to increase in severity and numbers. Seeing and
appreciating this, Superintendent Franklin arranged to meet and hold
council with McKenna and Linden in the vicinity of Mauch Chunk. Glen
Onoko, one of the most entrancing of the many beautiful spots found in
the vicinity of the city named, was the chosen place. In sight of Dual
Vista, another extraordinary and charming resort, accordingly, the three
men came together, and, in the quiet shadows of the everlasting
hills—the Alps of America—covered by the close-woven branches of the
overhanging trees, they seated themselves, and, at their leisure, fully
discussed the situation and the work being performed. It was while
returning from this meeting—the particulars of which may not find record
here, as they will be developed in the history of the progress of
events—that McKenna and Linden encountered Campbell, McGehan, and
others, as mentioned in another connection. While Capt. Linden remained
at Mauch Chunk and Superintendent Franklin returned to Philadelphia,
McParlan—otherwise McKenna—was constrained to accompany Alex. Campbell
and his jolly companions to their homes. The invitation was so pressing,
and the chance so good for obtaining knowledge of facts bearing upon the
Yost case, and the threatened assassination of Jones, that the watchful
operative could not well refuse acceptance. Evening saw the collection
of Mollies, McKenna among them, gathered in the smoking-car bound for
Summit. In a seat, not far removed from them, but, to their eyes, so
effectually steeped in liquor as to be almost unrecognizable—and in fact
entirely unnoticed by Campbell—reposed the form of Linden, every nerve
really strung to the highest tension, awake, cool, determined, and
ready, at any moment, to take his brother detective’s part, should he
find himself in trouble. Happily nothing occurred to call for his
assistance, and he feigned to sleep the time away, without molestation,
until the drunken crowd left the car. Linden continued his journey to
Tamaqua, and there awaited McParlan’s arrival. Reaching Summit, Campbell
pressed that operative to remain at his house all night, and he did so,
after first viewing the basement in which the late Bodymaster was to
assist McGehan to start his gin mill. The building was situated just
above the post-office, in an eligible locality, and preparations were
being made to celebrate the formal opening, to occur on the twelfth of
the month, with appropriate observances. Campbell asked no questions,
but naturally concluded, from McParlan’s previous avowals, that his
guest was in Mauch Chunk that day to obtain a new stock of counterfeit
money, and a crisp ten dollar bill he had seen him have changed, when
treating the company in a saloon, he was quite sure would not
successfully pass examination at any banking house. In this he seriously
erred, however, as the currency was genuine and just from the Shenandoah
post-office, where McKenna had presented and received the cash upon my
postal order for fifty dollars, to be used in paying current expenses.

“I tell you, Jim,” said Campbell, “if I knew just where to get such
flimsies as you find, at about fifty cents on the dollar, I don’t know
but I’d put aside me prejudices an’ religious scruples an’ make a small
investment!”

McParlan was never communicative as to the source from whence his
bank-bills came, but pleasantly returned:

“When ye git rid of the rest of yer scruples and religious principles,
come to me wid the ready cash, an’ I’ll do what I’ve never done for any
wan afore, lade ye right up to me partner in business, an’ indorse ye to
him as a shover of the quare that’ll do to dale wid!”

Saying he would remember this, the other changed the subject to the
expulsion of Tom Fisher from the order, as an inactive and inefficient
leader, because he, Alex. Campbell, thought himself much better
qualified for, and really wanted the conspicuous place. The Shenandoah
Secretary replied he had never heard anything urged against Fisher, only
that he was not in favor of putting the enemies of the order under the
sod, but that was a serious objection to any Ancient Order man, hence he
was in favor of cutting Fisher off and electing Campbell, who was a
chief after his own heart, and would not hesitate to shoot a rascally
Welsh boss in person, if it was found for the good of the society. The
Summit official swallowed the bait, hook and all, and remarked,
self-complacently, that he believed, after the Tamaqua Convention,
already called for the 25th of August, he would have John P. Jones taken
care of, whether Kerrigan came up with his assistance or not. There were
now two men in his neighborhood, Hugh McGehan and James Roarty, who
could not be matched for excellence in shuffling off the mortal coil for
those needing such a job performed, and if he once sent them out, that
mining boss would never again have a chance to refuse a friend of his
work in the breast. Jones, the detective found out, resided at Storm
Hill, about Lansford, not far from Mike O’Donnel’s tavern, in a field
just at the foot of an old plane near the pipe-line ascending to Summit
Hill, and Campbell thought it one of the easiest things imaginable to
take the man off just after sunrise, some fine morning, when on the way
to Number Four Breaker, without a soul being the wiser for the job.
“We’ll fix him, yet!” was the late Bodymaster’s conclusion of the talk,
when suddenly interrupted by the entrance of Mrs. Campbell. “Not a word
more!” was the sign made by the late Bodymaster, with a finger on his
lip, and as readily understood by McParlan, who quickly changed the
subject, saying, as a blind, he thought the “Company would very soon get
sick of standing out against the Union and offer to compromise on as
favorable a basis as that of 1874.” Mrs. Campbell suspected nothing, and
thought so too. Alex. Campbell knew it must come to that. After singing
“Widow Machree,” for the lady, the detective retired to his apartment.

The second day after the grand opening—the fourteenth of August,
rendered memorable as “bloody Saturday” in the coal regions—a fact,
however, that had not yet reached the knowledge of the little community
at Summit Hill, where few newspapers were taken and the telegraph
operatives were seriously uncommunicative—McParlan met his pretended
relative, Pat McKenna, the Bodymaster, but learned nothing new. At four
o’clock the same afternoon he repaired to McGehan’s saloon with
Campbell, and found Hugh, perfectly at his ease, smoking a pipe as
complacently as though no innocent human blood stained the hand that
supported his head. They had a pleasant chat, McParlan told one or two
stories, and also took a whiff from his cutty-pipe, and the three
enjoyed themselves in this way for an hour. At the end of that time, no
strangers being about, McParlan produced the new, nickel-plated pistol,
which he said he had taken from his hypothetical Welshman in Tamaqua,
and handed it over to McGehan for his scrutiny. He clicked the lock
critically, looked at the cylinder, and passed it back, saying it was
“an illigant affair, altogether.”

“So it is!” replied the owner of the repeater, putting it away, “but
divil a bit of good will it do me, in this or any other matter, if I
can’t find some cartridges! I don’t dare buy a single wan in the borough
of Tamaqua, for fear the gun may be traced to me ownership, an’ I don’t
care to go up on so small a job, when I can have bigger ones for the
axin’!”

McGehan hesitated a moment, looked cautiously around the room, was
assured that no one outside the Mollie ring heard him, and then
answered, in a low tone of voice:

“The cartridges for Roarty’s revolver might fit your shooter, but I am
not so sure that he has one left; an’ he too is a little timid about
purchasing, as it wor his pistol that I had to shoot Yost with!”

“Is that so?” carelessly remarked the detective, betraying no sign of
undue excitement over McGehan’s voluntary and tacit admission that he
had killed the Tamaqua police man, and at once adding “Well, never mind!
I can use the two I have in the cylinder, in case of accident, an’ as
I’m a tolerable marksman, I think no more’ll be actually wanted.”

McParlan had the three missing cartridges, at the moment, safely
secreted in his pocket. But McGehan was in for a clean breast of the
whole matter—would not stop—and went on with the narration:

“Ye see, we came to do the job in this way! Kerrigan an’ Campbell, they
had a trade between them, an’ I an’ Boyle was to go along, so was
Roarty, who started on ahead. Kerrigan agreed to get the pistols for us.
When we—Boyle and I—got over to Campbell’s we heard a messenger had been
there before us, comin’ from Roarty’s house, wid a word sayin’ as how
Roarty’s wife was taken sick, an’ for him to go straight for the doctor;
Roarty did so, but sent forward his pistol to represent him, to
Carroll’s house, where we were told to meet. When we reached Carroll’s,
sure an’ Roarty’s black pistol wor the only serviceable weapon in the
whole company, an’ Jim Carroll, he gave us a little, old,
breech-loading, single-barrel affair, which was of no account. I took
the big shooter, an’ gave the other to Boyle, after Kerrigan had been
out to try an’ borrow another, an’ returned empty-handed. An’ I told
Boyle, if he wakened, upon gettin’ up to Yost, an’ stirred a foot in
retrate, I’d shoot him down too! Kerrigan then went up Broad Street an’
put us in our places, near the fence, in the shadow of some trees, an’
after that went down town, saw the policemen together, and took a sip o’
whisky wid Yost—more’n I’d ha’ done in such a case—when he jist come
back to us, by a winding route, sayin’ all wor right, an’ the men would
be up by midnight, or a little later. They had to put out two lamps near
by. One would be taken by Yost, to outen, and the other by McCarron. It
wor nearly two o’clock when they came, both together, which wor very
different from our expectations. But they came! Kerrigan wanted to be
there, armed wid two rocks in his hands, to bate out Yost’s brains, in
case the pistols failed, but I ordered him away and made him stand fifty
yards off, rightly thinkin’ he wor too noticeable, from his small size,
an’ if any one saw him he would be known an’ remembered. Then the thing
wor done! Roarty’s pistol did it! It’s all nonsense to say McCarron did
not give chase, fur he did, an’ fired two shots at us, which I returned,
an’ then we ran away, Kerrigan, the rat, along wid us! But I made him
lave when we came out at Breslin’s White Bear tavern, an’ I would have
been much better plazed had he remained away an’ left us to find our
route by ourselves!”

“It wor a mighty slick thing!” exclaimed the operative, “an’ I’m sure
Tamaqua Division should be willin’ to send you over men to do your job
whenever ye may ask it!”

Campbell was of the same belief, saying that Kerrigan and Carroll were
all right and would come up with their help in due season.

The ensuing Sunday, at church, in company with Campbell, McParlan met
James Roarty, and the latter accompanied him to McGehan’s. Then, in
McGehan’s presence, he made more inquiry for cartridges for his
supposed-to-be-stolen revolver, and Roarty answered:

“I believe I have some belonging to the revolver McGehan used at
Tamaqua!”

He made known his willingness to supply a charge to McParlan. Then
Roarty left, expecting soon to return, and McParlan and McGehan passed
the evening, to a late hour, waiting in the damp, cool basement, but
Roarty did not get back, probably being prevented by the rain, which was
falling, and finally the operative separated from his companion,
returning to Campbell’s for a bed.

During the detective’s talk with McGehan he found that the murderer of
Yost boarded with a young widow lady named Mrs. Boyle, living near
Number Four Breaker, who was very fond of her lodger, and intended to
become his wife. It was more than probable, from this circumstance,
that, should McGehan be arrested, Mrs. Boyle would try to swear him
clear, by saying he had been in her company the night of the fifth of
July. How clearly McParlan saw future events will be shown hereafter.

Well satisfied with his trip to Lansford and vicinity, McKenna returned
to Tamaqua with Alex. Campbell the ensuing Monday, there to find very
important news. Picking up a copy of the Pottsville _Miners’ Journal_,
for Monday, the 16th of August, the agent read aloud to his comrades an
article, entitled “Bloody Saturday,” of which the following is a
summary:

“Saturday was a horrible day for the people of the Mahanoy Valley. The
devil had business on his hands. Two dastardly assassinations and one
case of manslaughter, beside several cases of lesser crimes, were his
harvest. At Girardville, possibly the most heinous act of the short but
bloody list was committed. A good citizen, and a mild, inoffensive man,
was murdered, in the person of Thomas Gwyther, Justice of the Peace.

“Saturday, the miners in the Mahanoy Valley received the first pay of
any consequence since the strike, and the result was that Girardville,
in the evening, was crowded with men in various stages of intoxication.
The rougher element grew absolutely rampant and defiant of lawful
restraint. Gangs of ruffians went about the streets, flourishing their
revolvers. Though there were special policemen, they were powerless and
cowed. One of the bands was headed by a man named Hoary, who was heard
to exclaim, as he exhibited his weapon: ‘Give me some one to shoot! I’ll
kill the first man that insults me!’ In their travels this party went to
Jacob Wendel’s tavern, and jostled a number of persons in the bar room.
Hoary struck and maltreated Mr. Sheisler. Squire Gwyther was sitting in
the room, at the time, and to him Hoary’s victim applied for a warrant.
Before matters could advance any further there, Wendel put Hoary and
party out, and then let the Squire and the complainant out by the back
way. They went to the Squire’s office and he had begun to write out a
warrant for Hoary’s arrest, when that individual and his gang entered
the office, threatening to kill both the Justice and the plaintiff if
the warrant should be issued. They were got out and the door locked. The
warrant was properly prepared, and the Squire stepped out to look for
Hoary. He was standing near his own door at the corner, when he found a
man a few yards off with a leveled gun. His daughter also saw the same
man, and cried out, ‘For God’s sake, don’t shoot father!’ Almost
immediately the gun was fired, the contents taking effect in the breast
of the Justice and in a short while causing death. The assassin fled and
escaped. A man named Thos. Love was arrested on suspicion, but he proved
an _alibi_ and was released. Subsequently it was ascertained that the
assassin was Wm. Love, who is missing. Naturally, so bold a defiance of
law and so dastardly a murder created the most intense excitement in the
borough and vicinity, where the victim was known and esteemed.

“At Shenandoah a cool and premeditated murder was committed. The motive
of this particular assassination is to be sought in the events of the
past. On Monday night, August the 11th, 1873, a Welshman, named Tom
Jones, was assaulted, knocked down and beaten by one Edward Cosgrove, in
Shenandoah. Jones’ friends ran to his rescue, and among them was a young
fellow, called Gomer James, a Welsh miner. In the trouble which
followed, Cosgrove was shot and killed, James was accused of his murder,
arrested and tried. The testimony at the trial was not sufficient to
convict him and he was acquitted. His escape incensed Cosgrove’s
friends, who believed James guilty, and threats were made to take his
life. Saturday last, the Rescue Hook and Ladder Company, of Shenandoah,
held a picnic, which being well attended, was run far into the night.
Gomer James, somewhere about 11 o’clock, was inside a bar at this
picnic, waiting upon its patrons, and a number of men came up. They
asked for beer, and while James was drawing it he was shot and killed.
In the semi-darkness and confusion the assassin escaped.

“A dispatch from Shenandoah, received last evening, says ‘Gomer James
was shot last evening, about 12 o’clock, at the picnic grounds in
Hecksher and Glover’s Grove, the ball passing through his heart,
embedding itself in his back near the skin. Dr. Quail, Coroner, assisted
by Drs. Reagan and Byers, held a _post-mortem_ examination. Deputy
Coroner Dengler impaneled the following jury: T. J. Foster, R. Stacker,
Lyam Bloom, George A. Herring, A. H. Roades, and H. C. Boyer. The jury
adjourned until Monday morning to finish hearing the testimony, there
being a large number of witnesses. The evidence so far is likely to
point suspicion on some one.’

“The usual results of a large pay were visible in Mahanoy, Saturday
night. There were numbers of drunken men on the streets, and a lawless
spirit seemed to animate some of them. There were several encounters, in
which individuals got roughly handled, and a fight which cost the life
of an innocent citizen. A disturbance arose at Phillips’ Pottsville
House, on Centre Street, between Wm. M. Thomas and a man named James
Dugan. Both drew revolvers, and fired a number of shots at each other.
Which fired first we could not ascertain. Thomas was in an intoxicated
condition. He received a bullet in his left cheek, where it now is. A
man whose name is given as Christian Zimmerman, or Christian Brenhower,
who was standing across the street, waiting for his wife to come out of
a store where she was shopping, received a bullet through his left lung.
It was taken out of his back. Though alive at five o’clock yesterday
afternoon, this unfortunate man was surely dying, having made his will.
Yesterday Dugan was arrested and held by Squire Comrey in $800, for an
aggravated assault and battery on William Thomas. Thomas was arrested
and committed by Squire Groody in default of $1,800 bail, for an
aggravated assault and battery on Dugan. He was lodged in the county
jail yesterday afternoon by officer Gorman. So it appears no one has
been arrested for the killing of the innocent man.

“A man, whose name we did not learn, received a flesh wound in a leg
during the shooting. Another, called ‘Carney,’ a shoemaker, while
standing on his own door-step, was assaulted by a party of young men,
struck on the head with a billy, and had an oyster knife stuck into his
back. His injuries are not serious!”

McKenna was astounded to find that Gomer James, after so much had been
done for him, should have engaged in any public position, especially as
booth-tender at a picnic, thus placing himself temptingly before the
Mollies, who, for over two years, as he must have known, had been
thirsting for his blood. He reached the very result that might have been
expected from such criminal recklessness.

When Alex. Campbell learned that Gomer James was killed, he almost shed
tears of delight. McKenna was forced, against his will, to participate
in the general rejoicing which followed. It proved hard for him to put
on the hateful mask, but, galling as it was, he had to wear it. The same
afternoon, he returned to Mahanoy City, finding the country in a blaze
of excitement, and none the more safe place of refuge for a man, well
known as a prominent member of the Ancient Order of Hibernians,
otherwise the Mollie Maguires, as he was. Remaining but a short time he
went, by train, to Shenandoah, saying, when he met McAndrew, Morris, and
Lawler at that place, that his friends, the Buffalo detectives, had
either been frightened off by recent occurrences, or gone away to
Canada, on a false scent, and it was no longer necessary he should hide
from them. All the Mollies were glad to meet him. The non-Mollies, as
they were aware of his prolonged absence from the vicinity, could not
look upon him as at all chargeable with the killing of Gomer James, and
therefore did not, at this time, particularly seek his life. They—the
goodly citizens—merely glanced at him, out of the corners of their eyes,
and some thought he was good enough to be hanged, but made no overt
demonstrations.

[Illustration: “_Hurley reached forward, over the counter, and fired,
the bullet striking Gomer James._”]

McKenna had not been four hours in Shenandoah when he learned, through
Muff Lawler, that there was little doubt who had done for the young
Welshman. Mike Carey, who was present, with Lawler, McAndrew, Morris,
and other Mollies, said in an impressive whisper:

“Hurley reached forward, over the counter, and fired, the bullet
striking Gomer James full in his heart, an’ he fell! Before any one
could go to his assistance he wor dead! I saw the thing done myself!”

It seems that Shenandoah Division was in session at the time of the
assassination—eleven o’clock at night of the fourteenth—when Carey
rushed in, before the members, and announced, “Tom Hurley has shot Gomer
James!” He was quickly stopped by McAndrew, and subsequently sharply
reprimanded because of his thoughtlessness, in making such a statement
before all the members. But it was doubtless true that Tom Hurley had
done the deed.

As a result of this unexpected success, all the Mollies in Shenandoah
engaged in a grand bacchanal, and few remained sober. To get rid of
them, McKenna left the place and went to Girardville. Kehoe said that
the murder of Squire Gwyther was the result of a drunken spree, and
Love, he was glad to say, had made his escape. The young man, Thomas
Love, who had been arrested by High Constable Kehoe, in person, he knew,
as well as any one, was quite innocent, but the brother, who was guilty,
had traveled off, untrammeled.

This dark day was not the end of the reign of the assassins in
Pennsylvania.


                               ————●————




                              CHAPTER XL.

                          MORE BOSSES DOOMED.


Now the Mollies having Gomer James dead and buried and out of their way,
it was believed by some bloodshed would cease. But the attentive reader
will have arrived at the conclusion that the end was not yet. For my own
part, I must confess to having experienced occasional periods of
disappointment. Here had I been, using my best efforts, seconded by the
most effective help the Company could furnish, and notwithstanding our
united action, despite the fact that we daily knew much of the order,
assassinations were not being entirely prevented. This midnight society,
to guard against surprise or capture, had its committees within
committees, or, in other words, its secret affairs were seldom given to
the general members, but were kept in charge of the leading officers and
prominent personages. Hence, very few of the Mollies in Shenandoah were
officially aware of the fact that Gomer James was to be put out of the
way. McAndrew, Hurley, Morris, Munley, Monaghan, McKenna, and a few more
knew it, and kept it to themselves—excepting the detective who reported
it—as those in Tamaqua and Summit Hill retained among a few leading
spirits the facts connected with the murder of Yost and the preparations
for cutting off John P. Jones. But Jones was notified by Mr. Franklin, a
guard of men put in his house, and the boss instructed to seek some
other route, by which to reach his work, than the pipe-line. For a while
he maintained a measure of caution, but not during many weeks; it became
an old story. Danger, as he thought, had been overestimated.
Carelessness and the resumption of his former habits quickly followed
this conclusion.

The convention, appointed for the twenty-fifth of August, occurred at
Carroll’s house, the members occupying three chambers in the upper part
of the building. Among those convened on this interesting occasion were
Jack Kehoe, County Delegate; Wm. Gavin, County Secretary; Christopher
Donnelly, County Treasurer; Jerry Kane, of Mt. Laffee; Francis Keenan,
of Forestville; Frank O’Neill, of St Clair; James Roarty, of Coaldale;
John Donahue—“Yellow Jack”—of Tuscarora, and Michael O’Brien, of Mahanoy
City. Tom Hurley and John Morris, of Shenandoah, were in one of the
rooms for a few minutes. Many outsiders seemed to be in the city and in
the building, but the parties mentioned transacted all the business of
the meeting. Pat Butler was on hand, but not as a legal part of the
convention’s committee—only as a sort of witness. During the session of
the lesser body, which was devoted principally to hearing grievances,
expelling and readmitting members, Tom Hurley came forward and made
known that to him, and to no one else, was the society indebted for the
killing of Gomer James. Modesty, it appears, was far from a prominent
point in Hurley’s character. At least, on this day, he not only boasted
much of his peculiar service, but put before the order, with no
circumlocution or evasion, a direct and open claim to a money reward for
putting out of the way the murderer of Cosgrove. He thought he was
entitled to a large sum for his success. James McKenna, the detective,
acting as Secretary of the committee before which Hurley’s demand was
made, was obliged to receive it, but Pat Butler, of Loss Creek,
presented himself before the same committee with the verbal demand of
one McClain, of his division, who asserted that he, and not Hurley, had
been the marksman who brought down the young Welshman. When Kehoe heard
of the difference, he ordered Pat Butler and James McKenna to act as
arbiters and to settle the difference by holding an investigation and
reporting a decision, in writing, at a subsequent date, directing to him
at his home in Girardville. They accepted the duty and appointed the
succeeding Sabbath for the appearance, in Shenandoah, of the two men and
their witnesses, when the case should be heard and adjusted according to
its real merits. Kehoe would make no movement toward rewarding the man,
who, he was free to say, deserved a fair recompense, until this trial
had been concluded. Friends of Hurley were satisfied, they urged, that a
dozen persons could swear Tom did the shooting. Every confidence was
expressed that the blood-money would go to him and to no other person.

Jerry Kane, Pat Dolan, Frank Keenan, Jack Donahue, Mike O’Brien, and
James McKenna, constituted the committee first spoken of as having been
selected by the convention.

The convention and its committee, after transacting their legitimate
business, adjourned, the members returning to their respective homes,
only Hurley, Morris, and McKenna remaining at Tamaqua over night.

The Shenandoah Mollies were very anxious to enlist the Secretary in
assisting to get bail for Chas. Hayes, who was in jail in Pottsville. He
consented, and through his influence Marks, the proprietor of the
Columbia House, was induced to sign Hayes’ bond. This resulted in the
young man’s release, and earned for McKenna the gratitude of his many
friends.

McAndrew, while in attendance upon the convention, was approached by
Kerrigan and asked to send men to do the Jones killing. The Shenandoah
President answered, assuring him he would, if he could be made to see
that assistance was, in return, ready for him when required. Kerrigan
promised to furnish the needed men on a trade, and then McAndrew said he
should have the help of his branch in doing anything reasonable.

McKenna went back to Shenandoah the day following the convention,
accompanied by Morris and Hurley, and while on the way his comrades were
anxious to know if the operative had recently seen anything of Linden.
He answered that he had not.

“If I thought, for wan moment, Linden wor doin’ anything on us, or on
you, McKenna, I’d make him a target for me revolver as sure as ever I
came up wid him!”

This sentiment of Hurley’s was echoed by John Morris, who said he’d
shoot Linden on sight, in such a contingency.

“Oh, ye naden’t spend yer precious breath over Linden!” replied McKenna.
“I know him pretty well! He’s all as right as a trivet, as square as any
man can be, and will never go back on his true friends!”

This quieted the fears of the two men for the time, and no more threats
were indulged in during the journey. McKenna informed Linden by letter,
that night, of his danger, at least regarding the empty menaces of
Morris and Hurley, hinting that it might be well that his friend have a
care for himself during the excitement prevailing, or he would possibly
find the acts of the Mollies in question not so harmless as their savage
words and looks.

The meeting to prove or refute Hurley’s assertion that he killed Gomer
James, as against the application of McClain for the same rare
distinction, took place near Number Three Breaker, Sunday, the
twenty-ninth of August. McKenna, Pat Butler, Hurley, and several of his
witnesses, gathered in the bush at the appointed time. There was little
or no evidence introduced, but Hurley’s statement was reiterated. He
said he, with his own hand, had killed the young Welshman, and demanded
recompense for the act in no measured terms. His own mother, it seems,
had been an eye-witness of the murderous work of the son. She had heard
him swear he would shoot James or be killed himself. Hurley had no
compunctions of conscience in refusing to obey her command to go home,
but repeated his oath that he “would fetch Gomer James that day, if it
cost him his life!” Too well had he kept his word. Now he wanted the
wages of his iniquity, the thirty pieces of silver for which, more than
from feelings of revenge, he had shed human blood.

Butler’s man, McClain, so the Loss Creek Bodymaster intimated, was
afraid to meet Hurley, refused to put in an appearance before the
committee, and there was no course left but to quietly acquiesce in
Hurley’s charge. This was done, and McKenna requested to prepare a
written version of the decision arrived at and forward the same to the
County Delegate. There the duty of the committee of two ended. The men
dispersed to their houses, and Hurley had made another confession,
before witnesses, of his guilt.

The following Monday, Hurley presented himself at McKenna’s
boarding-place, received the letter to Jack Kehoe, and departed in quest
of the reward for his deed. It is not known that he ever received it.
But, at a later date, Kehoe was heard by the detective to say that
Hurley should be given five hundred dollars, by right, from the
society’s treasury for the important job he had performed. Jack was
always very free-hearted as long as the money donated did not come from
his own pocket. It is fair to presume that the murderer will have to
wait until the gallows claims its own before fully realizing his worldly
recompense for that cold-blooded assassination. After finishing this
matter the two men adjourned to Tobin’s ball-alley, where they had
several games. The operative thought it necessary that he should be seen
in company with Hurley, and at the same time remember, if he could, who
observed the companionship.

It was very late when McKenna retired that night—rather quite early in
the morning—and he was so completely fagged out by the labors of the
day, not to speak of the drinks Hurley had compelled him to imbibe, that
he slept until after sunrise. When he did regain consciousness he found
another man reposing in the bed by his side. Sitting up, and somewhat
astonished that such a liberty should be taken with his apartment, the
agent learned that his companion was none other than Mike Doyle, who had
evidently arrived after all Mrs. Cooney’s couches were occupied and been
sent to repose with him. So soundly was the operative sleeping that he
was unaware of the fact that he had an unbidden bedfellow. When he
arose, which was soon after making the discovery, he saw, on the
wash-stand, a Smith and Wesson revolver, about the size of the new one
he carried, where it had probably been left by Doyle. This portended
business, as he very well knew that Doyle had no weapon of his own, and
he at once proceeded to rouse his partner and ask him what was in the
wind.

“Where did ye get the repeater?” asked McKenna, pointing to the pistol,
when Doyle had sufficiently rubbed his eyes to understand where he
really was.

“Oh, I got it from Ned Monaghan,” he replied, yawning, as if not above
half pleased that he had been called so early.

“An’ I suppose Monaghan is so rich that he can afford to be afther
givin’ away five-shooters to every man what comes along! Faix, I belave
I’ll have to get meself one that way!”

“No! I have only borrowed the pistol! There’s a big job on hand! Me an’
Jim an’ Charlie O’Donnell, Charlie McAllister an’ Munley are to go to
Raven Run an’ jist finish off Tom Sanger, the mining boss, an’ take him
afther he comes out to his dinner!”

“Is that all?” inquired McKenna, treating the matter lightly, but
feeling, in truth, very much concerned, as he knew the persons mentioned
and was very sure there would be bloody work whenever Friday O’Donnell
had a share.

“I think, for my part, that’s plenty an’ to spare,” returned Doyle, as
he proceeded to dress himself. “I don’t at all relish the thing! But of
course orders must be obeyed, an’ I’m the last man to go back on the
Bodymasther!”

Here was news for the detective—early news, at that. But what could he
do with it? By the time he was well down stairs to breakfast, Doyle
signified his readiness for that meal. In the bar who should present
himself but that early-bird, Tom Hurley, already well posted about the
proposed Raven Run matter.

“Jim, lend me your old, gray coat!” said Doyle. “I came off without
anything but a light one, an’ I nade somethin’ somewhat heavier!”

“Ye can take it, in welcome!” replied McKenna. And Doyle put the garment
on and wore it at the dining-table. It was the same unfortunate coat
John Gibbons had donned when starting upon the last expedition to take
off Wm. M. Thomas. The agent soon saw that the new situation of affairs
much resembled the former in other particulars. Not only had one of the
proposed murderers secured the loan of his gray coat, but he was himself
so hampered, through the close attendance of Hurley and others, that
there was no opportunity to send a message of any sort to Mr. Franklin,
at Philadelphia, or to Linden. In fact, as concerned the whereabouts of
the latter individual, he was at the moment entirely ignorant. He might
be in Lansford, looking after Jones, as he had been intending, or in
Tamaqua, or in Ashland. Where he was he could not tell. But as McKenna
was in the company of the Mollies, and could not avoid them on any
pretext, however specious, it made little difference. An attempt to send
off word by telegraph would be the signal for suspicion, and with men
like his companions a shadow of doubt was good enough pretext for an
assassination. Hence, hard as it really was, he endeavored to quell his
excitement, appear to enjoy the prospect, and lend seeming countenance
to that against which every thought, impulse, and instinct of his nature
recoiled.

Hurley told Doyle that if he went with the O’Donnell crowd, he would
have to act the manly part, and perform his whole duty, or they would
kill him as if he were only a mad dog. With this consoling remark the
young murderer proceeded to give Doyle particular instructions in the
fine art of assassination, showing him minutely how a man should be
killed and how not killed. He accompanied his remarks with
illustrations, made in his peculiar style, in the yard attached to
Lawler’s premises.

McKenna and Hurley, still in company—it appeared to the operative that
he would do almost anything to free himself from Tom’s friendly and
unconscious surveillance—strolled about the streets of the city, as
usual taking the prominent saloons in their route, and finally
encountering James, _alias_ Friday O’Donnell—a tall, slimly-built,
fair-complexioned man, whose smooth face, dark eyes, brown hair and
genial expression of countenance, were no indication of the murderous
passions slumbering in his being—with James McAllister, the latter a
brother-in-law of Jack Kehoe. McAllister was quickly photographed on the
memory of the detective. Some twenty-four years of age, of florid
complexion, a little freckled, light hair and mustache, and usually well
appareled, he was an average representative of his race, and by no means
unhandsome in form and figure. The latter said that Chas. O’Donnell
would soon be through his work and had promised to join them. Friday
O’Donnell carried two revolvers, which the agent saw were about the same
size as his own, bearing a number thirty-two cartridge. In company,
after Charles O’Donnell came, all repaired to Muff Lawler’s residence.

[Illustration: “_All repaired to Muff Lawler’s residence._”]

While on the way, McKenna made every excuse possible to separate himself
from Hurley, who stuck to him more closely than Carey had, through the
night following the departure of the men to shoot Wm. Thomas, and
finally, seeing that all his efforts were useless, he discontinued them
and came to the conclusion that, whatever was to be done, it would be
impossible for him to successfully interfere. The Mollies must take
their course. His life would pay the forfeit of any indiscreet word or
act. The news of the intended foray could not be forwarded to
Philadelphia, neither was it possible to admonish the intended victim.
There was nothing left for him but to endure the suspense, carry with
him the horrible thought that a man was possibly being murdered in his
neighborhood, and he impotent to warn or protect. “Where is Linden?”
“What can be keeping him?” “What shall I do?” were some of the questions
which puzzled his brain while he was making his way to Lawler’s house.
When all the men arrived, and, well prepared for the deed, again left
the locality so as to be early at Raven Run, the operative secretly
hoped Hurley would start too, but he did not. On the contrary, fastening
himself more closely to his person, he marched arm-in-arm with him to
Frank McAndrew’s place, and insisted upon treating to the drinks for all
who gathered there. And this was no small number, as McAndrew had called
a meeting of the leading members of the division for that afternoon, and
they were convening at five o’clock, so that their business might be
ended before nightfall. The liquor once consumed, there was no time to
spare until the appointed hour, and Hurley and McKenna entered the
division room, an upper chamber in the building, in company. There were
only men composing the inside ring of the lodge present. To these, after
prayer and the usual opening ceremonies, McAndrew said the time for
action had come. The Hibernians in other places were following the good
example set by his branch, and he must not be idle. He had come to the
conclusion that a boss named Reese must be cut off, and reported he had
an order from Kerrigan, Bodymaster of Tamaqua Division, for three men to
do an important job at Summit Hill. Jones was to be put out of the way,
and “there must be no growling about it!” Mike Carey was chosen to go
and assist in the Lansford scheme, but unqualifiedly refused. McAndrew
was much angered, and exclaimed that such conduct would be punished as
it deserved, when he had more time, and in a moment selected John
McGrail, Thomas Munley, and Mike Darcey to go to Tamaqua and report to
Kerrigan. As Munley lived at Gilberton and was not present, Ed Sweeney
was detailed to inform him of the affair on hand, and instruct him when
to start and where to report.

“The latest must not be later than to-morrow night!” ordered the
Bodymaster.

McKenna was requested to visit Tamaqua at once, make all right with
Kerrigan, deliver the men for his job, and secure those to do for Reese.
There was nothing to be gained by refusal. He had to go. The thought
struck him: “Here is a chance for a warning! It is my only opportunity!”
He promptly accepted the mission and at once took cars for Tamaqua. It
was a terrible ordeal, but from it there seemed to open no avenue of
escape.

Here is the situation: Campbell striving to have John P. Jones killed,
and calling upon Kerrigan for men to do the deed. McAndrew to furnish
these men to Kerrigan, and Kerrigan, to make the matter even, to repay
in a batch of assassins for the killing of Reese. Shenandoah Division
having its business transacted in the Sanger case by persons from
Girardville, part of the number being relatives of Jack Kehoe, McAndrew
was not informed—though McKenna was, through his chancing to sleep with
Doyle—of the duty the O’Donnell delegation were to perform. When the
operative thought over the complications by which he was surrounded he
hardly knew which thing to do first. But, as soon as he reached Tamaqua,
he closeted himself long enough at the Columbia House to indite a brief
letter to Mr. Franklin, setting forth the critical condition of affairs,
and breathed somewhat more freely when the dangerous paper was out of
his possession, safely deposited in the post-office. He had done all he
could, but without much hope that his endeavors would save the lives
threatened.


                               ————●————




                              CHAPTER XLI.

                       MURDER OF SANGER AND UREN.


Leaving my agent in Tamaqua, a victim of three-fold suspense, I must now
attempt to describe a double murder, perpetrated by the Mollie Maguires
at Raven Run, near Ashland, Wednesday, the first of September, 1875, a
little more than two weeks later than the killing of Gomer James and
Squire Gwyther. The plain facts are here collected, as given by the
detectives, from sources which are deemed reliable.

As Hiram Beninger, a carpenter connected with the colliery, was passing
from his house to the breaker, at about six o’clock in the morning of
the day mentioned, he noticed two men, apparently strangers, sitting on
some car sills not far from the carpenter shop. One wore a soft hat and
the other a cap with a broad velvet band. Both had their coat collars
turned up as if to protect them from the chilling wind, and their
positions on the timbers were those of mere listlessness, as though
waiting for the arrival of the working boss. It was a common occurrence
to see parties thus early on the ground to make application for
employment, and Beninger paid no attention to these. But for
circumstances immediately following, possibly he might never have
thought of them again.

John Nicolls, this same clear cool morning in September and at about the
same hour, was walking on the Mammoth Colliery road, or the path leading
to that colliery, when he discovered three men, also seemingly new to
the neighborhood, resting themselves on the trucks with which coal is
elevated from the shaft or plane. One of the fresh arrivals spoke
pleasantly to Nicolls, saying, “Good-morning!” in a low tone of voice,
and, as a man naturally would, Nicolls politely returned the salutation.
After passing these three persons, Nicolls noticed two others, sitting
just where the carpenter had found them, and Nicolls walked within a
yard of their locality. One of the last-named persons, he remembered,
wore a light-colored soft hat and brown coat, and looked closely in his
face as he was going by. The other had on the velvet cap noticed by
Beninger. The first, a light-complexioned, heavily-built man, spoke to
Nicolls, saying: “You are going early to your work!” Nicolls answered:
“Yes; rather early!” and went on his way. He recalled nothing
particularly suspicious in the circumstance, excepting, as he
subsequently remarked, the man having the cap pulled its visor down over
his eyes. Mr. Nicolls only saw five men, concluded in his mind that they
were travelers, probably seeking work, and but for subsequent events
would soon have forgotten them altogether.

Ten or fifteen minutes afterward Thomas Sanger, a boss in Heaton & Co.’s
Colliery, started from his home for the scene of his daily labor, taking
tender leave of his wife at their garden gate, accompanied by Wm. Uren,
who boarded in his family and was also employed at the same mining
works. Both bore their dinner-cans in their hands.

Sanger was a man greatly respected by his neighbors, about thirty-three
years of age, and, while he had always been firm in his purpose, and
true to his employers, had failed to make any enemies, excepting among
the Mollies. He had, in his time, been duly threatened, but more
recently believed the anger of his organized enemies was buried,
forgotten, or appeased. But it proved a great mistake. Their murderous
desires only slept.

Sanger and his companion, who was a miner, had not gone far when they
were fired upon and both mortally wounded by the same strange men
noticed by the carpenter and Mr. Nicolls. Beninger heard the shots, and
rushing out, saw Robert Heaton, one of the proprietors of the colliery,
firing his pistol at and running after two of the murderers. He heard
“Red” Nick Purcell call for a gun. Two of the five assassins just then
stopped in their retreat and began discharging their revolvers at
Heaton, but he was not hit, and, holding boldly his ground, continued
using his weapon, apparently without effect. Then all of the strange men
turned and ran quickly up the mountain. Heaton followed as fast as he
could, and when he had gained a little on them, stopped, and resting his
pistol on a stump, to get steadier aim, continued to shoot. Still none
were wounded. At least they did not slacken their speed, but made
rapidly for the heavier timber and soon disappeared. Mr. Nicolls saw the
same sight. It may be said, to his credit, that Heaton never withdrew
from the unequal chase until his cartridges were exhausted and the men
beyond range of his bullets. Had any of the several other witnesses of
the deed been prepared, and followed the example of Heaton, the gang of
assassins would have been killed or captured. As it was, they were not
further pursued at the moment, and got away before reason prevailed and
preparations were made for going on their trail. Then it was too late.
The game was out of even rifle range.

After Sanger received his wound he was taken to the house of a neighbor,
named Wheevil, where every attention was given him. Wm. Uren, who was
also bleeding freely, was removed to the same residence. The surgeons
were sent for, and Mrs. Sanger soon came in. Sanger lived but a little
while. When his wife entered the room he said, in a faltering voice:
“Sarah, come and kiss me! I am dying!” involuntarily echoing Yost’s
exclamation under similar circumstances. Neither of the wounded men
retained consciousness long enough to give any coherent description of
the manner in which they had been met, but there were witnesses in
plenty, workmen going to their labor and others, who had seen the entire
transaction.

Sanger had been three years with Heaton & Co., and always performed his
duty faithfully. He had received two gunshot wounds, one through the
right forearm, and the other in the groin, the last severing the femoral
artery. There was no gleam of hope for him. He bled to death in a few
minutes. Dr. A. B. Sherman, assisted by Doctors Yocum and Yeomans, of
Ashland, did everything in the power of man, but without avail. Death
was inevitable from the locality and extent of the hurt.

Uren was shot in the right groin, in about the same place as Sanger, an
important artery in his leg being injured. He remained in a sort of
stupor until death ensued, the next day.

[Illustration: “_‘Don’t stop for me, Bob, but give it to them!’_”]

Heaton was eating his breakfast when he heard the firing, and at once
his mind reverted to the men he had seen sitting by the carpenter shop.
There was something peculiar in their posture, and in the fact of their
hats being over their eyes, and coat collars turned up. Believing they
were the cause of the trouble, he seized his revolver and ran out. The
first thing he encountered was Thomas Sanger, wounded, lying on the
ground by a stump, near the house, bleeding freely, where the murderers
had left him; still Sanger said: “Don’t stop for me, Bob, but give it to
them!” Heaton caught sight of the departing assassins, and, as before
related, opened fire upon them, but without effect. He had a fair view
of one of the persons, when he turned on his heel and fired back at him.
But Mrs. Williams, a neighbor of Heaton, had a better opportunity to
judge of the same man. Her young son, when he heard the shooting, was
very anxious to go out and join in Heaton’s attempt to capture or kill
the assassins. He desired to do just what the others should have done,
but did not do, and his mother, naturally fearful harm might come to
him, had, with the assistance of her daughter, dragged the lad back into
the room after he had reached the entrance, which was open. She threw
her arms around him and effectually barred his progress. Then the
murderer of Sanger—having brought the boss down, as he ran for the
protecting building, and even stopping to turn him over on his back and
deliberately fire a second shot into his quivering and bleeding
body—with smoking pistol still in hand, passed Mrs. Williams’ door.
While engaged in preventing her son’s exit, her mind filled with horror
from what had already happened, and dread of that which she thought
might occur, she noted each feature of the murderer’s face and every
peculiarity of his form, as, with head raised and defiant air, he swung
his weapon over his head, walked rapidly by her door and up the road.
She said she could never forget that man. His likeness haunted her,
waking and sleeping, for many nights, and she furnished her neighbors
with a description which was afterwards very valuable.

           .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .

The two men who had accompanied McKenna to Tamaqua, quite unfit for duty
when they reached their destination, were put to bed at Carroll’s—which
place they had approached by three several routes, by previous
arrangement not having spoken together on the car—very soon after their
arrival. Drink had quite overpowered them. This left the agent at
liberty to walk about and think over the predicament he was in. His
nerves were not particularly braced up by the perusal of a savage
article in the Shenandoah _Herald_, recommending the formation by the
citizens of a vigilance committee, which should summarily rid the
country of the Mollie Maguires. He thought that such an organization was
the one thing needful to render his position quite unendurable. His
Mollie friends merely laughed at it. They said: “Let the committee be
appointed! If it is, we will then spare neither women, old men, nor
children! It will be war to the knife, and the knife to the throat!”

This was anything but cheerful talk for the Shenandoah Secretary, but he
was forced to acquiesce in it, however much his heart misgave him. He
well knew that it would be a modern miracle, if such a combination was
entered into, should he fail in becoming its first victim. No Mollie
Maguire was better known. No Mollie was suspected of having committed
more crimes, and, meanwhile, he was perfectly innocent. McKenna
certainly did not favor a vigilance committee. On the contrary, he was
zealously opposed to anything of the sort. While thinking over these
unpleasant things the operative inquired of Carroll where Kerrigan was.
He pretended he did not know. Under these circumstances it occurred to
the agent that it was his duty to send the men, brought there to perform
a murder, directly back to their homes. In the afternoon he did so,
informing them that he had been unable to find Kerrigan, which was true,
and probably the Jones job had been postponed, which he did not know to
be the fact, but which he hoped might be so. No sooner were his parties
off for Shenandoah than McKenna set about a plan for putting Linden and
his men in the bush about Jones’ house, proposing to be near himself and
see that the boss was not hurt. After failing to find Linden or
Kerrigan, he went to Carroll’s, the hour being about ten at night, and
luckily the saloon-keeper was alone.

“Were the men you had here to go to Old Mines?” asked Carroll.

“Yes! But as I couldn’t run across Kerrigan, they have been sent home! I
can get them again by merely telegraphing McAndrew to ‘send me over a
game chicken!’ That’s the signal agreed upon. Where is that fellow,
Kerrigan, anyhow? Sure, you ought to know!”

“I’ll tell you, McKenna,” whispered Carroll. “He has been off since
Wednesday, wid two men from Mt. Laffee, an’ I’m after thinkin’ that,
before this time, all is over in that case! The fellows came here wid a
letther from Jerry Kane, an’ gave it to me, an’ I jist kept them inside
until Kerrigan got in, which was about nine at night, an’ they all left.
It wur Mike Doyle and Ed Kelly that went wid Kerrigan. They brought no
arms along, so if they wur arrested nothing would be found on them!
Campbell has plenty of pistols.”

Here the saloon-keeper had to attend to the wants of a customer and
McKenna, completely bewildered, walked out of the place and over to his
hotel. What was he to do? The probability was that Kerrigan and his men
had shot Jones that very morning. Where should he find Linden? How
should he act? After calm reflection he determined that he could do
nothing. If Jones had been killed, it was not possible to aid him.
Everything had been done that his inventive mind suggested to notify and
guard the man. McKenna therefore took the cars and returned, heart-sick
and despondent, to Shenandoah.

Linden’s duty had called him elsewhere, and hence he cannot be held at
all responsible for a job he thought amply provided for. Still in doubt
about Jones’ fate, it was at Muff Lawler’s house that the operative
learned the result of the expedition by Friday O’Donnell and his men to
Raven Run. They regained the outskirts of Shenandoah at about eight
o’clock, the morning of the murder, and the crowd, consisting of Mike
Doyle, Friday and Chas. O’Donnell, Thos. Munley, and Chas. McAllister,
entered the house, one by one, and each was made quickly comfortable.

Chas. McAllister lived with the O’Donnells at Wiggan’s Patch, and was
married to their sister.

The entire company were covered with dust and perspiration and expressed
themselves as very thirsty. They certainly drank a great quantity of
water, for men whose usual beverage was something stronger, and seemed
recently to have traveled far and fast. Friday O’Donnell made no secret
of the scene all were freshly from, and boasted that they had made a
clean sweep of it, and, while it was the intention only to take off
Sanger, they had killed another man, supposed to be a miner. He did not
know but they had hurt others.

Chas. McAllister exhibited to McKenna a navy revolver, and said that
Chas. O’Donnell carried one of the same size. Doyle wore the Smith &
Wesson he had previously seen, and Friday O’Donnell had two pistols. In
Lawler’s back kitchen, that morning, they talked over the murder for an
hour, saying they had all traded clothing before the shooting, and,
after finishing, swapped back again. Each murderer took part in the
conversation, and related, in his own way, the share he had taken in the
assassination. Their reports were not particularly at variance with the
facts as set forth in this chapter, and hence the reader’s mind, already
sickened with relation of violence and bloodshed, need not be further
harrowed up by their repetition here.

But what were McKenna’s feelings at this period? To say that he was
exceedingly anxious, is a very weak expression in which to convey the
mental experiences of that eventful day. With what patience he could
command, he awaited information of Kerrigan’s work at Lansford.


                               ————●————




                             CHAPTER XLII.

                          ARREST OF ASSASSINS.


Quite a fraternal feeling had existed between the two men murdered on
the first of September at Raven Run, Wm. Uren having been a native of
the parish of Germoe, Cornwall, England, but a short distance from
Sanger’s birthplace. He entered the Greatwork tin mines at the early age
of ten years, with his father, and remained until about nineteen, when
he bid his relatives adieu and sailed for this country, landing at New
York in the fall of 1872. After working nearly a year at Dover, New
Jersey, he removed to Schuylkill County and was employed by the Messrs.
Heaton as a coal miner. While in England Uren was a regular attendant at
church and Sabbath-school. In Pennsylvania he kept up the same course,
early enlisting as a teacher in a Sunday-school, which place he held at
the time of his death. Uren, with other bosses and miners, including
Sanger, was coffin-noticed by the Mollies as early as 1874, and in
consequence Sanger invited the young man to board at his house. They
soon formed an intimate and enduring friendship. The winter of 1875 and
following summer, to the day of the assassination, passing peaceably and
without any apparent attempt to carry out the promises of the
organization, as far as he and Sanger were concerned, Uren began to
believe all danger passed or blown over. They thought nothing would
actually be done. Thus had it always been. No sooner did a threatened
man come to the understanding that his life was perfectly safe, than, in
this very peculiar country and with this very peculiar class of people,
he was, as too many cases proved, in the exact position to prepare for
leaving this world, for the fiends incarnate causing all the trouble in
the coal region were abundantly capable of waiting for any length of
time, keeping their wrath warm and pouring it, at any unsuspected
moment, upon the devoted heads of their victims. Therefore, Uren, when
set upon, was no better prepared to defend himself against the power of
his enemies than his friend, Sanger. There was nothing that either could
possibly do but to stand up like men before the deadly pistols and be
shot cruelly down.

A more sorrowful scene than that enacted around the couch of the dying
Uren was never witnessed. His fellow-countryman, Sanger, was already
gone. It was not long before he followed. The funeral of the two men,
like their murder, was a double one, and both were buried in the same
grave. The parents of Wm. Uren are yet living in England, with four
sisters and five brothers. They receive no more assistance from their
dutiful son and brother. They know their main help this side of the
Atlantic has been cut off by the bullet of the assassin.

McKenna was again in Shenandoah when he received a note from Linden
informing him of certain remarks that person had heard made by a citizen
of Tamaqua concerning the Secretary. They were not exactly the kind of
words generally causing a man to feel more secure of or harbor firmer
belief in his personal safety. Said Linden in his letter:

“A citizen by the name of Boyd remarked to me to-day that the only
chance for an excitement in dull Tamaqua was when that man with the big
head (alluding to the wig, I suppose) and blue coat came upon the
street. Then people began to say to each other, ‘What a shame that such
a fellow (this means you, McParlan) is allowed to live! He ought to be
strung up!’ You need to keep a sharp look out, wherever you are, for
about everybody here is thinking that you are a suspicious fellow
generally and a particularly bad Mollie!”

This was not very inspiriting information for the officer to receive,
and, the next day, was supplemented by the following, showing that
Linden had called at Shenandoah and not been able to find or communicate
with his fellow-operative:

“I was in conversation, yesterday, with several influential men, and it
was the universal expression that all would soon have to emigrate or
make the Mollies leave. They talked vigilance committee very earnestly.
One of the party asked another if ‘that fellow, McKenna, was about the
city yet?’ He replied ‘yes!’ Then said the first speaker: ‘That is the
smartest business man of the society! He has the best head and does the
most work; in short, is the most dangerous scamp among them!’ You will
observe that my former recommendation is enforced by this. Look sharp!
Don’t be imprudent! Have an eye out for breakers, day and night!”

A wayfaring man has, before this, perused letters of a more calming and
conciliatory tenor. Indeed McKenna remembered having read passages, even
in yellow-covered romances of the blood-and-thunder style of literature,
which, torturingly bad as they were, gave him much more unalloyed
pleasure than those two missives from Linden. Yet he was thankful to
their author for them. His intentions were good, and his recommendations
among the best that could be made.

Here there arose another apparent conflict between duty and inclination.
The first said: “Stay here and procure testimony which shall punish the
assassins.” The second chimed in with a broad hint to pack up his
clothing and other goods, purchase a ticket for Chicago, and hasten away
toward the setting sun. McParlan thought he had but just commenced his
work. It would be time for him to desert the post if forced to do so, or
when Mr. Franklin might deem his duty in the country quite complete. In
any event, he concluded to stay some time longer, even though the wishes
of the citizens of Tamaqua and Shenandoah might be executed. He knew
that, if the excited people of the vicinity could only be aware of his
true purposes, they would willingly carry him in their arms, or draw him
in a carriage, shielding him from harm with their own bodies; and this
inward consciousness of rectitude, which buoyed him through many a
stormy day in the years he had been in my service, kept his head above
water and steadied his nerves while he continued his professional work.
He knew that, if he lived yet a little longer, the residents of
Schuylkill, Carbon, Columbia, and Luzerne Counties would praise and
bless him. If he died, they would discover that his life was sacrificed
that they, and generations to them yet unborn, might have and enjoy
protection from the Mollie Maguires, under the law, and secure immunity
from the black dragon which for a score of years had made their land a
terror and a shame in the nation.

These and similar ideas were passing through the brain of McKenna, the
afternoon of the third of September, 1875, when the perusal of the
evening newspaper confirmed his worst fears. John P. Jones was added to
the long list of victims of the mysterious society. He had been shot
that morning. The operative soon learned the principal facts connected
with this assassination and embodied them in a report to the Agency.

John P. Jones left his house, which was in Lansford and contained his
wife and seven children, at about seven o’clock in the morning, bound
for the breaker where he was employed, carrying his dinner-pail in his
hand, and following the pipe-line toward the old railway embankment,
which he had been, by Mr. Zehner, Mr. Beard, and others, repeatedly
urged not to take, as they were aware that his life was by no means
safe. He felt, like Sanger and Uren, entirety satisfied that the
Mollies, who had so long been confronting him, were of a more forgiving
nature than the public credited them with being or that their desire for
his blood had been satiated by the several recent sacrifices. Instead of
heeding advice, and extracting warning from the deaths lately occurring,
and using a locomotive to carry him up and down the line, as he could
easily have done, or even refusing to work unless some such course was
observed, he put his revolver in his pocket and went off cheerfully to
what proved his last journey.

The assassins, James Kerrigan, Mike Doyle, and Edward Kelly, were
waiting for him. He saw them not, but continued his walk as though
nothing more than usual stood before him. Not a premonition of impending
evil; not a thought of coming death; not a glance around, to see if the
cowardly assassin was in ambush prepared to kill him.

[Illustration: “_Then Doyle and Kelly drew their pistols and fired on
Jones._”]

But they were there, lying in wait, Kerrigan, as usual, standing at a
little distance and wholly unarmed. Jones left his home by a rear door
and moved down the pipe-line. When the trio of murderers reached the top
of the path, he was some yards from the same position. He heard their
footsteps and turned aside, patiently pausing for the others to pass.
Still not a suspicion could have crossed his mind that he stood at the
gateway of death. The men had no intention of permitting him to obtain a
hint of their design. They halted, when close to him, and then Doyle and
Kelly drew their pistols and fired on Jones. Each discharged one shot.
Their victim made a spasmodic blow at his assailants with the tin
dinner-pail, when Doyle fired again. Turning off toward the bushes,
Jones raised his hands and cried out: “I’m shot! I’m shot!” In a moment
he fell forward upon his face. After this, Doyle fired two more bullets
into his already riddled body. The Superintendent had not time to draw
or think of a weapon, and in a few minutes the life of the man was
ended. His heart beat no more. While Doyle was finishing the savage job,
his companions were running away across the mountains. The reports of
the pistols brought many workmen on the railroad to the spot, and Jones’
corpse was immediately taken to his home. Several persons had seen the
assassins retreating over the hill, and one man was so near them as to
be frightened, thinking his turn to be shot would come next. He made
rapid progress in placing himself out of harm’s way.

The citizens of Tamaqua were not long in ignorance of the incidents
attending the killing of Jones, and the excitement, which before had
risen to a high pitch, reached the verge of general madness. People
procured arms and went upon the streets in numbers. Men, women, and boys
were aroused, and everybody appeared intent upon arresting or killing
somebody. The Mollie Maguires alone kept quiet. Finally it was
discovered, by some one who had been quietly following the little miner
since the killing of Yost, that James Kerrigan was away from his home.
Silently and doggedly a few persons kept watch over his house. Early in
the forenoon he returned, remained but a short time, and was shortly
afterward seen to start out with a small bundle in his hand, and,
sticking from one pocket, a flask of liquor. Cautiously the men kept on
his trail and tracked him until he reached a spring where Doyle and
Kelly were waiting. He had no more than time to give them the
refreshments, when the three Mollies, evidently warned by a preconcerted
signal from Carroll, who walked along, making himself conspicuous upon
the railway track, started to run. But the people confronted and soon
captured them. They had no arms about their persons, and when examined
at the jail only some cartridges were found in their pockets. A little
later, however, some officers, while making a search, unearthed three
pistols and a heavy club, secreted under the trees in the leaves near
the spring. The sheriff, the next day, escorted Kerrigan, Kelly, and
Doyle to Mauch Chunk, where they were committed to prison, to await
trial, the crime having been committed in Carbon County.

The supposed murderers were in a safe place. Was there testimony upon
which they could be convicted? It was doubtful. They were unquestionably
the guilty parties, and might be well identified as far as descriptions
went, but the actual witnesses were standing at such a distance from the
scene it was possible that a jury, especially without having
corroborating evidence, might be deceived and fail to find sufficient
fact to warrant conviction.

One good effect, at least, was produced by the arrest of the three
Mollies. The remainder of the members of the order were, for the time,
struck dumb. Their hands were powerless. They could perform no further
acts of violence, for fear of prejudicing the interests of their
brothers then in custody. Peace would be assured, at least until the
trials could take place. But that the defendants would be sworn clear by
the oaths of the fraternity few were found to doubt.

As in one of the earlier murders of the year, the killing of Jones was,
by many innocent and well-meaning but uninformed people, charged upon my
detective, James McParlan, _alias_ McKenna. I do not allude to this
censoriously. They did not know what they were doing, and were judging
from outward appearances alone. Seeing him, for a series of years, the
associate of murderers, thieves, and Mollies, and apparently the
toughest man among them, it was no more than reasonable they should
suppose him really one of their number and a leader in many of their
criminal works. Mr. Reese, of Shenandoah, whose life the operative had
just been the means of preserving, sent word, on the tenth of September,
a week subsequent to Jones’ taking off, that he desired to see Mr.
Linden. When they met, Reese told my officer that an Irishman named
McKenna was supposed to have originated, planned, and assisted in
executing the crime, concluding with the death of John P. Jones, of
Lansford. He added that, so well were the good people of Tamaqua
satisfied of the truth of this assumption, though they were without a
particle of positive evidence, he, Mr. Reese, had no doubt, if McKenna
appeared in the town, they would turn out in hundreds and hang him to
the nearest tree. This state of feeling exhibits the closeness with
which the operative was doing his work, and is another evidence of his
skill. The reader who has followed me thus far can tell how entirely
void of all criminal act or intent the record of that officer had been.
The public now knows that he was laboring, even at the risk of losing
his own life, to clear the country of those who had for years been
perpetrating crimes of blood in the anthracite region. It understands
that he went there for a purpose, and I hope to be able to show, before
the close of this volume, that he was eminently successful in his
undertaking.

This feeling, on the part of the deadly enemies of the Mollie Maguires,
that McKenna was the deepest and most guilty man in that wicked
organization, is an evidence of the discretion and tact the detective
had continually exercised. Without seeming to be fully in sympathy with
and inside the order, without an apparent acquiescence in its doings,
his task would have been abortive. It was this confidence on the part of
good people that he was a very bad man, and the belief on the side of
the Mollies that he was as hard and as bloody a character as even Tom
Hurley, Yellow Jack Donahue, or Jemmy Kerrigan, that gave witness of his
standing and efficiency as a secret detective. The mere suspicion, by
the fraternity, that he might possibly be other than the party he
affected to be would surely have been seized upon as the signal for his
death.

Despite his apprehensions, which were more excited by the promised
formation in the coal region of a vigilance committee than by the
information just recorded, or the idea that his identity would be
revealed to his companions, the agent stuck courageously to his verbal
contract with me; did not desert his post, but, stopping for a time in
Shenandoah, busied himself, as before, in keeping inside the inner
sanctuary of the infernal society with which he was connected. He
thought occasionally of going to Tamaqua and resuming his attentions to
Kerrigan’s wife’s sister, and eventually did so, but for the few days
following the assassination at Lansford he was almost continually in the
company of Thomas Hurley and the rest of the Shenandoah branch. Hurley
was fairly famishing for more blood. He had not done, and could not do,
enough. The scent of gore had fallen on his senses and he longed for
another draught. One day he said to McKenna:

“I tell you, Jim, so long as there is a pot over the fire, the fire must
be kept to it!”—meaning that, as the era of murders had begun, it must
be continued. The inventive genius of Hurley was constantly on the
stretch, manufacturing cases in which the pistol might be used with
effect. This was one reason, undoubtedly, that McAndrew took it into his
head to have Reese put out of the path. McKenna was the cause of the
signal failure of that scheme.

In one of the operative’s reports for this date, he wrote, evidently
feeling exactly and keenly the sentiment that his pen expressed:

“I am sick and tired of this thing! I seem to make no progress, and the
terrible and long-continued state of excitement in the town and the
country around here will one day end in something more fearful than has
yet occurred. I hear of preparations for bloodshed in all directions.
The sun looks crimson to me, and the air is tainted with the smell of
blood. We must do something to stop the sanguinary whirlwind that bids
fair to destroy everything!”

Long before this I had arrived at a similar conclusion. A crisis in the
operation had arrived which demanded immediate, masterly work.
Therefore, Mr. Franklin met Linden in Pottsville, the ninth of
September, and McKenna was directed to communicate with them at the same
place. He had little difficulty in cutting loose from his associates,
saying that he was forced to visit an adjoining town to meet his
principal in the bogus money business, and, after promising that he
would only be absent a few days, took cars by a roundabout route and
reached Pottsville the same night, making sure that no doubts of the
object of his mission had been aroused in the minds of the Mollies, and
that none of the order were following him.

Affairs had reached the pass that Linden was, in some places, known as
my representative in the coal fields. It was brought about by one of my
open policemen unfortunately shooting a man who acted suspiciously and
also being himself wounded. O’Brien was arrested, tried, and in due time
acquitted. Linden acted as his friend and counselor, and thus revealed
his connection with the Agency. It was time, however, the season being
ripe for the act. Linden and McKenna must not be known to communicate
with each other. Any attempt to do so which would be seen by the Mollies
must serve as an excuse for the agent’s execution. It was as much as his
life was worth to be found with either Linden or Franklin. Still a
meeting was necessary, and he did not falter. Putting up at a smaller
house, McParlan went, after darkness set in, to the Exchange Hotel,
where he knew Linden had his apartment, found that officer at home, and
there remained, locked in the sleeping-chamber, until Mr. Franklin came.
The three men held a very long and interesting conversation, during
which our plans for the future were discussed. The operative detailed
all that he knew of the Gomer James, Sanger and Uren, and Jones murders,
aside from his written reports, of all of which Mr. Franklin made
extended notes. He also answered such inquiries respecting names and
localities as were put. McKenna was kept in the room through the night,
or until nearly morning, when he left and repaired to his own
boarding-place, not appearing on the streets again until the
Superintendent had left for Philadelphia and Linden was far away, going
toward the scene of his future operations in Carbon County.

In a day or two McKenna was summoned to Philadelphia, thence traveled to
New York, and had a meeting with General Superintendent Geo. H. Bangs.
The result of the journey the ensuing pages will explain.


                               ————●————




                             CHAPTER XLIII.

                         VIOLENCE FOR VIOLENCE.


It should have been mentioned that, on the sixteenth of August, James
Riles, of Shenandoah, was attacked by a crowd of Mollies, headed by
Charles McAllister, Ned Monaghan, and Tobin, while sitting on the steps
of his own dwelling. Mr. Glover was near him at the time. Riles was not
mortally wounded, though his life, for several weeks, hung as upon a
thread, and his health is still much broken because of the injuries he
received. A man named Delaney was another eye-witness of the outrage,
but could do nothing to stop its progress. It was about nine o’clock at
night when three men came suddenly up to Riles and put their pistols to
his back. Immediately the victim felt a stinging sensation running
through him and knew he was hit. Regaining his feet he ran up Delaney’s
steps, closely tracked by the Mollies. It seemed to him there was a
great mob pursuing, and he flew through his neighbor’s house as fast as
he could, jumped out of the window, not knowing what he was doing,
striking heavily against the hard street below, and received injuries
which, added to the effects of the bullet, made him faint and almost
unconscious. When Riles was lying in the road the crowd cried: “Shoot
him! shoot him!” But he managed to crawl into the residence of Wm.
Kendrick, who protected him, finally saving his life. Thence he had to
be taken by the members of the Coal and Iron Police. Before their
arrival, however, the Mollies surrounded Kendrick’s house and excitedly
demanded possession of Riles, saying: “Give him to us! Give him to us!”
One timid citizen who was present tried to persuade Kendrick to comply,
urging that the crowd would have him, in the end, and if troubled in
their fierce pursuit of blood might do violence to the family of his
brave preserver. Kendrick flatly refused to pursue any such course and
resolutely stood by the wounded and supposed-to-be dying man. For
several days Mr. Riles was supposed to be near death’s door, but
subsequently recovered sufficiently to escape to Philadelphia. There he
was forced to remain in the hospital until restored to partial health.
At the risk of his life, he then returned to Shenandoah, sold his
homestead and other property, and emigrated to Illinois. He had seen
enough of the Mollies. Among his late assailants he recognized Ned
Monaghan and others, but was unable to swear to the men who actually
fired upon him. Riles kept a saloon, and had incurred the displeasure of
the gang in some way unknown to himself.

The murder of Geo. K. Smith, already briefly alluded to, which occurred
at Audenried, Carbon County, the night of Thursday, November 5, 1863,
was totally unprovoked. Mr. G. W. Ulrich, now employed by Messrs.
Wanamaker and Brown, of Philadelphia, but then a clerk for Mr. Smith,
gives the following condensed statement of the incidents connected with
the atrocious crime:

“The night of the murder I had just returned from Mauch Chunk. I got
home about half-past six P.M. I boarded at Smith’s house. When I went
down to supper, I told Smith I thought something serious was going to
happen. He asked me why. I replied because of what George Allen had said
about having heard that the night of that day was to be the greatest
ever known in Audenried, and because, during the afternoon, several men
were noticed prowling around there, going about in different directions,
and, on the evening before, there were others in the store for powder.
Mr. Smith laughed and said: ‘Mr. Ulrich, they wont hurt you or me!’ I
stayed at Smith’s house that night, at the request of Mrs. Smith,
because her husband was unwell. About five minutes before eight o’clock,
hearing a rap at the door, I, upon opening it, found standing there a
man whom I thought to be a Welshman named Evan Jones. Asking him to stay
outside until I put the dog away, I shut the door, took the animal by
the collar and put him in the parlor, where Mrs. Smith was. Then I went
back, opened the door, and when I did so a tall man, with a soldier’s
overcoat on, stepped in, and the one I took to be Evan Jones followed.
As soon as I saw his face I found it was not Evan Jones. The taller
person asked if Mr. Smith was in. I at first said ‘no,’ but afterward
told him he was in, ‘and very sick at that.’ He professed to have a
letter for Smith, that a man had given him in Mauch Chunk the same
afternoon. I told him if he would give it to me I could hand it to Mr.
Smith. He would not do that, as he said he was instructed to deliver it
personally. I then left the room and told Mrs. Smith. She went up and
saw the sick man, and he replied if the person could not deliver the
letter to her, he must wait until the next day. Mrs. Smith and I
returned to the room where the two men were sitting. She told them what
Smith had said. The man answered: ‘If I can’t deliver it to him I must
deliver it to you!’ He quickly put his hand to his back, and the first
thing I saw was the butt-end of a Colt’s revolver. Before he got it out
altogether it went off, and his clothes caught fire, the ball
penetrating the floor on which we were standing. When the revolver was
discharged Mrs. Smith cried out: ‘Oh, my God!’ and ran precipitately
into the library. Then the tall man caught me around the neck and the
smaller man commenced beating me on my head and on the back of my
shoulders with a billy. The tall man got his revolver out and put it to
the side of my head. I threw up my left hand and the pistol went off,
and the powder flew into my eyes and blinded me so that I could not see
for some time. By this time some fifteen or twenty persons had walked
into the room where we were. The majority were disguised in soldiers’
overcoats and in miners’ clothes. They crowded over against the wall,
and the tall man tried to shoot me again in the head. Once more I threw
up my arm and the pistol ball passed over me. Another man stooped down
behind me, on his knees, and put his pistol to my person and shot me in
the leg while I was held by the other. I then broke away from the crowd,
with the intention of going upstairs. They followed me too closely,
however, and I could not get clear. As I reached the foot of the stairs,
Mr. Smith came down and walked into the room where the men were. I went
to the hall door and they knocked me down and fired two shots over me
with the intention of hitting my body. After this, I turned around to
find if I could see anything, and saw Mr. Smith standing by the crowd. A
man came up behind him, put a pistol to his head, and fired. He fell
dead upon the carpet. After finishing this, they fired three or four
shots, and I thought they were shooting Mr. Smith’s dead body, but they
fired them at Mrs. Smith’s sister, who was in the room adjoining. This
is all I know, excepting that the others escaped.”

[Illustration: “_A man came up behind him, put a pistol to his head, and
fired._”]

No present arrests were made. Nobody could tell who the murderers were,
excepting that they belonged to the Mollie Maguires, or had been set on
and were accompanied by those suspected of forming that clan. When, some
time after, suspected parties were captured, a mob released them from
Mauch Chunk prison.

The work performed by McKenna while in New York and Philadelphia was
very important and constituted a portion of the first really aggressive
acts of the Agency against the formidable foe. It consisted in the
preparation of classified and carefully arranged lists of all the
Mollies, or members of the Ancient Order of Hibernians, in Luzerne,
Northumberland, Columbia, Carbon, and Schuylkill Counties, their
residence, occupation, standing in the society, and crimes they had been
connected with. When completed, the schedule was given very extensive
circulation throughout the United States, by publication in the
principal newspapers. It was but the prelude of the thunderbolt which
was soon to cast consternation into the hearts of the leaders of the
society. Our plans were formed for unrelenting and unending warfare upon
them. They had for years carried everything unresistingly before them,
but now a force, the secret emissaries of which for nearly three years
had been ferreting out and marking their weak places, meanwhile
sharpening and charging their own weapons for use, was to put its potent
machinery suddenly in motion. Fresh detectives were sent to the support
of those already on the ground, unknown to the others, and every
available adjunct that ingenuity could devise and money and influence
supply was set at work to accomplish the defeat of the thus far
unopposed and victorious Mollie Maguires.

Meanwhile the order was as active as a hive of bees, no longer forcibly
aggressive, but moving purely in self-defense. Their long day of murder
had set in crimson, and the day of their abnegation and shame was at the
dawn. Money was raised for the legal expenses of the prisoners. Evidence
was hunted up to falsify the truth and swear them clear. But on the
track of the brewers of this testimony was the stealthy tread of a man
they knew but suspected not, and to whose care they intrusted their most
secret transactions. Such a game must only end, after a time, in the
defeat of the society, however strong and large in numbers. Hurley,
Morris, Monaghan, Mulhall, Sweeney, Clark, Gavin, Butler, Campbell, and
Fisher, and many more, were absorbingly engaged, day and night, securing
funds with which to engage attorneys for the cases of Kelly, Doyle, and
Kerrigan. The members of Shenandoah Division were assessed two dollars
each, by McAndrew, which was promptly paid, and the result went to swell
the protection fund.

On the twenty-third of September, McAndrew gave a grand ball—which was
attended by McKenna—at his own house, for the especial benefit of the
prisoners. It was on this occasion that Morris proposed killing Mr.
Foster, the editor of the Shenandoah _Herald_, but was strongly opposed
by both McAndrew and McKenna, and the matter fell through. Mr. Fielders,
the city editor of the same sheet, was present at this entertainment and
listened to one or two songs which the detective sang, but he left the
room when he heard that the wild Irishman was threatening to kill him.
The hint was sent to Fielders purely in a spirit of mischief, by some of
the Mollies, who thought to frighten the reporter. They did not succeed,
but gave a permanently sharp point to his pencil, which, for several
years, he has used in puncturing the hearts of the Mollie leaders. It is
hardly necessary to say that McKenna never made a threat against any
one, in sober earnest. The ball was successful, and brought considerable
money to the treasury.

About the same date Linden was approached by Mike Lawler with a request
to find him a place on the Coal and Iron Police, which was easy enough
to promise but more difficult of fulfillment. Muff invited his friend
into Cleary’s saloon, where they soon found themselves in the enjoyment
of the usual refreshments. McKenna, seeing the two in company,
determined upon a little police business. He searched out Tom Hurley,
John Morris, and Ned Monaghan, and with them visited the same
drinking-place. While there he adroitly mentioned each man by name, and
Linden, knowing that something important was up, made himself familiarly
acquainted with the features and other peculiar points of all the
Mollies spoken of. But Linden and McParlan were not apparently as
friendly as usual. In fact, the former took occasion to roundly abuse
the latter for the part he had taken at the time of the riot, and later,
in fomenting discord in the coal region. The Secretary replied sharply
that he thought he knew his business pretty well, and would thank Linden
to give particular attention to his own affairs and leave those of other
people alone.

Lawler was astonished, and, by words and winks, warned McKenna not to
treat the officer so roughly, hinting that Linden was the best friend he
had in the State, and more than once had aided him when he was in
imminent danger from angry citizens of Tamaqua and Shenandoah. McKenna
put on an air of indifference, coarsely expressing himself that it “made
no difference to him. He could take care of Number One!”

Time passed, from the last of September, through November, until the
tenth of December, 1875, and still my work was never relinquished or
relaxed.

Between two and three o’clock, the morning of the day mentioned,
occurred an outrage of which it was supposed citizens of the
neighborhood were perpetrators, the Mollies taking, for the very first
time, the place of victims. It was at Wiggan’s Patch, a colliery
village, not far from Mahanoy City, that a band of masked men forced an
entrance to the house of the O’Donnell’s, where lived Friday O’Donnell,
his mother, and brother—all related by marriage to Jack Kehoe—and in the
mêlée that ensued shot and killed Mrs. McAllister, a daughter of Mrs.
O’Donnell, a sister-in-law of Mrs. John Kehoe, and then took Charles
O’Donnell into the street, and riddled him with bullets, leaving him
dead where he fell.

This was fighting fire with fire, and the Mollie Maguires experienced a
new feeling of dread. The people, stung to madness by the rapidly
succeeding murders of the summer and fall, were, it appeared, taking the
law in their own hands and giving payment for assassination in similar
coin. It looked natural that this should be so. There was a breach of
the law, it is true, but it was in the interests of humanity and the
law, and, coupled with the arrests of the murderers of John P. Jones,
had a wonderfully tranquillizing effect upon the society, which, during
the preceding months, had disported itself riotously in human blood and
caused a dozen families to mourn in despair the taking off of some of
their members. Now all was outwardly quiet. Inwardly human passion
surged and boiled, and the hearts of the Mollies were filled with hate
and bitterness. Jack Kehoe, the King of the Mollies in Schuylkill, was
open and loud in his denunciation of the cowardly murderers of his
wife’s kinsman. He was averse to receiving the sauce he served to his
neighbors, and vowed dire vengeance upon the vigilance committee.
Pretending to believe that the killing of Mrs. McAllister had been
wholly intentional, when some of the O’Donnell family believed it purely
accidental, he deeply cursed all murderers of women. Forgetting, for the
moment, the several attempts the Mollies had made in the same direction,
he endeavored to create sympathy for Kelly and Doyle—wasting no breath
on Kerrigan—in which he made a mistake—seeking to make their expected
acquittal the easier by arousing the prejudices of the people against
the men supposed to have formed a part of the committee of safety. How
he prospered in this, the succeeding pages will exhibit.

The Mollies were now confronted with an adversary as mysterious and as
dangerous as themselves, and were forced into at least an appearance of
submission. That they truly intended to give over their misdeeds is
doubtful. On the contrary, should they succeed in evading punishment, it
was more than probable their deeds of the past would be eclipsed in
inhumanity by those they hoped were to follow. They could not be allowed
to escape the just reward of their many misdeeds. While seemingly giving
expression only to great indignation, the society was secretly
discussing the propriety of forming military companies and buying
improved firearms. Some went so far in their divisions as to pass orders
requiring each man to pay into the treasury a sum of money sufficient
for the purchase of a rifle or carbine. In the face of the fear produced
by the late arrest, and the midnight work of the vigilants, progress in
the business of arming was tediously slow. It was the subject of comment
at a county convention, held at Tamaqua in January, 1876. Men were to be
sent to New York to obtain the guns, with three hundred rounds of
cartridges, and each Mollie was expected to hold himself in readiness to
march to the front at a moment’s notice. But the movement failed. The
guns were not even bargained for. All the bluster ended only in bluster.

Hugh McGehan, at this time, gave out that he had been fired upon, at
night, while going from his saloon to the spring for a pail of water,
and made a very narrow escape from death, the bullet striking him in the
fleshy part of the shoulder. There were several in the attacking party,
one of whom McGehan said he knew, but was wise enough not to name.
Beside the real injury inflicted on McGehan, several bullets passed
through and cut holes in his coat, showing that however hurried the aim
of the attacking party had been, it was tolerably well taken, despite
the surrounding darkness.

The publication of the list of Mollies raised a feeling in the society
that they held a traitor in their midst. Each man fell to suspecting his
neighbor. No one, excepting a member, they correctly argued, could ever
have given the newspapers such full and accurate information. The
question uppermost in all minds was, “Who is the apostate?” That he was
well posted, controlled sources of intelligence not available by or open
to ordinary communicants of the body, was evident to all. After a season
of serious discussion, during which every point was covered, it was
settled that the journals had been supplied with the names by some
person residing in Schuylkill County. Soon suspicion began to be
directed to Muff Lawler, who was known to be so particularly kind to
Linden, in whose society, for his own purposes, he had very frequently
placed himself. Jack McClain, of the same division, was charged with
having assisted Muff in collating the facts. McKenna, the actual
culprit, without saying a word to give direction to the idea, was freely
acquitted. Had he not quarreled with Linden months before? Had he not
separated himself from Lawler? Was he not the same wicked Mollie Maguire
that he always had been since his initiation? These queries were
promptly answered in the affirmative. The agent was even the recipient
of praise that he no longer found pleasure in the society of Lawler or
Linden. There were some who charged the damaging publication on Barney
Dolan, but he gave the lie to it. As Barney, with his brother, “Bear”
Dolan, was in prison, at Pottsville, where they had been sent for thirty
days, convicted of breaking a Mrs. Sweeney’s windows, he thought such an
accusation uncommonly hard upon him, and was very vehement in his
denials.

McKenna was now succeeded in the Secretaryship of Shenandoah Division by
Ned Monaghan, and new members were being gradually received, until the
Shenandoah branch was one of the most important and flourishing in that
part of Pennsylvania. But fear pervaded the division hall.

Nor was it much better at Summit Hill, where McKenna found it convenient
to go on the sixteenth of January, 1876. While visiting Alex. Campbell
at his residence, the landlord took Carroll and himself beyond ear-shot
of their companions, and, with a very solemn face, assured them that
traitors were fast multiplying in the camp. His pet, Hugh McGehan, was
just in receipt of another intimation that he would be called for. In
fact, he had been “noticed.” The missive bearing the startling
intelligence had upon it the Mauch Chunk postmark, and informed Hugh
that, as he had not given policeman Yost, of Tamaqua, much of a chance
for his life, he and Boyle, accomplices in that cruel assassination,
with Campbell, Roarty, Carroll, and Mulhall, who were all known, would
have about an equal chance for theirs. Their fate was sealed. This
document frightened the Summit Hill Mollies. Campbell hardly knew what
to do about it. Were some of the boys in jail too open-mouthed, or was
the dastardly work of the first spying miscreant yet going on? The men
who had so long murdered with a stab in the dark, under cover of a mask,
hated this baleful mystery. The weapon aimed full upon them, it made
their faces pale with fear. They finally decided that the warning paper
must have been sent by some one who knew nothing whatever of their
crimes, but had suspected something and sought to disturb them with
silly menaces.

Soon afterward a crowd of men walked up to McGehan’s house in the night
and fired seven or eight bullets through its siding, but none touched
the murderer of Yost. Muff Lawler, of Shenandoah, was similarly treated.

That there was a spy among the Mollies all were now agreed, but thus far
no thought had gone abroad that McKenna was the man. If Linden had
something to do with the matter no one would be disappointed.

At Mauch Chunk, on his return, McParlan met one Teague McGinly, who drew
him aside and informed him that he had very important news to
communicate.

“What is it?”

“Shortly after last court I met Major Klutz, an’ he took me out, and
inquired if John McGinly wor a Mollie? I told him the right down truth,
that he wor not! Then Klutz said that a man named Pinkerton sent one of
his detectives to Mauch Chunk, and he had reported McGinly as a member
of the order!”

“Who the divil is this man, Pinkerton?” innocently asked McParlan, “an’
where do he howld out!”

“He is a great one at catching rogues, an’ lives in Philadelphia! He has
over a hundred men employed! I wonder you have never heard of him!”

“It’s all owin’ to me ignorance, I suppose! An’ that’s because I don’t
rade all of the papers. Beside, I have a very poor recollection of names
ony how! I may hev heard sometime about Pinkerton. If so, I must hev
forgotten it!”

If the informer was not Muff Lawler, then who was it? Time would
probably solve the riddle. McParlan was fearful that not much time would
elapse, as matters were shaping themselves, before he would stand
revealed as the person. Still he did not falter, and continued his
labors as before.


                               ————●————




                             CHAPTER XLIV.

                        TRIALS AND CONFESSIONS.


Some weeks before the occurrence of part of the events narrated in the
last chapter, McKenna had suffered from a severe illness, and for
several weeks was under the constant care of an eminent physician, at
Wilkesbarre, who succeeded in restoring him to comparatively good
health, beside giving him back a fair sprinkling of hair for the
adornment of his previously shining and denuded scalp. The capillary
substance, which had formerly been of a yellow, or light hue, when
reproduced was of a dark, glossy brown, adding considerably to his
personal appearance. In fact, a number of his friends remarked that he
was far more proud of the second than the first growth, because it made
him more attractive to the ladies. However this may have been, when he
again visited Tamaqua and gave further attention to Miss Higgins, it is
true that he found more favor in her eyes than he had while sporting the
red, straggling, and bushy wig. But he had little time in which to press
his suit with Kerrigan’s sister-in law, as Mrs. Kerrigan and her
relatives were all industriously engaged in preparing testimony to prove
the “Babe” innocent of crime. Inadvertently the sisters let fall hints,
now and then, as to the course they were pursuing and the parties on
whom they relied for making oath to Jimmy’s whereabouts the day of the
murder. Very naturally, these confidences were incorporated in the
detective’s reports, and, very naturally again, the prosecution was made
aware of this and other portions of the line of defense to be adopted by
the prisoners when brought to trial at Mauch Chunk.

Passing over a few weeks, during the expiration of which the Agency was
employed in massing testimony in all the cases and placing it in good
shape before the District Attorney, I now come to the first indictment
of a Mollie Maguire, in this country, with a possible chance for
ultimate conviction. This was on the eighteenth of January, 1876, at
Mauch Chunk, Carbon County. The parties arraigned were Michael J. Doyle,
of Mt. Laffee, Schuylkill County, and Edward Kelly, charged with the
murder of John P. Jones. The circumstances of the crime have already
been sufficiently detailed. At an earlier date the three murderers,
Kelly, Doyle, and Kerrigan, had been jointly put on trial, entering the
usual plea of “not guilty,” and demanding a severance. The Commonwealth
was represented by E. R. Siewers, Esq., the able District Attorney, Hon.
F. W. Hughes, of Pottsville, Gen. Chas. Albright, of Mauch Chunk, and
Hon. Allen Craig. For the defendant, Doyle, the Commonwealth choosing to
try him first, appeared Hon. Lin. Bartholomew, Hon. J. B. Reilly, and
John W. Ryon, of Pottsville, Daniel Kalbfus, Esq., and Edward Mulhearn,
Esq., of Mauch Chunk. On the twenty-first of January a jury had been
obtained, consisting of Wm. Bloss, Jonas Beck, Joel Strohl, Dan’l Boyer,
jr., Dan’l Remaly, Abraham Henry, Levi West, Levi Straub, Henry Long,
Peter Cushman, Thos. A. Williams and Drake H. Long. The trial at Mauch
Chunk was well attended by all the celebrities of the Carbon County bar,
much surprise being exhibited that at last there seemed a possibility
that a Mollie might be convicted of a crime. Great efforts were made by
the leaders of the clan to show that not one of the three men charged
with the deed could possibly have been present at the killing of Jones,
as they really were elsewhere, but their trouble and expense came to
naught, from the effective work the detectives had performed and were
performing. The witnesses, so confidently expected to appear, were for
once abashed and afraid to take the stand. They knew they could not
swear to a lie and go unpunished. The old and well tried _alibi_ fell
prostrate, no more to be resuscitated, it is to be hoped, in the
criminal courts of the Commonwealth. Before the end of the cause, James
Kerrigan, of Tamaqua, made known, in a proper way, to the prosecuting
officer that he wanted to give State’s testimony. After a careful
consideration, he was accepted, placed before the court and made a
confession about as follows:

“I live in Tamaqua and have been there six or seven years; am a man of
family and work in the mines. I have known Alex. Campbell three or four
years; met him first at Tamaqua, last September; he lived at Storm Hill
and kept a tavern, selling whisky and porter. I did not know John Jones,
but was acquainted with Michael Doyle and Edward Kelly. On the first of
September last I had been working at Alaska Colliery, in Tamaqua, for
Mr. Richards, and was returning home from work in the evening, when I
went into the hotel, kept by James Carroll, to get a drink. Mr. Lutz, of
Tamaqua, was there, also Doyle and Kelly. I was going out, when Carroll
followed me to the porch, asking me if I would take those men, Doyle and
Kelly, over to Alex. Campbell’s, at Storm Hill. I told him I would have
to go to work at 11 o’clock, but after he coaxed me I promised. He then
made me acquainted with them and I went home to wash myself and get
supper, returning at twenty minutes past seven P.M. (I left work at
about half-past five P.M., that day.) The colliery was nearly a mile
from Carroll’s place. When I got back from the house Carroll treated
twice and walked with us as far as Freidenburgh’s, giving me
instructions not to tell any one that might ask where we were going. At
the New York depot we met Mr. and Mrs. Griffiths and I bade them good
evening. We then walked on to Storm Hill and found Alex. Campbell there,
and his little brother-in-law, a boy of fourteen, with him. Campbell
called me outside, bidding me wait until he had put on his coat, when he
would accompany us to McGehan’s, at Storm Hill, first treating us at his
own bar. He told his little brother-in-law to say, if any one inquired
for him in his absence, that he had gone to a wake. As we went into
McGehan’s, two or three men were coming out; one I know is named Aubry
and I think his given name is William. Alex. Campbell called for drinks
and paid for them. Then he began to whisper, up by the bar. The next
thing I observed was three revolvers. McGehan got them, and took the
chambers out of two and began to oil them out of a can. After fixing
them he gave one to Doyle and one to Kelly. Campbell handed one to me,
but I refused and would not take it. He wanted me to go with the others
and shoot John Jones, but I said I did not know him and would not go.
They then agreed I should stay there that night and they would go with
me to get work in the morning, as they wanted to see and recognize the
boss.

“McGehan and Campbell were saying that John Jones had black-listed some
men that had been working there, and McGehan was one of the three,
another being named Marshall. Parish gave these men a letter to give
John Jones and Zehner, to be reinstated, but they ordered the men away
from the office, saying there was no work for them. Campbell said if
Jones was shot Zehner would then run away. McGehan said: ‘By G——, if he
does not cool off, after this, we’ll give him a ball!’ McGehan said he
was black-listed at Judd’s, also, and there were two men there that he
wanted put out of the way, B. Marble and John Turner.

“We started from McGehan’s at seven A.M., and came down to the Catholic
church and on the road to Micky O’Donnel’s tavern, passing Micky at the
depot, and went up the railroad to Number Six, where Doyle went into a
blacksmith’s shop and Kelly and I went up to a house above, where we
asked a woman if she sold anything. Doyle afterward came up and we got a
bowl of milk.

“We then went up to a Mrs. Davis, and finding she sold porter, called
for three bottles; she asked Doyle where we came from, and he told her
Shenandoah. Then she gave us tea and a good meal. We went out to the
slope to look for work, but leaving Doyle and Kelly, I went to
McGehan’s; still they could not see the boss, so came back and met me.
They failed again to find Jones, and about six P.M. we all went to Alex.
Campbell’s, McGehan carrying the pistols. As a wagon was passing I
wanted to go home on it, as I told them my wife would think me lost, but
Campbell would not let me. Campbell treated us, on arriving at his bar,
and after supper I again wished to start for home, but Campbell
objected, wishing me to go up with the others and shoot Jones at the
house, as he would be coming from the post-office about that time. While
Doyle and Kelly went, Campbell made me get down on my knees and promise
never to tell or speak of the matter, drunk or sober. He then bade me go
up and see where they were. I met them this side of Micky O’Donnel’s,
and Doyle was sitting on a stone. Kelly said he had been into a house
and asked if Jones was at home, and the person said he was not.

“On returning to Campbell’s, this house was described to Alex., and he
said it was Geo. Hooley’s house, not Jones’. We stopped at Campbell’s
all that night, and they were fooling with the cartridges. Kelly said he
would take Campbell’s small revolver along in the morning, and shoot
Jones as he was going to his work, and not let him off with one ball,
but give him three or four. Michael Doyle had the old pistol and the
black-jack, and Kelly had the other two. Campbell advised them they need
not be a bit afraid, for no one would ever follow them, as Jones was not
liked by the Welshmen or any one else. ‘You can have this,’ said
Campbell, handing me a five dollar bill, ‘and buy them some whisky and
give them enough to pay their way home on the cars.’ I gave the bill to
my woman when I got to Tamaqua, and she got a pint of whisky of Mrs.
Clark, who could not change the bill. I took the liquor out to them at
the spring where we were arrested.

“Campbell told Doyle and Kelly to be sure not to be seen at Carroll’s in
the day-time, but to go in the night and leave the pistols there, and
then go home on the cars in the morning. He also told them this the
night Carroll came up the railroad. Then Doyle said: ‘By G——, they are
after us! There is Carroll!’ and he started to run. I joined the society
in Campbell’s cellar, thinking it the A. O. H. A man named Donahue put
me through. I did not know it was the Mollie Maguires until Barney
O’Hare was burned out at Tuscarora. Slattery got and paid Alex. Campbell
to send the men. I was at Campbell’s when they started.

“I made this statement before Doyle’s conviction. I received no reward
from Campbell for showing the men the road, and the five dollar bill
which we could not change I have since sent my wife from the prison by
Wallace.

“The order of Mollie Maguires is an organization to murder, and the men
do not speak of their plans at the public meetings but the Bodymasters
employ men to do the work for them.”

After this, Mrs. Kerrigan turned against her husband and said he might
hang. She would not raise her hand to save him.

During the trial, McKenna, who was in attendance, ostensibly as a
spectator, but really to find out all he could, came across a man named
Durkin, who told him he was ready, in the event that the Mollies were
convicted, to blow up the court-house edifice, killing judges, jury,
attorneys, officials, and innocent spectators, having procured a can of
nitroglycerine, which he had safely deposited in a shop near at hand.
The agent informed the desperado that he was very foolish to concoct
such a plot, and would be still more silly should he endeavor to put it
into operation, as he could make sure of being captured and strung up by
the vigilance committee, to the nearest tree. As the attempt was never
made, it is probable that the reckless fellow was sufficiently
frightened and wisely decided to abandon the idea.

Kerrigan’s confession having corroborated, in every important
particular, the stories of the other State’s witnesses, on the first of
the ensuing February the jury returned a verdict of “guilty of murder in
the first degree,” and, on the twenty-second, the Court sentenced
Michael Doyle to death. This was noteworthy as the earliest conviction
and disposal of a real Mollie in Pennsylvania, and the news spread
rapidly, far and wide, carrying consternation and dismay into the ranks
of the organization and shocking the nerves of the leaders everywhere in
the State. During the progress of the trial the Mollies had been bold
and defiant, and many of their principal men were on the spot,
expecting, as they expected to live, to witness the defendant’s release.
How deeply they were disappointed. McKenna was among the first to
receive intelligence. He said that the unforeseen result had come upon
the order like an earthquake in a quiet village. Everybody was
dumbfounded.

Edward Kelly was placed at the bar before Judge Dreher, the twenty-ninth
of the succeeding March, and although ably defended, met with a similar
fate, a verdict of murder in the first degree having been returned by
the jury on the twelfth of April following. Death-warrants were issued
by the Governor in both cases, fixing the execution of Doyle for the
third of May, and that of Kelly for the fourth of the same month. Writs
of error in the Supreme Court, however, superseded the death-warrants,
and all of the murderers of John P. Jones, and those implicated before
and after the fact, at this date, are still unexecuted. In February,
1877, Edward Kelly made a voluntary confession, clearly showing that he
had not been wrongfully charged or convicted, and substantiating the
words of Kerrigan to the letter. He did not expect or ask for mercy,
but, before dying, desired to purge himself of his crime, and was given
the opportunity.

These cases failed in the Supreme Court, and in May, 1877, Gov.
Hartranft signed the death-warrants, the executions to take place on the
21st of June following.

Returning to Shenandoah, after the adjournment of Carbon County Court,
McKenna rejoined his friends, the Mollies, and silently acquiesced in
the “sweet” prayers of all the organization for the “dear” judge and
jury that had convicted one of their number. They were terribly
mortified and annoyed through the failure of their plans, and were at a
standstill.

Jerry Kane took the cue early, and fled from the country. Hurley
preceded him, and the remainder, now fugitives from justice, stopped
awhile to see the full result of the matter.

Barney Dolan, the great, at this time was outspoken against Kehoe,
exclaiming in his mild way, that all the pending troubles came from the
County Delegate’s own inefficiency and unpardonable blundering. He added
complacently that, had he been the incumbent of the office of County
Delegate, it could never have occurred. He would have taken ten or
twelve good men, marched to Mauch Chunk, captured the jail, and released
the prisoners. Barney was allowed to have and enjoy his boast, but there
were those present who thought even he might not have saved the
defendants from conviction.

Kerrigan turning State’s evidence was the most stunning blow the Mollies
had thus far received, but they knew not, at the time, how much heavier
strokes were yet in preparation to fall upon their villainous heads.
Some of the tribe, Jack Kehoe included, would not believe the report
that a Bodymaster, especially one who knew so much of the cruel crimes
of the society as Kerrigan, had assumed the work of informer. He even
went as far as to say that some of the State’s officers—Capt. Linden
very probably—had originated the story for the purpose of inviting a
person to do just what they accused Jimmy Kerrigan of doing. He was more
inclined to the thought that Ned Monaghan, who had been seen, he
alleged, at a suspiciously late hour, coming out of the editorial rooms
of the Shenandoah _Herald_, was engaged in the character of spy, and
accused him of having inaugurated the movement by publishing the names
of the chief Mollies. “At least,” concluded King Jack, “somebody in
Shenandoah is at the head of the game for injuring the organization, and
I am determined to learn who it may be!”

At this juncture McKenna suggested that, to make his own work more
effective, he might be arrested on a trumped-up charge of having been in
some way connected with the Yost tragedy, after which, when incarcerated
with other prisoners, he could safely form plans for learning all their
secrets, and possibly obtain important confessions, in the presence and
hearing of other witnesses, which would lead to new arrests and at least
make sure the conviction of all that had been captured. Linden urged the
same thing upon Mr. Franklin and we were about to arrange the scheme in
accordance with the line indicated, when a series of startling events
transpired, which concluded the chances for such work proving
successful. The Mollies thought they had discovered who was the traitor
in their ring.


                               ————●————




                              CHAPTER XLV.

                           SUSPICION AROUSED.


In February, McAndrew found himself the victim of a panic regarding the
society. He believed that Kerrigan was only the Alpha and that Omega was
not far away, and therefore requested the detective to go with him and
help destroy every book and paper in any manner connected with
Shenandoah Division, A. O. H., otherwise the Mollie Maguires. They
quickly performed that task, and the test-paper, fabricated record of
proceedings, constitution and by-laws, treasurer’s receipts and
vouchers, with the charter and blank traveling cards, were converted
into black and harmless charcoal. The men who had so long carried the
affairs of the county with a high hand were now in a state of
demoralization. They appreciated that something dreadful lay in their
pathway. What goblin shape it might assume they could not say, and it
was the more horrible from its very indistinctness. It might be a
gallows tree. It might be a prison. It might be something more to be
feared than either, and at last take the form of a vigilance committee.
Whatever it might prove to be, they were determined to have no written
evidences of their acts confronting them. In Kerrigan’s case, the books
and papers of Tamaqua branch were at his house when the constables
searched it, but so well concealed were they that, after upsetting
almost everything, and turning all the beds and mattresses inside out,
they were still undiscovered.

The next news Shenandoah Division received was contained in a letter
from Linden, written to McKenna, giving the latter a fraternal greeting
and saying that, as he, James McKenna, was suspected, he had best make
his way to foreign parts. “I may at any moment, have a warrant placed in
my hands for your arrest,” concluded this precious epistle, “and I
really do not wish to be forced to lay hands upon you. If you have flown
and I cannot find you, as a natural consequence I will be unable to put
irons on my old chum from Buffalo!”

“I’ll not budge wan single inch, to save them all from perdition!”
exclaimed the operative, after reading the document to McAndrew and the
crowd usually congregated at Cleary’s. “I am innocent! I’ll only be
arrested, anyhow! An’ if others stand by, why shouldn’t I! Linden knows
I will remain!”

The Mollies applauded him for this exhibition of mock courage. They
would have acted in an entirely different manner had they known that it
was precisely the response he had been expected to make to the
well-concocted epistle, and that even then the proper papers were ready
for McParlan’s apprehension and confinement at Mauch Chunk.

Thomas Munley was arrested for the Sanger and Uren murder at about this
date, with McAllister, and both were taken to Pottsville, where a
hearing on an application for a writ of _habeas corpus_ was had, and
many of the members of the order were accordingly in the city. The
detective found it necessary to confine himself very closely to his
room, under medical treatment he was receiving, seldom venturing beyond
a block from the boarding-house on Norwegian Street, and was feeling
very despondent over the prospect of becoming totally blind unless there
soon came a change for the better, when he received a call from Frank
McAndrew, then a transient visitor at Pottsville in the interests of the
prisoners. After a little friendly conversation, the Shenandoah
Bodymaster invited his Secretary to walk with him to the court-house. It
would not do to deny the reasonable request, and the two emerged from
the dwelling, arm-in-arm.

McAndrew was thoughtful for a moment, then exclaimed:

“Something queer occurred on the cars as I was coming down, this
morning!”

“Phat wor that?” inquired McParlan.

“I know it’s not true, but I must tell you for the danger there is in
it! Some of the boys, Kehoe among the number, were making bets, as we
rode along, that you’d appear on the witness stand, to-day, for the
Commonwealth—in other words, that you were a secret spy, a detective!
There! It’s out! But, remember, I don’t believe a word about it!”

“Me a spy? Me a detective?” exclaimed McKenna, with a show of virtuous
indignation. “I will thank ye to name the man that dare insult me by
saying so!”

“There is no occasion for anger!”

“I think, be me sowl, there _is_ occasion for much of it! I won’t have
such a slander circulated about me! Sure, if ye are the friend ye say ye
are, you’ll out wid it and give me the man’s name!”

McAndrew hesitated a second, and then responded:

“Jack Kehoe was the person!”

“Jack Kehoe? Does he dare do that?”

“I heard him whispering it to several. But, to the credit of the men of
the division, I must say they’ll not entertain the suspicion, which has
risen in some way since the arrest of Munley and the squealing of Jimmy
Kerrigan!”

“Will ye go wid me, an’ see Kehoe? I’ll knock those words down his
throat, or he shall tell me where he got ’em, or take them back!”

After consenting, the two men visited Danny Hughes’ place—which at the
time was a sort of headquarters for the crew, since Dormer had sold out
the Sheridan House and adopted the peaceful calling of a pedler of wares
and vegetables, in a wagon, over the hilly country—but Kehoe was not
there.

“An’ hev ye heard the nonsensical charge they’re circulatin’ about me?”
asked McKenna of the tavern-keeper.

“Yes! and I must confess that it staggered me! I am far from belavin’
anything of the sort! Kehoe didn’t come down here himself, but sent Mrs.
Kehoe to me, wid a message, like. She came into me saloon, she did, an’
wanted me, for Jack’s sake, to say to every wan interested, to beware of
you, Jim McKenna, fur you wor a detective! At laste, that such wor the
report; an’ that Jack had recaved it from responsible persons! That’s
all I know of the matter! Tho’ Jack Kehoe was to take his oath on the
holy cross, I’d tell him he lied! I’m not such a fool as to be scared at
a shadow!”

“Thanks for your confidence in me,” answered the agent, pleased that
Hughes, who was an honest, free-spoken man, should refuse to credit the
statement of even King Kehoe. “I’ll see this man, soon, an’ he’ll have
to tell me who’s the father of this lie, or I’ll surely make somebody
suffer!”

“I would, if I were in your place,” said Hughes. “No person should
slander me in that way an’ live!”

The case before court resulted in the holding of Munley for trial. This
created more indignation, and the murderers began to look about them and
inquire if this was the State of Pennsylvania that they were in, or some
territory where Mollies were unknown? With their surprise was mingled
inveterate hate for those who were supposed to be following them for the
purpose of their capture and punishment.

The time had now come, with McKenna, which he had so long dreaded.
Suspicion, which he knew, from experience with many others, had
generally proven fatal, was at last directed upon him. There was nothing
for him to do but brazenly face the accusation down. He believed that
not a living person knew anything of the actual facts. People might
think him a detective, but he had the utmost confidence that they would
be unable to bring an item of proof to support their belief. Nobody
excepting Mr. Gowen, Mr. Linden, Mr. Franklin, Mr. Bangs, and myself had
knowledge that he was James McParlan, the detective. He was confident no
other man could learn anything of his business. Bishop Wood, of
Philadelphia, was aware of the circumstance that an operative was in the
coal region, as before explained, but he had no definite idea of the
individual. Even had he been cognizant of his personality he still would
have preserved the secret intact. “Then,” the detective argued, “it must
be merely a chance suspicion, which Jack Kehoe has himself originated,
or some other highly imaginative person may have given to him.” Come
what would, he resolved to go at once to Shenandoah, thence to
Girardville, and openly denounce the tale as a falsehood of the deepest
dye. Kehoe kept out of the way while he was in Pottsville and the agent
could not see him. In the evening of the same day, still accompanied by
McAndrew, the agent took cars for Shenandoah. After sleeping there, he
went alone to Girardville and marched direct to the house of the County
Delegate.

“What is this I hear you are afther sayin’ agin me?” inquired the
visitor, facing Kehoe, who was in his own bar waiting upon customers
when he entered, but the strangers having gone, the two men being quite
alone at the time. “Tell me what you have been spreadin’ over the
country about me!”

“I have told that you are not what you seem, but a detective; an’ I
heard it some time ago!” Then Kehoe laughed a cynical laugh, and added:
“But I don’t believe a word of the yarn!”

He was evidently ill at ease and wanted to conciliate the heated
individual before him, whose flushed face and uneasy movements indicated
more than a usual degree of excitement, and he had no desire that the
interview should end in a personal disturbance.

“I want to know, Misther Kehoe, who is goin’ to prove this assertion!
Nobody can prove it, fur it is a downright lie! You may appoint a trial
fur me before the society! I’ll be there, an’ let me stand forninst the
thafe of the worruld who dare report me as an informer! Let the order
judge me! An’ if I find who is lyin’ about me, it’ll go hard wid him!
I’ll shoot the scoundrel, if I hang fur it!”

And McKenna made considerable bluster, thumped the counter with the
butts of two revolvers, which he held in his hands and almost convinced
Kehoe himself that he was not acting a part in his denials of the grave
charge. At last the County Delegate informed McKenna that a conductor on
the Reading Railroad, while he was riding from Ashland, at least when
between Ashland and Girardville, had asked him, Kehoe, into the baggage
car and inquired if he had seen McKenna lately, and added that he, the
conductor, had heard that he was a detective. The reply that Kehoe made
was not given.

“We’ll have some proof of this!” exclaimed the agent, having become more
cool as the circumstance was detailed.

Subsequently Kehoe, who acted as though he discredited the rumor, agreed
to give McKenna a hearing before a convention of Bodymasters, and,
saying that, as he was himself rather nervous, the detective should make
the necessary notices, signing the County Delegate’s name to them. To
this McKenna agreed, and, obtaining stamped envelopes and stationery,
went upstairs to the family apartment, where he found Mrs. Kehoe with
her children, and, sitting at the table between the two front windows,
he commenced writing. But he found his own fingers not in the exact
plight to do duty in producing readable penmanship. Persevering,
however, he managed to get ready a few of the needed letters. Mrs. Kehoe
received him pleasantly, as she always had. In a little while Kehoe,
himself, left the bar and visited the sitting-room. He did not remain
many minutes, but returned to his business below. Presently the
detective heard his footsteps again ascending the staircase. When Kehoe
entered the apartment the second time his face was of a more sickly
color than usual and his hand trembled perceptibly as he passed a glass
of liquor to the operative.

“This will steady your nerves,” said Kehoe.

The tumbler and contents were accepted by McKenna. Saying he would taste
of it soon, he thanked the agitated saloon-keeper and resumed work on
his stack of letters. Mrs. Kehoe looked up inquiringly, as she continued
her sewing, and the little girl, who had been playing with a ball and
her pet kitten, gazed wonderingly upon Kehoe as he turned on his heel
and journeyed down stairs again. McKenna did not particularly like the
expression of Jack Kehoe’s naturally smiling countenance. He pondered
the circumstance for a moment and then, saying that the fumes of liquor,
under certain conditions, made him ill, shoved the goblet from him with
a preoccupied air and went on with his writing. He was in such haste to
complete his work and place the letters, all enveloped, sealed, and
directed in Kehoe’s hands, that he quite forgot to imbibe the spirits,
something Mrs. Kehoe had never observed in him before. He touched not a
single drop to his lips.

It struck the mind of the operative, while he wrote, that Kehoe really
believed in his guilt and had determined to silently and quietly put him
out of the way with poison, hence he had decided to forego the potion so
kindly brought to him. He might have been over-fearful of treachery, at
that time, and without just cause, but quickly following events
convinced him that he was not, and never could be, too cautious while
dealing with Jack Kehoe. Had Mrs. Kehoe given him the beverage with her
own hand, he would have swallowed it without a suspicion, as he knew
that she was with him in not crediting what they said to his
disparagement, and her true womanly nature would not permit her to
connive at his murder, even had he been her worst enemy.

The date mentioned for the proposed convention was about the first or
second of March, the place, Ferguson’s Hall, in Shenandoah.

When the work of getting ready the notices was properly finished, the
result was shown to Kehoe. He approved and sealed the envelopes. They
were given into his charge for deposit in the mail, and he went out,
ostensibly to drop them in the box at the post-office.

McKenna remained at the Emerald House all night, sleeping with his
revolver close by his side in the bed, fixed for use, and, not having
been disturbed, early the ensuing morning took car and returned to
Pottsville.

The report detailing these circumstances was of the utmost interest to
me. I considered well the position in which the young man was placed,
and consented, for his own sake, as well as for the good of the Company
and the general public, that he should be arrested and thrown into
prison. But, before the order could be carried out, the necessity giving
rise to it had passed away.

Beside Kehoe, a number of other members of the organization informed
McKenna that they had heard he was a detective, Pat Butler, of Loss
Creek, saying some of his men were early let into the secret and were
very earnest in making a demand to have the matter promptly and properly
considered.

“I hev the decided advantage of them in that,” returned the operative,
“fur haven’t I already demanded and secured the calling of a county
convention, to take action on me case? I have took early action on the
matter by meself! Sure, an’ if there’s such a thing as justice in the
State, I’ll hev the matin’ an’ a fair trial on them villainous charges!”

Butler hoped he might come through all right, but was free to say things
appeared very stormy, kindly advising the Shenandoah Mollie to keep an
eye out for those who would seek to end the trouble easily by killing
the one suspected, thus saving the formality of an investigation. Butler
showed that he knew the Mollies thoroughly.

Saturday, the 26th of February, Kehoe made his appearance in Pottsville,
in company with his brother-in-law, Manus O’Donnell, and the detective
met the County Delegate again at Danny Hughes’ house. Jack was full of
business, having visited the city, as he said, to retain John W. Ryon,
Esq., for the defense of McAllister, held with Munley for the murder of
Sanger. There was not much transpired in the way of conversation between
the King of the Mollies and the suspected man, Kehoe evidently being
indignant with his former favorite that he had given him further trouble
and work by refusing his recent sweet drop of poteen at Girardville.

In the afternoon the two came together once more.

“What is the news, now?” asked McKenna.

“The gettin’ of a lawyer for McAllister is goin’ to cost me two hundred
dollars, sure,” was the reply, “an’ there is worse news nor that! I
learn there are twenty-five hundred men banded together in this country
for the purpose of prosecuting the Ancient Order, an’ there is positive
proof that we have detectives in our midst. These detectives even gets
money to go aroun’ an’ spend among us, an’ find out all our secrets, an’
will soon turn around an’ send us, some of us, to the penitentiary or
hang us up by the neck! That’s news, isn’t it?”

“True to ye, that is, an’ bad news—sorry news enough! There has been
somethin’ of the same sort in me own mind for these many wakes.
Somethin’ crooked is surely goin’ on, in wan place or another, an’
that’s the raison I’m doubly cautious where I goes; or what I says! But
who tells ye these onpleasant things the day?”

“I got them from John W. Ryon, this time,” answered the County Delegate.
“That’s the very man! He’s jist afther tellin’ me at his own private
office!”

There was no call for the denial of this. It did not apply directly to
himself, and McKenna was content with the remark that it was possible
Ryon told the truth. He knew, at all events, something was wrong in the
coal region, or there could not be so many arrests. Whence came the
difficulty it was not his province to explain. One thing he might do,
and he did it, which was to again deny any claim to the despicable title
of informer. Kehoe left the saloon in a few minutes, venturing nothing
in answer to the last words uttered by his late associate, but with a
sneer of disbelief on his face, as though to say he was convinced of the
fact that there was a screw loose in the Mollie machinery, somewhere,
and he entertained the belief that, if McKenna did not know where it
was, nobody in the country could.

Time rolled around and the day preceding the one on which Kehoe had
promised the convention to try McKenna arrived. During the forenoon the
County Delegate once more appeared in Pottsville, and the accuser and
accused again met in Danny Hughes’ saloon, seemingly on fair terms with
each other, exchanging civilities in a rather distant but not unfriendly
manner, and enjoying a cigar in company.

“Are ye goin’ up to Shenandoah this evenin’?” inquired Kehoe,
carelessly.

“Yes! I’m almost ready now,” answered McKenna, “an’ I don’t intind
missing me appearance at the convention for me trial, to-morrow!”

“That’s right!”

Kehoe, after this, said he would see McKenna later in the day and they
could take the train together. It was his hour for an interview with
Ryon. He mentioned, incidentally, that his wife was in the city, seeing
some friends.

The detective made his report to the Agency, as usual, for the day,
spoke of encountering the County Delegate, and informed Mr. Franklin
that he was, at a certain hour the same evening, to start for
Shenandoah. After mailing this, he returned to Hughes’ place and
particularly inquired for Kehoe. No person remembered seeing him after
the conversation with McKenna, held some hours earlier.

Before nightfall the officer found himself in company with a man named
Mullen, residing in the vicinity of Tuscarora. He had heard the tale
concerning the detective business, and was fearful that, should there be
any truth in it—of which he could not judge—there might be danger in
having a convention at Shenandoah. For his part, he had done nothing
wrong, and was therefore not afraid, but he was lately listening to the
talk of some others, who readily concluded that McKenna merely wanted to
get the officers and Bodymasters crowded together, at Ferguson’s Hall,
in Shenandoah, when he could have the whole band arrested by the Coal
and Iron Police.

McKenna scouted the idea. All he wanted was a hearing. He did not care
where it occurred. Using his best endeavors, he tried to convince Mullen
that such a foolish scheme would be illegal, as well as impossible, even
though he had the desire to execute it, which he had not. Mullen, at
last, seemed to be convinced of the honesty of the accused Mollie’s
purpose in asking for a trial, and said he would see how many of the
officials he could cause to arrive at the same understanding.

Before starting for Shenandoah, the accused sought out and held a short
interview with Linden, telling him, for his sake, not to have one of his
policemen in Shenandoah on the morrow and to keep out of the city
himself. A contrary course, he thought, would raise suspicions that
Mullen’s friends were correct in their belief. Much against his
inclination, Linden promised compliance. He knew McKenna was running a
great risk, and it would have suited him better to be quite near, for
his protection.

“I believe I can fight them right through and make them believe that I
am no detective!” said McKenna.

“Very well! Do as you please,” returned the Captain, but I fear they
will not be convinced! If you come away with your life, you’ll do better
than I expect!”

“I am pretty well prepared against surprises,” were the last words of
McKenna, “and if they don’t overpower me, or kill me with a shot from
behind, I’ll get along all correct!”

The separation which ensued was not without feeling, as, despite his
defiant air and confident words, McParlan was not perfectly sure that he
would ever meet his partner again. That night he started for Shenandoah
on the late train, but saw nothing of the County Delegate.

McParlan was in the smoking-car, just before reaching Mahanoy City, when
Manus O’Donnell came to him with word that Mrs. Kehoe was in the ladies’
car and desired to see and speak with him. He waited until the train
stopped, then emerged from his coach and went to the rear, entering the
one the wife of Kehoe occupied. After the usual salutations he inquired
where Jack was, that he had not met him and journeyed in his company,
according to previous agreement. She believed he had gone up to
Frackville on the afternoon train, while she had been to Tamaqua to see
her mother. Returning to his own seat the young man began to deliberate.
There was certainly something suspicious in the actions of his old
associate—something he could not account for—and he made a mental
resolution to be very careful of himself. Not that he knew anything
particularly dangerous immediately threatening, but he was suspected,
and the Mollies usually put suspected persons where they could do no
harm. If they would give him a fair trial, as they were in duty bound,
he thought he would move along safely. But Kehoe’s failure to meet him
and going to another place looked to him, under the circumstances, and
in his excited mental condition, as though double dealing was going on.
It would do no harm to be circumspect, hence, when the train slackened
its speed and arrived at a certain crossing, where he had long been in
the habit of alighting, it being a shorter route to his boarding-house,
the detective kept his place, thought he saw—but was not sure of
seeing—several men standing by the track, and rode on until the
passenger depot was reached. Kehoe had told him to be sure to be up
_that night_. Was it possible some harm was then intended? Without
misadventure, he alighted, looked about the depot building, and saw no
one. He had taken pains to send up word to McAndrew and his friends that
he would be there by the evening express. For a long time, whenever he
was expected, there would be from three to half a dozen of the members
of his division ready in waiting to meet and give him welcome. On this
particular occasion not a man sent him greeting, not a friend made his
appearance at the platform. But he thought, as he walked up the street,
this might have been accidental, or his letters from Pottsville had
possibly miscarried or been delayed. It was evident he was an unexpected
or an unwelcome visitor. Which was it? Many knew he was to be up there
that night. But not a person was at hand to ask him the news or go with
him to take a drink. Something warned him all this was caused by a
change of feeling on the part of his acquaintances.

As he moved through the town he did not seem as secure as he would have
felt in his own room at the Agency, in Philadelphia; but he carried on
his person two loaded revolvers, his nerves were steady and his mind on
the alert for an attack. He met some citizens, but no old acquaintances
who were members of the organization.

When he reached James McHugh’s saloon, he thought, as he was a member,
he would speak with the proprietor. They had always been tolerably good
friends. McHugh was in front of his door and answered McKenna, asking
him to enter the bar-room, which he did.

“Will you have something?” said McHugh.

“I don’t mind taking a bottle of porter!” answered the agent. This was
an unexpected response, as McKenna was noted for seldom touching any of
the weaker fluids, but McHugh produced the bottle and fumbled about the
cork excitedly, his face turning as white as a sheet meanwhile.

“An’ phat is the matther wid ye, Jim McHugh?” inquired the visitor. “Hev
ye got the shakin’ ager, been sick, or wor ye drunk last night, or
what?”

“Oh, it’s only because I’m chilled through, standin’ outside!” was the
answer.

“Did ye hear what the divils hev ben tellin’ of me?”

“Yes, McKenna, I have; but, between you an’ I, there’s no truth in the
stories! I hope you’ll come out all right, an’ I’ll be around to-morrow,
to see what’s done at the convention!”

It struck the detective that McHugh had not exactly expected to meet him
in his house that night. Could it be that a plan already made for
killing him had fallen through? But banishing all such ideas he left the
saloon and kept on toward McAndrew’s house. Passing the Lehigh depot he
met another friend, Mike McDermott by name, who was also a member of his
division and with whom he had always been well disposed and rather
friendly. That night, after merely recognizing the former Secretary,
McDermott hardly spoke, and passed along very quickly.

Just across the street from him McKenna now saw Edward Sweeney, another
Mollie, with whom he had been quite intimate since his arrival in town.

“Is that you, Sweeney?” said McKenna.

“Yes! It is me!” was the answer. Sweeney was standing just near a
lamp-post, but he crossed the street and joined the agent, who inquired:

“Have you seen McAndrew the night?”

“Yes, I have seen him!”

“How long since?”

“Not above an hour!”

“Do you think he’s already gone to bed?”

“I guess not!”

Sweeney did not seem greatly inclined to talk, but continued to stop by
McKenna’s side, only once or twice dropping a step or two in the rear.
Sweeney was a bad man. He did not know fear. McKenna had once seen him
walk up to a party who was drunk and threatening to kill everybody, and
boldly take the man’s gun away from him. If a job had to be done Sweeney
was just the person who might be selected to do it.

“I say, Sweeney,” exclaimed the operative, “I’ve had so much trouble wid
me eyes, lately, that they are none of the best and I don’t see very
well! Will ye be kind enough to go on ahead and I can follow you widout
danger of runnin’ in the gutther or falling through these holes in the
pavement!”

“Certainly!” said Sweeney, and he walked before the operative, who made
sure to keep him at the front, from that time until they arrived at
McAndrew’s place. So certain was McParlan that Sweeney meant him harm
that he had fully determined, if the man turned suddenly, to shoot him
down in his tracks. But his companion did not look around. When
McAndrew’s house was reached a man named Grady was posted outside and
Doyle standing in the yard. They evidently expected him to arrive, and
having waited his coming had put a sentinel at the gate and another by
the door. Truly, this was showing him altogether too much consideration.
It made him uncomfortable. He did not like it. There was something in it
favoring the dark and mysterious.


                               ————●————




                             CHAPTER XLVI.

                        M^cANDREW SAVES A LIFE.


From what occurred later McParlan believed his friend Sweeney had been
waiting for his coming, when he found that person on the street, near
the lamp-post. But he said nothing, and gave no marked attention to the
manner in which McAndrew’s premises were watched, but entered as if
everything had been about as usual. McAndrew received him graciously,
and yet with a degree of constraint, probably, as McKenna thought,
perfectly consistent with the changed relations now existing between
them. After greetings, Sweeney came into the room, looked carefully
around, said a few words, in a joking way, and went outside again. He
remarked as he left the doorway that he was going home, but could not
have done so, for, in a little while, he reentered the bar, having a bit
of snow in his hand. Watching closely the movements of the man, while,
to all outward intents and purposes, earnestly engaged in smoking his
pipe and reading a newspaper, McKenna saw Sweeney toss the piece of snow
toward McAndrew, who was sitting by the stove. McAndrew looked up,
stretched out his legs, yawned a little, gazed for one moment on the
face of the detective, then said: “My feet are sore! I guess I’ll take
off my brogues!”

The Bodymaster suited action to his words and proceeded to doff his wet
and heavy miners’ boots, and replace them with a pair of easy slippers.
At this, still silently and carefully observed by the seemingly absorbed
McKenna, Sweeney curled his lip disdainfully, and once more left the
apartment. From the movements he had seen the agent was almost sure that
something had been arranged—felt suspicious of everybody and
everything—and the snow tossed by Sweeney, and the taking off of
McAndrew’s boots, were, to his excited imagination, signals having some
reference to his own case. But he had no desire to let those about him
think he was in fear of his life. It seemed far better to put on a bold,
defiant front and face the music, which he did. At last, his pipe being
out, he asked:

“Well, McAndrew, what about the matin’ for the morrow? Be every thing
all ready?”

“Yes! I’ve engaged the hall and it is all right! I hope there’ll be a
large attendance!”

“So do I! An’ I don’t care how soon the lies on me are disposed of! It’s
mighty upsettin’ to me nerves to have such charges restin’ again me
reputation as an Ancient Order man!”

McAndrew was, like Sweeney, not in a talkative mood, and, after vainly
attempting to draw him into a conversation, the accused man bid his glum
companion good night, left the house and started on his journey toward
Cooney’s residence, where he then made his temporary home. Once well in
the street, he cast his eyes anxiously around in the darkness, expecting
to find Sweeney, or some other Mollie, lingering in the vicinity. But he
did not. Everything was quiet, somber, and in doubt. Something seemed to
say to him, “Do not go home by the usual route, but take some other!”
and he accepted the suggestion as sensible, struck boldly into the
swamp, at the risk of losing his footing, getting wet and muddy, finally
crossed over, and came out in front of his boarding-house. His heart
felt appreciably more buoyant when he saw a light shining from the
window at Cooney’s, and he knew the family were expecting him. He
entered, was cordially received, but soon retired to his room. He
afterward confessed to not sleeping much that night. After an
unrefreshing season in bed, he arose early, swallowed his breakfast, and
went over to see McAndrew. Thence he took a walk up-town, meeting Ned
Monaghan and a fellow named Carlin, the latter being Bodymaster at St.
Nicholas. Florence Mahony, of Turkey Run, was also seen, but the hall
was otherwise deserted. Nobody seemed to come to the convention, and it
struck the accused Mollie that Kehoe was surely playing him false, and
had never forwarded the notifications prepared at his house. A little
after ten o’clock, a couple of drunken men arrived from Mt. Laffee—or at
least one was a little intoxicated and the other feigned to be so. These
fellows, Dennis Dowling and Mickey Doyle—not Michael J. Doyle, the
Sanger and Uren murderer, but another person and no relative—said they
had just stepped off the cars, when everybody in town knew no trains of
any sort came in at that hour. They were Mollies, and Dowling was a big,
red-complexioned man. After a time, all present made up their minds
there would be no convention, and those in the hall adjourned to
McAndrew’s saloon, where Dowling asked McKenna what the meeting was
about.

“Don’t you know? Didn’t you understand what you were called together
fur?”

“No!”

“Well, somebody, I don’t know who, have said that I am a detective—which
is a lie—and I demanded a trial before the assembled Bodymasters of the
county. Kehoe granted it, sent the orders, and here the hour is past and
no convention comes. Even Kehoe himself kapes away!”

“I won’t believe the story about you, McKenna,” exclaimed Dowling.
Thereupon, to express his peculiar satisfaction, McKenna, as was
expected, invited the crowd to drink with him. None refused the chance.
Then McAndrew took McKenna into a rear room and left him there. Doyle,
who was drinking very hard, was soon very drunk and some one had to take
him away and put him to bed.

The failure of the convention was a great disappointment to the agent.
He readily charged the non-arrival of the delegates to Kehoe’s door. It
was more than probable he never intended to grant an investigation, but
had held out the inducement in order to quiet McKenna, keep him in the
locality, and manage, through some of his cut-throats, to have him
murdered. The suspected Mollie made up his mind that he would pay the
County Delegate a visit and institute strict inquiry as to the cause of
the late adjournment. McAndrew insisted upon accompanying him, and, in
order that he might have witnesses, he went out with his Bodymaster,
hired horses and a sleigh, and paid for another cutter and horse for
Monaghan. Dowling accompanied the ex-constable, McAndrew and McKenna
leading the way over the snow-covered road to Girardville.

“How is this thing, any way, Frank?” asked McKenna of McAndrew, as the
latter laid the lash upon the horses and they sped away swiftly over the
hills. “I can’t understand it at all! I am charged with guilt, am given
an investigation before a county committee, the matin’ fails, an’ now
Ned Monaghan and Dennis Dowling are goin’ wid us to see Kehoe! What have
they to do wid the subject when there’s no convention? It’s all a muddle
to me enthirely!”

McAndrew was driving over a particularly rough piece of road at the
moment and did not answer until smooth traveling was reached, then, when
well out of the hearing of the others, he said:

[Illustration: “_‘That man, who is riding in the sleigh behind you,
calculates to take your life!’_”]

“Look here, McKenna, let me say a word to ye in confidence, while I have
the opportunity! You had better look out, for that man, who is riding in
the sleigh behind you, calculates to take your life! Dennis Dowling is
the one! Have you got your pistols ready?”

“Faith an’ I always hev them, but little use will they be to me if I get
in a crowd an’ Dowling lets on that I am to be killed! Fur I know that
he’ll find plenty to help him! Innocent or guilty, it makes no
difference!”

“Well, I have me revolver here, an’ I mean to stand by you! I’ll lose my
life for ye! I don’t know whether you’re a detective or not, but I have
nothing against you! I always knew you to do the right thing by me an’
those you were with, an’ until proven a traitor, which I can’t believe
ye are, I’ll keep with you! Why don’t they try a man fairly, an’ not
seek to take his life on mere suspicion?”

“I thank ye, Frank McAndrew!” was all the detective could say as the
slim hold he had upon the things of this world was suddenly realized.
“I’ll sell me life dearly, as the miscreants shall find if they make a
movement to attack me. I’ll kape a sharp eye out for Mr. Dowling! That
will I!”

From that moment, while riding, McParlan sat a little sideways, in the
cutter, with one eye upon the couple behind them.

When they came to Anthony Munley’s tavern, the four men alighted and
entering enjoyed something to refresh the inner man. But McKenna avoided
talking with Dowling, who, more than once, endeavored to draw him into a
wordy dispute. With his eye constantly upon the the burly fellow and his
hand in his overcoat pocket, where slept snugly one of his brace of
trusty repeaters, he mixed with the crowd and chatted unconcernedly
about the general topics of the day. He was closely attended by
McAndrew, and this was particularly noted by Dowling, who had no desire
to interfere with the Bodymaster’s charge while thus under his immediate
care.

After leaving Munley’s, McAndrew positively informed McKenna that he had
saved him from death, and that Kehoe, instead of keeping the detective
company on the cars, as he had promised, came to Shenandoah by himself
the previous afternoon. He gathered together all the Mollies in the
place, spent a great amount of money among them, and, in the presence of
others, begged him, McAndrew, for God’s sake, to have that man, McKenna,
killed, or he would “hang half the people in Schuylkill County!”

“Did he say that?”

“I consented,” continued McAndrew, not noticing the inquiry, “and Kehoe
went home satisfied. I didn’t know but you might be guilty, and, at
first, I intended to act in good faith toward my agreement with Jack,
but my heart afterward misgave me, and I couldn’t do the thing! I
wouldn’t do it! But others did prepare for your arrival at the crossing,
and as they were afraid to shoot you, because it would make too much
noise, twelve or fourteen of the fellows gathered at the bank, knowin’
you’d be up by the late train—fur Kehoe had told us you were comin’—but
you did not get off then—your life was spared; and I was very thankful
it was so; and, from that moment, decided I would have nothing to do
with the affair. Some of the boys had hatchets and clubs and axes, picks
and iron bars, and others such sledges as they use in the mines. If you
had stepped off the train, at that place, you would surely have been
killed, cast into a wagon, which was in waiting for the purpose, and
then tossed down a deserted shaft, where, had your body ever been
discovered, it would have been supposed, by all exceptin’ your
oath-bound murderers, that you had fallen in, in the darkness, and met
an accidental death. Kehoe planned the whole thing, inspired the men
with spirits, an’ then informed ’em you had no relatives or friends in
the world, an’ you would never be inquired for! But, Jim, to save my
sweet sowl, I couldn’t hev any hand in it, an’ I staid at me house, an’
when you jist popped in upon me there, last night, and I learned you had
escaped the evil gang, an Sweeney hadn’t been able to kill you while ye
were walkin’ wid him to my place, I blessed God that I hadn’t stained me
hands wid yer innocent blood! An’ as Sweeney tossed the bit o’ snow to
me—I believe you saw it—I gave him answer, by the takin’ off me boots,
that, so long as you were wid me, you should be protected, and come to
no harm; an’ more’n that, I’d have no share in the affair from that
moment forward. Sweeney went away mad! I couldn’t help it! I was afraid
they would wait for ye over night, or go to Cooney’s an’ kill ye, so,
after ye were out, I watched ye, an’ saw ye go across the swamp; and
then I knew ye were safe! Jim, I mane to stand by ye to the last drop of
my blood! If Dowling undertakes the job, this day, or Jack Kehoe himself
interferes, they’ll have to get to ye over my dead body!”

McParlan warmly pressed the hand of his friend, could not speak his
gratitude, but determined that, thereafter, if he could do Frank
McAndrew a good turn he would. But there was little time for talk, and
none for forming schemes.

“You’ll find I’m telling ye the truth, and that ye are in queer company
this very minute!”

“I don’t give a cent!” exclaimed the detective. “I’m in fur it, an’ I am
able, backed by you, to defend meself! They have accused me wrongfully,
an’ I mane to have justice! I’m goin’ to Jack Kehoe’s to face him down
in it!”

McAndrew smiled.

“An’ why do ye laugh? It may be fun for some, but I’m in no jesting
humor!”

“I meant no harm, and was only thinkin’ what Jack Kehoe will say or
believe when he sees ye marchin’ into his house, all alive an’ well,
when he at this time supposes ye are lyin’ at the bottom of the auld
shaft, food for the rats!”

“I can’t help what he may say or think! I’m goin’ there, sure, an’ if he
wants me killed perhaps he’ll have the bouldness to try the job with his
own two hands!”

In a few minutes the four persons alighted from their respective
conveyances in front of Kehoe’s house, in Girardville, and McKenna
suddenly made his appearance before the County Delegate, with McAndrew
at his side. Monaghan and Dowling were not far away. Never was a man
more surprised than Kehoe. He had twice essayed to clear that
troublesome McKenna from his path, and the last time invoked, and
thought he had secured the assistance of so many good men at the
business that he believed he could not fail. Still, here was the man,
McKenna, in the flesh, unharmed, and sternly confronting him. Evidently
his plans had not worked well. McKenna still lived, and was in company
with one of the very men who had promised him to aid in the assassin’s
bloody work. The County Delegate’s crafty, narrow face was as white as a
sheet of paper, and his whole body shivered with an ague fit. It needed
the sound of McKenna’s voice to recall him to himself.

“Well, Mister Kehoe, what about that county matin’? It seems the
Bodymasters did not get together—at laste only a few of them—an’ me
trial seems to be a total failure!”

Jack placed some tumblers on the counter, in a crooked row. took down a
bottle, spilled much of its contents untidily over the counter,
succeeded in controlling his anger, resentment, and disappointment, and
answered:

“Well, you see, I came to the conclusion that there was no use in tryin’
you——”

“That’s what _I_ thought at the start!” interrupted McKenna.

“There was little use in gettin’ together a crowd at Shenandoah!”

“So you have taken a good deal of trouble to see that no crowd was
gathered?”

“There’s no use talkin’,” answered Kehoe. “The trial can’t take place!”

“What am I to do, then? Rest under this suspicion as long as you may
choose to keep me down? I’ll not do it!”

“If you don’t desire to wait, you can go to Father O’Connor about it!
Maybe he’ll tell you something!”

“I’m only wantin’ to find out who makes up these lyin’ charges! That I
want to know! The story of the conductor on the train is a downright
lie! It’s too thin! You never heard such a thing, but have got it up in
order to have me put out of your way!”

“Go to Father O’Connor! It’s all I have to say!”

And Kehoe turned aside and spoke to others. But he kept his unsteady eye
on McKenna.

“Well, I’ll go to Father O’Connor! He’ll do me justice widout doubt!
An’, Misther Kehoe, look here a little!” and the detective pulled his
two heavy pistols from behind his back and again thumped the counter
with their butts, loudly enforcing attention to his speech:

“I don’t care for you, or fur any wan here, or in the county! I’m an
innocent, ill-used man, an’ ye are tryin’ to have me shot; but listen to
this! I’m all ready, an’ will sell me chances at the highest! I’ll go
see Father O’Connor, an’ then possibly I’ll have a settlement wid you,
Jack Kehoe!”

Seeing that McKenna was becoming excited, and not knowing but Dowling
might pluck up courage to shoot while in the room, McAndrew seized his
friend by the arm, advised him to put up his pistols, and walked with
him out of the place. He was right in this, as Phil Nash, Dave Kelly and
Tom Donahue, beside Dowling and Monaghan, had gathered there, any one of
whom, had Kehoe said the word, would have finished the trouble with a
pistol shot from the rear. McAndrew talked the matter over with the
others, after McKenna was once in the sleigh, and it was determined to
drive to Father O’Connor’s house at once.

When the four men, McKenna, McAndrew, Monaghan, and Dowling, reached
Callaghan’s place, at Mahanoy Plane, who should be there ahead of them
but Phil Nash and Tom Donahue. It was suspicious, the detective thought,
but said nothing. They had heard that McKenna was going to see Father
O’Connor, but might possibly have had other business at the Plane.
Donahue and Nash took McAndrew some distance away, and held quite a talk
with him. The agent was on the alert, and saw, from their
gesticulations, that the two men were endeavoring to induce his friend
to do something, but he obstinately refused. Dowling and Monaghan
finally joined the group and the remonstrances with McAndrew were
resumed.

While the rest were talking, McKenna went to Father O’Connor’s house
with Callaghan, but was told the priest was absent in Philadelphia, and
not expected back until the next day. By the time he got back the sleigh
was ready. Dowling was very drunk and McAndrew in haste to leave. They
entered the cutter and started, followed by Monaghan alone, as Dowling
was too much overcome to take along.

“What was the matter at Callaghan’s?” inquired McKenna.

“The same thing,” was McAndrew’s reply. “They wanted to kill you right
here! Dowling tried hard to have me lend him my revolver! But I wouldn’t
allow it! Had they succeeded in disarming me, you could not have lived
one minute. I would be unable to defend you, and not another in the
crowd would interfere. Dowling was armed, but he didn’t want to hurt me,
and I told them sternly they couldn’t have their way wid you while I
lived.”

“I was on the watch for Dowling,” said the operative, “and had he made a
motion toward me, I’d have shot him! My life is as dear to me as that of
another man to him, an’ I’ll not be murdered widout hurting some of
them!”

But Dowling was too much intoxicated to do anything, and Monaghan,
becoming disgusted, drove off and left him. Having failed to extract any
satisfaction from Kehoe, or see Father O’Connor, McAndrew and McKenna,
still accompanied by Monaghan, drove directly to Shenandoah. By the time
they reached McAndrew’s saloon, after putting up their teams and
settling the livery bill, it was night. McAndrew took the operative to
his home, where he remained undisturbed until his bedtime, when he
started up to return to Cooney’s, thinking he would again take the route
through the swamp.

“Good night, Frank!” said McKenna. “It’s time for me to be joggin’!”

“Where to?”

“To me boarding-house, av coorse!”

“Not to-night!” replied McAndrew, earnestly.

“An’ why not?”

“Never mind why not; but you are to sleep wid me! My wife is away from
home. There’s plenty of room, an we are to be bedfellows!”

And the detective did sleep at McAndrew’s, and, as the reader may well
suppose, was very glad of the opportunity. Nothing occurred, however, to
disturb the two men.

The ensuing morning, by the first train, McParlan returned to
Pottsville, made out and mailed his report, and found a chance to
communicate privately with Capt. Linden. He had appointed to meet
McAndrew at Mahanoy Plane the afternoon of that day. Once more Linden
urged him not to go without being shadowed by him, as he was sure they
were laying plans for killing him. The operative said he would make one
more attempt to prove his character good before the priest. Then, if
unsuccessful, he could either abandon that course or allow his friend to
keep him under surveillance.


                               ————●————




                             CHAPTER XLVII.

                         THE LAST OF M^cKENNA.


When the detective, in accordance with his promise, appeared that
afternoon at Mahanoy Plane, he encountered Dennis Dowling and Tom
Donahue still hanging about Callaghan’s saloon. Both were a little more
sober than on the previous day, but not a whit the less inclined to pick
a quarrel with the man whose life they sought. It should be explained
here that this man, Donahue, was neither “Yellow Jack” Donahue, nor was
it the Tom Donahue, of Girardville, who had accompanied McKenna on his
visit to Pat Hester’s daughter, but a man in no way related to either of
those mentioned. McAndrew arrived there also, true to appointment,
saying he was in to see the affair through. It was fortunate for McKenna
that he had such valuable assistance. Had he gone to the place alone it
is more than probable he would have disappeared and no one ever been the
wiser. When they were by themselves, McAndrew remarked:

“It was well that you stopped at my house, last night. If you had
returned home, as you intended, I should never hay seen you again alive.
I met Cooney to-day, and he says men were waiting for you, and watching
all through the night! They knocked at the door, asked if they could
stay there, were refused, but kept coming and going until broad
daylight, when they got away! They left an old carpet-sack, and other
things, on the ground near the fence, to make it appear they were
tramps, but Mrs. Cooney thinks although they were well disguised, that
she recognized one of the fellows as a resident of Shenandoah.

“Faith, an’ I am beholden to ye once more, McAndrew! When can I ever
repay your kindness? I will try to do all that I can, whenever I hev the
chance!”

“Oh, that’s all right!” returned the young man.

Again the visit to Father O’Connor was unsuccessful, as that person had
not yet arrived from Philadelphia. Returning to Callaghan’s, McKenna
reported his want of success. McAndrew, Dowling, and the rest were
talking together, but no one offered him any violence. Bidding all “good
night,” he went to Pottsville once more. He did not feel that there was
any actual necessity for going to Shenandoah again that day. In fact, it
occurred to him that, thereafter, it might be as well to have somebody,
upon whose aid he could count, along with him whenever he made the
journey.

I had telegraphed word to Mr. Franklin to have the detective clear his
record, even at further risk, by persevering until he saw Father
O’Connor, but, as matter of precaution, Mr. Linden should never leave
him while there seemed the least danger that he would run into serious
trouble.

The operative, meantime, became convinced, through circumstances brought
to his knowledge, that the Mollies had penetrated his disguise—seen his
cards. Somebody had given them information about him. Who it was, he
could not tell. But that they were satisfied of his double part, he was
well aware. Nevertheless he said:

“I’ll go to Mahanoy Plane just once more! Then, if all is not made
straight, you’ll see me leave this country!”

“It’s according to orders, I see, and, as I am to be with you, I shall
feel better about it!” said Linden.

Linden prepared for the journey, and, the next day, which was Saturday,
the fifth of March, after writing to Mr. Franklin, saying he was to go
to Mahanoy Plane, to see Father O’Connor, and adding: “If I am killed,
Jack Kehoe is my murderer,” McParlan took the noon train for the place
designated. Linden was aware of the localities the operative would visit
and at no time permitted him to stray far from his presence. This time
Father O’Connor was found at his residence.

Callaghan was invited to go with him to interview the clergyman, but
refused, saying he had already been there too many times. Beside, he and
Father O’Connor had passed some sharp words regarding a sermon which the
priest had delivered about the Mollie Maguires, or Ancient Order of
Hibernians. So the accused Mollie was forced to go alone—excepting that
Linden kept him in view. He entered the house and was told the reverend
gentleman would see him in a moment. While sitting in a room, waiting,
McKenna heard footsteps in the hallway and then came the voice of a man
speaking. He recognized the tone as belonging to one of the Mollies of
the Mahanoy Plane Division. Listening intently, he thought a chair was
drawn along the wall until near the door. Evidently some one was
preparing to hear every word that passed between himself and the priest.
This was enough to put him on his guard and prompt the use of no
language which would compromise him in the eyes of the Mollie Maguires.
Soon Father O’Connor arrived, and McKenna civilly addressed him:

“I am James McKenna, Father O’Connor! I suppose you have heard many ill
things about me before this, but I am not quite sure that I am as bad as
reported. I know I am not what you have represented me to be, a
detective, spy, informer! In tellin’ me friends this, you hev hurt me
above remedy. I’m no detective! The order I belongs to is a good wan—but
its members are, some of them, charged wid crimes—an’ they’ll kill me if
they think I’m in league wid their enemies, which I surely am not! They
are now quietly engaged in seekin’ means of accomplishing me injury. You
can stop it by saying that it is not true; that ye don’t belave the tale
told on me! I beg you to consider! I stands up for the Ancient Order of
Hibernians, everywhere! They are the right sort! I hev belonged to ’em
for seventeen years, and never saw anything wrong in them. Bishop Wood,
an’ all the rest, are astray in condemning them, an’ if they’ll only
give us time we’ll prove that we are not murderers and incendiaries an’
all that’s wicked!”

“I have heard about you, young man,” calmly answered the priest, “and
the language used need not be repeated. I assure you, however, that I
have never used your _name_ in connection with that of a detective! I
confess I heard that you were a detective, and although I did not know
you, I thought you might be, on occasion, cognizant of crimes long
before their perpetration; crimes that I thought you should have
prevented; and in doing as you did you acted as a stool-pigeon—a common
phrase among men—and took part in bad acts in lieu of giving word to the
authorities and having the perpetrators arrested and punished. I
acknowledge I wrote a letter to John Kehoe, and gave it to a party to
deliver. It was not sent, but brought back to me. I have told these
unfortunate men that their time would surely come, that death would yet
be their fate, and now they see that I gave them good counsel. They
would not listen to my voice, would not leave their organization, and
they must abide by the consequences. I can do no more for them. You can
go to Father Ryan, of Mahanoy City, and Father O’Reilly, of Shenandoah,
as they know more about it than I do. I learned of the detective matter
only recently, and have been to Philadelphia to see how your relations
are with another party. I need not name the man, for I found out
nothing. You were seen around the vicinity—or in Tamaqua—about the time
Kelly and Doyle were arrested. You kept Kerrigan’s company, just before
Jones was shot!”

“But, indade, I had business in Tamaqua, Father O’Connor! I wor sparkin’
Kerrigan’s sister-in-law!”

This provoked a smile on the priest’s face.

“Well, if that was all, there was nothing wrong in it; you had a right
to pay attention to the young lady if you liked!”

“Of course I know that! An’ to get the good-will of the sister-in-law,
sure, didn’t I hev to spark Kerrigan jist a little?”

Here some other persons wanted to see the clergyman, and McKenna took
his leave, promising to visit the other priests and have the tangle
straightened out, notifying Father O’Connor of it, so that he might, if
he would, make due notice to the members of his congregation. The pastor
stated that, when he was satisfied, he would be very happy to make a
public correction.

But McKenna had no idea of going to see Fathers Ryan and O’Reilly. He
had had quite enough of that kind of work.

McKenna was careful to speak loud while complimenting the Mollie
Maguires, so that the eavesdropper might hear this part of the
conversation if nothing else. As he went out at one door, he knew that
Martin Dooley made his exit at another, and, had he given out anything
derogatory to the order, he would never have escaped with his life.

After visiting Callaghan’s, and telling the crowd assembled there that
he had seen Father O’Connor, and it was all right, he agreed to have an
interview with Father O’Reilly, at Shenandoah, the next day, and then
took his final leave. While on his way out of the village the agent
encountered Dooley, who quickly commenced to laugh. He was glad it was
not Tom Donahue and Dowling he had met.

“Phat are you afther laughin’ about?” asked McKenna.

“Oh, I heard ivery word of it!”

“Every word of what?”

“That passed while you was closeted wid Father O’Connor!”

“For shame! Wor you list’ning?”

“Sure, an’ I was!”

“Well, didn’t I tell him some things about the society that not every
_gorsoon_ would have known?”

“That you did! Didn’t you give the order a lift, tho’?”

“That wor me rale intention!”

“An’ you have been a member for seventeen years, eh? You told the whole
truth about the A. O. H.—or the Mollies—but I don’t believe you did
about the age of your membership!”

Dooley seemed highly pleased, and reported to all the men at Callaghan’s
that he never heard a man talk better sense to anybody than Jim McKenna
put before Father O’Connor, during their short interview. The crowd
changed their feelings toward the agent, and were, at the moment, more
inclined to doubt Kehoe than McKenna. Dowling was quite drunk, as usual,
but managed to put in:

“It’s a mystery to me, anyhow! I can’t tell what to make of that fellow
in the blue clothes! He’s a counterfeiter, a thief, a gentleman, a
singer of songs and dancer of jigs, an’, be gorra, now they say he’s a
detective! It’s a long way beyond me thoughts! I gives it up! I gives it
up!”

And Dowling called all hands to the bar, which was satisfactory to the
landlord, at least.

Notwithstanding the detective had carried himself manfully before his
foes, bearded Kehoe in his den, faced the priestly accuser, and defied
the select band of assassins, now, while he knew that Linden was
somewhere within sight of him—in truth he was in Mr. Davis’ office,
close at hand, all the while he had been with the priest, and even then
was tracing McKenna’s footsteps at a safe distance—as he made fast time
toward Frackville, and the sun began to sink in the west, a feeling of
dread came over him, a chilliness ran in his veins, which was nigh unto
fear, and he walked faster than he had in a long time. Fortunately he
overtook a Dutchman, driving to Frackville, and McKenna, not wishing to
be caught in the dark on the mountains, asked the driver if he would
give him a ride. The Dutchman consented, stopped his team, and the
detective mounted the seat by his side, saying:

“I’m in a very great hurry! I hev a dispatch that me sisther is just
dying, at Pottsville beyant, an’ I fear I may not get to the train in
sayson!”

[Illustration: “_Linden was still some distance behind, but making good
time to catch up with the Dutchman’s horses._”]

“I’ll drive a little faster!” said the obliging fellow, and he applied
his black-snake whip to the animals’ flanks and they went flying up the
steep road, while Linden was some distance behind, but making good time,
to catch up with the Dutchman’s horses. McKenna looked back, and after a
while, seeing his friend, told the Jehu that he thought there was no
need of such hot haste, as they would probably get to the depot in time.
But poor Linden had to walk all the way, and was glad enough when he saw
the end of the journey. Both operatives took the same train for
Pottsville, but were careful not to be seen communicating, and the next
morning McKenna went by train to Philadelphia, no more to return as
James McKenna. This was therefore, theoretically, if not in fact, the
end of that personage so long known to the coal region and to the
reader. No more would he appear as the wild Irishman of Shenandoah. When
he again visited the locality—if he went there at all—it would be in his
true character of James McParlan, the detective.

Let us now return to the trials of the Mollies already arrested. While
he did not testify in the Kelly and Doyle cases, in March, 1876, at
Mauch Chunk, McParlan was much in the locality and furnished very
valuable information, greatly assisting the prosecution in their legal
warfare upon the Mollie Maguires.

In April, 1876, I went to Philadelphia, and held another long,
interesting and profitable consultation with Mr. F. B. Gowen and
Superintendent Franklin. They had for some time been urging upon me the
necessity for placing McParlan on the witness stand. With his
assistance, I could easily see that many convictions might be made
which, without his aid, never could occur. Still there was in my mind
the verbal agreement I had entered into, nearly three years before, in
my office in Chicago, that he, the operative, should not be called upon
to go before a court and give testimony. I would not go behind that
statement, and was determined never to make the attempt. It was true
that McParlan’s usefulness as a detective in the coal region was gone,
through the discovery which had been made rendering his departure from
that part of Pennsylvania imperatively necessary.

Calling the detective to me, in my private office, we held an earnest
and prolonged interview. Without saying anything to bias his mind, I
plainly stated the situation, and asked him to consider whether it was
better for him to go upon the stand or not. He could do as he chose, and
I would remain firmly with him to the last. For some moments McParlan
sat, with his head bowed down, seemingly in deep thought, saying
nothing. He then raised his eyes, and replied:

“You remarked, just now, that Mr. Gowen would like to see me!”

“Yes, he so stated.”

“Well, I can decide what is best to be done, after talking with him.”

I then visited Mr. Gowen’s house, where he was confined from sickness.
He appointed a time when McParlan and I should meet him. We did meet
him, at my office, in Philadelphia, and we held further talk over the
matter. Mr. Gowen informed McParlan that all he desired was simply to
bring the guilty men to justice. In his own quiet, businesslike manner,
he placed the full circumstances of the case before him, offering,
however, no hope of future or present reward, but describing plainly the
duty he thought he owed to the public. When Mr. Gowen was through,
McParlan thought over the subject for at least five minutes, none of us
speaking, and Mr. Gowen and I almost breathlessly awaiting the result.
At last McParlan said:

“I will come out in my true character as a detective, speak the truth in
all the cases, wherever needed, and, so help me God, every assistance
that I can give shall be rendered! Nothing shall be held back. With
God’s aid, I may be the means of doing much good!”

Mr. Gowen then left, and arrangements were made to carry out the
decision.

I had consented, with this proviso, that, as soon as he should visit the
coal region, and from that time until the precautions were all ended, he
would place himself constantly, day and night, under the especial care
of two of my bravest and most courageous men, who should be properly
armed, and instructed to give him protection wherever he went. He did
not deem this precaution at all necessary. I did, and McParlan agreed to
it. Messrs. Gilchrist and Deacons, able and determined officers, have
since that date acted as his guardsmen. That this was needful, several
facts afterward transpiring abundantly prove. While two men would have
been of little use in a combined attack, or if an assassin might come
upon them suddenly in the night, I knew the Mollies would soon be so
demoralized that the first would not occur, and no man would be willing
to take the risk of killing another whom he knew was constantly under
the eye of armed and watchful guardians. The fact that he had to move
about the streets of Pottsville, Mauch Chunk, or Bloomsburg, protected
by armed men, was galling to the detective’s pride, but he finally began
to see the demand for such care of himself, and never tried to evade
those guarding him. It is more than probable that his life would long
since have been sacrificed, had I adopted a more reckless course, which
I never contemplated doing.

Making arrests now begun in earnest, Mr. Linden having been duly
authorized to attend to this department of the business under the
direction and advice of Mr. Franklin, the district attorneys, and
assisted by McParlan. Capture followed swiftly upon capture, commencing
on the fourth of February, 1876, when Alexander Campbell, Bodymaster at
Lansford, Carbon County, was apprehended, charged with the murder of
John P. Jones, Sept. 3d, of the same year.

On the fifth of the same month, Hugh McGehan, of Carbon County, was
arrested for the Yost murder, committed at Tamaqua, July 6, 1875. James
Boyle was taken on the sixth and the capture of James Roarty, Bodymaster
at Coledale, Schuylkill County, occurred on the seventh. On the eighth,
James Carroll, of Tamaqua, then acting as Bodymaster at Tamaqua, was
lodged in prison. There, on the ninth, he was joined by his coadjutor in
the murder of B. F. Yost, Thomas Duffy, of Reevesdale. The last named
was captured while at work, at Buckville.

The six murderers mentioned above were taken, one after the other, and
so sudden was the descent upon them that they did not have a moment’s
warning, and the greatest excitement resulted throughout the coal
region. Not only were the Mollies themselves greatly agitated, but the
people of the vicinity arose in a mass and threats of lynching the
prisoners were freely indulged in. Owing to the admirable arrangements
of Capt. Linden, ably seconded by the officers and men of the Coal and
Iron Police and local officials, everything passed off quietly, in a
little while, and all of the defendants were safely lodged in Pottsville
jail. Writs of _habeas corpus_ were promptly taken out, made returnable
on the thirteenth of February. On that day, Linden took James Kerrigan
away from the Carbon County jail, at Mauch Chunk, in a special car, and
landed him safely in Pottsville, ready for the hearing on the writ. The
crowd at the court-house was so overpowering that President Judge
Pershing declined to enter upon the case, and the numbers of citizens
present had to be forcibly diminished before the cause could go on.
Trouble was anticipated at this time from the Mollie Maguires, who were
on the spot in crowds, and, while Capt. Linden was taking Kerrigan to
the carriage in waiting, a member of the order, named Thomas Waldron,
cried out, alluding to Kerrigan, “Drown the scoundrel! Drown him!” A nod
to one of the officers in attendance was sufficient, and Mr. Waldron was
promptly arrested, taken before a magistrate, and put under bail. This
quick settlement of his case quieted the order, and no further trouble
occurred.

On the tenth of February followed the arrest of Thomas Munley, of
Gilberton, on the affidavit of Capt. Linden, for the murder of Thomas
Sanger, and Wm. Uren, at Raven Run, as related in these pages.

On the fourth of May, 1876, the trial of James Carroll, Thomas Duffy,
James Roarty, Hugh McGehan, and James Boyle, for the murder of B. F.
Yost, was commenced in Pottsville, before a full bench of Hon. C. L.
Pershing, D. B. Green, and T. H. Walker. The jury was composed of the
following gentlemen: Joel H. Betz, Thomas Bomboy, O. Miller, William
Becker, Lewis Maul, Levi Stein, Paul Artz, Amos Forsman, Daniel Yeager,
Benjamin Weller, Jules Kurten, and Jacob B. Hoffman. After hearing much
of the testimony, and getting well along in the cause, Levi Stein, one
of the jurors, and an estimable man, was taken very sick, and the court
adjourned until the twenty-third of the same month. Mr. Stein never
recovered sufficiently to reappear in the jury box, and after his death
the remainder of the panel were discharged. The cause therefore went
over. It was in this unfortunate trial that McParlan came upon the
stand, stood revealed to the world as the former James McKenna, and made
his astonishing revelations, which, for interest and novelty, have
startled the civilized world. James Kerrigan, also made his _début_ as a
witness for the Commonwealth, and, but for the sad incident occurring,
as related, the trial would have proven a triumph over the Mollies. Hon.
F. B. Gowen, President of the Philadelphia and Reading Railroad Company
and of the Philadelphia and Reading Coal and Iron Company, in this case
first came forward as counsel, ungloved himself for the struggle, and by
his boldness did much to reassure the depressed and suffering people of
the coal region. It was a sad providence and calamity that terminated
the trial so unhappily. The counsel engaged for the Commonwealth were
George R. Kaercher, Esq., District Attorney, Hon. F. B. Gowen, Hon. F.
W. Hughes, Gen. Charles Albright, and Guy E. Farquhar, Esq.; for the
defense were Hon. Lin Bartholomew, John W. Ryon, Esq., and Daniel
Kalbfus, Esq. It was an array of talent which attracted deserved
attention from the people and the press, many citizens daily crowding
the court room, and all the leading newspapers having representatives
present. Everything, however, had to be repeated, because of the decease
of Mr. Stein.


                               ————●————




                            CHAPTER XLVIII.

                            A NOBLE EFFORT.


Kerrigan, Doyle, and Kelly were already convicted of the murder of John
P. Jones, and on the fourth of February, 1876, Alex. Campbell, the
originator of the plan and the man for whom the assassination had been
committed, was lodged in prison at Mauch Chunk. His trial commenced the
twentieth of June ensuing. By the twenty-first the following jury had
been obtained: Adam Meeker, Elias Berger, R. J. Koch, Charles Horn,
William Williams, Harrison Heinbach, and Charles Zelner. A verdict of
“murder in the first degree” was returned July 1st. An attempt was
subsequently made to secure a new trial, an argument was heard on the
twenty-fourth of July, and a second trial granted, which occurred on the
twenty-first of January, 1877. He was a second time found guilty of
murder in the first degree and sentenced by the court to be executed. He
was also found guilty in the Morgan Powell murder.

In June, 1876, at Pottsville, occurred the trial of Thomas Munley and
Charles McAllister, arrested Feb. 10th, in the same year, for the Sanger
and Uren murder. This capture was made on the affidavit of R. J. Linden.
The prisoner was taken at his house in Gilberton. McAllister demanding a
separate trial, Geo. R. Kaercher, Esq., the District Attorney, elected
to try Munley first, and the case commenced June 28th, before Judge D.
B. Green, a jury having been found on the preceding day, composed of the
following named persons: John T. Clouse, I. W. White, John Springer,
Benj. H. Guldin, Thomas Fennell, Sr., Emanuel Gehris, Solomon Fidler,
Daniel Zerbe, Frederick Alvord, Charles Brenneman, Jefferson Dull, and
Daniel Donne. A verdict of “guilty of murder in the first degree” was
returned on the twelfth of July. It was in this case that Hon. F. B.
Gowen, assisting in the prosecution, made his memorable address against
the Mollie Maguires, which I give almost entire. After alluding to the
importance of the cause, the gravity of the case, a man being on trial
for his life, and disclaiming any reflections as against the talented
legal gentlemen engaged in the defense, Messrs. Lin. Bartholomew, John
W. Ryon, M. M. L’Velle, and S. A. Garrett, he entered upon a minute
history of the crime, not differing materially from that furnished in
these pages, calling attention to the utterances of Mr. Sanger, while
dying, and then said:

“What is the first defense? An _alibi_. That which comes most readily at
the beck and call of every criminal who knows himself to be guilty; for,
when every other defense fails, the ever-ready _alibi_ is always on hand
to be proved by a crowd of relatives and retainers, who come forward to
say that a man charged with the commission of a particular offense, at a
particular time, and in a particular place, was, on that very day,
engaged in some lawful and legitimate calling many miles away. When
established to the satisfaction of a jury, an _alibi_ is the very best
defense that can be offered, but, as it is always the defense that is
resorted to by the guilty, and as it is the defense that is most easily
manufactured, it becomes the duty of a jury most carefully to scrutinize
and examine its truth; and in this case I am glad to say that I think
you will have no trouble in disposing of it. By whom is this _alibi_
proven? In the first place by Edward Munley, the father of the prisoner,
and by Michael Munley, the prisoner’s brother.”

After showing how signally the _alibi_ had failed, he said:

“I dismiss these two witnesses from the case. There is no palliation for
such testimony, for there can be no palliation for perjury; and it has
become too serious an offense in this county to be passed over,
hereafter, in silence. But if there ever was a palliation for perjury,
if there should be at the last great day, before the final Judge, any
excuse for the enormity of this crime, it will be urged on behalf of a
father who has striven to save his son from the gallows, and on behalf
of one brother, who seeks to shield another from infamy and from shame.”

 .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .

Addressing himself to the Mollie Maguires, he continued:

“I may say, however, before leaving this branch of the case, that now
that the light of day is thrown upon the secret workings of this
association, human life is as safe in Schuylkill County as it is in any
other part of this Commonwealth; that as this association is broken down
and trampled into the dust, its leaders either in jail or fugitives from
the just vengeance of the law, the administration of justice in this
court will be as certain as human life is safe throughout the whole
length and breadth of the county. The time has gone by when the
murderer, the incendiary, and the assassin can go home reeking from the
commission of crimes, confident in the fact that he can appear before a
jury and have an _alibi_ proved for him to allow him to escape
punishment. There will be no more false _alibis_ in this county; the
time for them has gone forever. No more false _alibis_. No more
confident reliance upon the perjury of relatives and friends to prove an
_alibi_ for him who was seen in the commission of the act. No more dust
thrown in the eyes of juries to blind them from looking directly at the
facts of a case; and I do say that if there ever was anything to be
proud of, to be glad of, after the fact that we are enfranchised and
disenthralled from this despotism and this tyranny that has been hanging
over us, it is that the administration of justice will no longer be
polluted and disgraced by perjury and false swearing, for the purpose of
rescuing a criminal from the just vengeance of the law.

“I now come to the testimony of McParlan. Many of you know that some
years ago I was the District Attorney of this county. I am, therefore,
not very much out of my old paths, and not very much away from my old
moorings, when I am standing on behalf of the Commonwealth, in the Court
of Pottsville, demanding the conviction of a guilty man. It was when I
was District Attorney of this county, a young man, charged with the
prosecution of the pleas of the Commonwealth, that for the first time I
made up my mind from what I had seen, in innumerable instances, that
there then existed in this county a secret organization, banded together
for the commission of crime, and for the purpose of securing the escape
or acquittal of any of its members charged with the commission of an
offense.

“That conviction forced itself indelibly upon my mind. A man, who for
two years acts as District Attorney in this county, prosecuting
criminals who are brought before the court, must be either very obtuse
or wilfully blind, if he could close his eyes to the existence of a fact
as perceptible as this was then to me. I left this county with that
settled conviction, and circumstances that occurred time and again, long
after I withdrew from the prosecution of criminals, still more deeply
fastened this conviction in my mind. Murder, violence, and arson,
committed without detection, and apparently without motive, attested the
correctness of that belief, and when the time arrived that I became so
much interested in the prosperity of this county, and in the development
of its mineral wealth, that I saw that it was a struggle between the
good citizen and the bad citizen as to which should obtain the
supremacy, I made up my mind that if human ingenuity, if long suffering
and patient care, and toil that stopped at no obstacle, and would
confront every danger, could succeed in exposing this secret
organization to light of day, and bringing to well-earned justice the
perpetrators of these awful crimes, I would undertake the task.

“I knew that it could only be done by secret detectives, and I had had
enough experience, both as a lawyer, and as the head of a very large
corporation, to know that the public municipal detectives employed by
the police authorities of the cities, who operate only for rewards, are
the last persons to whom you could trust a mission and an enterprise
such as this. It was as important for us to know who was innocent as it
was to know who was guilty.

“The detective who operates for rewards, who is only paid upon his
conviction of the offender, has a motive to incite him to action which I
would be the last man in the world to arouse. I knew, for I had had
experience before of the National Detective Agency of Allan Pinkerton,
of Chicago, which was established by an intelligent and broad-minded
Scotchman, established upon the only basis on which a successful
detective agency can be established, and I applied to Mr. Pinkerton. His
plan was simply this: ‘I will secure an agent, or an officer,’ said he,
‘to ferret out the existence of this society. Whoever I get is to be
paid so much a week, no matter if he finds out nothing. He is bound to
me, never, under any circumstances, to take a reward for his services,
from anybody, and, if he spends five years and obtains nothing in the
way of information, he must have every month or every week exactly the
same compensation as if every week he had traced a new murder and every
month had discovered a new conspiracy. He is never to gain pecuniarily
by the success of his undertaking; but as a man who goes into this
organization, as a detective, takes his life in his own hands, I will
send no man on this mission of yours, Mr. Gowen, unless it be agreed,
beforehand, and I can tell him so, that he never is to be known in
connection with the enterprise.’ Upon these terms this man, James
McParlan, was selected. A young Irishman and a Catholic, but six or
seven years in this country, eminently qualified by his peculiar Irish
accomplishments to ingratiate himself with those to whom he was sent, he
came here in the fall of 1873, and within six months he had so far won
the confidence of the class of people who constituted this order that he
was admitted as a member. Remember, now, here—and I advert to it lest I
might forget it—that he came here pledged that he should not be used as
a witness. Therefore, the only object of his coming was to put us upon
the track, so that we could discover the crime when it was being
perpetrated, and this is the best answer that can possibly be made to
the charge that he wilfully withheld his knowledge when he might have
saved human life. His only object here was to get knowledge. He never
was to be used as a witness. His only desire was to find out when a
murder was to be committed, to be with the perpetrators if he could, and
to give notice to Captain Linden, who had an armed police force ready,
so that they might be waiting at the very spot, and not only save the
life of the intended victim, but arrest every man engaged in the
perpetration of the offense, in order that there could be abundant
evidence of their guilt. That was his whole object. Almost every night
he made his report; and how well he has performed his duty, the security
of human life and property in this county, to-day, as compared with what
it was six months ago, is the best commentary I can make upon the
subject.

“But Mr. L’Velle tells you that from the advent of Mr. McParlan into
this county have all these crimes been committed. Remember the words:
‘From the advent of McParlan into this county have all these crimes been
committed.’ I fear that Mr. L’Velle has not been long among you, or, if
he has, his memory is sadly deficient, when he says that all these
crimes have been committed since the advent of Mr. McParlan in
Schuylkill County.

“MR. L’VELLE.—I antedated you in coming to Schuylkill County.

”MR. GOWEN.—Then your memory is very defective. Does the gentleman
forget Dunne, who was murdered within two miles of this town? Does he
forget Alexander Rae, who was stricken down near Mt. Carmel? Does he
remember the assassination of William Littlehales? If he does not I am
very sure that his colleague, Mr. Bartholomew, will not forget it, for I
remember that I stood here, just where I stand now, some years ago,
defending a couple of men for murder, who, with other good citizens,
when the house of a boss had been attacked at Tuscarora by a mob intent
upon murder, had behaved, not like some of those at Raven Run, but had
sprung to arms, and had taken their old muskets, their rusty rifles,
their pistols and their swords, some of them with no time to load their
muskets save with the marbles with which their children had been
playing, and had sprung to arms to defend the house that was attacked,
and had shot down one of the assailants in his tracks, and were arrested
and brought here charged with the crime of murder; my friend, Mr.
Bartholomew, who was my colleague, joined with me in contending that our
clients had done that which they ought to have done to protect
themselves, and, as I was standing here, arguing that case, there came
over from Coal Castle the news that William Littlehales had been
murdered.

“Does the gentlemen forget all this? Does he forget George K. Smith and
David Muir? Does he forget the assassins who made the attack upon Claude
White? Does he forget Morgan Powell, and Langdon, who were killed, and
Ferguson, who was beaten almost to death? Does he forget Patrick Barry,
who, living with his wife and children in the house by the tunnel, when
a band of assassins attacked him at night, placed his wife and little
ones in the middle of the house and piled all the mattresses and
blankets and pillows around them, and, when he had sheltered them as
best he could, fought an angry horde of two or three hundred men,
keeping them at bay until daylight, when they fled, leaving the long
tracks of their blood behind them to show how well he had avenged
himself upon his assailants?

“These coal fields for twenty years, I may say, have been the theatre of
the commission of crimes such as our very nature revolts at. This very
organization that we are now, for the first time, exposing to the light
of day, has hung like a pall over the people of this county. Before it
fear and terror fled cowering to homes which afforded no sanctuary
against the vengeance of their pursuers. Behind it stalked darkness and
despair, brooding like grim shadows over the desolated hearth and the
ruined home, and throughout the length and breadth of this fair land
there was heard the voice of wailing and of lamentation, of ‘Rachel
weeping for her children and refusing to be comforted, because they were
not.’ Nor is it alone those whose names I have mentioned—not alone the
prominent, the upright, and the good citizen whose remains have been
interred with pious care in the tombs of his fathers; but it is the
hundreds of unknown victims, whose bones now lie mouldering over the
face of this county. In hidden places and by silent paths, in the dark
ravines of the mountains, and in secret ledges of the rocks, who shall
say how many bodies of the victims of this order now await the final
trump of God? And from those lonely sepulchres, there will go up to the
God who gave them the spirits of these murdered victims, to take their
places among the innumerable throng of witnesses at the last day, and to
confront with their presence the members of this ghastly tribunal, when
their solemn accusation is read from the plain command of the Decalogue,
‘Thou shalt not kill.’

“But we are told that in the commission of these crimes, although Mr.
Bartholomew admits that they existed long years before McParlan came
into the county, this man abandoned his duty as a detective, and became
an accomplice in the crime. And upon whose testimony does this charge
rest? My friend invokes from you a careful attention to the facts of
this case, and properly endeavors to exclude from it an examination of
any other circumstances or any other facts than those which have been
proved in the case.

“But upon whose testimony is McParlan an accomplice? Upon whose
testimony is the charge made that McParlan engaged deliberately in the
commission of offenses and secreted the offenders? Upon Ned Monaghan’s
and Patrick Coyle’s, alone. Upon Ned Monaghan, for whom the doors of
your jail open wide to-day, never probably to reopen until he comes out
in company with Jack Kehoe, and the other murderers, to stand his trial
for his life. Upon Monaghan, the Molly Maguire, the man who was on the
Ringtown Mountain helping to select the committee to kill William
Thomas. Edward Monaghan, who, to-day, is as guilty of murder in the
first degree as any other man now confined within the walls of your
prison.

“And who is Patrick Coyle? A man who saw McParlan drawing a pistol and
never heard him say or saw him do anything else, and because he did not
see him do and did not hear him say anything, he swears he believes that
McParlan was inciting to murder.

“What need I say further? An accomplice! McParlan an accomplice! Mr.
Bartholomew tells you that he permitted Thomas Hurley to escape, and
that he permitted Michael Doyle to escape. Neither Thomas Hurley nor
Michael Doyle have escaped; but the excoriating denunciation which Mr.
Bartholomew hurled against Thomas Hurley will effectually prevent him
from defending Hurley, when he comes before this court for trial for
murder. It will not be long before he comes here. It is simply a
question between the Mollie Maguires on the one side and Pinkerton’s
Detective Agency on the other, and I know too well that Pinkerton’s
Detective Agency will win. There is not a place on the habitable globe
where these men can find refuge and in which they will not be tracked
down. Let them go to the Rocky Mountains, or to the shores of the
Pacific; let them traverse the bleak deserts of Siberia, penetrate into
the jungles of India, or wander over the wild steppes of Central Asia,
and they will be dogged and tracked and brought to justice, just as
surely as Thomas Munley is brought to justice to-day. The cat that holds
the mouse in her grasp sometimes lets it go for a little while to play;
but she knows well that at her will she can again have it secure within
her claws; and Pinkerton’s Agency may sometimes permit a man to believe
that he is free who does not know that he may be traveling five thousand
miles in the company of those whose vigilance never slumbers and whose
eyes are never closed in sleep.

“They may not know that the time will come, but I say that so surely as
I am standing before you to-day, the time will come, be it short or be
it long, be it months or be it years, when every single murderer then
living on the face of the earth, who has committed a crime in this
county, since April, 1874, will answer for that crime before the
presence of this court. ‘The race is not always to the swift, nor the
battle to the strong.’ Those who see what we are doing now have seen but
little; for it is only the opening of the book of this vast conspiracy,
and behind the meaner men who shot the pistol there stand others far
more guilty than they who, with them, at some time will be brought to
justice—

                “‘For Time at last sets all things even,
                And if we do but wait the hour,
                There never yet was human power
                That could evade, if unforgiven,
                The patient search and vigil long
                Of him who treasures up a wrong.’

“And now some words about this secret organization of Mollie Maguires.
My friend, Mr. Bartholomew, is not correct in his statement of their
history. If, after this case is over, and when you are permitted to
read, you will get a little book called Trench’s _Realities of Irish
Life_, written by a relative of that celebrated Dean Trench, whose name
is well known wherever English literature is read, you will find the
history of this organization. It was known as the Ribbonmen of Ireland.
It sprang up at a time when there was an organized resistance in Ireland
to the payments of rents. The malcontents became known as Ribbonmen, and
they generally made their attacks upon the agents of the non-resident
landowners, or upon the constables or bailiffs who attempted to collect
the rents. Their object was to intimidate and hold in terror all those
to whom they owed money or who were employed in its collection. As a
branch of this society, and growing out of it, sprang the men known as
Mollie Maguires, and the name of their society simply arose from this
circumstance, that, in the perpetration of their offenses, they dressed
as women, and generally ducked or beat their victims, or inflicted some
such punishment as infuriated women would be likely to administer. Hence
originated the name of the Mollie Maguires, which has been handed down
to us at the present day; and the organization of the Mollie Maguires,
therefore, is identical with that of the Ribbonmen in Ireland, who have
terrorized over the Irish people to so great an extent.

“How this association came into this county we do not know. We had
suspected for many years, and we know now, that it is criminal in its
character. That is proved beyond peradventure. It will not do to-day to
say that it was only in particular localities in this county that it was
a criminal organization, because the highest officer in the society in
this county, the County Delegate, Jack Kehoe, the man who attended the
State Convention, and was the representative of the whole order in this
county, is at present, as you hear from the testimony, in prison
awaiting his trial for murder. Whether this society, known as the
Ancient Order of Hibernians, is beyond the limits of this county a good
society or not I cannot tell; but I have believed at some times that it
was, and I am willing to be satisfied of that fact now, if there is any
evidence of it. But there has been an attack made upon this
organization, and up to this time we have not had furnished to us any
evidence that in any place its objects were laudable or commendable.
Criminal in its character, criminal in its purpose, it had frequently a
political object. You will find the leaders of this society the
prominent men in the townships. Through the instrumentality of their
order, and by its power, they were able to secure offices for
themselves. You see here and now know that one of the Commissioners of
this county is a member of this order. You know that a previous
Commissioner of this county was a member of this order, convicted of a
high offense, and pardoned by the Governor. You know that another County
Commissioner, before that, was a member of this order, convicted of an
offense, and pardoned by the Governor. High constables, chiefs of
police, candidates for associate judges, men who were trusted by their
fellow-men, were all the time guilty of murder.

“But in addition to the criminal and the political motives, these people
claim national characteristics. They claim that they were, _par
excellence_, the representatives of the Irish of this country. They
claim more than that, that they represent the Irish Catholics of this
country. I shall say but little about the Irish, except that I am myself
the son of an Irishman, proud of my ancestry, and proud of my race, and
never ashamed of it, except when I see that Ireland has given birth to
wretches such as these! These men call themselves Irishmen! These men
parade on St. Patrick’s Day and claim to be good Catholics! Where are
the honest Irishmen of this county? Why do not they rise up and strike
down these wretches that usurp the name of Irishmen? If a German commits
an offense, and engages in murder, do all the other Germans take his
part and establish a false _alibi_ to defeat the ends of justice? If an
American becomes a criminal, do the Americans protect him? Do they not
say, ‘Away with you! You have disgraced the country that bore you?’ If
an Englishman becomes an offender, do the English nation take him to
their arms and make him a hero? Why, then, do not the honest Irishmen of
this county come together in public meeting, and separate themselves
widely from and denounce this organization? Upon what principle do these
men, outcasts from society, the dregs of the earth, murderers and
assassins, claim to be Irishmen and arrogate to themselves the national
characteristics of the Irish people? It is a disgrace to Ireland that
the honest Irish of this county, probably five or ten thousand in
number, should permit a few hundred wretches like these to say that they
are the true representatives of the Irishmen of Schuylkill County.

“Does an Irishman wonder why it is sometimes difficult to get a job in
this county? Does he wonder why the boss at a colliery hesitates to
employ him, when these people have been allowed to arrogate to
themselves the Irish character and have been permitted to represent
themselves to the people of this county as the proper representatives of
Ireland? The time has come when there must be a line of demarcation
drawn. The time has come when every honest Irishman in this county must
separate himself from any suspicion of sympathy with this association.
He must denounce its members as outcasts from the land that gave them
birth. He must denounce them as covered with infamy and blackened with
crime. He must say that they are not true Irishmen and that they are not
representatives of Ireland.

“But far beyond this attempt to invoke your sympathy on account of their
nationality is the attempt to invoke that sympathy on the ground that
they belong to a persecuted religion. Was there ever such sublime, such
tremendous impudence in the world, as that a member of this secret
society, a society which has been denounced by its own Church, and each
member of which has been excommunicated by the Archbishop of
Philadelphia, and by the Pope himself, outcasts from society, and from
the communion of their own religion, the door of the Church shut in
their faces and the gates of heaven closed against them by the
excommunication of their priests—these men, infidels and atheists,
caring for no church, and worshiping no God, set themselves up in this
community as the representatives of the Catholic faith.

              “‘Just Allah! what must be thy look?
              When such a wretch before thee stands,
              Unblushing, with thy sacred book,
              Turning its leaves with blood-stained hands,
              And wresting from its page sublime
              His creed of lust and hate and crime.’

“A few words more upon this subject of Irish Catholics. I was born and
am a Protestant, but I was partially educated among the Catholics, and I
have always had a kindly feeling for them, and when these assassins,
through their counsel, speak of being Catholics, I desire to say to you
here, in the first place, that they have been denounced by their Church
and excommunicated by their prelates, and that I have the direct
personal authority of Archbishop Wood himself to say that he denounces
them all, and that he was fully cognizant of and approved of the means I
took to bring them to justice. And, for myself, I can say that for many
months before any other man in this world, except those connected with
the Detective Agency, knew what was being done, Archbishop Wood, of
Philadelphia, was the only confidant I had and fully knew of the mission
of the detective in this whole matter. So much, then, for the assumption
of Mr. L’Velle that these men claim sympathy on account of their being
Catholics. I can hardly reply calmly to such an argument. I believe that
there must be different sects in this country, as there are in all
countries, and I am one of those who believe that a good Catholic is
better than a bad Protestant.

”MR. L’VELLE.—I repel that remark.

“MR. GOWEN.—Mr. L’Velle repels the remark! I cannot help it, and I
reiterate the fact that although I am a Protestant, I have been taught
to believe that a good Catholic is better than a bad Protestant.

“I have been taught to believe that the eyes of Justice are closed not
only against individuals and corporations, but against nationalities and
sects. I have been taught to believe that he is the good citizen who is
truthful and honest, who is kind-hearted and affectionate, who lives in
charity with all men, who gives freely of his means to the poor, and,
whether he kneels before an altar or worships God in his own chamber, he
is entitled to the favorable consideration of his fellow-men. And I do
know, oh! so well, that when our lives draw toward their close, and the
opening portals of the tomb reveal to our eyes some glimpses of the
boundless waters of that vast eternity upon which we will all embark,
that then, at that dread moment, it will be to the recollection of the
possessions of these simple virtues, this pure morality, this
unostentatious charity that I have named, that we will all cling, in the
sublime confidence that it will avail us most, when the time shall come
that each one of us, Catholic and Protestant, Lutheran and Calvinist,
Gentile and Jew, shall be stripped of the thin garb of the sectarian,
and stand in equal favor before the great white throne of God.

“And now one word more upon this subject, and I dismiss it. Whenever you
hear a complaint made against a man because he is an Irishman, or
because he is a Catholic; whenever you hear any one, no matter who he
may be, say that the outrages of this county are due to the Irishmen, or
due to the Catholics do not, I beg of you, forget, in your secret
hearts, that the highest prelates of that Church have cursed and
excommunicated this order. Do not forget that whatever little credit may
be due to him who has conceived the plan of exposing this association is
due to one who is the son of an Irishman; and do not forget that a
greater honor and a greater meed of praise than is due to any other is
due to Detective McParlan, who is an Irishman by birth, and a Catholic
by religion; and if those who profess to be Irish Catholics in this
county have brought their nationality and their religion into disrepute,
I beg of you to remember that both have been gloriously and successfully
vindicated by an Irishman and a Catholic, in the person of James
McParlan.

 .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .

“And now let us look to society in this county, as it was three months
ago, when men retired to their homes at eight or nine o’clock in the
evening and no one ventured beyond the precincts of his own door; when
every man engaged in any enterprise of magnitude or connected with
industrial pursuits left his home in the morning with his hand upon his
pistol, unknowing whether he would again return alive; when the very
foundations of society were being overturned, when the administration of
justice, which should always be regarded with reverence, had almost sunk
into contempt; when men doubted whether it was in the power of organized
society to protect their lives and to secure their property; and then
reflect upon the change which a few weeks has brought forth. To-day I
give you notice that there is no part of this county that is not as safe
as the aisle in which I stand here now.

“Is there a man in this audience, looking at me now, and hearing me
denounce this association, who longs to point his pistol at me? I tell
him that he has as good a chance here as he will ever have again. I tell
him that it is just as safe to-day to murder in the temple of Justice as
it is in the secret ravines of the mountains, or within the silent
shadows of the woods. I tell him that human life is safe. I tell him
that the members of his society, whom we desire to convict, all, save
one or two, are either safely lodged within the walls of your prison or
are fugitives from justice, but almost within the grasp of the
detectives, who are upon their heels. I tell him that if there is
another murder in this county, committed by this organization, every one
of the five hundred members of the order in this county, or out of it,
who connives at it, will be guilty of murder in the first degree, and
can be hanged by the neck until he is dead, not by vigilance committees,
but according to the solemn forms of justice, after being defended by
able and experienced counsel; and I tell him that, if there is another
murder in this county by this society, there will be an inquisition for
blood with which nothing that has been known in the annals of criminal
jurisprudence can compare. And to whom are we indebted for this
security, of which I now boast? To whom do we owe all this? Under the
Divine Providence of God, to whom be all the honor and all the glory, we
owe this safety to James McParlan, and if there ever was a man to whom
the people of this county should erect a monument, it is James McParlan,
the detective.

 .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .

“McParlan is a detective, engaged in the performance of a professional
duty, who enters upon his quest with the avowed purpose of trying to
make all those with whom he was brought in contact believe that he is
one of them. He is not an accomplice. He went there for the purpose of
aiding the officers of the law in discovering and punishing guilt, and
even were he an accomplice, even if every particle of testimony we have
had during the last two weeks from the lips of James McParlan had fallen
on that stand from the lips of Friday O’Donnell, or from the lips of
Michael Doyle, it would have been not only corroborated, but
strengthened and attested by the evidence of identification alone.

“But suppose there was no evidence of identification, I desire now to
show you what corroborative testimony beyond that of identification we
have of the facts proved by McParlan himself. I have taken the trouble,
during the time Mr. L’Velle was speaking yesterday, to go over, with one
of my colleagues, nearly the whole of the testimony in this case, so
that I might be able to point out to you the various places in which and
the manner by which McParlan is corroborated by other witnesses. I will
now call your attention to this testimony, in detail, in the order in
which it was given, and, having done so and fixed it upon your mind, I
will endeavor to make some few arguments based upon this corroborative
testimony, if any such were needed to enable a jury of intelligent men
to determine whether they will give credence to the testimony of
McParlan.

“McParlan says that Munley told him that McAllister and O’Donnell,
called for him, Munley, on the evening of the thirty-first of August.
Remember, McParlan says that Munley told him at Michael Lawler’s that
McAllister and O’Donnell called for him the previous evening. How could
McParlan have known this if Munley did not tell it to him? Weigh that in
your minds for one instant. How could McParlan have found this fact out,
if Munley had not told him? Oh! but our friends may say that McParlan
swears that Munley said so, but the statement is not true, and here
comes in the corroborative testimony. Frederick Hunniken, a witness
produced by the Commonwealth, says that on the evening of the
thirty-first of August a stranger came to Wiggan’s Patch and talked with
the O’Donnells, and that James O’Donnell and the stranger went toward
Gilberton together. Then James Patton says that on the evening of the
thirty-first of August, Darcy and Munley joined a party near Gilberton,
and Luke Richardson says that on the evening of the thirty-first, Darcy
and Munley joined a party from Wiggan’s Patch; and Sarah Ann Gessford
and George Gessford both testified that they saw Munley with Darcy and
some other men between eight and nine o’clock on the evening of the
thirty-first, at the Cross Roads, by the old Flour Barrel, near
Gilberton. There are now one, two, three, four, five witnesses, in
different parts of the county, who have testified to a state of facts of
which McParlan could have had no knowledge whatever, unless informed by
Munley. Where can you find better corroborative evidence than this? How
did McParlan know, if he made up this story to tell, that the O’Donnells
came for Munley in the evening, and that they went off together? Did
McParlan know Luke Richardson or Mr. or Mrs. Gessford? Had he ever
communicated with either of them? And yet James McParlan comes forward
and gives us a statement which was told to him by Munley, and we produce
five witnesses to prove that when Munley made that statement he told the
truth.

“Again, McParlan says that Munley had on dark pantaloons of a grayish
color. How could McParlan describe Munley’s pantaloons, if he had not
seen him on that morning? If he attempted to make up a story, is it
likely that he would have discovered exactly the proper kind of
pantaloons? James Williams and Roberts say that on that day Munley was
dressed in gray pantaloons; Robert Heaton describes them as darkish;
Melinda Bickelman says that they were pepper and salt, and Munley’s
family, themselves, have to admit that they were of a grayish color—one
of them said of a brownish color, and still another said that they were
gray, but had a kind of a dark stripe in them. Here is corroborative
testimony again.

“Further on in his testimony McParlan says that Munley told him that
after O’Donnell began the attack, he ran up and shot Sanger near the
fence at the house, and that Charles O’Donnell, Doyle, and McAllister
fired shots to intimidate the crowd. That is exactly as Patrick Burns
describes it, and as Melinda Bickelman describes it. The two men that
followed Sanger down the road and killed him were Friday O’Donnell and
this prisoner, Thomas Munley. McAllister ran around to intercept Sanger,
and the other two men fired shots to intimidate the crowd. How, under
heaven, did McParlan know this, unless Munley told him. Where can there
be stronger corroborative testimony than this?

“Again, McParlan swears that after some conversation at Lawler’s, when
these five men came in on the morning of the first of September, the two
O’Donnells and McAllister left for home. How did McParlan know that,
unless he saw it? Our friends may say, where is the evidence of that? We
answer by saying that Edward Fox, a witness produced by the
Commonwealth, says that James O’Donnell, with two men, came to his
engine-house, on a path between Wiggan’s Patch and Shenandoah, dusty and
thirsty as if from traveling, at eleven o’clock on the morning of the
first of September. It seems to me as if there was some almost
supernatural or divine agency pointing out to the officers of justice
and the agents of the Commonwealth the evidence that would corroborate
the testimony of this man McParlan. How could McParlan make up a story
of this kind, unless he had seen the men? He swears these three men left
together, and these three men are found together, and separated from the
other two.

“Again, McParlan goes further, for he tells you what became of the other
two. He says that after Doyle had gone to his boarding-house and changed
his clothes, Doyle, Hurley, Munley, and himself went to Tobin’s
ball-alley, in Shenandoah; and Philip Weissner and William J. Fulton,
two witnesses produced by the Commonwealth, testified that they met
Munley in Shenandoah, with some other men, at ten o’clock on the morning
of the first of September, at the corner of Coal Street and Chestnut
Street.

“McParlan also says that Munley left Shenandoah for home about one
o’clock in the afternoon on the first of September, and Mrs. Smith, Mrs.
Richardson, Mrs. Lambert, and Mrs. Hayes, all saw Munley coming home to
his house at Gilberton between two and three o’clock, just about the
time at which he would have arrived if he left Shenandoah at one
o’clock.

“McParlan also swears that Munley returned to Shenandoah in the evening,
and attended a meeting of the Mollie Maguires, when men were selected to
murder John P. Jones. Philip Weissner swears that he met Munley on the
evening of the first of September, about five o’clock, on his way to
Shenandoah, and Mrs. Smith saw him leave his home, after changing his
clothes, on the evening of the first of September, in company with
Darcy, who was one of the Mollie Maguires, and who was one of the men at
the meeting in the bush on the evening of the first of September. Where
can you have stronger corroborative testimony than this? Ask yourselves
the question: how could James McParlan have known this? It is true, and
it is proved by fifteen or twenty witnesses who have placed these men
just at the spot and just at the time. How did McParlan know this,
unless Munley told him? Ask yourselves that question, and then ask
yourselves whether, if this man McParlan was Friday O’Donnell himself,
and had testified to this state of facts, would you as jurors require
any other corroborative evidence than that which has been laid before
you?

“The only other portion of the defense to which it is necessary for me
now to revert is the testimony of the men around Raven Run, who saw some
of this occurrence, but could not recognize Thomas Munley. In the first
place, we believe, though we have no right to make charges, but we do
believe that there were a number of men on this stand, who, from the
manner in which they gave their testimony, revealed the fact that they
knew a great deal more than they intended to tell; and when an Irishman
from the same county as this prisoner so testifies on cross-examination
that you must believe, notwithstanding his denial of the fact, that he
was a member of the same organization, and always prefaces his testimony
as to the prisoner’s being one of the murderers by saying, ‘Not to the
best of my opinion,’ you will see the easy way by which he bargained
with his conscience for getting over the obligation of the oath which he
had taken to tell the truth.

“What does all this testimony amount to? Here were four days taken up
with the examination of forty or fifty witnesses, and at the utmost all
that each or any of them could say was that Friday O’Donnell was not
Thomas Munley. Why, we knew that before. Friday O’Donnell was the leader
of this gang. Friday O’Donnell was the man who had the principal hand in
it; he was the man who took the prominent part in the murder; he was the
man whom nearly all the witnesses saw and described by his clothing and
by his stature; and every one of them swore, with great vehemence, that
Friday O’Donnell was not Thomas Munley. God knows, gentlemen, we knew
this before; we knew that Friday O’ Donnell was not Thomas Munley, but
when they were questioned, they either had to admit that they could not
tell whether the prisoner was one of the other four men, or that they
had not seen the other four men sufficiently to enable them to identify
them thereafter.

“I have said to you before that it seems to me as if there had been a
divine interposition for the investigation and punishment of crime in
this county. Remember that McParlan came here pledged that he should not
be used as a witness. We placed no reliance upon him as a witness. We
could not arrest a man because he told us anything about him, because he
was protected by the pledge we had given him that he was not to be
exposed, and was never to be known in the investigation; and I tell you
that, no matter what the consequence would have been, when I became an
instrument to lead him into the danger to which he was subjected when he
took his life into his own hand and entered into the secret councils of
this order, I would have been the last man in the world to have asked
him to relieve me from the pledge which had been made to him. You have
heard that his mission became known to this order, how or by what manner
I am not at liberty to tell you to-day, for it is not in evidence. We
have the fact, though, that his mission became known to this society,
and we have the fact that those from whose vengeance he was to be
protected, by ignorance of his true character, acquired information that
enabled them to know that he was playing a false part in their
organization, and that he was in reality a detective; and he was
compelled to leave the county. And then I saw before me my path as clear
as day. Then I saw that some miraculous interposition of providence had
been vouchsafed to permit us to use the testimony and the knowledge of
this man McParlan. Then I breathed freer, and trod with elate step; then
I knew that I had within my hands the power to crush these villains;
then, and on the day when he took his place upon the witness stand, I
took my seat at this table as counsel for the Commonwealth, and the
warrants were executed which consigned to the prison every one of these
criminals, with the exception of one or two and of those who had run
away when Jimmy Kerrigan turned State’s evidence. When, in all the
history of criminal jurisprudence, did ever such a change of society
come over a county as that which came over this county on the morning
that McParlan first became a witness, and on the morning when Jack
Kehoe, the County Delegate, with twelve or fifteen other men, handcuffed
to a chain, were marched from the high places they had occupied to take
their solitary cells as felons within the walls of your prison?

“When I came to this court-house, on that memorable day, the court-room
was crowded with the sympathizing friends of these criminals, but where
are they to-day? They may be here, but they give no sign, and we know
nothing of them, and we care not if they are here. The whole county
sprang up like a giant unbound, and never, except in dramatic
literature, has there been revealed such an awakening and such a change.

“There is an old drama called the ‘Inconstant,’ in which the hero of the
play is beguiled into a den of infamy, and when he is confronted by
miscreants he for the first time realizes the danger in which he is
placed. He feels that his money is to be taken and that his life will be
sacrificed. He has with him, however, a faithful page, and turning
toward the outlaws he addresses them as if he was unaware of their true
character. He shakes them by the hand, presents one with his watch, and
another with his purse; he is ‘hail fellow well met’ with them, and he
invites them to join him in a carouse, and offers to send his page for
wine. The outlaws hear it and consent, and he says to his page: ‘Bring
me the wine—the blood-red wine marked 100.’ The page departs, well
knowing that the message refers not to wine but to a company of soldiers
numbering one hundred and wearing a red uniform. After breathless
suspense the page returns, and in answer to the frantic demand, ‘The
wine, boy, the wine!’ answers: ‘Coming, sir,’ and the tramp of armed men
is heard. Then the entrapped man grows bold. He pulls one outlaw by the
nose, and cuffs another on the ear, and the soldiers enter and march
them off to jail. So it was with us when McParlan came upon the stand.
He was the blood-red wine marked 100. Then we knew we were free men.
Then we cared no longer for the Mollie Maguires. Then we could go to
Patsy Collins, the Commissioner of this county, and say to him: ‘Build
well the walls of the new addition of the prison; dig the foundations
deep and make them strong; put in good masonry and iron bars, for, as
the Lord liveth, the time will come when, side by side with William
Love, the murderer of Squire Gwyther, you will enter the walls that you
are now building for others.’ Then we could say to Jack Kehoe, the high
constable of a great borough in this county: ‘We have no fear of you.’
Then we could say to Ned Monaghan, chief of police, and murderer, and
assassin: ‘Behind you the scaffold is prepared for your reception.’ Then
we could say to Pat Conry, Commissioner of this county: ‘The time has
ceased when a Governor of this State dares to pardon a Mollie
Maguire—you have had your last pardon.’ Then we could say to John
Slattery, who was almost elected judge of this court: ‘We know that of
you that it were better you had not been born than that it should be
known.’ Then all of us looked up. Then at last we were free, and I came
to this county and walked through it as safely as in the most crowded
thoroughfares of Philadelphia.

“There is one other dramatic illustration which I remember and to which
I cannot help adverting, as it so clearly paints the scene which has
been enacted so lately in this county. It occurs in Bulwer’s drama of
Richelieu. You remember that Richelieu, the Prime Minister of Louis
XIII. was threatened by a secret conspiracy, led by a great noble man,
dramatized as De Baradas, and headed in the army by the very brother of
the King himself. You will remember that the statesman, realizing that
his power over the King was gone, and that the conspirators had acquired
absolute control over the mind of the monarch, set a page upon the track
to discover the evidence of the conspiracy, so that he could lay it
before the monarch in the presence of the conspirators themselves. You
will also remember, if you have read the drama, the thrilling
description of the manner in which the page, at the point of the
poniard, wrested the parchment evidence of this conspiracy from one of
the chief conspirators, at a time when the monarch was holding court,
and when the prime minister, almost dead with rage and chagrin, fear and
disappointment, had almost ceased to hope for success. It was at this
moment that the page, wearied, bleeding, and breathless, rushes in
behind Richelieu and hands him the parchment, which is laid before the
monarch, who, for the first time, learns that he has been betrayed, and
that the army of Spain is on the march to Paris. He says: ‘Good heavens,
the Spaniards! Where will they be next week?’ And Richelieu, rising up,
exclaimed: ‘There, at my feet!’ and issuing his orders for the arrest of
the conspirators, turns to the chief, and exclaims: ‘Ho, there, Count De
Baradas. thou hast lost the stake,’ and that stake was his head.

“So when we discovered the criminal nature of this organization, and
when the evidence of this conspiracy was brought forward to us by
McParlan, we issued our warrants for the arrest of the conspirators, and
we turned to these men, with the Commissioner of the county at their
head, and we said to them: ‘Ha! you have lost the stake.’ They played a
deep game, and they played for a great stake. They played to secure the
property of this county, by endangering the lives of their
fellow-citizens. They had agents as chiefs of police, and as constables
and commissioners, and they had one of their number almost on the bench
itself. God alone knows what would have happened to us if they had
gotten him there, and then elected a jury commissioner besides. With
Mollie Maguires as judges, and Mollie Maguires as constables, and Mollie
Maguires as commissioners, and Mollie Maguires as witnesses, what would
have been the history of this good old county? Think of this for a
moment! Can you think where then we would have drifted, and to what it
would have led us? Can you imagine the condition of the people of this
county, with murderers upon the bench, and in the jury box, and in
control of all the principal offices of the county. I lived in the
apprehension of all this for two years and a half alone, and God knows
that when the time comes that all I know may be told to the world, it
will reveal a history such as will make every American citizen hang his
head with shame. I have seen a society of murderers and assassins having
its members in the highest places of this county. I have seen them
elected to fill the positions of constables and police officers. I have
seen a trusted member of that band of murderers a Commissioner of the
county. I have seen this organization wield a political power in the
State which has controlled the elections of a great Commonwealth. I have
received the information of meetings between some of the highest
officers of the State, and the chief of the murderers, at which large
sums of money were paid to secure the votes of this infernal association
to turn the tide of a State election. God knows, if ever in the world
there was a revelation as deep and as damning as that now laid open to
the people of this Commonwealth for the first time.

“I have one other allusion to make to a remark made by my friend Mr.
L’Velle in his argument yesterday. At some time or other I thought it
would be dragged into the case. Mr. L’Velle, acting for the prisoner,
and defending him as his counsel, has said to you that it is the old
story of capital against labor. I think I have shown to you how impudent
is the claim that these men set up to be the representatives of the
Irish race. I am sure I have shown to you the unblushing audacity of
their claim that they are the representatives of the Catholic religion;
but I now stand here on behalf of the laboring people of this county,
the people who have suffered more throughout the length and breadth of
this land by the actions of these men than any other—I stand here to
protest, with all the power that God has given me, against the monstrous
assumption that these villains are the representatives of the laboring
people of Schuylkill County. You know very well in what estimation in
the public prints the laboring people of this county have been held in
consequence of the acts of this society. Two or three hundred assassins
have given a name to the whole people of this county, and now, when they
are put upon trial for murder, they say it is the old story of capital
against labor. On behalf of every honest laboring man in this county, on
behalf of every man subjected to the primeval curse of the Almighty,
that by the sweat of his face he shall earn his daily bread, I protest
with indignation against the assumption that these men are the
representatives of labor. It is too early in the history of what I have
done in this county to say aught of myself in connection with labor, but
those who know me well will bear witness that on every occasion in which
I had to take any public part in the conflicts between capital and
labor, I have taken pains to assert my belief that the laboring people
of this county were as upright, as honest, as law-abiding, and as moral
as those of any other community in the State. I took the pains to show
that there was a secret association banded together for the purpose of
committing outrages which had given a notorious character not only to
the laboring people of the county, but to the whole county itself. Look
abroad upon this great county, diversified by a thousand industries and
beautified by nature to an extent such as few counties in the
Commonwealth enjoy. Why is not this a hive of industry, and the chosen
seat of the investment of capital? Why do not people from all parts of
the country come to these mountains to enjoy the salubrity of the
climate, and to revel in the beauties which nature has spread before us?
Why is it that a curse and a blight has rested for so long upon this
county? Why is it that mothers and wives in far-distant cities have
shuddered when their sons and husbands have told them that business led
them to the mining regions of Pennsylvania?

“Because, fostered and protected here in the mountains of this county,
was a band of assassins and murderers that brought reproach upon the
whole county itself. For the first time now they are exposed, and we
know where were their secret places, and who were their chosen leaders,
and knowing this, we can stand up before the whole country and say, ‘Now
all are safe in this county; come here with your money; come here with
your enterprises; come here with your families, and make this country
your residence; help us to build up this people and you will be safe,’
and by your aid, gentlemen, we will show to the world that not by
vigilance committees, and not by secret associations, but by open,
public justice the name of the law has been vindicated, and the foul
stain that had rested upon us has been wiped out forever.

“A few words more, and I am done. I feel that I have occupied more of
your time than I ought to have taken, but ‘out of the fullness of the
heart the mouth speaketh,’ and if I have said aught which some of you
might think had better have been left unsaid, you must remember the
strong provocation that I have had. You must remember what I have been
doing for nearly three years. You must remember what a seal I had to put
upon my lips. You must remember that it was only when Mr. McParlan
consented to become a witness that I could speak of that, the weight of
which was enough to crush me to the dust.

“I feel, indeed, that if I failed in my duty, if I should shrink from
the task which was before me, that if I failed to speak, the very stones
would cry out. Standing before you now with the bright beams of victory
streaming upon our banners, how well I can recall the feelings with
which I entered upon the contest which is now so near the end. Do not
think it egotism if I say, with the hero of romance, that

               “‘When first I took this venturous quest,
                 I swore upon the rood,
               Neither to turn to right nor left,
                 For evil or for good.
               My forward path too well I ween,
               Lies yonder fearful ranks between;
               For man unarmed ’twere bootless hope
               With tigers and with fiends to cope.
               Yet if I turn, what wait me there,
               Save famine, dire and fell despair?
               Other conclusion let me try,
               Since, choose howe’er I list, I die.
               Forward lies faith and knightly fame,
               Behind are perjury and shame;
               In life or death, I keep my word.’

“And when all had been discovered, and McParlan consented to become a
witness, I said that I would come up into this county, where I first had
learned to practice law, that I would take my place among the ranks of
the counsel for the Commonwealth, and that I would stand side by side
with him in the prosecution of these offenses until the last one was
wiped from off the calendar of your criminal courts. And let it take
weeks, or let it take months, or let it take years, I have buckled on my
harness and entered for the fight, and, God willing, I shall bear it out
as bravely and as well as I can, until justice is vindicated, and the
county of Schuylkill is free.

“My friend, Mr. L’Velle, makes a plea to you for mercy. He pleads to you
for the mother and the wife of this prisoner, and he asks you to let
mercy enter into your hearts, and to restore this prisoner to his home.
Are there no others who plead for mercy? Have I no clients asking mercy
at your hands? Why is this young woman made a widow in the early morning
of her life? What crime had her husband committed that he was shot down
like a dog? Oh, she pleads to you for mercy, more eloquently, even if
more silently, than any one on behalf of the family of this prisoner. I
plead to you on behalf of the whole people of this county. I plead for
mercy on behalf of the whole people of this State. On behalf of the
orphans, the fatherless, and the widows, whose protectors have been
stricken down before you, I plead to you for mercy. I invoke the spirits
of the dead, and ask them silently to pass before you in this
court-house. I invoke the spirits of Dunn, of Littlehales, of Muir, of
Smith, of Rae, and the many victims of this foul conspiracy, to aid me
in pleading for mercy. I ask you to listen to the cries of the wounded,
to the shrieks of the dying, and the mournful funereal wailings over the
bodies of the dead. If I close my eyes I hear voices against which you
cannot close your ears, and which are pleading for mercy, oh! so
strongly, that my poor words are but as the empty air.

    “‘I hear the dying sufferer cry,
  With his crushed face turned to the sky;
    I see him crawl in agony
  To the foul pool, and bow his head into its bloody slime, and die!’

“Oh! think once more upon your own county, almost one vast sepulchre,
where rest the half-buried bodies of the victims of this infernal
order—victims whose skeleton hands, bleached by the sun and by the wind,
are stretching up from out the thin covering of earth that wraps their
bodies in all the eloquence of silent prayer, beseeching you to have
mercy upon your fellow-men.

“Oh! gentlemen, I beg to you for mercy, but to this prisoner let it be
such mercy as the father, whose slaughtered infant lies beside him,
gives to the wolf that has mangled the corpse; such mercy as the seed of
the woman bestows upon the serpent whose head is crushed beneath its
heel; and when you yield such mercy to assassins such as these, you
yield a mercy and grant a protection to society at large, which looks to
you now as its only refuge.

“And now the duty which I owe to this case is almost performed, and I
commit it to your hands. For three years I have been engaged in an
investigation, the result of which has now become known to the
community. Two or three days after the commission of this offense I
believed, from the information which came to me, that Thomas Munley was
one of the assassins of Sanger. I had no evidence that I could use, for
it was not until McParlan consented to become a witness that I could
furnish the information that led to the arrest of this prisoner. I
believe I have done my duty; for God’s sake, let me beg of you not to
shrink from doing yours. Solemn judges of the law and of the
facts—august ministers in the temple of justice—robed for sacrifice, I
bring before you this prisoner and lay him upon your altar, bound and
fastened by such cords of testimony as all the ingenuity of counsel
cannot unloosen, and, trembling at the momentous issues involved in your
answer, I ask you, will you let him go? If you perform your duty without
favor and without affection, if, in the pursuit of what appears to me to
be your plain and bounden duty, you will say, almost without leaving the
box, that this man is guilty of murder in the first degree, you will do
that which I believe to be just, and you will do that which will protect
society and save the lives of hundreds and thousands of your fellow-men.
But if you should falter—if, from any false sympathy, you should unbind
this prisoner and let him go, I tremble for the consequences to society.
Who then would be safe? For you to do this would be to hold up this
prisoner’s hands, and the hands of all his fellows and associates, to
place the dagger and the pistol in their grasp, and with the torch of
the incendiary, to send them again throughout this land to play their
part of murder, of arson, and of crime.

“I have done all that I could to expose the criminal character of this
organization. Laying aside all other duties, giving up everything else
that I had to do, I have tried to devote myself to this cause, for I
believe it to be the highest duty that I could be called upon to
perform. I am glad, at the conclusion of this case, to return my thanks
to the able gentlemen who have been associated with me, and especially
to the District Attorney, under whose administration these crimes have
come to light. He was an old student of mine when I was in this county,
and I was glad to know that it was he who filled the office when this
conspiracy was first brought to light. He has done his duty faithfully
and nobly, in the face of danger, without fear, or favor, or affection.
I know that we have a Court that will not shrink from whatever duty may
be imposed upon it, and I believe, from what I have seen of you, that
you will walk unshrinkingly in the plain paths of duty that are opened
before you. Do this, gentlemen, and I am sure that, linked together with
that of McParlan and of others who have aided in this _glorious
crusade_, your names will be enshrined for long coming years in the
grateful recollections of an enfranchised and redeemed people.”

This remarkable address had its effect upon the jury and upon the public
feeling in the State, and such a demand was there for it that a very
large edition in pamphlet form was quickly exhausted. It was read with
avidity and greatly commended wherever circulated. With Mr. Kaercher and
Mr. Gowen in this case were associated Hon. F. W. Hughes, Gen. Chas.
Albright, and Guy E. Farquhar, Esq.

Before the conclusion of the Munley case a jury was impaneled, on the
sixth and seventh of July, to try over again the case against Hugh
McGehan, James Carroll, James Roarty, James Boyle, and Thomas Duffy, in
the matter of the Yost murder, the other defendants in the same cause
demanding separate trials. After a full and careful hearing the jury
rendered a verdict of “guilty of murder in the first degree,” against
the prisoners. The speeches of Gen. Albright and Hon. F. W. Hughes—both
very able and eloquent—were also published and very widely read, the
interest in the trial as well as their own intrinsic value having
created a demand for them. The counsel for the defense and prosecution
was the same as in the Munley case. All the defendants named above were
sentenced to be hanged on the sixteenth of August. Their cases were
carried to the Supreme Court, arguments held, and a _nol. pros._ finally
entered, confirming the sentence of the court below.

[Illustration: “The trial for conspiracy attracted the gentleman of the
bar from all parts of the State.”]

John Kehoe, Michael O’Brien, Chris Donnelly, John Donahue, _alias_
“Yellow Jack,” James Roarty, Dennis F. Canning, Frank McHugh, John
Gibbons, and John Morris were arrested on the sixth of May, 1876,
charged with conspiracy, at the famous Mahanoy City Convention of the
first of June, 1875, to kill Wm. M. Thomas and Jesse Major. They were
tried at Pottsville before President Judge Pershing and Associates Green
and Walker, commencing August 9 and ending August 14, 1876. The trial
for conspiracy attracted the gentleman of the bar from all parts of the
State, and during its continuance the court-room was daily crowded to
the point of suffocation with ladies and gentlemen, some of them having
traveled hundreds of miles to have a view of the Mollies, the jury, the
court and officials, and the witnesses for the prosecution. McParlan’s
testimony was intensely interesting, and such a public call for its
particulars was there among the legal fraternity and the general reading
public, that the entire evidence of the trial was printed in a pamphlet
of nearly three hundred pages, and a very large edition quickly
exhausted. The newspapers had special correspondents on the ground, and
the illustrated journals of New York sent their artists to Pottsville to
make drawings of the court and surroundings. The leading facts contained
in this extraordinary suit have been given in the course of the
preceding narrative. With the exception of the young man, Frank McHugh,
who gave evidence for the Commonwealth, the defendants were all found
guilty according to the counts in the several indictments, and sentenced
to seven years’ confinement each in the penitentiary. McHugh has not
been sentenced, having been recommended to the mercy of the court by the
jury.


                               ————●————




                             CHAPTER XLIX.

                          CLOSING THE RECORD.


After this came the arrest of the murderers—or those interested in the
murder—of Gomer James. Thomas Hurley, having for the time made his
escape—though it is reasonable to suppose that he will, with other
fugitives from justice, some day be caught and punished—Chris Donnelly,
John Donahue, Michael O’Brien, Pat Dolan, Sr., Pat Butler, and Frank
O’Neill were arraigned at Pottsville on the 17th of August, 1876. James
Roarty, charged with aiding and abetting in the killing of Gomer James,
was, with the others, found guilty. Chris Donnelly was given two years
in the penitentiary, while Patrick Butler, partly in consideration of
his having given State’s evidence, met similar leniency. John Donahue,
having already received sentence of death, was not sentenced. Mike
O’Brien was sent to prison for two years. Patrick Dolan, Sr., was
sentenced to eighteen months’ imprisonment. Frank O’Neill also received
two years.

[Illustration: “_Pat. Hester smiled when he saw Dan. Kelly, alias Manus
Kull, alias ‘Kelly the Bum., in the witness box._”]

September 23, of the same year, John Slattery, John Stanton, Michael
Doolan, Chas. Mullhearn, Ned Monaghan, John Kehoe, Chris Donnelly,
Dennis F. Canning, Michael O’Brien, Frank O’Neill and Pat Dolan, Sr.,
were arraigned for conspiracy to murder Wm. and Jesse Major, stood their
trial, and all but John Stanton were found guilty, and sentenced to
imprisonment as follows: O’Neill, five years; O’Brien, five years;
Canning, seven years; Donnelly, five years; Kehoe, seven years, and Ned
Monaghan, seven years.

At the same term of court, Thomas Donahue was sentenced to two years’
imprisonment for aiding in the escape of John Gibbons, one of the men
assaulting Wm. M. Thomas.

September 22, 1876, Muff Lawler was brought to court, as accessory after
the fact to the murder of Sanger and Uren, found guilty, but not
sentenced, having enrolled himself among those willing to aid the State
in convicting men more guilty. James Duffy was sent one year for
perjury. Mrs. Bridget Hyland, Bernard M. Boyle, and Kate Boyle, having
been rather too fast in swearing their friends clear, were found guilty
of perjury and given two and three years each at the State prison.

The murder of F. W. S. Langdon, by the Mollie Maguires, at Audenried, in
Schuylkill County, committed July 14, 1862, implicated John Kehoe,
County Delegate, John Campbell, and Neill Dougherty. Campbell and
Dougherty were arrested, and with Kehoe brought to trial at Pottsville,
January 2, 1877, found guilty of murder in the second degree and
sentenced, Campbell for nine, and Dougherty five years to the State
penitentiary. Kehoe was brought in guilty of murder in the first degree,
and sentenced to be executed the 16th of April in the same year, but his
cause was taken to the Supreme Court, where it will doubtless be decided
in accordance with the testimony and its merits.

In November, 1876, Chas. McAllister was convicted of an assault, with
intent to kill, upon James Riles, at Shenandoah. Sentence thus far has
been deferred.

All of the above were Schuylkill County cases.

In Carbon County arrests were made almost simultaneously. John Donahue,
Thomas P. Fisher, Patrick McKenna, Alex. Campbell, Patrick O’Donnell,
and John Malloy, were taken, charged with the murder of Morgan Powell,
at Summit Hill, December 2, 1871. The defendants were tried, at
different terms of the Carbon County Court, at Mauch Chunk, James
McParlan frequently appearing—as in most of the suits in Schuylkill
County—on the witness stand and testifying to the confessions and
admissions of the Mollies. They were found guilty as follows: Donahue of
murder in the first degree; Fisher of murder in the first degree, and
sentenced to death; Pat McKenna of murder in the first degree, and
sentenced to nine years’ imprisonment; Patrick O’Donnell, as accessory,
and sentenced to five years’ imprisonment.

In Columbia County, February 24, 1877, Pat Hester, Pat Tully, and Peter
McHugh, were arraigned for the murder of Alex. Rae. The circumstances of
the crime have been related in these pages. The court was held at
Bloomsburg, the county-seat, and attracted a very large attendance.
McParlan was present, and his testimony was fully corroborated by Dan
Kelly, _alias_ Manus Kull, and Mike, _alias_ Muff Lawler, was also a
witness. An interview between McParlan and the last-named personage is
thus described by an eye-witness:

“At about a quarter to ten this morning, February 12, 1877, the stage
from Rupert Station rattled up the street, into town, and disgorged its
occupants in front of the Exchange Hotel. With Messrs. Hughes and Ryon,
from Pottsville, the redoubtable Muff Lawler made his appearance. The
meeting between Lawler and his old friend McParlan—Muff once knew him as
McKenna, and initiated him into Shenandoah Division of the Mollies, a
few years ago—was particularly interesting. Stretching out his hand,
McParlan inquired of Lawler, as he indulged in a warm shake: ‘Have you
the “goods” for the last quarter?’

“‘I have not!’ was the blushing reply.

“‘Well, now, that’s a pity,’ said McParlan, ‘as I wanted to get the
quarreling toast!’”

Several witnesses of the scene were convulsed with laughter.

I had at the time the “goods” for the quarter ending the first of
February, 1877, in my office, and at once sent them by telegraph to
McParlan, so that he might not have to inquire about them of Muff
Lawler. They were as follows:

    “DAY WORDS: _Question_—How does Erin stand?

                _Answer_—The Russians will be victorious!

    “NIGHT WORDS: _Question_—The nights are getting short!

                  _Answer_—We’ll soon have the Spring!

    “QUARRELING WORDS: _Question_—Don’t be outrageous!

                       _Answer_—I never was such!”

The sign of recognition was made as follows:

    “_Question_—With the thumb and forefinger of the right hand, take
    hold of the lapel of the vest between the top buttons, or
    button-holes.

    “_Answer_—Draw the back of the left hand across the chin.”

The leaders of this society can make up their minds that henceforth, as
in the past, I will not remain in ignorance of their most secret
transactions. It is simply out of their power to prevent this. As long
as it is a society, and as long as its signs, mummeries, and passwords
are used for purposes of murder and assassination, so long will its
imported “goods” remain my “goods” in the interests of humanity and
justice.

It was the ninth of February, 1877, that the trial at Bloomsburg
approached a crisis. Sitting in the prisoner’s dock, Pat Hester smiled
when he saw Dan Kelly, _alias_ Manus Kull, _alias_ “Kelly the Bum,” in
the witness-box. But his humor changed to dire dismay as he discovered
that there were still other witnesses, who fully corroborated what Kelly
made oath to. Dan Kelly’s story of the Rae assassination was about as
follows:

He met Pat Hester, Peter McHugh and Ned Skivington at Big Mine Run, in
Barney Dolan’s place, on the sixteenth of October, 1868, the day
preceding that of the murder. Hester was on his way, he said, down the
mountain with Skivington, but had missed the train and returned to
Dolan’s, where all had something to drink. Afterward they walked to
Ashland, and entered Donahue’s saloon. There Hester informed the witness
that he had lost something by not going down the mountain that day,
adding, “But there is a good thing to be had to-morrow, for Rae will go
to Bell’s Tunnel, and there is money in it for us!” It was then agreed
that Hester, McHugh, Tully, Skivington, Brian Campbell, Jim Bradley,
Billy Muldowney and Dan Kelly should go and rob Rae. Roger Lafferty,
_alias_ Johnstone, went across the street and procured some powder and
bullets, returned and loaded the pistols, each one of the persons named
having a weapon. After this they had more liquor and stayed there all
night. All but Lafferty went out in the morning to meet and rob Rae. But
when they got as far as Germantown, Muldowney left, saying that he was
too lame to keep on. After they got above the toll-gate, Hester and
Skivington left, and Hester handed witness, Kelly, his pistol, saying:
“Kelly, your pistol is no good! Take mine! for I know it’s sure!” And he
remarked that he would go to Shamokin, to purchase hair to mix with lime
to make mortar for plastering. Skivington was off also, wanting to go to
work in the mine to throw aside suspicion from the rest. All the others
went as far as the water-barrel, and remained there. They then begun
talking about Rae and his son, and finally concluded that, if the lad
should chance to be riding with his father that morning, as he often
did, they would send the boy home with the horse, if they had to shoot
Rae. The object was plunder, not murder, unless the latter was necessary
to secure the money. Bradley, who was not known in Centralia, went and
procured a quart of whisky and some crackers. When he got back all hands
drank and ate. Five of the number present did not know Rae if they saw
him, so Dalton, who was acquainted with him, walked out on the road to
signal the others should their victim arrive. Soon a man came along in a
wagon, but as Dalton did not shake his hat the person was allowed to
pass. Still another man moved up while the assassins waited in ambush,
driving a horse attached to a light wagon, and he was permitted to go
his way unharmed, as Dalton again failed to give the notice. He
presently stepped out into the road to see who was coming and returned
to his former position. Quickly afterward a buggy hove in view and the
assassins saw that Dalton was standing in plain sight, shaking his hat,
and they knew that the driver was Alex. Rae. When the vehicle reached
the watering-trough, all jumped out upon their victim. Rae alighted from
the buggy when the men ordered him to, and quickly handed his watch and
pocket-book to Kelly, the witness, but said nothing. He was confronted
by a squad of heavily armed ruffians. What was there for him to say?
Kelly asked McHugh what should be done with the man? McHugh replied: “I
won’t be hunted around the world by any living man,” when the shooting
began. Rae ran toward the woods, and Tully went up to him, put his
pistol to his head, and shot him near the ear. Seeing that the man was
sure to die, all ran up the mountain, where they divided the money,
about sixty dollars, and the witness remembered that Dalton received a
ten dollar bill with a corner torn off. Tully and McHugh and Kelly got
in at Graham’s some time that day, and in the afternoon witness drove to
Locust Gap with a beer-seller. He got home at half-past three. They
killed Rae at about nine o’clock. He struck the ground upon his face,
and they left him where he fell, after putting the horse and buggy out
of sight in the wood. Kelly acknowledged that he fired two shots, but
could not say how many the others fired. Dalton did not shoot at all.
All of the rest discharged their weapons at the man. He was sure he saw
Tully fire. One shot hit Rae in the cheek. He left Hester’s pistol at
Graham’s and had given his own to Bradley. Hester’s weapon was a sort of
navy pistol and held five cartridges. It was loaded at Donahue’s house.
Dalton had a small pistol and McHugh’s was not as large as Kelly’s.
McHugh had a seven-shooter. Hester met him the same night in Graham’s,
at about nine o’clock, when the rest were there. The next he saw of
Hester was three days later, when he rode in his wagon with him from the
Gap to Ashland. Hester received none of the money taken from Rae. It was
Hester’s idea that Ray would have eighteen or nineteen thousand dollars
with him, but when he heard how small a sum had been realized he said it
was not worth dividing, so took none of it. About the seventeenth of
November, after Donahue and Duffy had been arrested, Jack Smith told
Hester of the capture, and he remarked it was about time for him to go,
and he did go, without telling his confederates where he went. They all
separated, remained away a month or two, and returned. When they got
back Hester was in jail. He said he had been to Illinois, but it would
look better to go back, as he might be taken there. A woman got Rae’s
pocket-book. The watch—a gold one—witness gave to Mike Graham, to keep
for him. He took it from him afterward and left it with Con Garrah for
ten dollars. Garrah restored it, when Kelly gave it to McGuire for ten
dollars and turned the money over to Garrah. The watch was subsequently
broken up with rocks and thrown into a creek, for fear it might lead to
trouble.

The attorneys for the defense were unable, after many efforts, to shake
Kelly’s testimony in the least. Despite his bad character for truth and
veracity, it was the conviction of everybody that he, for once in his
checkered career, was bent upon telling the straightforward truth. It
had its weight with the jury.

Judge Elwell presided at the session of court, and Hon. F. W. Hughes
assisted the District Attorney in the prosecution, John W. Ryon, Esq.,
of Pottsville, and others, appearing for the defendants.

On the 24th, the jury returned a verdict in the three cases of “guilty
of murder in the first degree.” This was not unexpected by the general
public, but formed a complete surprise to Pat Hester and his Mollie
friends. So confident had Hester been of release, that, the day before
the reception of the decree, he sent word to Locust Gap, ordering a
grand supper prepared at his house in commemoration of his discharge and
triumphant acquittal. While he did not actually fire the shot that
killed Rae, he was virtually as guilty as those who did, having
originated the job, and justice will, without doubt, be meted out to
him.

Hester, Tully, and McHugh found that they had but one course to adopt,
and got a new trial; but all has failed, the Supreme Court has affirmed
the judgment against the prisoners, and sentence of death is their doom.

While these trials were going on, the Mollies were not idle. They moved
every string possible to pull in money and influence to defend their
brethren in the coal region. Contributions were levied by the National
head of the order, in New York, upon the subordinate divisions of the
country for a large amount of money—some place it as high as
$30,000—part of which was to be expended in clearing the criminals, and
the rest, I have reason to believe, in paying assassins to go to
Pottsville and take the lives of McParlan and all of my employés in that
section of country. But the refusal of one of the Philadelphia lodges to
respond to this levy brought the matter to the notice of the public
press and stopped at least a portion of the funds from going forward to
the National officers. New Orleans and some other distant branches had
sent their share without knowing exactly the purpose for which it was to
be employed, but it is presumable that not more than one-half of the
assessment was ever realized, and that must have been expended in paying
for legal services.

During the session of court, at which occurred the trial of Kehoe and
others for conspiracy to murder Wm. M. Thomas, I learned that an attempt
would be made to assassinate Mr. Gowen, McParlan, and the entire court.
It seems at first there was an informal meeting of the Mollies, in
Pottsville, and it was arranged that twenty-four men should be chosen to
go to the court-house, twelve to sit on the back row of seats, and
twelve on the front tier, near the prisoners. All were to be armed with
loaded revolvers. Those on the front row of seats were, at a given
signal, to rise and simultaneously fire upon the judges, the attorneys
for the Commonwealth—Mr. Gowen especially—and the officers, including
McParlan and Capt. Linden, and the members of the Coal and Iron Police.
Those on the back seat were to kill off those left by the first platoon,
when all were to rush in, seize the prisoners and with them fight their
way out and make their escape to the hills. An influential member of the
order, and a county official, hearing of this arrangement, after the
twenty-four men had actually been appointed, made his appearance at
their rendezvous and informed the ringleaders in the movement that such
an act was evidence of sheer madness. “If you do this, boys,” said he,
“there will not be an Irishman left in Schuylkill County, and what is
more, if you persist in the plot, I shall consider it my bounden duty to
go at once and have every mother’s son of you arrested! It can’t be
done, and it shall not be done!”

This, for the time, broke up the conspiracy. Subsequently a young Mollie
Maguire made his boast, in the presence of several friends, that he
would go to the court-house, any time when he could hear that Mr. Gowen
was alone, and shoot him down. He was soon told that the President of
the Reading Railway, and the personal head of the prosecution of the
members of the bloodthirsty organization, was writing, all by himself,
in a jury room. The assassin walked into the apartment, his hand upon
his revolver, and was about to produce it and fire, when an officer of
the Coal and Iron Police, having business with the gentleman threatened,
unexpectedly appeared on the scene. As the would-be murderer had no
reasonable excuse for remaining, he took his hand away from his pistol,
and, thwarted in his design, sneaked out of the place. These and other
equally foolish acts of the Mollies were duly reported to Mr. Gowen, and
he was advised that he must take some precautions or his life would pay
the forfeit of criminal rashness. Up to that date he had not as much as
worn a pistol, or any other weapon, upon his person, and it is
questionable if he ever did subsequently. He is a brave, frank man, but
depended too much, I think, upon the justness of his cause, for with the
Mollie Maguires the common instincts of human nature are outraged and
disregarded. Still he was not attacked. While there were hundreds
present thirsting for his blood, he turned upon the Mollies the heaviest
deluge of invective that they have ever received.

But one New York newspaper, I believe, has ever openly taken the part of
the Mollie Maguires. That was the _Irish World_. The animus of its
article was contained in an attack upon Mr. Gowen and James McParlan,
calling one “the head of a coal monopoly,” and the other his “hired
informer.” As the editor possibly had to do something to earn his
proportion of the $30,000 received for the defense of the Mollies, and
as his modicum of the labor was so insignificant and trivial, I have not
the heart to devote space to an answer. He is sufficiently replied to,
perhaps, by the verdicts of the courts of justice, which point to
something more serious than the editorial writer in question had in mind
at the time of the preparation of his weak and idle philippic.

A well informed writer in the _American Law Review_, for January, 1877,
seems to have taken a more sensible impression of the matter, and found
interest enough in the trials of the Mollies to devote twenty-eight
pages of valuable space to the calm and dispassionate discussion of the
subject from a legal standpoint.

 .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .

The work of several years is now nearly finished. About seventy persons
have been arrested in the coal region. Of those twelve have been, by a
jury of their countrymen, found guilty of murder in the first degree;
four of murder in the second degree; and four of being accessory to
murder; sixteen of conspiracy to murder; six of perjury; one of assault
with intent to kill; eight of aiding and abetting a murder; one of
assault and battery; one for aiding in the escape of a murderer, and
several others of lesser crimes. The sum-total of the time of these
sentences to imprisonment foots up one hundred and twenty-four years and
eight months. Eleven have received sentence of death.

On May 21st, 1877, Governor Hartranft issued warrants for the execution
of eight of the murderers, viz.:—Alexander Campbell, convicted of
complicity in the killing of John P. Jones; James Carroll, Hugh McGehan,
James Boyle, and James Roarty, convicted of the murder of Benj. F. Yost;
Patrick Hester, Peter McHugh, and Patrick Tully, convicted of the murder
of Alexander W. Rae. Campbell was hanged at Mauch Chunk on the 21st of
June, in company with Michael Doyle and Edward Kelly, concerned in the
murder with him. Carroll, McGehan, Boyle, and Roarty expiated their
crime on the same day on the gallows from which Thomas Munley was
suspended for the murder of William Sanger and James Urens; and Hester,
McHugh and Tully will be executed at Bloomsburg on the 9th day of August
next, which will be the first executions that have ever taken place in
Columbia County.

                                THE END.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           Transcriber’s Note

Characters on the margins are very often missing or only partially
inked, especially punctuation, more particularly hyphens and periods.
Where the context is clear, these lapses have been addressed without any
notice taken here. On occasion, an earlier 1877 edition has been
consulted to confirm the intent. Where punctuation has been restored in
midline, the lapse has been noted here. (331.4 run away[.]; 20.2
service[.]; 259.30 Mine Hill Gap[.]; 388.34 case[.]; 483.35 delayed[.];
501.2 arrested[.])

When conversation employs dialect, the text is generally followed as
printed. The apostrophe in the contraction “it’s” is typically missing
(pp. 34, 37, 64(2), 157, 165, 248(3), 263, 266, 314). The common
contraction “an’” sometimes appears without the apostrophe, which _is_
supplied (295.7, 303.1, 322.33, 384.12, 384.32, 492.6).

At 62.12, the text employs “_wrapped_ attention” in place of “rapt”. The
correct word appears only one other time. The odd phrase is retained.

A passage at 196.11 includes an odd use of the exclamation point and
does not re-open the ensuing speech: “Don’t stand here askin’
questions,” answered Mrs. McIntyre! [“]Oh, why did I fall in....” The
quotation mark has been added, but the exclamation point is retained.

Other errors deemed most likely to be the printer’s have been corrected,
and are noted here. The references are to the page and line in the
original.

  17.19    it can be ac[c]omplished                       Inserted.
  34.28    [“]As an argument in favor                     Removed.
  36.1     Is that you, Tony[!/?]                         Replaced.
  62.29    the larger State penitent[i]aries              Inserted.
  131.31   on a job load[ /i]n’ coal                      Restored.
  144.34   the right eye, thus:[”]  and the Bodymaster    Added.
  148.20   at a house w[h]ere he was acquainted           Inserted.
  150.1    Since the authorit[i]es have been              Inserted.
  150.15   regular war in S[k/ch]uylkill county!          Replaced.
  155.10   passed of[f] smoothly                          Added.
  194.18   who stood no[r/t] far off                      Replaced.
  278.3    is General Superin[d/t]endent                  Replaced.
  292.30   in Schuy[l]kill County.                        Inserted.
  308.27   Faith, an[,/’[ I can think                     Replaced.
  311.28   at their different coll[i]eries.               Inserted.
  319.14   incapable of physic[i]al exertion              Removed.
  320.13   until [to morrow]                              _sic_
  320.14   back to ye![’/”]                               Replaced.
  327.24   Gen. Pleasant[s]                               Added.
  347.16   in favor of an antagonistic co[r]poration      Inserted.
  347.34   from the city of Philad[a/e]lphia              Replaced.
  354.18   but entirely u[n]seen                          Inserted.
  365.1    “Was not one Jimmy Kerrigan?[’/”]              Replaced.
  381.5    many inquiries goin[’]  on                     Added.
  387.1    saying he [“]had other fish to fry.”           Added.
  435.27   Mr. Nicoll[’]s                                 Removed.
  437.2    [“]Don’t stop for me                           Added.
  439.20   has plenty of pistols.[”]                      Added.
  451.6    Superintend[a/e]nt Geo. H. Bangs.              Replaced.
  454.7    By this [time ]some fifteen                    Missing.
  461.7    Carroll, and Mul[l]hall                        Removed.
  477.5    with her child[r]en                            Inserted.
  489.17   he never inten[d]ed                            Inserted.
  507.11   Drown him![”]                                  Added.
  522.20   was the only confid[e/a]nt                     Replaced.
  523.14   this unostentatio[n/u]s charity                Inverted.
  524.7    beyond the precin[c]ts of his own door         Inserted.
  532.33   [‘]The time has ceased                         Added.
  533.33   ‘There, at my feet![’]                         Added.
  552.25   R[ea/ae]                                       Transposed.
  552.26   Chun[c]k on the 21st of June,                  Removed.
  552.31   Uren[s]                                        Added.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MOLLY MAGUIRES AND THE DETECTIVES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


